find me. It may prove of consequence if you have a message to send, and
can not come yourselves."

"That is very true," replied Edward; "I shall not forget it. Humphrey,
shall you or I go with the cart?"

"Humphrey, by all means; it will not do for them to suppose I had the
cart from you, Edward; they do not know Humphrey, and he will be off
again in the morning before they are up."

"Very true," replied Edward.

"And it is time for us to set off," replied Oswald. "Will Mistress
Alice oblige me with something for my men to eat, for they have fasted
the whole day."

"Yes," replied Alice; "I will have it ready before the pony is in the
cart. Edith, dear, come with me."

Humphrey then went out to harness the pony, and when all was ready, he
and Oswald set off again.

When they arrived at the pitfall, they found Corbould lying between the
two other verderers, who were sitting by his side. Corbould was much
recovered since his wound had been bound up, and he was raised up and
put on the fodder which Humphrey had put into the cart; and they
proceeded on their journey to the other side of the forest, the
verderers eating what Humphrey had brought for them as they walked
along. It was a tedious and painful journey for the wounded man, who
shrieked out when the cart was jolted by the wheel getting into a rut
or hole; but there was no help for it, and he was very much exhausted
when they arrived, which was not till past midnight. Corbould was then
taken to his cottage and put on the bed, and another verderer sent for
a surgeon; those who had been with Oswald were glad to go to bed, for
it had been a fatiguing day. Humphrey remained with Oswald for three
hours, and then again returned with Billy, who, although he had crossed
the forest three times in the twenty-four hours, appeared quite fresh
and ready to go back again.

"I will let you know how he gets on, Humphrey, and what account he
gives of his falling into the pit; but you must not expect me for a
fortnight at least."

Humphrey wished Oswald good-by; and Billy was so anxious to get back to
his stable, that Humphrey could not keep him at a quiet pace. "Horses,
and all animals indeed, know that there is no place like home; it is a
pity that men who consider themselves much wiser, have not the same
consideration," thought Humphrey, as the pony trotted along. Humphrey
thought a good deal about the danger that Edward had been subjected to,
and said to himself, "I really think that I should be more comfortable
if Edward was away. I am always in a fidget about him. I wish the new
king, who is now in France would raise an army and come over. It is
better that Edward should be fighting in the field than remain here and
risk being shot as a deer-stealer, or put in prison. The farm is
sufficient for us all; and when I have taken in more ground it will be
much more than sufficient, even if I do not kill the wild cattle. I am
fit for the farm, but Edward is not. He is thrown away, living in this
obscurity, and he feels it. He will always be in hot water some way or
another, that is certain. What a narrow escape he has had with that
scoundrel, and yet how little he cares for it! He was intended for a
soldier, that is evident; and, if ever he is one, he will be in his
element, and distinguish himself, if it pleases God to spare his life.
I'll persuade him to stay at home a little while to help me to inclose
the other piece of ground; and, after that is done, I'll dig a saw-pit,
and see if I can coax Pablo to saw with me. I must go to Lymington and
buy a saw. If I once could get the trees sawed up into planks, what a
quantity of things I could make, and how I could improve the place!"

Thus thought Humphrey, as he went along; he was all for the farm and
improvements, and was always calculating when he should have another
calf, or a fresh litter of pigs. His first idea was that he would make
Pablo work hard, but the advice he had received from Oswald was not
forgotten; and he now was thinking how he should coax Pablo into
standing below in the sawpit, which was not only hard work, but
disagreeable from the sawdust falling into the eyes. Humphrey's
cogitations were interrupted by a halloo, and turning round in the
direction of the voice, he perceived Edward, and turned the cart to
join him.

"You've just come in time, Humphrey; I have some provision for Alice's
larder. I took my gun and came on the path which I knew you would
return by, and I have killed a young buck. He is good meat, and we are
scarce of provisions."

Humphrey helped Edward to put the venison in the cart, and they
returned to the cottage, which was not more than three miles off.
Humphrey told Edward the result of his journey, and then proposed that
Edward should stop at home for a few days and help him with the new
inclosure. To this Edward cheerfully consented; and as soon as they
arrived at the cottage, and Humphrey had his breakfast, they took their
axes and went out to fell at a cluster of small spruce-fir about a mile
off.




CHAPTER XIV.


"Now, Humphrey, what do you propose to do?"

"This," replied Humphrey: "I have marked out three acres or thereabout
of the land running in a straight line behind the garden. There is not
a tree on it, and it is all good feeding-ground. What I intend to do is
to inclose it with the spruce-fir posts and rails that we are about to
cut down, and then set a hedge upon a low bank which I shall raise all
round inside the rails. I know where there are thousands of
seedling-thorns, which I shall take up in the winter, or early in the
spring, to put in, as the bank will be ready for them by that time."

"Well, that's all very good; but I fear it will be a long while before
you have such a quantity of land dug up."

"Yes, of course it will; but, Edward, I have plenty of manure to spare,
and I shall put it all over this land, and then it will become a rich
pasture, and also an earlier pasture than what we can get from the
forest, and will be very handy to turn the cows and the calves upon; or
even Billy, if we want him in a hurry."

"All that is very true," replied Edward; "so that it will be useful at
all events, if you do not dig it up."

"Indeed it will," replied Humphrey; "I only wish it were six acres
instead of three."

"I can't say I do," replied Edward, laughing; "you are too grand in
your ideas; only think what a quantity of spruces we shall have to cut
down on it, to post and rail what you just propose. Let it be three
acres first, Humphrey; and when they are inclosed, you may begin to
talk of three more."

"Well, perhaps you are right, Edward," said Humphrey.

"Why, here's Pablo coming after us; he's not coming to work, I presume,
but to amuse himself by looking on."

"I don't think he's strong enough to do much hard work, Humphrey,
although he appears very ingenious."

"No, I agree with you; and if he is to work, depend upon it it must not
be by having work set out for him; he would take a disgust to it
directly. I have another plan for him."

"And what is that, Humphrey?"

"I shall not set him any thing to do, and shall make him believe that I
do not think he is able to do any thing. That will pique him, and I
think by that means I shall get more work out of him than you would
think, especially when, after he has done it, I express my wonder and
give him praise."

"Not a bad idea, that; you will work upon his pride, which is probably
stronger than his laziness."

"I do not think him lazy, but I think him unused to hard work, and
having lived a life of wandering and idleness, not very easy to be
brought to constant and dayly work, except by degrees, and by the means
which I propose. Here we are," continued Humphrey, throwing his ax and
bill-hook down, and proceeding to take off his doublet; "now for an
hour or two's fulfillment of the sentence of our first parents--to wit,
'the sweat of the brow.'"

Edward followed Humphrey's example in taking off his doublet; they
selected the long thin trees most fitted for rails, and were hard at
work when Pablo came up to them. More than a dozen trees had fallen,
and lay one upon the other, before they stopped a while to recover
themselves a little.

"Well, Pablo," said Humphrey, wiping his forehead, "I suppose you think
looking on better than cutting down trees; and so it is."

"What cut down trees for?"

"To make posts and rails to fence in more ground. I shall not leave the
boughs on."

"No cut them off by-and-by, and then put poles on the cart and carry
them home."

Edward and Humphrey then recommenced their labor, and worked for
another half hour, when they paused to recover their wind.

"Hard work, Pablo," said Humphrey.

"Yes, very hard work; Pablo not strong enough."

"Oh no, you are not able to do any thing of this kind, I know. No work
this for gipsies; they take birds' nests and catch rabbits."

"Yes," replied Pablo, nodding, "and you eat them."

"So he does, Pablo," said Edward, "so you are useful in your way; for
if he had nothing to eat, he would not be able to work. Strong man cut
down trees, weak man catch rabbits."

"Both good," said Pablo.

"Yes, but strong man like work; not strong man not like work, Pablo. So
now look on again, for we must have another spell."

"Strong man cut down trees, not strong man cut off branches," said
Pablo, taking up the bill-hook and setting to work to cut off the
boughs, which he did with great dexterity and rapidity.

Edward and Humphrey exchanged glances and smiles, and then worked away
in silence till it was, as they supposed, dinner time. They were not
wrong in their supposition, although they had no other clock than their
appetites, which, however, tell the time pretty correctly to those who
work hard. Alice had the platters on the table, and was looking out to
see if they were coming.

"Why, Pablo, have you been at work?" said Edith.

"Yes, little missy, work all the morning."

"Indeed he has, and has worked very well, and been very useful," said
Edward.

"It has given you an appetite for your dinner, Pablo, has it not?" said
Humphrey.

"Have that without work," replied the boy.

"Pablo, you are a very good gipsy boy," said Edith, patting his head
with a patronizing air; "I shall let you walk out with me and carry the
basket to put the eggs in when you come home in the evening."

"That is a reward," said Humphrey, laughing.

After dinner they continued their labor, and by supper time had so many
trees cut down, that they determined to carry home the next day, and
lay them along to see how many more they would want. While they put the
trees in the cart and took them home, Pablo contrived to lop off the
boughs and prepare the poles for them to take away. As soon as they had
cut down sufficient and carted them home, they then selected shorter
trees for posts; and when Pablo had cleared them of the boughs, they
sawed them out the proper lengths, and then carted them home. This
occupied nearly the whole week, and then they proceeded to dig holes
and set the posts in. The railing was then to be nailed to the posts,
and that occupied them three days more; so that it was altogether a
fortnight of hard work before the three acres were inclosed.

"There," said Humphrey, "that's a good job over; many thanks, Edward,
for your assistance; and thank you, too, Pablo, for you really have
helped us very much indeed, and are a very useful, good boy. Now for
raising the bank; that I must do when I can spare time; but my garden
is overrun with weeds, and I must get Edith and Alice to help me there."

"If you don't want me any longer, Humphrey," said Edward, "I think I
shall go over to see Oswald, and take Pablo with me. I want to know how
that fellow Corbould is, and what he says; and whether the intendant
has come back; not that I shall go near him or his good little
daughter, but I think I may as well go, and it will be a good
opportunity of showing Pablo the way to Oswald's cottage."

"I think so too; and when you come back, Edward, one of us must go to
Lymington, for I require some tools, and Pablo is very ragged. He must
have some better clothes than these old ones of ours, if he is to be
sent messages. Don't you think so?"

"Certainly I do."

"And I want a thousand things," said Alice.

"Indeed, mistress, won't less than a thousand content you?"

"Yes, perhaps not quite a thousand, but I really do want a great many,
and I will make you a list of them. I have not pans enough for my milk;
I want salt; I want tubs; but I will make out a list, and you will find
it a very long one."

"Well, I hope you have something to sell to pay for them?"

"Yes; I have plenty of butter salted down."

"What have you, Edith?"

"Oh, my chickens are not large enough yet; as soon as they are Humphrey
must get me some ducks and geese; for I mean to keep some; and
by-and-by I will have some turkeys, but not yet. I must wait till
Humphrey builds me the new house for them he has promised me."

"I think you are right, Edith, about the ducks and geese; they will do
well on the water behind the yard, and I will dig you out a bigger pool
for them."

"Edith, my dear, your little fingers are just made to weed my onions
well, and I wish you would do it to-morrow morning, if you have time."

"Yes, Humphrey, but my little fingers won't smell very nice afterward."

"Not till you have washed them, I guess; but there is soap and water,
you know."

"Yes, I know there is; but if I weed the onions, I can not help Alice
to make the butter; however, if Alice can do without me, I will do it."

"I want some more seeds sadly," said Humphrey, "and I must make out my
list. I must go to Lymington myself this time, Edward, for you will be
puzzled with all our wants."

"Not if I know exactly what you do want; but as I really do not, and
probably should make mistakes, I think it will be better if you do go.
But it is bedtime, and as I shall start early, good-night, sisters; I
beg you will let me have something to eat before I start. I shall try
for some venison as I come back, and shall take Smoker with me; he is
quite well again, and his ribs are as stout as ever."

"And, Edward," said Alice, "I wish, when you kill any venison, that you
would bring home some of those parts which you usually throw away, for
I assure you, now that we have three dogs, I hardly know how to find
enough for them to eat."

"I'll not fail, Alice," replied Edward, "and now once more good-night."

Early the next morning Edward took his gun, and, with Pablo and Smoker,
set off for Oswald's cottage.

Edward talked a great deal with Pablo relative to his former life; and,
by the answers which the boy gave him, was satisfied that,
notwithstanding his doubtful way of bringing up, the lad was not
corrupted, but was a well-minded boy. As they walked through a grove of
trees, Edward still talking, Pablo stopped and put his hand before
Edward's mouth, and then stooping down, at the same time seizing Smoker
by the neck, he pointed with his finger. Edward at first could see
nothing, but eventually he made out the horns of an animal just rising
above a hillock. It was evidently one of the wild cattle. Edward cocked
his gun and advanced cautiously, while Pablo remained where he was,
holding Smoker. As soon as he was near enough to hit the head of the
animal, Edward leveled and fired, and Pablo let Smoker loose, who
bounded forward over the hillock. They followed the dog and found him
about to seize a calf which stood by a heifer that Edward had shot.
Edward called him over and went up to the animal; it was a fine young
heifer, and the calf was not more than a fortnight old.

"We can not stop now, Pablo," said Edward. "Humphrey would like to have
the calf, and we must take our chance of its remaining by its mother
till we come back. I think it will for a day or two, so let us push on."

No further adventure happened, and they arrived a little after noon at
Oswald's cottage. He was not at home, his wife saying that she believed
that he was with the intendant, who had come back from London the day
before.

"But I will put on my hood and see," said the young woman.

In a few minutes she returned with Oswald.

"I am glad that you have come, sir," said Oswald, as Edward extended
his hand, "as I have just seen the intendant, and he has been asking
many questions about you. I am certain he thinks that you are not the
grandson of Jacob Armitage, and that he supposes I know who you are. He
asked me where your cottage was, and whether I could take him to it, as
he wished to speak to you, and said that he felt great interest about
you."

"And what did you say?"

"I said that your cottage was a good day's journey from here, and I was
not certain that I knew the exact way, as I had been there but seldom,
but that I knew where to find it after I saw the forests of Arnwood; I
told him about Corbould and his attempt upon you, and he was very
wroth. I never saw him moved before; and young Mistress Patience, she
was indeed angry and perplexed, and begged her father to send the
assailant away as soon as he could be moved. Master Heatherstone
replied, 'Leave it to me, my dear;' and then asked me what account
Corbould gave of himself, and his falling into the pit. I told him that
Corbould stated that he was following a deer, which he had severely
wounded about noonday, and having no dog with him he could not overtake
it, although he knew by its bleeding track that it could not hold out
much longer. That he followed it until nightfall, and had it in view
and close to him, when he fell into the pit."

"Well, the story was not badly made up," said Edward, "only for _a
deer_ read _man:_ and what did the intendant say to that?"

"He said that he believed you, and that Corbould's story was false--as,
if it had been a stag that he was following, no one would have known
that he had fallen into the pit, and he would have remained there till
now. I quite forgot to say, that when the intendant said that he wished
to call at your cottage, the young mistress said that she wished to go
with him, as you had told her that you had two sisters living with you,
and she wished very much to see them and make their acquaintance."

"I am afraid that we shall not be able to prevent this visit, Oswald,"
replied Edward. "He is in command here, and the forest is in his
charge. We must see to it. I only should like, if possible, to have
notice of his coming, that we may be prepared."

"You need no preparation, sir, if he should come," replied Oswald.

"Very true," said Edward; "we have nothing to conceal, and if he finds
us in a pickle, it is of no consequence."

"Rather the better, sir," replied Oswald. "Let your sisters be at the
wash-tub, and you and your brother carting manure; he will then be more
likely to have no suspicion of your being otherwise than what you
assume to be."

"Have you heard any news from London, Oswald?"

"Not as yet. I was away yesterday evening, when Master Heatherstone
came back, and I have not seen his man this morning. While you eat your
dinner, I will go into the kitchen; and if he is not there, Phoebe will
be sure to tell me all that she has heard."

"Do not say that I am here, Oswald, as I do not wish to see the
intendant."

"Mum's the word, sir; but you must stay in the cottage, or others will
see you, and it may come to his ears."

Oswald's wife then put before him a large pie, and some wheaten bread,
with a biggin of good beer. Edward helped Pablo to a large allowance,
and then filled his own platter; while thus occupied, Oswald Partridge
had left the cottage, as agreed.

"What do you say, Pablo? do you think you can walk back to-night?"

"Yes; like walking at night. My people always do; sleep in a daytime."

"Well, I think it will be better to go home: Oswald has only one bed,
and I do not wish them to know that I am here; so, Pablo, eat heartily,
and then we shall not be so tired. I want to get home, that I may send
Humphrey after the calf."

"One bed here; you stay," replied Pablo. "I go home, and tell Master
Humphrey."

