perpendicular Rays; and half this Thickness multiplied by the
Progression, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, &c. gives the Thicknesses of the Air at
the most luminous Parts of all the brightest Rings, _viz._ 1/178000,
3/178000, 5/178000, 7/178000, &c. their arithmetical Means 2/178000,
4/178000, 6/178000, &c. being its Thicknesses at the darkest Parts of
all the dark ones.

_Obs._ 7. The Rings were least, when my Eye was placed perpendicularly
over the Glasses in the Axis of the Rings: And when I view'd them
obliquely they became bigger, continually swelling as I removed my Eye
farther from the Axis. And partly by measuring the Diameter of the same
Circle at several Obliquities of my Eye, partly by other Means, as also
by making use of the two Prisms for very great Obliquities, I found its
Diameter, and consequently the Thickness of the Air at its Perimeter in
all those Obliquities to be very nearly in the Proportions express'd in
this Table.

-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------
Angle of Incidence |Angle of Refraction |Diameter  |Thickness
        on         |         into       |  of the  |   of the
      the Air.     |       the Air.     |   Ring.  |    Air.
-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------
    Deg.    Min.   |                    |          |
                   |                    |          |
    00      00     |     00      00     |  10      |  10
                   |                    |          |
    06      26     |     10      00     |  10-1/13 |  10-2/13
                   |                    |          |
    12      45     |     20      00     |  10-1/3  |  10-2/3
                   |                    |          |
    18      49     |     30      00     |  10-3/4  |  11-1/2
                   |                    |          |
    24      30     |     40      00     |  11-2/5  |  13
                   |                    |          |
    29      37     |     50      00     |  12-1/2  |  15-1/2
                   |                    |          |
    33      58     |     60      00     |  14      |  20
                   |                    |          |
    35      47     |     65      00     |  15-1/4  |  23-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    37      19     |     70      00     |  16-4/5  |  28-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    38      33     |     75      00     |  19-1/4  |  37
                   |                    |          |
    39      27     |     80      00     |  22-6/7  |  52-1/4
                   |                    |          |
    40      00     |     85      00     |  29      |  84-1/12
                   |                    |          |
    40      11     |     90      00     |  35      | 122-1/2
-------------------+--------------------+----------+----------

In the two first Columns are express'd the Obliquities of the incident
and emergent Rays to the Plate of the Air, that is, their Angles of
Incidence and Refraction. In the third Column the Diameter of any
colour'd Ring at those Obliquities is expressed in Parts, of which ten
constitute that Diameter when the Rays are perpendicular. And in the
fourth Column the Thickness of the Air at the Circumference of that Ring
is expressed in Parts, of which also ten constitute its Thickness when
the Rays are perpendicular.

And from these Measures I seem to gather this Rule: That the Thickness
of the Air is proportional to the Secant of an Angle, whose Sine is a
certain mean Proportional between the Sines of Incidence and Refraction.
And that mean Proportional, so far as by these Measures I can determine
it, is the first of an hundred and six arithmetical mean Proportionals
between those Sines counted from the bigger Sine, that is, from the Sine
of Refraction when the Refraction is made out of the Glass into the
Plate of Air, or from the Sine of Incidence when the Refraction is made
out of the Plate of Air into the Glass.

_Obs._ 8. The dark Spot in the middle of the Rings increased also by the
Obliquation of the Eye, although almost insensibly. But, if instead of
the Object-glasses the Prisms were made use of, its Increase was more
manifest when viewed so obliquely that no Colours appear'd about it. It
was least when the Rays were incident most obliquely on the interjacent
Air, and as the obliquity decreased it increased more and more until the
colour'd Rings appear'd, and then decreased again, but not so much as it
increased before. And hence it is evident, that the Transparency was
not only at the absolute Contact of the Glasses, but also where they had
some little Interval. I have sometimes observed the Diameter of that
Spot to be between half and two fifth parts of the Diameter of the
exterior Circumference of the red in the first Circuit or Revolution of
Colours when view'd almost perpendicularly; whereas when view'd
obliquely it hath wholly vanish'd and become opake and white like the
other parts of the Glass; whence it may be collected that the Glasses
did then scarcely, or not at all, touch one another, and that their
Interval at the perimeter of that Spot when view'd perpendicularly was
about a fifth or sixth part of their Interval at the circumference of
the said red.

_Obs._ 9. By looking through the two contiguous Object-glasses, I found
that the interjacent Air exhibited Rings of Colours, as well by
transmitting Light as by reflecting it. The central Spot was now white,
and from it the order of the Colours were yellowish red; black, violet,
blue, white, yellow, red; violet, blue, green, yellow, red, &c. But
these Colours were very faint and dilute, unless when the Light was
trajected very obliquely through the Glasses: For by that means they
became pretty vivid. Only the first yellowish red, like the blue in the
fourth Observation, was so little and faint as scarcely to be discern'd.
Comparing the colour'd Rings made by Reflexion, with these made by
transmission of the Light; I found that white was opposite to black, red
to blue, yellow to violet, and green to a Compound of red and violet.
That is, those parts of the Glass were black when looked through, which
when looked upon appeared white, and on the contrary. And so those which
in one case exhibited blue, did in the other case exhibit red. And the
like of the other Colours. The manner you have represented in the third
Figure, where AB, CD, are the Surfaces of the Glasses contiguous at E,
and the black Lines between them are their Distances in arithmetical
Progression, and the Colours written above are seen by reflected Light,
and those below by Light transmitted (p. 209).

_Obs._ 10. Wetting the Object-glasses a little at their edges, the Water
crept in slowly between them, and the Circles thereby became less and
the Colours more faint: Insomuch that as the Water crept along, one half
of them at which it first arrived would appear broken off from the other
half, and contracted into a less Room. By measuring them I found the
Proportions of their Diameters to the Diameters of the like Circles made
by Air to be about seven to eight, and consequently the Intervals of the
Glasses at like Circles, caused by those two Mediums Water and Air, are
as about three to four. Perhaps it may be a general Rule, That if any
other Medium more or less dense than Water be compress'd between the
Glasses, their Intervals at the Rings caused thereby will be to their
Intervals caused by interjacent Air, as the Sines are which measure the
Refraction made out of that Medium into Air.

_Obs._ 11. When the Water was between the Glasses, if I pressed the
upper Glass variously at its edges to make the Rings move nimbly from
one place to another, a little white Spot would immediately follow the
center of them, which upon creeping in of the ambient Water into that
place would presently vanish. Its appearance was such as interjacent Air
would have caused, and it exhibited the same Colours. But it was not
air, for where any Bubbles of Air were in the Water they would not
vanish. The Reflexion must have rather been caused by a subtiler Medium,
which could recede through the Glasses at the creeping in of the Water.

_Obs._ 12. These Observations were made in the open Air. But farther to
examine the Effects of colour'd Light falling on the Glasses, I darken'd
the Room, and view'd them by Reflexion of the Colours of a Prism cast on
a Sheet of white Paper, my Eye being so placed that I could see the
colour'd Paper by Reflexion in the Glasses, as in a Looking-glass. And
by this means the Rings became distincter and visible to a far greater
number than in the open Air. I have sometimes seen more than twenty of
them, whereas in the open Air I could not discern above eight or nine.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

_Obs._ 13. Appointing an Assistant to move the Prism to and fro about
its Axis, that all the Colours might successively fall on that part of
the Paper which I saw by Reflexion from that part of the Glasses, where
the Circles appear'd, so that all the Colours might be successively
reflected from the Circles to my Eye, whilst I held it immovable, I
found the Circles which the red Light made to be manifestly bigger than
those which were made by the blue and violet. And it was very pleasant
to see them gradually swell or contract accordingly as the Colour of the
Light was changed. The Interval of the Glasses at any of the Rings when
they were made by the utmost red Light, was to their Interval at the
same Ring when made by the utmost violet, greater than as 3 to 2, and
less than as 13 to 8. By the most of my Observations it was as 14 to 9.
And this Proportion seem'd very nearly the same in all Obliquities of my
Eye; unless when two Prisms were made use of instead of the
Object-glasses. For then at a certain great obliquity of my Eye, the
Rings made by the several Colours seem'd equal, and at a greater
obliquity those made by the violet would be greater than the same Rings
made by the red: the Refraction of the Prism in this case causing the
most refrangible Rays to fall more obliquely on that plate of the Air
than the least refrangible ones. Thus the Experiment succeeded in the
colour'd Light, which was sufficiently strong and copious to make the
Rings sensible. And thence it may be gather'd, that if the most
refrangible and least refrangible Rays had been copious enough to make
the Rings sensible without the mixture of other Rays, the Proportion
which here was 14 to 9 would have been a little greater, suppose 14-1/4
or 14-1/3 to 9.

_Obs._ 14. Whilst the Prism was turn'd about its Axis with an uniform
Motion, to make all the several Colours fall successively upon the
Object-glasses, and thereby to make the Rings contract and dilate: The
Contraction or Dilatation of each Ring thus made by the variation of its
Colour was swiftest in the red, and slowest in the violet, and in the
intermediate Colours it had intermediate degrees of Celerity. Comparing
the quantity of Contraction and Dilatation made by all the degrees of
each Colour, I found that it was greatest in the red; less in the
yellow, still less in the blue, and least in the violet. And to make as
just an Estimation as I could of the Proportions of their Contractions
or Dilatations, I observ'd that the whole Contraction or Dilatation of
the Diameter of any Ring made by all the degrees of red, was to that of
the Diameter of the same Ring made by all the degrees of violet, as
about four to three, or five to four, and that when the Light was of the
middle Colour between yellow and green, the Diameter of the Ring was
very nearly an arithmetical Mean between the greatest Diameter of the
same Ring made by the outmost red, and the least Diameter thereof made
by the outmost violet: Contrary to what happens in the Colours of the
oblong Spectrum made by the Refraction of a Prism, where the red is most
contracted, the violet most expanded, and in the midst of all the
Colours is the Confine of green and blue. And hence I seem to collect
that the thicknesses of the Air between the Glasses there, where the
Ring is successively made by the limits of the five principal Colours
(red, yellow, green, blue, violet) in order (that is, by the extreme
red, by the limit of red and yellow in the middle of the orange, by the
limit of yellow and green, by the limit of green and blue, by the limit
of blue and violet in the middle of the indigo, and by the extreme
violet) are to one another very nearly as the sixth lengths of a Chord
which found the Notes in a sixth Major, _sol_, _la_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_,
_la_. But it agrees something better with the Observation to say, that
the thicknesses of the Air between the Glasses there, where the Rings
are successively made by the limits of the seven Colours, red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet in order, are to one another as the
Cube Roots of the Squares of the eight lengths of a Chord, which found
the Notes in an eighth, _sol_, _la_, _fa_, _sol_, _la_, _mi_, _fa_,
_sol_; that is, as the Cube Roots of the Squares of the Numbers, 1, 8/9,
5/6, 3/4, 2/3, 3/5, 9/16, 1/2.

_Obs._ 15. These Rings were not of various Colours like those made in
the open Air, but appeared all over of that prismatick Colour only with
which they were illuminated. And by projecting the prismatick Colours
immediately upon the Glasses, I found that the Light which fell on the
dark Spaces which were between the Colour'd Rings was transmitted
through the Glasses without any variation of Colour. For on a white
Paper placed behind, it would paint Rings of the same Colour with those
which were reflected, and of the bigness of their immediate Spaces. And
from thence the origin of these Rings is manifest; namely, that the Air
between the Glasses, according to its various thickness, is disposed in
some places to reflect, and in others to transmit the Light of any one
Colour (as you may see represented in the fourth Figure) and in the same
place to reflect that of one Colour where it transmits that of another.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

_Obs._ 16. The Squares of the Diameters of these Rings made by any
prismatick Colour were in arithmetical Progression, as in the fifth
Observation. And the Diameter of the sixth Circle, when made by the
citrine yellow, and viewed almost perpendicularly was about 58/100 parts
of an Inch, or a little less, agreeable to the sixth Observation.

The precedent Observations were made with a rarer thin Medium,
terminated by a denser, such as was Air or Water compress'd between two
Glasses. In those that follow are set down the Appearances of a denser
Medium thin'd within a rarer, such as are Plates of Muscovy Glass,
Bubbles of Water, and some other thin Substances terminated on all sides
with air.

_Obs._ 17. If a Bubble be blown with Water first made tenacious by
dissolving a little Soap in it, 'tis a common Observation, that after a
while it will appear tinged with a great variety of Colours. To defend
these Bubbles from being agitated by the external Air (whereby their
Colours are irregularly moved one among another, so that no accurate
Observation can be made of them,) as soon as I had blown any of them I
cover'd it with a clear Glass, and by that means its Colours emerged in
a very regular order, like so many concentrick Rings encompassing the
top of the Bubble. And as the Bubble grew thinner by the continual
subsiding of the Water, these Rings dilated slowly and overspread the
whole Bubble, descending in order to the bottom of it, where they
vanish'd successively. In the mean while, after all the Colours were
emerged at the top, there grew in the center of the Rings a small round
black Spot, like that in the first Observation, which continually
dilated it self till it became sometimes more than 1/2 or 3/4 of an Inch
in breadth before the Bubble broke. At first I thought there had been no
Light reflected from the Water in that place, but observing it more
curiously, I saw within it several smaller round Spots, which appeared
much blacker and darker than the rest, whereby I knew that there was
some Reflexion at the other places which were not so dark as those
Spots. And by farther Tryal I found that I could see the Images of some
things (as of a Candle or the Sun) very faintly reflected, not only from
the great black Spot, but also from the little darker Spots which were
within it.

Besides the aforesaid colour'd Rings there would often appear small
Spots of Colours, ascending and descending up and down the sides of the
Bubble, by reason of some Inequalities in the subsiding of the Water.
And sometimes small black Spots generated at the sides would ascend up
to the larger black Spot at the top of the Bubble, and unite with it.

_Obs._ 18. Because the Colours of these Bubbles were more extended and
lively than those of the Air thinn'd between two Glasses, and so more
easy to be distinguish'd, I shall here give you a farther description of
their order, as they were observ'd in viewing them by Reflexion of the
Skies when of a white Colour, whilst a black substance was placed
behind the Bubble. And they were these, red, blue; red, blue; red, blue;
red, green; red, yellow, green, blue, purple; red, yellow, green, blue,
violet; red, yellow, white, blue, black.

The three first Successions of red and blue were very dilute and dirty,
especially the first, where the red seem'd in a manner to be white.
Among these there was scarce any other Colour sensible besides red and
blue, only the blues (and principally the second blue) inclined a little
to green.

The fourth red was also dilute and dirty, but not so much as the former
three; after that succeeded little or no yellow, but a copious green,
which at first inclined a little to yellow, and then became a pretty
brisk and good willow green, and afterwards changed to a bluish Colour;
but there succeeded neither blue nor violet.

The fifth red at first inclined very much to purple, and afterwards
became more bright and brisk, but yet not very pure. This was succeeded
with a very bright and intense yellow, which was but little in quantity,
and soon chang'd to green: But that green was copious and something more
pure, deep and lively, than the former green. After that follow'd an
excellent blue of a bright Sky-colour, and then a purple, which was less
in quantity than the blue, and much inclined to red.

The sixth red was at first of a very fair and lively scarlet, and soon
after of a brighter Colour, being very pure and brisk, and the best of
all the reds. Then after a lively orange follow'd an intense bright and
copious yellow, which was also the best of all the yellows, and this
changed first to a greenish yellow, and then to a greenish blue; but the
green between the yellow and the blue, was very little and dilute,
seeming rather a greenish white than a green. The blue which succeeded
became very good, and of a very bright Sky-colour, but yet something
inferior to the former blue; and the violet was intense and deep with
little or no redness in it. And less in quantity than the blue.

In the last red appeared a tincture of scarlet next to violet, which
soon changed to a brighter Colour, inclining to an orange; and the
yellow which follow'd was at first pretty good and lively, but
afterwards it grew more dilute until by degrees it ended in perfect
whiteness. And this whiteness, if the Water was very tenacious and
well-temper'd, would slowly spread and dilate it self over the greater
part of the Bubble; continually growing paler at the top, where at
length it would crack in many places, and those cracks, as they dilated,
would appear of a pretty good, but yet obscure and dark Sky-colour; the
white between the blue Spots diminishing, until it resembled the Threds
of an irregular Net-work, and soon after vanish'd, and left all the
