Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18813-h.htm or 18813-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/9/1/18813/18813-h/18813-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/9/1/18813/18813-h.zip)





The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Tiger of Mysore, by G. A. Henty,
Illustrated by W. H. Margetson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Tiger of Mysore
       A Story of the War with Tippoo Saib


Author: G. A. Henty



Release Date: July 12, 2006  [eBook #18813]
[Most recently updated August 3, 2006]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TIGER OF MYSORE***


E-text prepared by Martin Robb



THE TIGER OF MYSORE:

A Story of the War with Tippoo Saib

by

G. A. HENTY.

Illustrated by W. H. Margetson

1895







            Preface.
Chapter  1: A Lost Father.
Chapter  2: A Brush With Privateers.
Chapter  3: The Rajah.
Chapter  4: First Impressions.
Chapter  5: War Declared.
Chapter  6: A Perilous Adventure.
Chapter  7: Besieged.
Chapter  8: The Invasion Of Mysore.
Chapter  9: News Of The Captive.
Chapter 10: In Disguise.
Chapter 11: A Useful Friend.
Chapter 12: A Tiger In A Zenana.
Chapter 13: Officers Of The Palace.
Chapter 14: A Surprise.
Chapter 15: Escape.
Chapter 16: The Journey.
Chapter 17: Back At Tripataly.
Chapter 18: A Narrow Escape.
Chapter 19: Found At Last.
Chapter 20: The Escape.
Chapter 21: Home.



Preface.


While some of our wars in India are open to the charge that they were
undertaken on slight provocation, and were forced on by us in order
that we might have an excuse for annexation, our struggle with Tippoo
Saib was, on the other hand, marked by a long endurance of wrong, and
a toleration of abominable cruelties perpetrated upon Englishmen and
our native allies. Hyder Ali was a conqueror of the true Eastern type.
He was ambitious in the extreme. He dreamed of becoming the Lord of
the whole of Southern India. He was an able leader, and, though
ruthless where it was his policy to strike terror, he was not cruel
from choice.

His son, Tippoo, on the contrary, revelled in acts of the most
abominable cruelty. It would seem that he massacred for the very
pleasure of massacring, and hundreds of British captives were killed
by famine, poison, or torture, simply to gratify his lust for murder.
Patience was shown towards this monster until patience became a fault,
and our inaction was naturally ascribed by him to fear. Had firmness
been shown by Lord Cornwallis, when Seringapatam was practically in
his power, the second war would have been avoided and thousands of
lives spared. The blunder was a costly one to us, for the work had to
be done all over again, and the fault of Lord Cornwallis retrieved by
the energy and firmness of the Marquis of Wellesley.

The story of the campaign is taken from various sources, and the
details of the treatment of the prisoners from the published
narratives of two officers who effected their escape from prisons.

G. A. Henty.



Chapter 1: A Lost Father.


"There is no saying, lad, no saying at all. All I know is that your
father, the captain, was washed ashore at the same time as I was. As
you have heard me say, I owed my life to him. I was pretty nigh gone
when I caught sight of him, holding on to a spar. Spent as I was, I
managed to give a shout loud enough to catch his ear. He looked round.
I waved my hand and shouted, 'Goodbye, Captain!' Then I sank lower and
lower, and felt that it was all over, when, half in a dream, I heard
your father's voice shout, 'Hold on, Ben!' I gave one more struggle,
and then I felt him catch me by the arm. I don't remember what
happened, until I found myself lashed to the spar beside him.

"'That is right, Ben,' he said cheerily, as I held up my head; 'you
will do now. I had a sharp tussle to get you here, but it is all
right. We are setting inshore fast. Pull yourself together, for we
shall have a rough time of it in the surf. Anyhow, we will stick
together, come what may.'

"As the waves lifted us up, I saw the coast, with its groves of
coconuts almost down to the water's edge, and white sheets of surf
running up high on the sandy beach. It was not more than a hundred
yards away, and the captain sang out,

"'Hurrah! There are some natives coming down. They will give us a
hand.'

"Next time we came up on a wave, he said, 'When we get close, Ben, we
must cut ourselves adrift from this spar, or it will crush the life
out of us; but before we do that, I will tie the two of us together.'

"He cut a bit of rope from the raffle hanging from the spar, and tied
one end round my waist and the other round his own, leaving about five
fathoms loose between us.

"'There,' he shouted in my ear. 'If either of us gets chucked well up,
and the natives get a hold of him, the other must come up, too. Now
mind, Ben, keep broadside on to the wave if you can, and let it roll
you up as far as it will take you. Then, when you feel that its force
is spent, stick your fingers and toes into the sand, and hold on like
grim death.'

"Well, we drifted nearer and nearer until, just as we got to the point
where the great waves tumbled over, the captain cut the lashings and
swam a little away, so as to be clear of the spar. Then a big wave
came towering up. I was carried along like a straw in a whirlpool.
Then there was a crash that pretty nigh knocked the senses out of me.
I do not know what happened afterwards. It was a confusion of white
water rushing past and over me. Then for a moment I stopped, and at
once made a clutch at the ground that I had been rolling over. There
was a big strain, and I was hauled backwards as if a team of wild
horses were pulling at me. Then there was a jerk, and I knew nothing
more, till I woke up and found myself on the sands, out of reach of
the surf.

"Your father did not come to for half an hour. He had been hurt a bit
worse than I had, but at last he came round.

"Well, we were kept three months in a sort of castle place; and then
one day a party of chaps, with guns and swords, came into the yard
where we were sitting. The man, who seemed the head of the fellows who
had been keeping us prisoners, walked up with one who was evidently an
officer over the chaps as had just arrived. He looked at us both, and
then laid his hand on the captain. Then the others came up.

"The captain had just time to say, 'We are going to be parted, Ben.
God bless you! If ever you get back, give my love to my wife, and tell
her what has happened to me, and that she must keep up her heart, for
I shall make a bolt of it the first time I get a chance.'

"The next day, I was taken off to a place they call Calicut. There I
stopped a year, and then the rajah of the place joined the English
against Tippoo, who was lord of all the country, and I was released. I
had got, by that time, to talk their lingo pretty well, though I have
forgotten it all now, and I had found out that the chaps who had taken
your father away were a party sent down by Tippoo, who, having heard
that two Englishmen had been cast on shore, had insisted upon one of
them being handed over to him.

"It is known that a great many of the prisoners in Tippoo's hands have
been murdered in their dungeons. He has sworn, over and over again,
that he has no European prisoners, but every one knows that he has
numbers of them in his hands. Whether the captain is one of those who
have been murdered, or whether he is still in one of Tippoo's
dungeons, is more than I or any one else can say."

"Well, as I have told you, Ben, that is what we mean to find out."

"I know that is what your mother has often said, lad, but it seems to
me that you have more chance of finding the man in the moon than you
have of learning whether your father is alive, or not."

"Well, we are going to try, anyhow, Ben. I know it's a difficult job,
but Mother and I have talked it over, ever since you came home with
the news, three years ago; so I have made up my mind, and nothing can
change me. You see, I have more chances than most people would have.
Being a boy is all in my favour; and then, you know, I talk the
language just as well as English."

"Yes, of course that is a pull, and a big one; but it is a desperate
undertaking, lad, and I can't say as I see how it is to be done."

"I don't see either, Ben, and I don't expect to see until we get out
there; but, desperate or not, Mother and I are going to try."

Dick Holland, the speaker, was a lad of some fifteen years of age. His
father, who was captain of a fine East Indiaman, had sailed from
London when he was nine, and had never returned. No news had been
received of the ship after she touched at the Cape, and it was
supposed that she had gone down with all hands; until, nearly three
years later, her boatswain, Ben Birket, had entered the East India
Company's office, and reported that he himself, and the captain, had
been cast ashore on the territories of the Rajah of Coorg; the sole
survivors, as far as he knew, of the Hooghley.

After an interview with the Directors, he had gone straight to the
house at Shadwell inhabited by Mrs. Holland. She had left there, but
had removed to a smaller one a short distance away, where she lived
upon the interest of the sum that her husband had invested from his
savings, and from a small pension granted to her by the Company.

Mrs. Holland was a half caste, the daughter of an English woman who
had married a young rajah. Her mother's life had been a happy one; but
when her daughter had reached the age of sixteen, she died, obtaining
on her deathbed the rajah's consent that the girl should be sent to
England to be educated, while her son, who was three years younger,
should remain with his father.

Over him she had exercised but little influence. He had been brought
up like the sons of other native princes, and, save for his somewhat
light complexion, the English blood in his veins would never have been
suspected.

Margaret, on the other hand, had been under her mother's care, and as
the latter had always hoped that the girl would, at any rate for a
time, go to her family in England, she had always conversed with her
in that language, and had, until her decreasing strength rendered it
no longer possible, given her an English education.

In complexion and appearance, she took far more after her English
mother than the boy had done; and, save for her soft, dark eyes, and
glossy, jet-black hair, might have passed as of pure English blood.
When she sailed, it was with the intention of returning to India, in
the course of a few years; but this arrangement was overthrown by the
fact that on the voyage, John Holland, the handsome young first mate
of the Indiaman, completely won her heart, and they were married a
fortnight after the vessel came up the Thames.

The matter would not have been so hurried had not a letter she posted
on landing, to her mother's sister, who had promised her a home,
received an answer written in a strain which determined her to yield,
at once, to John Holland's pressing entreaties that they should be
married without delay. Her aunt had replied that she had consented to
overlook the conduct of her mother, in uniting herself to a native,
and to receive her for a year at the rectory; but that her behaviour,
in so precipitately engaging herself to a rough sailor, rendered it
impossible to countenance her. As she stated that she had come over
with a sum sufficient to pay her expenses, while in England, she
advised her to ask the captain--who, by the way, must have grossly
neglected his duties by allowing an intimacy between her and his
mate--to place her in some school, where she would be well looked
after until her return to India.

The Indian blood in Margaret's veins boiled fiercely, and she wrote
her aunt a letter which caused that lady to congratulate herself on
the good fortune that had prevented her from having to receive, under
her roof, a girl of so objectionable and violent a character.

Although the language that John Holland used concerning this letter
was strong, indeed, he was well satisfied, as he had foreseen that it
was not probable Margaret's friends would have allowed her to marry
him, without communicating with her father; and that the rajah might
have projects of his own for her disposal. He laid the case before the
captain, who placed her in charge of his wife, until the marriage took
place.

Except for the long absences of her husband, Margaret's life had been
a very happy one, and she was looking forward to the time when, after
another voyage, he would be able to give up his profession and settle
down upon his savings.

When months passed by, and no news came of the Hooghley having reached
port, Mrs. Holland at once gave up her house and moved into a smaller
one; for, although her income would have been sufficient to enable her
to remain where she was, she determined to save every penny she was
able, for the sake of her boy. She was possessed of strong common
sense and firmness of character, and when Ben Birket returned with his
tale, he was surprised at the composure with which she received it.

"I have always," she said, "had a conviction that John was still
alive, and have not allowed Dick to think of his father as dead; and
now I believe, as firmly as before, that someday John will be restored
to me. I myself can do nothing towards aiding him. A woman can do
little, here. She can do nothing in India, save among her own people.
I shall wait patiently, for a time. It may be that this war will
result in his release. But in the meantime, I shall continue to
prepare Dick to take up the search for him, as soon as he is old
enough.

"I hear, once a year, from my brother, who is now rajah; and he will
be able to aid my boy, in many ways. However, for a time I must be
patient and wait. I have learnt to wait, during my husband's long
absences; and besides, I think that the women of India are a patient
race. I trust that John will yet come home to me, but if not, when it
is time, we will try to rescue him."

Ben said nothing, at the time, to damp her courage; but he shook his
head, as he left the cottage.

"Poor creature," he said. "I would not say anything to discourage her,
but for a woman and boy to try to get a captive out of the claws of
the Tiger of Mysore is just madness."

Each time he returned from a voyage, Ben called upon Mrs. Holland. He
himself had given up every vestige of hope, when it was known that the
name of her husband was not among the list of those whom Tippoo had
been forced to release. Margaret Holland, however, still clung to
hope. Her face was paler, and there was a set, pathetic expression in
it; so, when she spoke of her husband as being still alive, Ben would
sooner have cut out his tongue than allow the slightest word,
indicative of his own feeling of certainty as to the captain's fate,
to escape him; and he always made a pretence of entering warmly into
her plans.

The training, as she considered it, of her son went on steadily. She
always conversed with him in her father's language, and he was able to
speak it as well as English. She was ever impressing upon him that he
must be strong and active. When he was twelve, she engaged an old
soldier, who had set up a sort of academy, to instruct him in the use
of the sword; and in such exercises as were calculated to strengthen
his muscles, and to give him strength and agility.

Unlike most mothers, she had no word of reproach when he returned home
from school with a puffed face, or cut lips; the signs of battle.

"I do not want you to be quarrelsome," she often said to him, "but I
have heard your father say that a man who can use his fists well is
sure to be cool and quick, in any emergency. You know what is before
you, and these qualities are of far more importance, in your case,
than any book learning. Therefore, Dick, I say, never quarrel on your
own account, but whenever you see a boy bullying a smaller one, take
the opportunity of giving him a lesson while learning one yourself. In
the days of old, you know, the first duty of a true knight was to
succour the oppressed, and I want you to be a true knight. You will
get thrashed sometimes, no doubt, but don't mind that. Perhaps, next
time, you will turn the tables."

Dick acted upon this advice and, by the time he was fifteen, had
established a reputation among, not only the boys of his own school,
but of the district. In addition to his strength and quickness, he had
a fund of dogged endurance, and imperturbable good temper, that did
not fail him; even on the rare occasions when, in combats with boys
much older than himself, he was forced to admit himself defeated.

The fact that he fought, not because he was angry, but as if it were a
matter of business, gave him a great advantage; and his readiness to
take up the cause of any boy ill-treated by another was so notorious,
that "I will tell Dick Holland" became a threat that saved many a boy
from being burned.

Ten days before his conversation with Ben, his mother had said:

"Dick, I can stand this no longer. I have tried to be patient, for six
years, but I can be patient no longer. I feel that another year of
suspense would kill me. Therefore, I have made up my mind to sail at
once. The voyage will take us five months, and perhaps you may have to
remain some little time, at my brother's, before you can start.

"Now that the time is come, I think that perhaps I am about to do
wrong, and that it may cost you your life. But I cannot help it, Dick.
I dream of your father almost every night, and I wake up thinking that
I hear him calling upon me to help him. I feel that I should go mad,
if this were to last much longer."

"I am ready, Mother," the boy said, earnestly. "I have been hoping,
for some time, that you would say you would start soon; and though I
have not, of course, the strength of a man, I think that will be more
than made up by the advantage I should have, as a boy, in looking for
my father; and at any rate, from what you tell me, I should think that
I am quite as strong as an average native of your country.

"Anyhow, Mother, I am sure that it will be best for us to go now. It
must have been awful for you, waiting all this time; and though you
have never said anything about it, I have noticed for a long time that
you were looking ill, and was sure that you were worrying terribly.
What would be the use of staying any longer? I should not be very much
stronger in another year than I am now, and a year would seem an age,
to Father."

And so it was settled, and Mrs. Holland at once began to make
preparations for their departure. She had already, without saying
anything to Dick, given notice that she should give up the house. She
had, during the six years, saved a sum of money amply sufficient for
the expenses of the journey and outfit, and she had now only to order
clothes for herself and Dick, and to part with her furniture.

Ben, on his return, had heard with grave apprehension that she was
about to carry out her intention; but, as he saw that any remonstrance
on his part would be worse than useless, he abstained from offering
any, and warmly entered into her plans. After an hour's talk, he had
proposed to Dick to go out for a stroll with him.

"I am glad to have a talk with you, Ben," Dick said. "Of course, I
have heard, from Mother, what you told her when you came home; but I
shall be glad to hear it from you, so as to know exactly how it all
was. You know she feels sure that Father is still alive. I should like
to know what your opinion really is about it. Of course, it will make
no difference, as I should never say anything to her; but I should
like to know whether you think there is any possibility of his being
alive."

To this Ben had replied as already related. He was silent when Dick
asserted that, desperate or not, he intended to carry out his mother's
plan.

"I would not say as I think it altogether desperate, as far as you are
concerned," he said thoughtfully. "It don't seem to me as there is
much chance of your ever getting news of your father, lad; and as to
getting him out of prison, if you do come to hear of him; why, honest,
I would not give a quid of 'baccy for your chance; but I don't say as
I think that it is an altogether desperate job, as far as you are
concerned, yourself. Talking their lingo as you do, it's just possible
as you might be able to travel about, in disguise, without anyone
finding you out; especially as the Rajah, your uncle, ought to be able
to help you a bit, and put you in the way of things, and perhaps send
some trusty chap along with you. There is no doubt you are strong for
your age, and being thin, and nothing but muscle, you would pass
better as a native than if you had been thick and chunky. My old woman
tells me as you have a regular name as a fighter, and that you have
given a lesson to many a bully in the neighbourhood. Altogether, there
is a lot in your favour, and I don't see why you should not pull
through all right; at any rate, even should the worst come to the
worst, and you do get news, somehow, that your poor father has gone
down, I am sure it will be better for your mother than going on as she
has done for the last six years, just wearing herself out with
anxiety."

"I am sure it will, Ben. I can tell you that it is as much as I can
do, sometimes, not to burst out crying when I see her sitting, by the
hour, with her eyes open, but not seeing anything, or moving as much
as a finger--just thinking, and thinking, and thinking.

"I wish we were going out in your ship, Ben."

"I wish you was, lad; but it will be five or six weeks before we are
off again. Anyhow, the ship you are going in--the Madras--is a fine
craft, and the captain bears as high a character as anyone in the
Company's fleet.

"Well, lad, I hope that it will all turn out well. If I could have
talked the lingo like a native, I would have been glad to have gone
with you, and taken my chances. The captain saved my life in that
wreck, and it would only have been right that I should risk mine for
him, if there was but a shadow of chance of its being of use. But I
know that, in a job of this sort, I could be of no good whatsomever,
and should be getting you into trouble before we had gone a mile
together."

"I am sure that you would help, if you could, Ben; but, of course, you
could be of no use."

"And when do you think of being home again, lad?"

"There is no saying, Ben--it may be years. But, however long it takes,
I sha'n't give it up until I find out, for certain, what has become of
my father."

"And ain't there a chance of hearing how you are getting on, Dick? I
shall think of you and your mother, often and often, when I am on deck
keeping my watch at night; and it will seem hard that I mayn't be able
to hear, for years, as to what you are doing."

