Poor Nick believed half his bones were broken and that he was mortally
hurt; but the result of the charge was most extraordinary.

As the antlers of the buck struck him he was thrown like a limp dummy
toward the fallen tree, and, in reality, his greatest peril was
therefrom. Had he been driven with full momentum against the solid
trunk, he would have been killed as if smitten by a lightning stroke.

But his feet were entangled in some way and he fell headlong, his
forehead within a few inches of the bark, and his head itself was driven
under the trunk, which at that point was perhaps a foot above the
ground.

Instinctively the nearly senseless lad did the only thing that could
save him. He crawled under the trunk, so that it stood like a roof over
him.

His head was toward the base, and he pushed along until the lessening
space would not permit him to go further.

Thus he lay parallel with the uprooted tree, his feet at a point where
the bark almost touched his heels, the space growing less and less
toward his shoulders, until the back of his head rested against the
shaggy bark and his nose touched the leaves.

He had scarcely done this when he heard a thud at his elbow: it was
made by the knife-like hoofs of the buck, who, rearing on his hind
legs, gathered his two front ones close together and brought them down
with such force that, had they fallen on the body of the lad, as was
intended, they would have cut into him like the edge of a powerfully
driven ax.

As it was, the shielding tree trunk prevented it, and, grazing the bark,
they were driven into the yielding earth half a foot deep.

The buck immediately reared and repeated the terrible blow several
times, missing the body of the lad by what may be called a hair's
breadth.

The animal was in a fury, and, believing his foe was at his mercy, he
showed him none.

Nick heard the first thump of the sharp hoofs as they cut their way into
the earth, and then his head seemed to spin, as though he had been
whirled around with inconceivable velocity; innumerable stars danced
before his eyes, he felt as if shooting through space, and then
consciousness left him.

The buck could know nothing of this, and, had he known it, his actions
would not have been affected. He continued his rearing and plunging
until he saw he was inflicting no injury. Then he stopped, backed off
several paces, and, lowering his head, tried to dislodge the lad from
his place of refuge.

But the breadth of his antlers prevented success, which would have
placed Nick just where he could finish him. The oak barred his progress,
stopping the head and horns when they were almost against the body.

Then the buck reared and struck again, trying all manner of maneuvers
which his instinct suggested, but providentially none of them succeeded.

All this time Nick Ribsam, who had been so badly bruised, was oblivious
of the efforts against his life. Had he possessed his faculties, he
could not have done anything more for his protection than he did, by
lying motionless, extended along and below the trunk of the oak.

But the lusty, rugged nature of the lad soon asserted itself, and he
began rallying from the shock. A reaction gradually set in, and slowly
his senses returned.

It was a considerable time, however, before he realized where he was
and what had befallen him. His head was still ringing, as though the
clangor of a hundred anvils were sounding in his ears, and, when he drew
a deep breath, a pain, as if made by a knife, was in his side.

He listened, but heard nothing of his enemy. Then, with a great labor
and more suffering, he pushed himself a few inches backward, so as to
give some freedom to his body and to enable him to move his head.

Turning his face, he peered out on his right: the buck was not visible
in that direction.

Then he did the same toward the left: his enemy was invisible on that
side also.

"He is gone," said the lad to himself, still afraid to venture from the
shielding trunk that had been the means of saving him from the fury of
the enraged deer.

Nick believed he was close at hand, waiting for him to make a move that
would give another chance to assault him.

After several more minutes, the lad hitched farther backward, so that he
was able to raise his head a few inches. This extended his field of
observation, and, with a feeling of inexpressible relief, he still
failed to catch sight of the game.

"I guess he got discouraged and left," said Nick, startled at the
evidences of the buck's wrath so near him.

Finally the lad backed clear out from under the tree, and climbed to his
feet; it was climbing in every sense, for he nearly cried with pain
several times, and, still fearful that he had been seriously injured, he
examined himself as best he could.

A few minutes convinced him that none of his bones was broken, although
he afterward declared that he suspected his head had been fractured.

He now looked about for his gun and found it within a short distance,
much scratched by the hard treatment it had received, but without any
real injury.

Throwing the weapon over his shoulder, he started in the direction of
the appointed rendezvous, and, as he did so, observed that it was
already grown dark in the woods. Night had come, and he had quite a long
distance to walk.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE CAMP FIRE.


But Nick Ribsam was full of grit, and, though every step he took caused
him pain, he persevered with that grim resolution that was a part of his
nature from his very birth.

After walking some distance he found the soreness and stiffness leaving
him, and he straightened up with something of his natural vim and
elasticity of spirits.

"There's one thing certain," he added, recalling his encounter with the
buck, "I didn't have any one to help me out of that scrape, except the
One who always helps him that helps himself; but I never wanted a friend
more than then, and, if it hadn't been for that oak, it would have been
the last of Nicholas Ribsam."

"There is another thing I have learned," he added, with that glimmer of
humor which was sure to show itself, "I know considerable more than I
did yesterday; I have a good idea of how it feels when a wounded buck
_raises_ you, and, after this, I won't shoot one of the creatures unless
I'm sure of making a better shot than I did a while ago--hallo!"

Well might he utter the last exclamation, for at that moment he came
upon the dead body of the buck, lying as he had fallen on the earth,
when at last he succumbed to the wound received at the hands of Nick
himself.

The boy stopped to examine it, for he was much impressed by the
discovery.

"That came very near ending in the death of us both: nothing but the oak
saved me. I wonder whether I am going right."

He raised his head from his examination, and looked about him, but he
was without the means of judging whether he was following the proper
direction or not. When leaving the scene of his encounter with the deer,
he had taken the course that seemed to be right, without pausing until
he could make himself certain in the matter.

This is pretty sure, in a majority of cases, to lead one astray, but it
so happened with Nick that he headed in a bee-line for the camp, where
the impatient Sam Harper was awaiting him.

But the error came afterward: he toiled forward without any guide, and
soon began to turn to the left, so that he was in reality moving on the
circumference of a large circle, without suspecting how much he wandered
from the true course.

This peculiar mistake is made by many who are lost in the wilderness,
and is supposed to be due to the fact that everybody is either right or
left handed, instead of being ambidextrous as we all ought to be.

One side of the body being stronger than the other, we unconsciously
exert the limb on that side the most, and swerve from a straight line,
unless we have something to direct in the shape of a landmark or
guiding-post.

It was not until Nick had gone a long ways out of the right course that
he suspected his error: the appearance of the camp fire which Sam Harper
had kindled, was what led him to stop and make the best investigation he
could.

There was little else he could appeal to, and he was in doubt as to
whether that had not been kindled by some other party; but fortunately,
while he was debating the matter, he caught the faint but distinct
signal of his friend, who was on the point of starting out to look for
him.

Nick replied, and in the course of half an hour had joined Sam and
Herbert by the fire.

They were relieved beyond expression to see the figure of the sturdy
little fellow, as he emerged from the gloom, and took his seat around
the camp fire.

They noticed that he limped, and knew something unusual must have taken
place to delay him. He had the most attentive of listeners when he
related his dangerous encounter with the buck, which came so nigh ending
his life.

But, happily, he had come out without any serious injury, and the lads
attacked their supper with the keenest of appetites.

"The reason the buck did not kill you," said Herbert, "was because he
was disabled by the wound I gave him."

"He was struck by one bullet only, and that one was mine," said Nick,
who saw no sense in deferring to the absurd claims of the youth.

"Possibly not, but we shall have to examine his carcass to make sure of
that."

"I don't believe we shall have much time to look after dead deer," said
Sam, "for I believe we are in the neighborhood of the very bear we're
looking for."

His friends turned toward him for an explanation of this remark, which
was uttered with all seriousness.

"Bowser has been acting very queer for the last half-hour."

"I think he has acted queer all day," observed Nick.

"I did not consider him of much account until he saved me from the
rattlesnake this afternoon; after that, I'm ready to believe he's got a
good deal more sense than you are willing to think."

Then Sam told his story, and added that the hound had left the vicinity
of the fire several times, and, going some distance in the woods, had
come back, giving utterance to a peculiar whine. At the same time he
looked up in the face of his master with much the same expression as he
did when seeking to warn him of his danger from the poisonous serpent.

"There he goes now!" suddenly exclaimed Sam; "just watch him!"

Bowser had been stretched out near enough to the fire to receive much of
its warmth, and appeared to be asleep. All at once he threw up his head
and sniffed the air, as though he scented something; then he rose, with
a low whine, and trotted straight out in the gloom.

The lads listened attentively for some sound from him, but all remained
still. At the end of ten minutes he came trotting to view again, and
walked straight up to his master, looked up in his face, wagging his
tail, and whined again.

"You can depend on it," said Sam, "he has made some discovery, though I
have no idea what it is."

"Let's follow him and find out."

It was Nick Ribsam who made the proposal; the others were inclined to
hold back, but the plucky little fellow insisted, and it was agreed that
Bowser's secret should be learned by keeping him company to the spot
which he visited.




CHAPTER XXVI.

AN UNEXPECTED ATTACK.


The three boys had scarcely agreed to the proposition to follow the
hound, when Bowser, as if he understood their intention, rose from the
ground where he had been lying, close to the camp fire, looked sharply
out in the gloom of the surrounding woods, and then moved along the same
course he had taken several times before.

He did not trot, but walked with a deliberate gait, as if he felt the
importance of being the leader of such a party.

"It must be a wild animal," said Sam, in an undertone, "or Bowser
wouldn't act that way."

"It's the bear, of course; see that your guns are ready, and when you
fire be sure you don't miss," warned Herbert.

An idea suddenly occurred to Nick Ribsam.

"All wild animals are afraid of fire: let's each take a torch to keep
him off."

The others eagerly caught up a blazing brand and strode forward with
more confidence than ever.

Herbert Watrous, who was sensible that he had not made such an
exhibition before the others as he desired, placed himself at the head
of the little company.

He hardly would have done this, had he not been certain that the flaming
brands would act as a shield to keep away the wild animal, whatever its
nature.

Each lad found it a little awkward to carry his loaded and cocked rifle
in one hand and the flaming stick of wood in the other. It cannot be
said there was any special difficulty in the task itself, but if a
crisis came the boy would have to surrender one of his weapons.

The young hunters formed a picturesque group as they moved forward in
Indian file, each holding a burning torch above his head and swinging it
so as to keep the blaze going, while his gun was trailed in the other
hand.

The hound Bowser was at the head, Herbert Watrous next, Sam Harper
followed, and Nick Ribsam, who still limped slightly, brought up the
rear.

The hound showed an intelligence which would have been surprising but
for his action respecting the rattlesnake. He kept on a slow walk, so as
not to leave his friends, and now and then looked at them, as if to make
sure they were not trying to shrink from an important duty.

"Keep your torches going," called out Herbert, in a husky whisper, as he
swung his own so vigorously that a large piece dropped off, and, falling
on his foot, caused him to leap up with an exclamation of affright.

The fact was, they had gone no more than a hundred feet from the camp
fire when Herbert began to feel that he had not shown enough care in
picking out his torch, for the blaze was feeble, and, in spite of
continued nursing, showed a tendency to collapse altogether.

"Keep close to me, boys," he said, waiting for Sam to come still nearer,
"for I don't like the way this torch is behaving; I believe it is going
out altogether, and I think I'll get a better--"

"_Look out! there he is now!_" exclaimed Sam, in no little excitement.

As he uttered the warning words, Bowser turned squarely about and ran
back to where his master had halted with the smoking torch, and crouched
at his feet, whining and appealing for protection against some enemy.

Just then a savage sniff was heard, followed instantly by the sound of
hoofs, as the unknown animal charged upon Herbert Watrous, who was
whirling his half-expired torch around his head with such swiftness that
it made a ring of fire, similar to those which all boys delight to look
upon during the pyrotechnic displays on the Fourth of July.

Herbert was so impressed with the importance of this action, that he
threw all his energy in it, stooping down and rising on his tip-toes
with the motion of the torch, and grunting hard and with much
regularity, as he always did when exerting himself with unusual vigor.

He caught the warning cry of Sam and the rattle of the hoofs at the same
instant.

"_Shoot him! Shoot him!_" he shouted to his friends, who could not gain
the view of the beast necessary to make the shot safe for Herbert
himself.

The savage creature, from some reason, probably because the torch was
less formidable, made for the city youth, who was not aware of his
danger until too late.

The brute went directly between his outspread feet, and, lifting him on
his back, carried him several paces, when Herbert, his gun, torch, and
himself, mixed up in great confusion, rolled off backward, turning a
partial somersault and landing solidly on his head, his gun going off in
the confusion and adding to it.

Sam Harper threw down his torch, so as to use his rifle, but he saw
Herbert's dilemma and waited the chance to shoot without danger of
harming him; but the partial extinguishment of his own torch, and the
total blotting out of Herbert's, rendered the risk still greater.

While he stood, with gun partly raised and hand on the trigger, Herbert
rolled off, but Sam had not time to catch the fact when the beast shot
between his legs, and he felt himself lifted off his feet and fairly
whizzing through the air.

Nick Ribsam's torch was burning brightly and illuminated the whole
scene. He was in a stooping position, holding his flaming brand so he
could see everything, and he was laughing so hard that he could hardly
keep from falling to the ground from weakness.

He had recognized the animal, which they had held in such terror, as a
large hog that had doubtless wandered in the woods so long with his
mates, eating the acorns and nuts fallen from the trees, that he was
half wild and ready to attack any one who came near him.

The hog was a lank, bony fellow, with great strength and swiftness of
