habits are; but if it is considered in Ireland rather a virtue than
otherwise to spill a milk jug, and allow the contents to deface the
tablecloth, I am sorry for you, that is all."

"You cannot understand. I--I am sorry I came," said Nora.

She burst into sudden tears, and ran out of the room. In a few moments
Linda came back.

"Molly is storming," she said; "she is in an awful rage."

"Sit down, Linda, and don't tell tales of your sister," answered Mrs.
Hartrick in an annoyed voice.

"Dear me, mother!" said Linda; "and where is Nora?"

"Nora is a very impertinent little girl. She is wild, however, and
unbroken. We must all have patience with her. Poor child! it is terrible
to think that she is your father's niece. What a contrast to dear
Terence! He is a very nice, polite boy. I am sorry for Nora. Of course,
as to Molly, she is quite different. She has always had the advantage of
my bringing-up; whereas poor Nora--well, I must say I am surprised at my
sister-in-law. I did not think your father's sister would have been so
remiss."

"There is one thing I ought to say," said Linda.

"What is that, dear? Linda, do sit up straight, and don't poke your
head."

Linda drew herself up, and looked prettily toward her mother.

"What do you wish to say?"

"It is this. I think Nora will be a very bad companion for Molly. Molly
will be worse than ever that Nora is in the house."

"Well, my dear Linda, it is your duty to be a good deal with your
cousin. You are too fond of poking holes in others; you are a little
hard upon your sister Molly. I do not wish to excuse Molly; but it is
not your place as her younger sister to, as it were, rejoice in her many
faults."

"Oh, I don't, mother," said Linda, coloring.

"Linda dear, I am afraid you do. You must try and break yourself of that
very unchristian habit. But, on the whole, my dear, I am pleased
with you. You are careful to do what I wish; you learn your lessons
correctly; I have good reports of you from your schoolmistresses; and if
you are careful, my dear, you will correct those little habits which mar
the perfect whole."

"Thank you, dear mother," said Linda. "I will try to do what you wish."

"What I particularly want you to do just now is to be gentle and
patient with your cousin; you must remember that she has never had your
advantages. Be with her a good deal; talk to her as nicely as you can;
hint to her what I wish. Of course, if she becomes quite incorrigible,
it will be impossible for me to have her long with you and Molly; but
the child is much to be pitied; she is a very pretty creature, and with
a little care could be made most presentable. I by no means give her
up."

"Dear mother, how sweetly Christian-like and forgiving you are!" said
Linda.

"Oh, hush, my dear; hush! I only do my duty; I hope I shall never fail
in that."

Mrs. Hartrick rose from the tea-table, and Linda soon afterward followed
her. Mr. Hartrick was seen coming down the avenue. He generally walked
from the station. He came in now.

"What a hot day it is!" he said. "Pour me out a cup of tea, Linda. I am
very thirsty."

He flung himself into an easy chair, and Linda waited on him.

"Well," he said, "where are the others? Where is the little Irish witch,
and where is Molly?"

"I am sorry to say that Molly is in disgrace, as usual," said Mrs.
Hartrick.

"Oh, dear, dear!" said Mr. Hartrick; "we ought to send her to school,
poor child! I am sorry for her."

"And I intended to give her quite a pleasant evening," said Mrs.
Hartrick, "in honor of her cousin's arrival. She was in disgrace
yesterday when Nora arrived; and I had thought of giving the girls
a delightful evening. I had it all planned, and was going to ask the
Challoners over; but really Molly is so incorrigible. She was very pert
to me, although she did bring a better report from school; she used some
of her objectionable language to Linda, and was more awkward even than
usual."

"Look at the tablecloth, father," said Linda.

"I think, Linda, you had better run out of the room," said Mr. Hartrick.
He spoke in an annoyed voice.

"Certainly, father, I will go; but don't you want another cup of tea
first?"

"Your mother shall pour it out for me. Go, my dear--go."

"Only, mother, is it necessary that we should not ask the Challoners
because Molly is naughty? The rest of us would like to have them."

"I will let you know presently, Linda," said her mother; and Linda was
obliged, to her disgust, to leave the room.

"Now, then, my dear," said Mr. Hartrick, "I don't at all like to call
you over the coals; but I think it is a pity to speak against Molly so
much as you do in her sister's presence. Linda is getting eaten up
with conceit; she will be an intolerable woman by and by, so
self-opinionated, and so pleased with herself. After all, poor Molly may
have the best of it in the future; she is a fine child, notwithstanding
her naughtiness."

"I thought it likely you would take her part, George; and I am sorry,"
answered Mrs. Hartrick in a melancholy tone; "but I am grieved to tell
you that there is something else to follow. That little Irish girl is
quite as cheeky, even more cheeky than Molly. I fear I must ask you to
say a word to her; I shall require her to be respectful to me while she
is here. She spoke very rudely to me just now, simply because I found it
my duty to correct Molly."

"Oh, that won't do at all," said Mr. Hartrick. "I must speak to Nora."

"I wish you would do so."

"I will. By the way, Grace, what a pretty creature she is!"

"She is a beautiful little wildflower," said Mrs. Hartrick. "I have
taken a great fancy to her, notwithstanding her rudeness. She has never
had the smallest care; she has simply been allowed to grow up wild."

"Well, Nature has taken care of her," said Mr. Hartrick.

"Yes, dear, of course; but you yourself know the advantage of bringing
up a girl nicely."

"And no one is more capable of doing that than you are," said Mr.
Hartrick, giving his wife an admiring glance.

"Thank you, dear, for the compliment; but I should be glad if you would
speak to Nora. Now that she is here, I have no doubt that we shall soon
discipline her; and I should like her to pay quite a long visit--that
is, of course, if she becomes conformable to my ways."

"She will be sure to do that, Grace," replied the husband. "I am glad
you mean to be good to her, and to take her in hand, poor little lass!"

"I thought she might have some good masters and get some valuable
lessons while she is here," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Would you believe
it, George?--that little girl of sixteen calmly informed me that her
education was finished. At the same time, she said she knew no language
but her own, and just a smattering of that dead tongue, Irish. She
cannot play; in short, she has no accomplishments whatever, and yet her
education is finished. I must say I do not understand your sister. I
should have thought that she was a little more like you."

"There never was a more particular girl than Ellen used to be," said
Mr. Hartrick; "but I must have a long talk with Nora. I'll see her this
evening. I know she has a good deal she wants to talk to me about."

"A good deal she wants to talk to you about, George?"

"Oh, yes, my dear; but I will explain presently. She is a proud little
witch, and must not be coerced; we must remember that her spirit has
never been broken. But I'll talk to her, I'll talk to her; leave the
matter in my hands, Grace."

"Certainly, dear; she is your niece, remember."




CHAPTER XVII.


TWO DESCRIPTIONS.

Some of Nora's words must have sunk into Mrs. Hartrick's heart, for,
rather to Molly's own astonishment, she was allowed to dress nicely for
dinner, and to come down. Her somewhat heavy, dark face did not look to
the best advantage. She wore a dress which did not suit her; her hair
was awkwardly arranged; there was a scowl on her brow. She felt so sore
and cross, after what she considered her brave efforts to be good during
the morning, that she would almost rather have stayed up in her room.
But Nora would not hear of that. Nora had rushed into Molly's room, and
had begged her, for her sake, to come downstairs. Nora was looking
quite charming in that pretty white frock which Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had
purchased for her in Dublin. Her softly rounded figure, her dazzlingly
fair complexion, were seen now for the first time to the best advantage.
Her thick black hair was coiled up becomingly on her graceful little
head, and, with a bunch of sweet peas at her belt, there could scarcely
have been seen a prettier maiden. When she appeared in the drawing room,
even Terence was forced to admit that he had seldom seen a more lovely
girl than his sister. He went up to her and began to take notice of her.

"I am sorry I was obliged to be out all day. I am studying the different
museums very exhaustively," said Terence in that measured tone of his
which drove poor Nora nearly wild. She replied to him somewhat pertly,
and he retired once more into his shell.

"Pretty as my sister is," he soliloquized, "she really is such an
ignorant girl that few fellows would care to speak to her. It is a sad
pity."

Terence, the last hope of the house of O'Shanaghgan, was heard to
sigh profoundly. His aunt, Mrs. Hartrick, and his cousin Linda would,
doubtless, sympathize with him.

"Dinner was announced, and the meal went off very well. Molly was
absolutely silent; Nora, taking her cue from her, hardly spoke; and
Linda, Terence, and Mrs. Hartrick had it all their own way. But just
as dessert was placed on the table, Mr. Hartrick looked at Nora and
motioned to her to change seats and to come to one close to him.

"Come now," he said, "we should like to hear your account of Castle
O'Shanaghgan. Terence has told us all about it; but we should like to
hear your version."

"And a most lovely place it must be," said Mrs. Hartrick from the other
end of the table. "Your description, Terence, makes me quite long to see
it; and if it were not that I am honestly very much afraid of the Irish
peasantry, I should be glad to go there during the summer. But those
terrible creatures, with their shillalahs, and their natural aptitude
for firing on you from behind a hedge, are quite too fearful to
contemplate. I could not run the risk of assassination from any of them.
They seem to have a natural hatred for the English and--why, what is the
matter, Nora?"

"Only it's not true," said Nora, her eyes flashing. "They are not a
bit like that; they are the most warmhearted people in the whole world.
Terence, have you been telling lies about your country? If you have, I
am downright ashamed of you."

"But I have not. I don't know what you mean," answered Terence.

"Oh, come, come, Nora!" said her uncle, patting her arm gently; but
Nora's eyes blazed with fire.

"It's not a bit true," she continued. "How can Aunt Grace think of that?
The poor things have been driven to desperation, because--because their
hearts have been trampled on."

"For instance," said Terence in a mocking voice, which fell like ice
upon poor Nora's hot, indignant nature--"for instance, Andy Neil--he's a
nice specimen, is he not?"

"Oh," said Nora, "he--he is the exception. Don't talk of him, please."

"That's just it," said Terence, laughing. "Nora wants to give us all
the sweets, and to conceal all the bitters. Now, I am honest, whatever I
am."

"Oh, are you?" said Nora, in indignation. "I should like to know," she
continued, "what kind of place you have represented Castle O'Shanaghgan
to be."

"I don't know why I should be obliged to answer to you for what I say,
Nora," cried her brother.

"You describe it now, Nora. We will hear your description," said her
uncle.

Nora sat quite still for a moment; then she raised her very dark-blue
eyes.

"Do you really want me to tell you about O'Shanaghgan?" she said slowly.

"Certainly, my dear."

"Certainly, Nora. I am sure you can describe things very well," said her
aunt, in an encouraging voice, from the other end of the table.

"Then I will tell you," said Nora. She paused for a moment, then, to the
astonishment and disgust of Mrs. Hartrick, rose to her feet.

"I cannot talk about it sitting down," she said. "There's the sea, you
know--the wild, wild Atlantic. In the winter the breakers are--oh! I
have sometimes seen them forty feet high."

"Come, come, Nora!" said Terence,

"It is true, Terry; the times when you don't like to go out."

Terence retired into his shell.

"I have seen the waves like that; but, oh! in the summer they can be so
sweet and conoodling."

"What in the world is that?" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh, it is one of our Irish words; there's no other way to express it.
And then there are the cliffs, and the great caves, and the yellow,
yellow sands, and the shells, and the seaweeds, and the fish, and the
boating, and--and--"

"Go on, Nora; you describe the sea just like any other sea."

"Oh, but it is like no other sea," said Nora. "And then there are the
mountains, their feet washed by the waves."

"Quite poetical," said Mrs. Hartrick.

"It is; it is all poetry," said Nora. "You are not laughing at me, are
you, Aunt Grace? I wish you could see those mountains and that sea, and
then the home--O'Shanaghgan itself."

"Yes, Nora; tell us," said her uncle, who did not laugh, and was much
interested in the girl's description.

"The home," cried Nora; "the great big, darling, empty house."

"Empty! What a very peculiar description!" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Oh, it is so nice," said Nora. "You don't knock over furniture when you
walk about; and the dining-room table is so big that, even if you did
spill a jug of milk, father would not be angry."

Mrs. Hartrick uttered a sigh.

"Oh, we are wild over there," continued Nora; "we have no
conventionalities. We share and share alike; we don't mind whether we
are rich or poor. We are poor--oh! frightfully poor; and we keep very
few servants; and--and the place is bare; because it can be nothing but
bare; but there's no place like O'Shanaghgan."

"But what do you mean by bare?" said Mrs. Hartrick.

"Bare?" said Nora. "I mean bare; very few carpets and very little
furniture, and--and----But, oh! it's the hearts that are warm, and that
is the only thing that matters."

"It must be a right-down jolly place; and, by Jehoshaphat! I wish I was
there," interrupted Molly.

"Molly!" said her mother.

"Oh, leave her alone for the present," said Mr. Hartrick. "But do you
mean," he continued, looking at Nora in a distressed way, "that--that my
sister lives in a house of that sort?"

"Mother?" said Nora. "Of course; she is father's wife, and my mother;
she is the lady of O'Shanaghgan. It is a very proud position. We don't
want grand furniture nor carpets to make it a proud position. She is
father's wife, and he is O'Shanaghgan of Castle O'Shanaghgan. He is a
sort of king, and he is descended from kings."

"Well, Terence, I must say this does not at all coincide with your
description," said his uncle, turning and looking his nephew full in the
face.

"I didn't wish to make things too bad, sir. Of course, we are not very
rich over there; but still, Nora does exaggerate."

"Look here, Nora," said her uncle, suddenly turning and pulling her down
to sit beside him, "you and I must have a little chat. We will just
go and have it right away. You shall tell me your version of the story
quite by ourselves." He then rose and drew her out of the room.

"Where shall we go?" he said when they stood for a moment in the
conservatory, into which the big dining room opened.
