workhouse. Every building that could be arranged for the purpose was
filled to overflowing as soon as it was ready. But the worst of the
famine had not come upon them as yet. And then Herbert rode back to
Castle Richmond.




CHAPTER XVII.

FATHER BARNEY.


Mick O'Dwyer's public-house at Kanturk was by no means so pretentious
an establishment as that kept by his brother in South Main Street,
Cork, but it was on the whole much less nasty. It was a drinking-shop
and a public car office, and such places in Ireland are seldom very
nice; but there was no attempt at hotel grandeur, and the little
room in which the family lived behind the bar was never invaded by
customers.

On one evening just at this time--at the time, that is, with which we
have been lately concerned--three persons were sitting in this room
over a cup of tea. There was a gentleman, middle-aged, but none the
worse on that account, who has already been introduced in these pages
as Father Bernard M'Carthy. He was the parish priest of Drumbarrow;
and as his parish comprised a portion of the town of Kanturk, he
lived, not exactly in the town, but within a mile of it. His sister
had married Mr. O'Dwyer of South Main Street, and therefore he was
quite at home in the little back parlour of Mick O'Dwyer's house in
Kanturk. Indeed Father Bernard was a man who made himself at home in
the houses of most of his parishioners,--and of some who were not his
parishioners.

His companions on the present occasion were two ladies who seemed to
be emulous in supplying his wants. The younger and more attractive
of the two was also an old friend of ours, being no other than
Fanny O'Dwyer from South Main Street. Actuated, doubtless, by some
important motive she had left her bar at home for one night, having
come down to Kanturk by her father's car, with the intention of
returning by it in the morning. She was seated as a guest here on the
corner of the sofa near the fire, but nevertheless she was neither
too proud nor too strange in her position to administer as best she
might to the comfort of her uncle.

The other lady was Mistress O'Dwyer, the lady of the mansion. She was
fat, very; by no means fair, and perhaps something over forty. But
nevertheless there were those who thought that she had her charms.
A better hand at curing a side of bacon there was not in the county
Cork, nor a woman who was more knowing in keeping a house straight
and snug over her husband's head. That she had been worth more than
a fortune to Mick O'Dwyer was admitted by all in Kanturk; for it was
known to all that Mick O'Dwyer was not himself a good hand at keeping
a house straight and snug.

"Another cup of tay, Father Bernard," said this lady. "It'll be
more to your liking now than the first, you'll find." Father Barney,
perfectly reliant on her word, handed in his cup.

"And the muffin is quite hot," said Fanny, stooping down to a tray
which stood before the peat fire, holding the muffin dish. "But
perhaps you'd like a morsel of buttered toast; say the word, uncle,
and I'll make it in a brace of seconds."

"In course she will," said Mrs. O'Dwyer: "and happy too, av you'll
only say that you have a fancy, Father Bernard."

But Father Bernard would not own to any such fancy. The muffin, he
said, was quite to his liking, and so was the tea; and from the
manner in which he disposed of these delicacies, even Mrs. Townsend
might have admitted that this assertion was true, though she was
wont to express her belief that nothing but lies could, by any
possibility, fall from his mouth.

"And they have been staying with you now for some weeks, haven't
they?" said Father Barney.

"Off and on," said Fanny.

"But there's one of them mostly there, isn't he?" added the priest.

"The two of them is mostly there, just now. Sometimes one goes away
for a day or two, and sometimes the other."

"And they have no business which keeps them in Cork?" continued the
priest, who seemed to be very curious on the matter.

"Well, they do have business, I suppose," said Fanny, "but av so
I never sees it." Fanny O'Dwyer had a great respect for her uncle,
seeing that he filled an exalted position, and was a connexion of
whom she could be justly proud; but, though she had now come down to
Kanturk with the view of having a good talk with her aunt and uncle
about the Molletts, she would only tell as much as she liked to tell,
even to the parish priest of Drumbarrow. And we may as well explain
here that Fanny had now permanently made up her mind to reject the
suit of Mr. Abraham Mollett. As she had allowed herself to see more
and more of the little domestic ways of that gentleman, and to become
intimate with him as a girl should become with the man she intends
to marry, she had gradually learned to think that he hardly came up
to her beau ideal of a lover. That he was crafty and false did not
perhaps offend her as it should have done. Dear Fanny, excellent and
gracious as she was, could herself be crafty on occasions. He drank
too, but that came in the way of her profession. It is hard, perhaps,
for a barmaid to feel much severity against that offence. But in
addition to this Aby was selfish and cruel and insolent, and seldom
altogether good tempered. He was bad to his father, and bad to those
below him whom he employed. Old Mollett would give away his sixpences
with a fairly liberal hand, unless when he was exasperated by drink
and fatigue. But Aby seldom gave away a penny. Fanny had sharp eyes,
and soon felt that her English lover was not a man to be loved,
though he had two rings, a gold chain, and half a dozen fine
waistcoats.

And then another offence had come to light in which the Molletts were
both concerned. Since their arrival in South Main Street they had
been excellent customers--indeed quite a godsend, in this light, to
Fanny, who had her own peculiar profit out of such house-customers
as they were. They had paid their money like true Britons,--not
regularly indeed, for regularity had not been desired, but by a five
pound now, and another in a day or two, just as they were wanted.
Nothing indeed could be better than this, for bills so paid are
seldom rigidly scrutinized. But of late, within the last week,
Fanny's requests for funds had not been so promptly met, and only on
the day before her visit to Kanturk she had been forced to get her
father to take a bill from Mr. Mollett senior for L20 at two months'
date. This was a great come-down, as both Fanny and her father felt,
and they had begun to think that it might be well to bring their
connexion with the Molletts to a close. What if an end had come to
the money of these people, and their bills should be dishonoured when
due? It was all very well for a man to have claims against Sir Thomas
Fitzgerald, but Fanny O'Dwyer had already learnt that nothing goes so
far in this world as ready cash.

"They do have business, I suppose," said Fanny.

"It won't be worth much, I'm thinking," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, "when they
can't pay their weekly bills at a house of public entertainment,
without flying their names at two months' date."

Mrs. O'Dwyer hated any such payments herself, and looked on them as
certain signs of immorality. That every man should take his drop of
drink, consume it noiselessly, and pay for it immediately--that was
her idea of propriety in its highest form.

"And they've been down here three or four times, each of them," said
Father Barney, thinking deeply on the subject.

"I believe they have," said Fanny. "But of course I don't know much
of where they've been to."

Father Barney knew very well that his dear niece had been on much
more intimate terms with her guest than she pretended. The rumours
had reached his ears some time since that the younger of the two
strangers in South Main Street was making himself agreeable to the
heiress of the hotel, and he had intended to come down upon her with
all the might of an uncle, and, if necessary, with all the authority
of the Church. But now that Fanny had discarded her lover, he wisely
felt that it would be well for him to know nothing about it. Both
uncles and priests may know too much--very foolishly.

"I have seen them here myself," said he, "and they have both been up
at Castle Richmond."

"They do say as poor Sir Thomas is in a bad way," said Mrs. O'Dwyer,
shaking her head piteously.

"And yet he sees these men," said Father Barney. "I know that
for certain. He has seen them, though he will rarely see anybody
now-a-days."

"Young Mr. Herbert is a-doing most of the business up about the
place," said Mrs. O'Dwyer. "And people do say as how he is going to
make a match of it with Lady Clara Desmond. And it's the lucky girl
she'll be, for he's a nice young fellow entirely."

"Not half equal to her other Joe, Mr. Owen that is," said Fanny.

"Well, I don't know that, my dear. Such a house and property as
Castle Richmond is not likely to go a-begging among the young women.
And then Mr. Herbert is not so rampageous like as him of Hap House,
by all accounts."

But Father Barney still kept to his subject. "And they are both at
your place at the present moment, eh, Fanny?"

"They was to dine there, after I left."

"And the old man said he'd be down here again next Thursday,"
continued the priest. "I heard that for certain. I'll tell you what
it is, they're not after any good here. They are Protestants, ain't
they?"

"Oh, black Protestants," said Mrs. O'Dwyer. "But you are not taking
your tay, Father Bernard," and she again filled his cup for him.

"If you'll take my advice, Fanny, you'll give them nothing more
without seeing their money. They'll come to no good here, I'm sure of
that. They're afther some mischief with that poor old gentleman at
Castle Richmond, and it's my belief the police will have them before
they've done."

"Like enough," said Mrs. O'Dwyer.

"They may have them to-morrow, for what I care," said Fanny, who
could not help feeling that Aby Mollett had at one time been not
altogether left without hope as her suitor.

"But you wouldn't like anything like that to happen in your father's
house," said Father Barney.

"Bringing throuble and disgrace on an honest name," said Mrs.
O'Dwyer.

"There'd be no disgrace as I knows of," said Fanny, stoutly. "Father
makes his money by the public, and in course he takes in any that
comes the way with money in their pockets to pay the shot."

"But these Molletts ain't got the money to pay the shot," said Mrs.
O'Dwyer, causticly. "You've about sucked 'em dhry, I'm thinking, and
they owes you more now than you're like to get from 'em."

"I suppose father 'll have to take that bill up," said Fanny,
assenting. And so it was settled down there among them that the
Molletts were to have the cold shoulder, and that they should in fact
be turned out of the Kanturk Hotel as quickly as this could be done.
"Better a small loss at first, than a big one at last," said Mrs.
O'Dwyer, with much wisdom. "They'll come to mischief down here, as
sure as my name's M'Carthy," said the priest. "And I'd be sorry your
father should be mixed up in it."

And then by degrees the conversation was changed, but not till the
tea-things had been taken away, and a square small bottle of very
particular whisky put on the table in its place. And the sugar also
was brought, and boiling water in an immense jug, as though Father
Barney were going to make a deep potation indeed, and a lemon in a
wine glass; and then the priest was invited, with much hospitality,
to make himself comfortable. Nor did the luxuries prepared for him
end here; but Fanny, the pretty Fan herself, filled a pipe for him,
and pretended that she would light it, for such priests are merry
enough sometimes, and can joke as well as other men with their pretty
nieces.

"But you're not mixing your punch, Father Bernard," said Mrs.
O'Dwyer, with a plaintive melancholy voice, "and the wather getting
cowld and all! Faix then, Father Bernard, I'll mix it for ye, so
I will." And so she did, and well she knew how. And then she made
another for herself and her niece, urging that "a thimbleful
would do Fanny all the good in life afther her ride acrass them
cowld mountains," and the priest looked on assenting, blowing the
comfortable streams of smoke from his nostrils.

"And so, Father Bernard, you and Parson Townsend is to meet again
to-morrow at Gortnaclough." Whereupon Father Bernard owned that such
was the case, with a nod, not caring to disturb the pipe which lay
comfortably on his lower lip.

"Well, well; only to think on it," continued Mrs. O'Dwyer. "That the
same room should hould the two of ye." And she lifted up her hands
and shook her head.

"It houlds us both very comfortable, I can assure you, Mrs. O'Dwyer."

"And he ain't rampageous and highty-tighty? He don't give hisself no
airs?"

"Well, no; nothing in particular. Why should the man be such a fool
as that?"

"Why, in course? But they are such fools, Father Bernard. They does
think theyselves such grand folks. Now don't they? I'd give a dandy
of punch all round to the company just to hear you put him down once;
I would. But he isn't upsetting at all, then?"

"Not the last time we met, he wasn't; and I don't think he intends
it. Things have come to that now that the parsons know where they are
and what they have to look to. They're getting a lesson they'll not
forget in a hurry. Where are their rent charges to come from--can you
tell me that, Mrs. O'Dwyer?"

Mrs. O'Dwyer could not, but she remarked that pride would always have
a fall. "And there's no pride like Protesthant pride," said Fanny.
"It is so upsetting, I can't abide it." All which tended to show that
she had quite given up her Protestant lover.

"And is it getthing worse than iver with the poor crathurs?" said
Mrs. O'Dwyer, referring, not to the Protestants, but to the victims
of the famine.

"Indeed it's getting no betther," said the priest, "and I'm fearing
it will be worse before it is over. I haven't married one couple in
Drumbarrow since November last."

"And that's a heavy sign, Father Bernard."

"The surest sign in the world that they have no money among them at
all, at all. And it is bad with thim, Mrs. O'Dwyer,--very bad, very
bad indeed."

"Glory be to God, the poor cratures!" said the soft-hearted lady.
"It isn't much the like of us have to give away, Father Bernard; I
needn't be telling you that. But we'll help, you know,--we'll help."

"And so will father, uncle Bernard. If you're so bad off about here
I know he'll give you a thrifle for the asking." In a short time,
however, it came to pass that those in the cities could spare no aid
to the country. Indeed it may be a question whether the city poverty
was not the harder of the two.

"God bless you both--you've soft hearts, I know." And Father Barney
put his punch to his lips. "Whatever you can do for me shall not be
thrown away. And I'll tell you what, Mrs. O'Dwyer, it does behove us
all to put our best foot out now. We will not let them say that the
Papists would do nothing for their own poor."

"'Deed then an' they'll say anything of us, Father Bernard. There's
nothing too hot or too heavy for them."

"At any rate let us not deserve it, Mrs. O'Dwyer. There will be a lot
of them at Gortnaclough to-morrow, and I shall tell them that we, on
our side, won't be wanting. To give them their due, I must say that
they are working well. That young Herbert Fitzgerald's a trump,
whether he's Protestant or Catholic."

"An' they do say he's a strong bearing towards the ould religion,"
said Mrs. O'Dwyer. "God bless his sweet young face av' he'd come back
to us. That's what I say."

"God bless his face any way, say I," said Father Barney, with a wider
philanthropy. "He is doing his best for the people, and the time has
come now when we must hang together, if it be any way possible." And
with this the priest finished his pipe, and wishing the ladies good
night, walked away to his own house.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE RELIEF COMMITTEE.


At this time the famine was beginning to be systematised. The
sternest among landlords and masters were driven to acknowledge that
the people had not got food or the means of earning it. The people
themselves were learning that a great national calamity had happened,
and that the work was God's work; and the Government had fully
recognized the necessity of taking the whole matter into its own
hands. They were responsible for the preservation of the people, and
they acknowledged their responsibility.

And then two great rules seemed to get themselves laid down--not by
general consent, for there were many who greatly contested their
wisdom--but by some force strong enough to make itself dominant.
The first was, that the food to be provided should be earned and
not given away. And the second was, that the providing of that
food should be left to private competition, and not in any way be
undertaken by the Government. I make bold to say that both these
rules were wise and good.

But how should the people work? That Government should supply
the wages was of course an understood necessity; and it was also
necessary that on all such work the amount of wages should be
regulated by the price at which provisions might fix themselves.
These points produced questions which were hotly debated by the
Relief Committees of the different districts; but at last it got
itself decided, again by the hands of Government, that all hills
along the country roads should be cut away, and that the people
should be employed on this work. They were so employed,--very little
to the advantage of the roads for that or some following years.

"So you have begun, my men," said Herbert to a gang of labourers whom
he found collected at a certain point on Ballydahan Hill, which lay
on his road from Castle Richmond to Gortnaclough. In saying this
he had certainly paid them an unmerited compliment, for they had
hitherto begun nothing. Some thirty or forty wretched-looking men
were clustered together in the dirt and slop and mud, on the brow
of the hill, armed with such various tools as each was able to
find--with tools, for the most part, which would go but a little
way in making Ballydahan Hill level or accessible. This question of
tools also came to a sort of understood settlement before long; and
within three months of the time of which I am writing legions of
wheelbarrows were to be seen lying near every hill; wheelbarrows in
hundreds and thousands. The fate of those myriads of wheelbarrows has
always been a mystery to me.

"So you have begun, my men," said Herbert, addressing them in a
kindly voice. There was a couple of gangsmen with them, men a
little above the others in appearance, but apparently incapable
of commencing the work in hand, for they also were standing idle,
leaning against a bit of wooden paling. It had, however, been decided
that the works at Ballydahan Hill should begin on this day, and there
were the men assembled. One fact admitted of no doubt, namely, this,
that the wages would begin from this day.

And then the men came and clustered round Herbert's horse. They were
wretched-looking creatures, half-clad, discontented, with hungry
eyes, each having at his heart's core a deep sense of injustice done
personally upon him. They hated this work of cutting hills from the
commencement to the end,--hated it, though it was to bring them wages
and save them and theirs from actual famine and death. They had not
been accustomed to the discomfort of being taken far from their homes
to their daily work. Very many of them had never worked regularly
for wages, day after day, and week after week. Up to this time such
was not the habit of Irish cottiers. They held their own land, and
laboured there for a spell; and then they would work for a spell, as
men do in England, taking wages; and then they would be idle for a
spell. It was not exactly a profitable mode of life, but it had its
comforts; and now these unfortunates who felt themselves to be driven
forth like cattle in droves for the first time, suffered the full
wretchedness of their position. They were not rough and unruly, or
inclined to be troublesome and perhaps violent, as men similarly
circumstanced so often are in England;--as Irishmen are when
collected in gangs out of Ireland. They had no aptitudes for
such roughness, and no spirits for such violence. But they were
melancholy, given to complaint, apathetic, and utterly without
interest in that they were doing.

"Yz, yer honer," said one man who was standing, shaking himself, with
his hands enveloped in the rags of his pockets. He had on no coat,
and the keen north wind seemed to be blowing through his bones; cold,
however, as he was, he would do nothing towards warming himself,
unless that occasional shake can be considered as a doing of
something. "Yz, yer honer; we've begun thin since before daylight
this blessed morning."

It was now eleven o'clock, and a pick-axe had not been put into the
ground, nor the work marked.

"Been here before daylight!" said Herbert. "And has there been nobody
to set you to work?"

"Divil a sowl, yer honer," said another, who was sitting on a
hedge-bank leaning with both his hands on a hoe, which he held
between his legs, "barring Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady; they two do
be over us, but they knows nothin' o' such jobs as this."

Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady had with the others moved up so as
to be close to Herbert's horse, but they said not a word towards
vindicating their own fitness for command.

"And it's mortial cowld standing here thin," said another, "without
a bit to ate or a sup to dhrink since last night, and then only a
lump of the yally mail." And the speaker moved about on his toes and
heels, desirous of keeping his blood in circulation with the smallest
possible amount of trouble.

"I'm telling the boys it's home we'd betther be going," said a
fourth.

"And lose the tizzy they've promised us," said he of the hoe.

"Sorrow a tizzy they'll pay any of yez for standing here all day,"
said an ill-looking little wretch of a fellow, with a black muzzle
and a squinting eye; "ye may all die in the road first." And the man
turned away among the crowd, as an Irishman does who has made his
speech and does not want to be answered.

"You need have no fear about that, my men," said Herbert. "Whether
you be put to work or no you'll receive your wages; you may take my
word for that."

"I've been telling 'em that for the last half-hour," said the man
with the hoe, now rising to his feet. "'Shure an' didn't Mr. Somers
be telling us that we'd have saxpence each day as long we war here
afore daylight?' said I, yer honer; 'an' shure an' wasn't it black
night when we war here this blessed morning, and devil a fear of the
tizzy?' said I. But it's mortial cowld, an' it'd be asier for uz to
be doing a spell of work than crouching about on our hunkers down on
the wet ground."

All this was true. It had been specially enjoined upon them to be
early at their work. An Irishman as a rule will not come regularly to
his task. It is a very difficult thing to secure his services every
morning at six o'clock; but make a special point,--tell him that you
want him very early, and he will come to you in the middle of the
night. Breakfast every morning punctually at eight o'clock is almost
impossible in Ireland; but if you want one special breakfast, so that
you may start by a train at 4 A.M., you are sure to be served. No
irregular effort is distasteful to an Irishman of the lower classes,
not if it entails on him the loss of a day's food and the loss of a
night's rest; the actual pleasure of the irregularity repays him for
all this, and he never tells you that this or that is not his work.
He prefers work that is not his own. Your coachman will have no
objection to turn the mangle, but heaven and earth put together won't
persuade him to take the horses out to exercise every morning at the
same hour. These men had been told to come early, and they had been
there on the road-side since five o'clock. It was not surprising that
they were cold and hungry, listless and unhappy.

And then, as young Fitzgerald was questioning the so-named gangmen
as to the instructions they had received, a jaunting car came up to
the foot of the hill. "We war to wait for the ongineer," Shawn Brady
had said, "an' shure an' we have waited." "An' here's one of Misther
Carroll's cars from Mallow," said Thady Molloy, "and that's the
ongineer hisself." Thady Molloy was right; this was the engineer
himself, who had now arrived from Mallow. From this time forth, and
for the next twelve months, the country was full of engineers, or of
men who were so called. I do not say this in disparagement; but the
engineers were like the yellow meal. When there is an immense demand,
and that a suddenly immense demand, for any article, it is seldom
easy to get it very good. In those days men became engineers with a
short amount of apprenticeship, but, as a rule, they did not do their
work badly. In such days as those, men, if they be men at all, will
put their shoulders to the wheel.

The engineer was driven up to where they were standing, and he
jumped off the car among the men who were to work under him with
rather a pretentious air. He had not observed, or probably had not
known, Herbert Fitzgerald. He was a very young fellow, still under
one-and-twenty, beardless, light-haired, blue-eyed, and fresh from
England. "And what hill is this?" said he to the driver.

"Ballydahan, shure, yer honer. That last war Connick-a-coppul, and
that other, the big un intirely, where the crass road takes away to
Buttevant, that was Glounthauneroughtymore. Faix and that's been the
murthering hill for cattle since first I knew it. Bedad yer honer 'll
make it smooth as a bowling-green."

"Ballydahan," said the young man, taking a paper out of his pocket
and looking up the names in his list, "I've got it. There should be
thirty-seven of them here."

"Shure an' here we are these siven hours," said our friend of the
hoe, "and mighty cowld we are."

"Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady," called out the engineer, managing
thoroughly to Anglicise the pronunciation of the names, though they
were not Celtically composite to any great degree.

"Yez, we's here," said Thady, coming forward. And then Herbert came
up and introduced himself, and the young engineer took off his hat.
"I came away from Mallow before eight," said he apologetically; "but
I have four of these places to look after, and when one gets to one
of them it is impossible to get away again. There was one place where
I was kept two hours before I could get one of the men to understand
what they were to do. What is it you call that big hill?"

"Glounthauneroughtymore, yer honer," said the driver, to whom the
name was as easy and familiar as his own.

"And you are going to set these men to work now?" said Herbert.

"Well, I don't suppose they'll do much to-day, Mr. Fitzgerald. But
I must try and explain to the head men how they are to begin. They
have none of them any tools, you see." And then he called out again.
"Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady."

"We's here," said Thady again; "we did not exactly know whether yer
honer'd be afther beginning at the top or the botthom. That's all
that war staying us."

"Never fear," said Shawn, "but we'll have ould Ballydahan level in
less than no time. We're the boys that can do it, fair and aisy."

It appeared to Herbert that the young engineer seemed to be rather
bewildered by the job of work before him, and therefore he rode on,
not stopping to embarrass him by any inspection of his work. In
process of time no doubt so much of the top of Ballydahan Hill was
carried to the bottom as made the whole road altogether impassable
for many months. But the great object was gained; the men were fed,
and were not fed by charity. What did it matter, that the springs of
every conveyance in the county Cork were shattered by the process,
and that the works resulted in myriads of wheelbarrows?

And then, as he rode on towards Gortnaclough, Herbert was overtaken
by his friend the parson, who was also going to the meeting of the
relief committee. "You have not seen the men at Ballydahan Hill, have
you?" said Herbert.

Mr. Townsend explained that he had not seen them. His road had struck
on to that on which they now were not far from the top of the hill.
"But I knew they were to be there this morning," said Mr. Townsend.

"They have sent quite a lad of a fellow to show them how to work,"
said Herbert. "I fear we shall all come to grief with these
road-cuttings."

"For heaven's sake don't say that at the meeting," said Mr. Townsend,
"or you'll be playing the priests' game out and out. Father Barney
has done all in his power to prevent the works."

"But what if Father Barney be right?" said Herbert.

"But he's not right," said the parson, energetically. "He's
altogether wrong. I never knew one of them right in my life yet in
anything. How can they be right?"

"But I think you are mixing up road-making and Church doctrine, Mr.
Townsend."

"I hope I may never be in danger of mixing up God and the devil.
You cannot touch pitch and not be defiled. Remember that, Herbert
Fitzgerald."

"I will remember nothing of the kind," said Herbert. "Am I to set
myself up as a judge and say that this is pitch and that is pitch? Do
you remember St. Peter on the housetop? Was not he afraid of what was
unclean?"

"The meaning of that was that he was to convert the Gentiles, and
not give way to their errors. He was to contend with them and not
give way an inch till he had driven them from their idolatry." Mr.
Townsend had been specially primed by his wife that morning with
vigorous hostility against Father Barney, and was grieved to his
heart at finding that his young friend was prepared to take the
priest's part in anything. In this matter of the roads Mr. Townsend
was doubtless right, but hardly on the score of the arguments
assigned by him.

"I don't mean to say that there should be no road-making," said
Herbert, after a pause. "The general opinion seems to be that we
can't do better. I only say that we shall come to grief about it.
Those poor fellows there have as much idea of cutting down a hill as
I have; and it seems to me that the young lad whom I left with them
has not much more."

"They'll learn all in good time."

"Let us hope it will be in good time."

"If we once let them have the idea that we are to feed them in
idleness," said Mr. Townsend, "they will want to go on for ever in
the same way. And then, when they receive such immense sums in money
wages, the priests will be sure to get their share. If the matter had
been left to me, I would have paid the men in meal. I would never
have given them money. They should have worked and got their food.
The priest will get a penny out of every shilling; you'll see else."
And so the matter was discussed between them as they went along to
Gortnaclough.

When they reached the room in which the committee was held they found
Mr. Somers already in the chair. Priest McCarthy was there also,
with his coadjutor, the Rev. Columb Creagh--Father Columb as he was
always called; and there was a Mr. O'Leary from Boherbuy, one of the
middlemen as they were formerly named,--though by the way I never
knew that word to be current in Ireland; it is familiar to all, and
was I suppose common some few years since, but I never heard the
peasants calling such persons by that title. He was one of those with
whom the present times were likely to go very hard. He was not a bad
man, unless in so far as this, that he had no idea of owing any duty
to others beyond himself and his family. His doctrine at present
amounted to this, that if you left the people alone and gave them no
false hopes, they would contrive to live somehow. He believed in a
good deal, but he had no belief whatever in starvation,--none as yet.
It was probable enough that some belief in this might come to him
now before long. There were also one or two others; men who had some
stake in the country, but men who hadn't a tithe of the interest
possessed by Sir Thomas Fitzgerald.

Mr. Townsend again went through the ceremony of shaking hands with
his reverend brethren, and, on this occasion, did not seem to be
much the worse for it. Indeed, in looking at the two men cursorily a
stranger might have said that the condescension was all on the other
side. Mr. M'Carthy was dressed quite smartly. His black clothes were
spruce and glossy; his gloves, of which he still kept on one and
showed the other, were quite new; he was clean shaven, and altogether
he had a shiny, bright, ebon appearance about him that quite did
a credit to his side of the church. But our friend the parson was
discreditably shabby. His clothes were all brown, his white neck-tie
could hardly have been clean during the last forty-eight hours, and
was tied in a knot, which had worked itself nearly round to his ear
as he had sat sideways on the car; his boots were ugly and badly
brushed, and his hat was very little better than some of those worn
by the workmen--so called--at Ballydahan Hill. But, nevertheless,
on looking accurately into the faces of both, one might see which
man was the better nurtured and the better born. That operation
with the sow's ear is, one may say, seldom successful with the first
generation.

"A beautiful morning, this," said the coadjutor, addressing Herbert
Fitzgerald, with a very mild voice and an unutterable look of
friendship; as though he might have said, "Here we are in a boat
together, and of course we are all very fond of each other." To
tell the truth, Father Columb was not a nice-looking young man. He
was red-haired, slightly marked with the small-pox, and had a low
forehead and cunning eyes.

"Yes, it is, a nice morning," said Herbert. "We don't expect anybody
else here, do we, Somers?"

"At any rate we won't wait," said Somers. So he sat down in the
arm-chair, and they all went to work.

"I am afraid, Mr. Somers," said Mr. M'Carthy from the other end
of the table, where he had constituted himself a sort of deputy
chairman, "I am afraid we are going on a wrong tack." The priest had
shuffled away his chair as he began to speak, and was now standing
with his hands upon the table. It is singular how strong a propensity
some men have to get upon their legs in this way.

"How so, Mr. M'Carthy?" said Somers. "But shan't we be all more
comfortable if we keep our chairs? There'll be less ceremony, won't
there, Mr. Townsend?"

"Oh! certainly," said Townsend.

"Less liable to interruption, perhaps, on our legs," said Father
Columb, smiling blandly.

But Mr. M'Carthy was far too wise to fight the question, so he sat
down. "Just as you like," said he; "I can talk any way, sitting or
standing, walking or riding; it's all one to me. But I'll tell you
how we are on the wrong tack. We shall never get these men to work in
gangs on the road. Never. They have not been accustomed to be driven
like droves of sheep."

"But droves of sheep don't work on the road," said Mr. Townsend.

"I know that, Mr. Townsend," continued Mr. M'Carthy. "I am quite well
aware of that. But droves of sheep are driven, and these men won't
bear it."

"'Deed an' they won't," said Father Columb, having altogether laid
aside his bland smile now that the time had come, as he thought, to
speak up for the people. "They may bear it in England, but they won't
here." And the sternness of his eye was almost invincible.

"If they are so foolish, they must be taught better manners," said
Mr. Townsend. "But you'll find they'll work just as other men
do--look at the navvies."

"And look at the navvies' wages," said Father Columb.

"Besides the navvies only go if they like it," said the parish
priest.

"And these men need not go unless they like it," said Mr. Somers.
"Only with this proviso, that if they cannot manage for themselves
they must fall into our way of managing for them."

"What I say, is this," said Mr. O'Leary. "Let 'em manage for
'emselves. God bless my sowl! Why we shall be skinned alive if we
have to pay all this money back to Government. If Government chooses
to squander thousands in this way, Government should bear the brunt.
That's what I say." Eventually, Government, that is the whole nation,
did bear the brunt. But it would not have been very wise to promise
this at the time.

"But we need hardly debate all that at the present moment," said Mr.
Somers. "That matter of the roads has already been decided for us,
and we can't alter it if we would."

"Then we may as well shut up shop," said Mr. O'Leary.

"It's all very aisy to talk in that way," said Father Columb; "but
the Government, as you call it, can't make men work. It can't force
eight millions of the finest pisantry on God's earth--," and Father
Columb was, by degrees, pushing away the seat from under him, when he
was cruelly and ruthlessly stopped by his own parish priest.

"I beg your pardon for a moment, Creagh," said he; "but perhaps we
