was quiet, nor did repeated attempts upon the part of our telegrapher
succeed in winning a response from the other end of the line.  After
several days of futile endeavor to raise Pellucidar, we had begun to
despair.  I was as positive that the other end of that little cable
protruded through the surface of the inner world as I am that I sit
here today in my study--when about midnight of the fourth day I was
awakened by the sound of the instrument.

Leaping to my feet I grasped Downes roughly by the neck and dragged him
out of his blankets.  He didn't need to be told what caused my
excitement, for the instant he was awake he, too, heard the long-hoped
for click, and with a whoop of delight pounced upon the instrument.

Nestor was on his feet almost as soon as I. The three of us huddled
about that little box as if our lives depended upon the message it had
for us.

Downes interrupted the clicking with his sending-key.  The noise of the
receiver stopped instantly.

"Ask who it is, Downes," I directed.

He did so, and while we awaited the Englishman's translation of the
reply, I doubt if either Nestor or I breathed.

"He says he's David Innes," said Downes.  "He wants to know who we are."

"Tell him," said I; "and that we want to know how he is--and all that
has befallen him since I last saw him."

For two months I talked with David Innes almost every day, and as
Downes translated, either Nestor or I took notes.  From these, arranged
in chronological order, I have set down the following account of the
further adventures of David Innes at the earth's core, practically in
his own words.



CHAPTER I

LOST ON PELLUCIDAR

The Arabs, of whom I wrote you at the end of my last letter (Innes
began), and whom I thought to be enemies intent only upon murdering me,
proved to be exceedingly friendly--they were searching for the very
band of marauders that had threatened my existence.  The huge
rhamphorhynchus-like reptile that I had brought back with me from the
inner world--the ugly Mahar that Hooja the Sly One had substituted for
my dear Dian at the moment of my departure--filled them with wonder and
with awe.

Nor less so did the mighty subterranean prospector which had carried me
to Pellucidar and back again, and which lay out in the desert about two
miles from my camp.

With their help I managed to get the unwieldy tons of its great bulk
into a vertical position--the nose deep in a hole we had dug in the
sand and the rest of it supported by the trunks of date-palms cut for
the purpose.

It was a mighty engineering job with only wild Arabs and their wilder
mounts to do the work of an electric crane--but finally it was
completed, and I was ready for departure.

For some time I hesitated to take the Mahar back with me.  She had been
docile and quiet ever since she had discovered herself virtually a
prisoner aboard the "iron mole." It had been, of course, impossible for
me to communicate with her since she had no auditory organs and I no
knowledge of her fourth-dimension, sixth-sense method of communication.

Naturally I am kind-hearted, and so I found it beyond me to leave even
this hateful and repulsive thing alone in a strange and hostile world.
The result was that when I entered the iron mole I took her with me.

That she knew that we were about to return to Pellucidar was evident,
for immediately her manner changed from that of habitual gloom that had
pervaded her, to an almost human expression of contentment and delight.

Our trip through the earth's crust was but a repetition of my two
former journeys between the inner and the outer worlds.  This time,
however, I imagine that we must have maintained a more nearly
perpendicular course, for we accomplished the journey in a few minutes'
less time than upon the occasion of my first journey through the
five-hundred-mile crust.  Just a trifle less than seventy-two hours
after our departure into the sands of the Sahara, we broke through the
surface of Pellucidar.

Fortune once again favored me by the slightest of margins, for when I
opened the door in the prospector's outer jacket I saw that we had
missed coming up through the bottom of an ocean by but a few hundred
yards.

The aspect of the surrounding country was entirely unfamiliar to me--I
had no conception of precisely where I was upon the one hundred and
twenty-four million square miles of Pellucidar's vast land surface.

The perpetual midday sun poured down its torrid rays from zenith, as it
had done since the beginning of Pellucidarian time--as it would
continue to do to the end of it.  Before me, across the wide sea, the
weird, horizonless seascape folded gently upward to meet the sky until
it lost itself to view in the azure depths of distance far above the
level of my eyes.

How strange it looked! How vastly different from the flat and puny area
of the circumscribed vision of the dweller upon the outer crust!

I was lost.  Though I wandered ceaselessly throughout a lifetime, I
might never discover the whereabouts of my former friends of this
strange and savage world.  Never again might I see dear old Perry, nor
Ghak the Hairy One, nor Dacor the Strong One, nor that other infinitely
precious one--my sweet and noble mate, Dian the Beautiful!

But even so I was glad to tread once more the surface of Pellucidar.
Mysterious and terrible, grotesque and savage though she is in many of
her aspects, I can not but love her.  Her very savagery appealed to me,
for it is the savagery of unspoiled Nature.

The magnificence of her tropic beauties enthralled me. Her mighty land
areas breathed unfettered freedom.

Her untracked oceans, whispering of virgin wonders unsullied by the eye
of man, beckoned me out upon their restless bosoms.

Not for an instant did I regret the world of my nativity.  I was in
Pellucidar.  I was home.  And I was content.

As I stood dreaming beside the giant thing that had brought me safely
through the earth's crust, my traveling companion, the hideous Mahar,
emerged from the interior of the prospector and stood beside me.  For a
long time she remained motionless.

What thoughts were passing through the convolutions of her reptilian
brain?

I do not know.

She was a member of the dominant race of Pellucidar.  By a strange
freak of evolution her kind had first developed the power of reason in
that world of anomalies.

To her, creatures such as I were of a lower order.  As Perry had
discovered among the writings of her kind in the buried city of Phutra,
it was still an open question among the Mahars as to whether man
possessed means of intelligent communication or the power of reason.

Her kind believed that in the center of all-pervading solidity there
was a single, vast, spherical cavity, which was Pellucidar.  This
cavity had been left there for the sole purpose of providing a place
for the creation and propagation of the Mahar race.  Everything within
it had been put there for the uses of the Mahar.

I wondered what this particular Mahar might think now.  I found
pleasure in speculating upon just what the effect had been upon her of
passing through the earth's crust, and coming out into a world that one
of even less intelligence than the great Mahars could easily see was a
different world from her own Pellucidar.

What had she thought of the outer world's tiny sun?

What had been the effect upon her of the moon and myriad stars of the
clear African nights?

How had she explained them?

With what sensations of awe must she first have watched the sun moving
slowly across the heavens to disappear at last beneath the western
horizon, leaving in his wake that which the Mahar had never before
witnessed--the darkness of night? For upon Pellucidar there is no
night.  The stationary sun hangs forever in the center of the
Pellucidarian sky--directly overhead.

Then, too, she must have been impressed by the wondrous mechanism of
the prospector which had bored its way from world to world and back
again.  And that it had been driven by a rational being must also have
occurred to her.

Too, she had seen me conversing with other men upon the earth's
surface.  She had seen the arrival of the caravan of books and arms,
and ammunition, and the balance of the heterogeneous collection which I
had crammed into the cabin of the iron mole for transportation to
Pellucidar.

She had seen all these evidences of a civilization and brain-power
transcending in scientific achievement anything that her race had
produced; nor once had she seen a creature of her own kind.

There could have been but a single deduction in the mind of the
Mahar--there were other worlds than Pellucidar, and the gilak was a
rational being.

Now the creature at my side was creeping slowly toward the near-by sea.
At my hip hung a long-barreled six-shooter--somehow I had been unable
to find the same sensation of security in the newfangled automatics
that had been perfected since my first departure from the outer
world--and in my hand was a heavy express rifle.

I could have shot the Mahar with ease, for I knew intuitively that she
was escaping--but I did not.

I felt that if she could return to her own kind with the story of her
adventures, the position of the human race within Pellucidar would be
advanced immensely at a single stride, for at once man would take his
proper place in the considerations of the reptilia.

At the edge of the sea the creature paused and looked back at me.  Then
she slid sinuously into the surf.

For several minutes I saw no more of her as she luxuriated in the cool
depths.

Then a hundred yards from shore she rose and there for another short
while she floated upon the surface.

Finally she spread her giant wings, flapped them vigorously a score of
times and rose above the blue sea.  A single time she circled far
aloft--and then straight as an arrow she sped away.

I watched her until the distant haze enveloped her and she had
disappeared.  I was alone.

My first concern was to discover where within Pellucidar I might
be-and in what direction lay the land of the Sarians where Ghak the
Hairy One ruled.

But how was I to guess in which direction lay Sari?

And if I set out to search--what then?

Could I find my way back to the prospector with its priceless freight
of books, firearms, ammunition, scientific instruments, and still more
books--its great library of reference works upon every conceivable
branch of applied sciences?

And if I could not, of what value was all this vast storehouse of
potential civilization and progress to be to the world of my adoption?

Upon the other hand, if I remained here alone with it, what could I
accomplish single-handed?

Nothing.

But where there was no east, no west, no north, no south, no stars, no
moon, and only a stationary midday sun, how was I to find my way back
to this spot should ever I get out of sight of it?

I didn't know.

For a long time I stood buried in deep thought, when it occurred to me
to try out one of the compasses I had brought and ascertain if it
remained steadily fixed upon an unvarying pole.  I reentered the
prospector and fetched a compass without.

Moving a considerable distance from the prospector that the needle
might not be influenced by its great bulk of iron and steel I turned
the delicate instrument about in every direction.

Always and steadily the needle remained rigidly fixed upon a point
straight out to sea, apparently pointing toward a large island some ten
or twenty miles distant.  This then should be north.

I drew my note-book from my pocket and made a careful topographical
sketch of the locality within the range of my vision.  Due north lay
the island, far out upon the shimmering sea.

The spot I had chosen for my observations was the top of a large, flat
boulder which rose six or eight feet above the turf.  This spot I
called Greenwich.  The boulder was the "Royal Observatory."

I had made a start! I cannot tell you what a sense of relief was
imparted to me by the simple fact that there was at least one spot
within Pellucidar with a familiar name and a place upon a map.

It was with almost childish joy that I made a little circle in my
note-book and traced the word Greenwich beside it.

Now I felt I might start out upon my search with some assurance of
finding my way back again to the prospector.

I decided that at first I would travel directly south in the hope that
I might in that direction find some familiar landmark.  It was as good
a direction as any.  This much at least might be said of it.

Among the many other things I had brought from the outer world were a
number of pedometers.  I slipped three of these into my pockets with
the idea that I might arrive at a more or less accurate mean from the
registrations of them all.

On my map I would register so many paces south, so many east, so many
west, and so on.  When I was ready to return I would then do so by any
route that I might choose.

I also strapped a considerable quantity of ammunition across my
shoulders, pocketed some matches, and hooked an aluminum fry-pan and a
small stew-kettle of the same metal to my belt.

I was ready--ready to go forth and explore a world!

Ready to search a land area of 124,110,000 square miles for my friends,
my incomparable mate, and good old Perry!

And so, after locking the door in the outer shell of the prospector, I
set out upon my quest.  Due south I traveled, across lovely valleys
thick-dotted with grazing herds.

Through dense primeval forests I forced my way and up the slopes of
mighty mountains searching for a pass to their farther sides.

Ibex and musk-sheep fell before my good old revolver, so that I lacked
not for food in the higher altitudes.  The forests and the plains gave
plentifully of fruits and wild birds, antelope, aurochsen, and elk.

Occasionally, for the larger game animals and the gigantic beasts of
prey, I used my express rifle, but for the most part the revolver
filled all my needs.

There were times, too, when faced by a mighty cave bear, a
saber-toothed tiger, or huge felis spelaea, black-maned and terrible,
even my powerful rifle seemed pitifully inadequate--but fortune favored
me so that I passed unscathed through adventures that even the
recollection of causes the short hairs to bristle at the nape of my
neck.

How long I wandered toward the south I do not know, for shortly after I
left the prospector something went wrong with my watch, and I was again
at the mercy of the baffling timelessness of Pellucidar, forging
steadily ahead beneath the great, motionless sun which hangs eternally
at noon.

I ate many times, however, so that days must have elapsed, possibly
months with no familiar landscape rewarding my eager eyes.

I saw no men nor signs of men.  Nor is this strange, for Pellucidar, in
its land area, is immense, while the human race there is very young and
consequently far from numerous.

Doubtless upon that long search mine was the first human foot to touch
the soil in many places--mine the first human eye to rest upon the
