Squad ships didn't carry anything but two men and their equipment.

Sergeant Madden dogged the door shut. The ship fell up toward the sky.
The heavens became that blackness-studded-with-jewels which is space. A
great yellow sun flared astern. A half-bright, half-dark globe lay
below-the planet Varenga IV, on which the precinct police station for
this part of the galaxy had its location.

Patrolman Willis, frowning with care, established the squad ship's
direction, while Sergeant Madden observed without seeming to do so.
Presently Patrolman Willis pushed a button. The squad ship went into
overdrive.

It was perfectly commonplace in all its aspects.

       *       *       *       *       *

The galaxy went about its business. Stars shone, and planets moved
around them, and double stars circled each other like waltzing couples.
There were also comets and meteors and calcium-clouds and high-energy
free nuclei, all of which acted as was appropriate for them. On some
millions of planets winds blew and various organisms practiced
photosynthesis. Waves ran across seas. Clouds formed and poured down
rain. On the relatively small number of worlds so far inhabited by
humans, people went about their business with no thought for such things
or anything not immediately affecting their lives. And the cops went
about their business.

Sergeant Madden dozed most of the first day of overdrive travel. He had
nothing urgent to do, as yet. This was only a routine trip. The
_Cerberus_ had had a breakdown in her overdrive. Commercial ships'
drives being what they were, it meant that on her emergency drive she
could only limp along at maybe eight or ten lights. Which meant years to
port, with neither food nor air for the journey. But it was not even
conceivable to rendezvous with a rescue ship in the emptiness between
stars. So the _Cerberus_ had sent a message-torp and was crawling to a
refuge-planet, more or less surveyed a hundred years before. There she
would land by emergency rockets, because her drive couldn't take the
strain. Once aground, the _Cerberus_ should wait for help. There was
nothing else to be done. But everything was nicely in hand. The squad
ship headed briskly for the planet Procyron III, and Sergeant Madden
would take the data for a proper, official, emergency-call traffic
report on the incident, and in time the _Aldeb_ would turn up and make
emergency repairs and see the _Cerberus_ out to space again and headed
for port once more.

This was absolutely all that there was to anticipate. Traffic handled
such events as a matter of course. So Sergeant Madden dozed during most
of the first day of overdrive. He reflected somnolently when awake that
it was fitting for Timmy's father to be on the job when Timmy's girl was
in difficulty, since Timmy was off somewhere else.

On the second day he conversed more or less with Patrolman Willis.
Willis was a young cop, almost as young as Timmy. He took himself very
seriously. When Sergeant Madden reached for the briefing-data, he found
it disturbed. Willis had read up on the kind of ship the _Cerberus_ was,
and on the characteristics of Procyron III as recorded a century before.
The _Cerberus_ was a semi-freighter, Candless type. Procyron III was a
water-planet with less than ten per cent of land. Which was unfortunate,
because its average temperature and orbit made it highly suitable for
human occupation. Had the ten per cent of solid ground been in one
piece, it would doubtless have been colonized. But the ground was an
archipelago.

"Hm-m-m," said Sergeant Madden, after reading. "The survey recommends
this northern island for emergency landing. Eh?"

Willis nodded. "Huks used to use it. Not the island. The planet."

Sergeant Madden yawned. It seemed pathetic to him that young cops like
Willis and even Timmy referred so often to Huks. There weren't any, any
more. Being a cop meant carrying out purely routine tasks, nowadays.
They were important tasks, of course. Without the cops, there couldn't
be any civilization. But Willis and Timmy didn't think of it that way.
Not yet. To them being a cop was still a matter of glamour rather than
routine. They probably even regretted the absence of Huks. But when a
man reached Sergeant Madden's age, glamour didn't matter. He had to
remember that his job was worth doing, in itself.

"Yeah," said Sergeant Madden. "There was quite a time with those Huks."

"Did you ... did you ever see a Huk, sir?" asked Willis.

"Before my time," said Sergeant Madden. "But I've talked to men who
worked on the case."

       *       *       *       *       *

It did not occur to him that the Huks would hardly have been called a
"case" by anybody but a cop. When human colonies spread through this
sector, they encountered an alien civilization. By old-time standards,
it was quite a culture. The Huks had a good technology, they had
spaceships, and they were just beginning to expand, themselves, from
their own home planet or planets. If they'd had a few more centuries of
development, they might have been a menace to humanity. But the humans
got started first.

There being no longer any armies or navies when the Huks were
discovered, the matter of intelligent nonhumans was a matter for the
cops. So the police matter-of-factly tried to incorporate the Huk
culture into the human. They explained the rules by which human
civilization worked. They painstakingly tried to arrange a sub-precinct
station on the largest Huk home planet, with Huk cops in charge. They
made it clear that they had nothing to do with politics and were simply
concerned with protecting civilized people from those in their midst who
didn't want to be civilized.

The Huks wouldn't have it. They bristled, proudly. They were defiant.
They considered themselves not only as good as humans--the cops didn't
care what they thought--but they insisted on acting as if they were
better.

They reacted, in fact, as humans would have done if just at the
beginning of their conquest of the stars, they'd run into an expanding,
farther-advanced race which tried to tell them what they had to do. The
Huks fought.

"They fought pretty good," said Sergeant Madden tolerantly. "Not
killer-fashion--like delinks. The Force had to give 'em the choice of
joining up or getting out. Took years to get 'em out. Had to use all the
off-duty men from six precincts to handle the last riot."

The conflict he called a riot would have been termed a space battle by a
navy or an army. But the cops operated within a strictly police frame of
reference, which was the reverse of military. They weren't trying to
subjugate the Huks, but to make them behave. In consequence, their
tactics were unfathomable to the Huks--who thought in military terms.
Squadrons of police ships which would have seemed ridiculous to a
fighting-force commander threw the Huks off-balance, kept them
off-balance, did a scrupulous minimum of damage to them, and thereby
kept out of every trap the Huks set for them. In the end the cops
supervised and assisted at the embittered, rebellious emigration of a
race. The Huks took off for the far side of the galaxy. They'd neither
been conquered nor exterminated. But Sergeant Madden thought of the
decisive fracas as a riot rather than a battle.

"Yeah," he repeated. "They acted a lot like delinks."

Patrolman Willis spoke with some heat about delinks, who are the bane of
all police forces everywhere. They practice adolescent behavior even
after they grow up--but they never grow up. It is delinks who put
stink-bombs in public places and write threatening letters and give
warnings of bombs about to go off--and sometimes set them--and stuff
dirt into cold rocket-nozzles and sometimes kill people and go
incontinently hysterical because they didn't mean to. Delinks do most of
the damaging things that have no sense to them. There is no cop who has
not wanted to kill some grinning, half-scared, half-defiant delink who
hasn't yet realized that he's destroyed half a million credits' worth of
property or crippled somebody for life--for no reason at all.

Sergeant Madden listened to the denunciation of all the delink tribe.
Then he yawned again.

"I know!" he said. "I don't like 'em either. But we got 'em. We always
will have 'em. Like old age."

Then he made computations with a stubby pencil and asked reflectively:

"When're you coming out of overdrive?"

Patrolman Willis told him. Sergeant Madden nodded.

"I'll take another nap," he observed. "We'll be there a good twenty-two
hours before the _Aldeb_."

The little squad ship went on at an improbable multiple of the speed of
light. After all, this was a perfectly normal performance. Just an
ordinary bit of business for the cops.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Madden belched when the squad ship came out of overdrive. He
watched with seeming indifference while Patrolman Willis took a spectro
on the star ahead and to the left, and painstakingly compared the
reading with the ancient survey-data on the Procyron system. It had to
match, of course, unless there'd been extraordinarily bad astrogation.

Willis put the spectroscope away, estimated for himself, and then
checked with the dial that indicated the brightness of the still
point-sized star. He said:

"Four light-weeks, I make it."

Sergeant Madden nodded. A superior officer should never do anything
useful, so long as a subordinate isn't making a serious mistake. That is
the way subordinates are trained to become superiors, in time. Patrolman
Willis set a time-switch and pushed the overdrive button. The squad ship
hopped, and abruptly the local sun had a perceptible disk. Willis made
the usual tests for direction of rotation, to get the ecliptic plane. He
began to search for planets. As he found them, he checked with the
reference data. All this was tedious. Sergeant Madden grunted:

"That'll be it," he said, and pointed. "Water world. It's the color of
ocean. Try it."

Patrolman Willis threw on the telescope screen. The image of the distant
planet leaped into view. It was Procyron III. The spiral cloud-arms of a
considerable storm showed in the southern hemisphere, but in the north
there was a group or specks which would be the planet's only solid
ground--the archipelago reported by the century-old survey. The
_Cerberus_ should have been the first ship to land there in a hundred
years, and the squad ship should be the second.

Patrolman Willis got the squad ship competently over to the planet, a
