  Shedlock, Marie L., _The Art of the Story-Teller_.

  St. John, Edward Porter, _Stories and Story-Telling in Moral and
     Religious Education_.

  Wiltse, Sara E., _The Place of the Story in Early Education_.

  Wyche, Richard Thomas, _Some Great Stories and How to Tell Them_.


V. ON DRAMATIZATION

  Briggs, T. H., and Coffman, L. D., _Reading in Public Schools_.
     [Chap. x, "Dramatic Reading," and chap. xxiii, "Dramatics."]

  Curtis, Elnora W., _The Dramatic Instinct in Education_.

  Finlay-Johnson, Harriet, _The Dramatic Method of Teaching_.

  Gesell, Arnold L., and Beatrice C., _The Normal Child and Primary
     Education_. [Chapter on "Dramatic Expression."]

  Herts, Alice M., _The Children's Educational Theatre_.

  Nixon, Lillian E., _Fairy Tales a Child Can Read and Act_.


VI. THE BIBLE AS LITERATURE FOR CHILDREN

  Moulton, Richard Green, _A Short Introduction to the Literature
     of the Bible_.

        The simplest and best discussion for teachers
        of the Bible as literature. The books that
        follow are good sources for story material from
        the Bible.

  Baldwin, James, _Old Stories from the East_.

  Hodges, George, _The Garden of Eden_. _The Castle of Zion._ _When
     the King Came._

  Houghton, Louise Seymour, _Telling Bible Stories_.

  Moulton, Richard Green, _Bible Stories: Old Testament_. _Bible
     Stories: New Testament._ [Two volumes of _The Modern Reader's
     Bible for Children_. The only variations from the text are by
     omissions.]

  Olcott, Frances Jenkins, _Bible Stories to Read and Tell_.

  Smith, Nora Archibald, _Old, Old Tales from the Old, Old Book_.

  Stewart, Mary, "_Tell Me a True Story_."


VII. SOME INTERPRETATIONS OF CHILDHOOD

  Aldrich, Thomas Bailey, _The Story of a Bad Boy_.

  Du Bois, Patterson, _Beckonings from Little Hands_.

  Gilson, Roy Rolfe, _In the Morning Glow_.

  Grahame, Kenneth, _Dream Days_. _The Golden Age_.

  Howells, William Dean, _A Boy's Town_.

  Kelly, Myra, _Little Citizens_.

  Larcom, Lucy, _A New England Girlhood_.

  Loti, Pierre, _The Story of a Child_.

  Martin, George Madden, _Emmy Lou, Her Book and Heart_.

  Masters, Edgar Lee, _Mitch Miller_.

  Pater, Walter, _The Child in the House_.

  Shute, Henry A., _The Real Diary of a Real Boy_.

  Smith, William Hawley, _The Evolution of Dodd_.

  Stuart, Ruth McEnery, _Sonny_.

  Walpole, Hugh, _Jeremy_.

  Warner, Charles Dudley, _On Being a Boy_.

  White, William Allen, _The Court of Boyville_.


VIII. SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

  Addams, Jane, _Youth and Our City Streets_.

  Adler, Felix, _The Moral Instruction of Children_.

  Antin, Mary, _The Promised Land_.

  Cabot, Ella Lyman, _The Seven Ages of Childhood_.

  Dawson, George E., _The Child and His Religion_.

  Engleman, J. O., _Moral Education_.

  Griggs, Edward Howard, _Moral Education_.

  Hall, G. Stanley, _Youth_.

  Henderson, C. Hanford, _Education and the Larger Life_.

  Hoyt, Franklin Chase, _Quicksands of Youth_.

  Oppenheim, Nathan, _The Development of the Child_.

  Puffer, J. Adams, _The Boy and His Gang_.




CHILDREN'S LITERATURE




SECTION I. PREFACE AND GENERAL INTRODUCTION

THE PREFACE


This book is primarily a handbook for teachers in the grades and for
students preparing to teach in the grades. Although it does not ignore
problems of grading and presentation, the chief purpose is to acquaint
teachers and prospective teachers with standard literature of the
various kinds suitable for use in the classroom and to give them
information regarding books and authors to aid them in directing the
selection of books by and for children.

In discussing the early training of children in literature with large
classes of young people preparing for teaching in the grades, the
compilers found themselves face to face with two difficulties. In the
first place, only a limited number of these prospective teachers were in
any real sense acquainted with what may be called the basic traditional
material. Rhymes, fables, myths, stories were so vaguely and
indistinctly held in mind that they were practically of no great value.
It was therefore not possible to assume much real acquaintance with the
material needed for use with children, and the securing of such an
acquaintance seemed the first essential. After all is said, a discussion
of ways and means must follow such a mastery of basic material.

In the second place, there was the difficulty of finding in any compact
form a body of material sufficient in extent and wide enough in its
range to serve as a satisfactory basis for such a course. No doubt the
ideal way would be to send the student to the many authoritative volumes
covering the various fields dealt with in this collection. But with
large classes and a limited amount of time such a plan was hardly
practicable. The young teacher cannot be much of a specialist in any of
the various fields of knowledge with the elements of which he is
expected to acquaint children. The principles of economy demand that the
brief courses which specifically prepare for teaching should be such as
will make the work in the schoolroom most helpful and least wasteful
from the very beginning. Hence this attempt to collect in one volume
what may somewhat roughly be spoken of as material for a minimum basic
course in Children's Literature.

The important thing about this book, then, is the actual literary
material included in it. The notes and suggestions scattered throughout
are aimed to direct attention to this material either in the way of
pointing out the sources of it, or helping in the understanding and
appreciation of it, or suggesting some ways of presenting it most
effectively to children.

In the case of folk material, an effort has been made to present
reliable versions of the stories used. Many of the folk stories, for
instance, appear in dozens of collections and in dozens of forms,
according to the artistic or pedagogic biases of the various compilers.
As a rule the most accessible stories are found in versions written
down to the supposed needs of children, and intended to be read by the
children themselves. Even if we grant the teacher the right to make
extensive modifications, it is still reasonable to insist that some
correct traditional form be used as the starting point. Such a plan
insures a mastery of one's material. The sources of the versions used in
this text are pointed out in order that teachers who wish to do so may
extend their acquaintance to other folk material by referring to the
various collections mentioned.

Such a book as this must necessarily be selective. No doubt omissions
will be noted of poems or stories that many teachers deem indispensable.
Others will find selections included that to their minds are
questionable. The editors can only plead in extenuation that they have
included what they have found by experience to offer a sound basis for
discussing with training classes the nature of this basic material and
the form in which it should be presented to children. To accomplish
these ends it has sometimes seemed well to give parallel versions, and
occasionally to give a version that will necessitate the discussion of
such subjects as the use of dialect, the inclusion of items of terror or
horror, and the soundness of the ethical appeal. These various problems
are indicated in the notes accompanying individual selections.

The editorial apparatus does not constitute a treatise on literary
criticism, or a manual of mythology or folklore, or a "pedagogy" of
children's literature as such, or anything like an exhaustive
bibliography of the fields of study touched upon. It aims at the very
modest purpose of immediate and practical utility. It hopes to fill a
place as a sort of first aid for the inexperienced teacher, and as soon
as the teacher gets some real grasp of the elements of the problem this
book must yield to the more elaborate and well-knit discussions of
specialists in the various subjects treated. The bibliographical
references throughout are intended to offer help in this forward step.
These bibliographies are, in all cases, frankly selective. As a rule
most of the books mentioned are books now in print. In the
bibliographies connected with the sections of traditional material some
of the more important works in the field of scholarship are named in
each case for the benefit of those who may be working where such books
are available in institutional or public libraries. Titles of books are
printed in italics, while titles of poems, separate stories, and
selections are printed in roman type inclosed in quotation marks.

The grouping of material is in no sense a hard and fast one. Those who
work in literary fields understand the pitfalls that beset one who
attempts such a classification. Only a general grouping under headings
used in the ordinary popular sense has been made. Fine distinctions are
beside the mark in such a book as this. Popular literature was not made
for classification, but for higher purposes, and anything that draws
attention from the pleasure-giving and spirit-invigorating qualities of
the literature itself should be avoided. Hence, the classifications
adopted are as simple and unobtrusive as possible.

Finally, the editors make no pretense to original scholarship. They have
not attempted to extend the limits of human knowledge, but to point out
pleasant paths leading to the limitless domains of literature. They have
tried to reflect accurately the best practices and theories, or to point
out how teachers may get at the best. Their obligations to others are
too extended to be noted in a preface, but will be apparent on every
page of the text. Their most important lessons have come from the
reactions secured from hundreds of teachers who have been under their
tuition.

Copyright obligations are indicated in connection with the selections
used.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


1. LITERATURE FOR CHILDREN

_The beginnings._ During the eighteenth century the peoples of Europe
and America turned their attention in a remarkable way to a
consideration of the worth and rights of the individual. In America this
so-called democratic movement culminated in the Declaration of
Independence in 1776. The most dramatic manifestation of the movement in
Europe was the French Revolution of 1789, but every country of Europe
was thrilled and changed by the new thought. Every important democratic
movement leads to an awakened interest in the welfare of children, for
they are among the weak and helpless. This great movement of the
eighteenth century brought such a remarkable change of thought regarding
children as to mark the beginning of a new kind of literature, known as
literature for children.

Today we think of Andersen, Stevenson, Mrs. Ewing, and scores of others
as writers of literature for children. Such writers did not exist before
the democratic movement of the eighteenth century. It is true that a few
short books and articles had been written for children as early as the
fifteenth century, but they were written to teach children to be
obedient and respectful to parents and masters or to instruct them in
the customs of the church--they were not written primarily to entertain
children and give them pleasure. Within the last century and a half,
too, many authors have collected and retold for children innumerable
traditional stories from all parts of the earth--traditional fairy
stories, romantic stories of the Middle Ages, legends, and myths.

_The child's inheritance._ As has been indicated, children's literature
is of two kinds: first, the traditional kind that grew up among the folk
of long ago in the forms of rhyme, myth, fairy tale, fable, legend, and
romantic hero story; and, second, the kind that has been produced in
modern times by individual authors. The first, the traditional kind, was
produced by early civilization and by the childlike peasantry of long
ago. The best of the stories produced by the childhood of the race have
been bequeathed to the children of today, and to deprive children of the
pleasure they would get from this inheritance of folklore seems as
unjust as to deprive them of traditional games, which also help to make
the first years of a person's life, the period of childhood, the period
of imaginative play. The second kind of children's literature, that
produced in modern times by individual authors, has likewise been
bequeathed to children. Some of it is so new that its worth has not been
determined, but some of it has passed the test of the classics. The best
of both kinds is as priceless as is the classical literature for adults.
The world would not sell Shakespeare; yet one may well doubt that
Shakespeare is worth as much to humanity as is Mother Goose. To evaluate
truly the worth of such classics is impossible; but we may be assured
that the child who has learned to appreciate the pleasures and the
beauties of Mother Goose is the one most likely to appreciate the
pleasures and the beauties of Shakespeare when the proper time comes.

The true purpose of education is to bring the child into his
inheritance. For many years educators have talked about the use of
literature _in_ the grades as one means of accomplishing this purpose.
The results of attempts to teach literature in the grades have sometimes
been disappointing because often the literature used has not been _for_
the grades; that is, it has not been children's literature. In other
cases the attempts have failed because the literature has not been
presented as literature--it has, for example, been presented as reading
lessons or composition assignments. Students preparing to teach in the
grades have been studying textbooks from which literature for children
has been excluded, regardless of its artistic worth. Consequently many
teachers have not been prepared to teach literature in the grades. Often
they have assumed that the reading lesson would develop in the pupil an
appreciation of good literature, not realizing that the reading lesson
may cause pupils to dislike literature, especially poetry, unless it is
supplemented by appropriate work in children's literature. If the
student reads thoughtfully the literary selections in the following
sections of this book, he probably will realize that children's
literature is also literature for adults, and that it is not only the
child's inheritance, but also the inheritance of humanity.

The fact that literature for children is likely to have a strong
interest for adults is strikingly suggested in a few sentences in John
Macy's _A Child's Guide to Reading_:

        When "juveniles" are really good, parents read
        them after children have gone to bed. I do not
        know whether _Tom Brown at Rugby_ is catalogued
        by the careful librarian as a book for boys,
        but I am sure it is a book for men. I dare say
        that a good many pairs of eyes that have passed
        over the pages of Mr. John T. Trowbridge and
        Elijah Kellogg and Louisa M. Alcott have been
        old enough to wear spectacles. And if Mrs. Kate
        Douglas Wiggin ever thought that in _Timothy's
        Quest_ and _Rebecca_ she was writing books
        especially for the young, adult readers have
        long since claimed her for their own. I have
        enjoyed Mr. A. S. Pier's tales of the boys at
        St. Timothy's, though he planned them for
        younger readers. We are told on good authority
        that _St. Nicholas_ and _The Youth's Companion_
        appear in households where there are no
        children, and they give a considerable portion
        of their space to serial stories written for
        young people. Between good "juveniles" and good
        books for grown persons there is not much
        essential difference.


2. LITERATURE IN THE GRADES

_Reading and literature distinguished._ A country school-teacher once
abruptly stopped the routine of daily work and, standing beside her
desk, told the story of the maid who counted her chickens before they
were hatched. One of her pupils, who is now a man, remembers vividly how
the incident impressed him. Although he was in the second grade, that
was the first time he had known a teacher to stop regular school work to
tell a story. Immediately the teacher was transformed. She had been
merely a teacher, one of those respected, awe-inspiring creatures whose
business it is to make the school mill go; but the magic of her story
established the relation of friendship between teacher and pupil. She
was no longer merely a teacher. If the story had been read as a part of
the reading lesson, it would not have impressed the pupil greatly. It
was impressive because it was presented as literature.

A clear distinction should be made between reading and literature,
especially in the primary grades. In the work of the reading course the
pupil should take the lead, being guided by the teacher. If the pupil is
to progress, he must master the mechanics of reading--he must learn to
pronounce printed words and to get the meaning of printed sentences and
paragraphs. The course in reading requires patient work on the part of
the pupil, just as the course in arithmetic does, and the chief pleasure
that the primary pupil can derive from the work is a consciousness of
enlarged power and of success in accomplishing what is undertaken.

In the work with literature, however, the teacher should take the lead.
She should open to the pupils the magic treasure house of the world's
best story and song. The literature period of the day should be the
pupil's imaginative play period, bringing relief from the tension of
tired nerves. The teacher who makes the study of literature a mechanical
grind instead of a joyous exercise of imagination misses at least two of
her greatest opportunities as a teacher. First, by failing to cultivate
in her pupils an appreciation of good literature, she misses an
opportunity to make the lives of her pupils brighter and happier.
Second, by failing to realize that the person with a story and a song is
everybody's friend, she misses an opportunity to win the friendship,
admiration, and love of her pupils. The inexperienced teacher who is
well-nigh distracted in her efforts to guide forty restless, disorderly
pupils through the program of a day's work might charm half her troubles
away by the magic of a simple story or by the music and imagery of a
juvenile poem. Her story or poem would do more than remove the cause of
disorder by giving the pupils relaxation from nerve-straining work: it
would help to establish that first essential to all true success in
teaching--a relation of friendship between pupils and teacher.

_Culture through literature._ He was a wise educator who said, "The boy
who has access to good books and who has learned to make them his close
friends is beyond the power of evil." Literature in the grades, in
addition to furnishing intellectual recreation, should so cultivate in
the pupil the power of literary appreciation that he will make good
books his close friends. The child who has heard good music from infancy
is not likely to be attracted by popular ragtime. The boy who has been
trained in habits of courtesy, industry, and pure thinking in his home
life, and school life is not likely to find pleasure in the rudeness,
idleness, and vulgarity of the village poolroom. The pupil who is taught
to appreciate the beautiful, the true, and the good in standard
literature is not likely to find pleasure in reading the melodramatic
and sentimental trash that now has prominence of place and space in many
book stores and in some public libraries. It is the duty of the teacher,
and it should be her pleasure, to cultivate in her pupils such a taste
for good literature as will lead them to choose the good and reject the
bad, a taste that will insure for them the culture that good literature
gives.

_Selection of material._ In choosing selections of literary worth to
present to her pupils, the teacher should keep in mind the pupil's stage
of mental development and she should not forget that the study of
literature should give pleasure. Often pupils do not like what moral
writers think they should like, and usually the pupils are right. Good
literature is sincere and is true in its appeal to the fundamental
emotions of humanity, and an obvious attempt to teach a moral theory at
the expense of truth is no more to be tolerated in literature for
children than in literature for adults. The childhood of the race has
produced much literature with a true appeal to the human heart, in the
form of fable, fairy story, myth, and hero story. Most of this
literature appeals strongly to the child of today. For several hundred
years the nursery rhymes of "Mother Goose" have delighted children with
their melody, humor, and imagery. As literature for the kindergarten and
first grade, they have not often been excelled by modern writers. The
task of selecting suitable material from the many poems, stories, and
books written for children in recent years is difficult, but if the
teacher has a keen appreciation of good literature and is guided by the
likes and dislikes of her pupils, she probably will not go far astray.

_Supplemental reading._ If the teacher examines the juvenile books
offered for sale by the book dealers of her town or city, she probably
will discover that most of them are trash not fit to be read by anyone,
and she will realize the importance of directing parents in the
selection of gift books for children. A good way to get better books
into the book stores and into the hands of children is to give the
pupils a list of good books, with the suggestion that they ask their
parents to buy one of them the next time a book is to be bought as a
present. Such lists of books also will improve the standard of books in
the town library, for librarians will be quick to realize the importance
of supplying standard literature if there is a demand for it.


3. STORY-TELLING AND DRAMATIZATION

_Story-telling._ Most stories are much more effective when well told
than they are when read, just as most lectures and sermons are most
effective when delivered without manuscript. To explain just why the
story well told is superior to the story read might not be easy, but
much of the superiority probably comes from the freedom of the "talk
style" and the more appropriate use of inflection and emphasis. Then,
too, the story-teller can look at her audience and is free to add a
descriptive word or phrase occasionally to produce vividness of
impression. Some stories, of course, are so constructed that they must
follow closely the diction of the original form. "Henny-Penny" and
Kipling's _Just-So Stories_ are of this type. Such stories should be
read. Most stories, however, are most effective when well told. The
teacher, especially the teacher of one of the primary grades, should not
consider herself prepared to teach literature until she has gained
something of the art of story-telling.

_Selection of stories._ Never attempt to tell a story that you do not
like. You are not prepared to interest pupils in a story, however
appropriate it otherwise may be, if you are not interested in it
yourself. Try to choose stories adapted in structure and content to the
age and experience of the children of your grade. For the first or
second grade, choose a few simple fables, a few short, simple fairy
tales, and a few short, simple nature stories, such as "Peter Rabbit,"
"How Johnny Chuck Finds the Best Thing in the World," and "Mr. 'Possum's
Sick Spell." Remember that a story for the first or second grade should
be short.

_Two principles._ Learn to apply readily the following principles of
method: First, use the past tense in telling a story except in direct
quotation. The rules of grammar require this, and it is an aid to
clearness and effectiveness. For example, do not say, "So he goes" or
"Then he says"; but say, "So he went" or "Then he said" (or, for
variety, _replied_, _growled_, _mumbled_, etc.). Second, use direct
discourse (the exact words of the characters) rather than indirect
discourse. For example, do not say, "The Troll asked who was tripping
over his bridge"; but say, "'WHO'S THAT tripping over my bridge?' roared
the Troll." Direct discourse always gives life and vividness to a story.

_Preparation and presentation._ When you have selected a suitable story,
read it carefully several times to learn the essential details and the
order in which they should come. Keep in mind the fact that you are to
use the past tense and direct discourse. If the story is a fable, you
probably will see that you should add much conversation and description
not in the text. A little description of the witch, giant, fairy, or
castle may give vividness to your story. If the story is a long fairy
tale, you may see that many details may be omitted. If the story is as
concise and dramatic as is the version of "The Three Billy-Goats Gruff"
in this book, it may be suitable for presentation without any changes.
When you have the story clearly in mind as you wish to present it, tell
it to the pupils several times, and then have some of them tell it.

Your story, of course, should not be told in a lifeless monotone. Some
parts should be told slowly, and others rapidly. In some parts the voice
should be low and soft, while in other parts it should be loud and gruff
or harsh. The words of the princess should not sound like those of the
old witch or the soldier. The daintiness and grace of elves and fairies
should be indicated in the delivery.

_Corroborative opinion._ The many books on the art of story-telling by
skilled practitioners and the emphasis placed upon the great practical
value of story-telling by all those charged with the oversight of the
education of children show conclusively that the story method in
teaching is having its grand renascence. The English education minister,
Mr. H. A. L. Fisher, speaking recently on the subject of "History
Teaching," set forth admirably the general principles back of this
revival:

        There is no difficulty about interesting
        children. The real difficulty is to bore them.
        Almost any tale will interest a child. It need
        not be well constructed or thrilling; it may be
        filled with the most unexciting and trivial
        incidents, but so long as it carries the mind
        along at all, it will interest a child. The
        hunger which intelligent children have for
        stories is almost inexhaustible. They like to
        have their stories repeated, and insist that
        the characters should reappear over and over
        again, for they have an appetite for reality
        and a desire to fix these passing figments into
        the landscape of the real life with which they
        are surrounded.

        One of the great qualities in childhood which
        makes it apt for receiving historical
        impressions is just this capacity for giving
        body to the phantoms of the mind. The limits
        between the real and the legendary or
        miraculous which are drawn by the critical
        intelligence do not exist for the childish
        mind. . . . It would then be a great educational
        disaster if this valuable faculty in childhood
        were allowed to run to waste. There are certain
        years in the development of every normal
        intelligent child when the mind is full of
        image-making power and eager to make a friend
        or enemy of any god, hero, nymph, fairy, or
        servant maid who may come along. Then is the
        time when it is right and fitting to affect
        some introductions to the great characters of
        mythology and history; that is the age at which
        children will eagerly absorb what they can
        learn of Achilles and Orpheus, of King Arthur
        and his Knights, of Alexander and Christopher
        Columbus and the Duke of Wellington. I do not
        think it is necessary to obtrude any moralizing
        commentary when these great and vague images
        are first brought into the landscape of the
        child's intellectual experience. A little
        description, a few stories, a picture or two,
        will be enough to fix them in the memory and to
        give them body and shape together with the
        fairies and witches and pirate kings and
        buccaneering captains with whom we have all at
        one time been on such familiar terms. Let us
        then begin by teaching the past to small
        children by way of stories and pictures.

_Dramatization._ The play spirit that leads children to play lady,
doctor, church, and school will also lead them to enjoy dramatizing
stories, or "playing the stories," as they call it. Some stories, of
course, are so lacking in action as to be not well suited for
dramatization, and others have details of action, character, or
situation that may not well be represented in the schoolroom. The
teacher may be surprised, however, to see how ingenious her pupils are
in overcoming difficulties after they have had a little assistance in
playing two or three stories. Unconsciously the pupil will get from the
dramatization a training in oral English, reading, and literary
appreciation that can hardly be gained in any other way.

When the pupils have learned a story thoroughly, they are ready to make
plans for playing it. The stage setting may be considered first, and
here the child's imagination can work wonders in arranging details. The
opening under the teacher's desk may become a dungeon, a cave, a cellar,
or a well. If a two-story house is needed, it may be outlined on the
floor in the front part of the schoolroom, with a chalk-mark stairway,
up which Goldilocks can walk to lie down on three coats--the three beds
in the bed-chamber of the three bears.

The pupils can probably soon decide what characters are necessary, but
more time may be required to assign the parts. To play the part of a
spider, bear, wolf, fairy, sheep, or butterfly does not seem difficult
to a child who has entered into the spirit of the play.

The most difficult part of dramatization may be the plan for
conversation, especially if the text version of the story contains
little or no direct discourse. The pupils should know the general nature
of the conversation and action before they begin to play the story,
although they need not memorize the parts. Suppose that the fable "The
Shepherd's Boy" is to be dramatized. The first part of the dramatization
might be described about as follows:

        The shepherd boy, tending his flock of
        pupil-sheep in the pasture land at one side of
        the teacher's-desk-mountain, looked toward the
        pupil-desk-village at one side of the room and
        said quietly, "It certainly is lonely here. I
        believe I'll make those villagers think a wolf
        has come to eat the sheep. Then perhaps they'll
        come down here, and I'll have a little company
        and some excitement." Then he jumped around
        frantically, waving his yardstick-shepherd's
        crook, and shouted to the villagers, "Wolf!
        Wolf!"

        The villagers came rushing down to the pasture
        land, asking excitedly, "Where's the wolf? Has
        he killed many of the sheep?"

        "Oh, oh, oh," laughed the boy, "there wasn't
        any wolf. I certainly did fool you that time."

        "I don't think that's very funny," said one of
        the villagers.

        "Well, we might as well go back to our work,"
        said another. Then they went back to the
        village.

        After they had gone, the boy said, "I guess
        I'll try that joke again."

If the teacher puts much direct discourse in a story of this kind when
she tells it to the pupils, the task of dramatizing will naturally be
made easier.

Some stories lend themselves in the most natural manner to
dramatization. An interesting example of such a story may be found among
the tales dealing with the Wise Men of Gotham. These Wise Men are
referred to in one of the best known of the Mother Goose rhymes. It
would seem that the inhabitants of Gotham, in the reign of King John,
had some reason of their own for pretending to be mad, and out of this
event the legends took their rise. The number of fishermen may be
changed to seven or some other number to suit the number in the acting
group. Here is the story:

        On a certain time there were twelve men of
        Gotham that went to fish, and some stood on dry
        land. And in going home, one said to the other
        "We have ventured wonderfully in wading. I pray
        God that none of us come home to be drowned."
        "Nay, marry," said the other, "let us see that,
        for there did twelve of us come out." Then they
        counted themselves, and every one counted
        eleven. Said the one to the other, "There is
        one of us drowned." They went back to the brook
        where they had been fishing and sought up and
        down for him that was drowned, making great
        lamentation.

        A stranger coming by asked what it was they
        sought for, and why they were sorrowful. "Oh!"
        said they, "this day we went to fish in the
        brook; twelve of us came together, and one is
        drowned." Said the stranger, "Tell how many
        there be of you." One of them, counting, said,
        "Eleven," and again he did not count himself.
        "Well," said the stranger, "what will you give
        me if I find the twelfth man?" "Sir," said
        they, "all the money we have got." "Give me the
        money," said the stranger, and began with the
        first, and gave him a stroke over the shoulders
        with his whip, which made him groan, saying,
        "Here is one," and so he served them all, and
        they all groaned at the matter. When he came to
        the last he paid him well, saying, "Here is the
        twelfth man." "God's blessing on thy heart,"
        said they, "for thus finding our dear brother."


4. COURSES OF STUDY

As an aid to inexperienced teachers, it seems well to suggest in a
summary how a selection of material suitable for each grade might be
made from the material of this book. The summary, however, should be
regarded as suggestive in a general way only. No detailed outline of a
course of study in literature for the grades can be ideal for all
schools because the pupils of a given grade in one school may be much
more advanced in the knowledge of literature and the ability to
understand and appreciate it than are the pupils of the same grade in
another school. Many literary selections, too, might appropriately be
taught in almost any grade if the method of presentation in each case
were suited to the understanding of the pupils. _Robinson Crusoe_, for
example, may appropriately be told to second-grade pupils, or it may be
read by fourth- or fifth-grade pupils, or it may be studied as fiction
by eighth-grade pupils or university students. All poems of remarkable
excellence that are suitable for primary pupils are also suitable for
pupils in the higher grades and for adults, and the same is true of many
prose selections.

The summary that follows, then, is to be regarded as "first aid" to the
untrained, inexperienced teacher. The teacher's own personal likes and
dislikes and her success in presenting various literary selections
should eventually lead her to modify any prescribed course of study. If
a teacher of the sixth grade discovers that her pupils should rank only
second grade in knowledge and appreciation of literature, she may very
properly begin with traditional fairy tales. Another outlined course of
study is given in Section XII of this book.

_First, second, and third grades._ Since pupils in the primary grades
read with difficulty if at all, the teacher should tell or read all
selections presented as literature in these grades.

No kind of prose is better suited for use in the primary grades than
traditional fairy tales. About half a dozen might well be presented in
each of the three grades. For the first grade, the simplest should be
chosen, such as "The Old Woman and Her Pig," "Teeny-Tiny," "The Cat and
the Mouse," "The Three Pigs," "The Three Bears," and "The Elves and the
Shoemaker." As suitable stories for the second grade, we might choose
"The Three Sillies," "Little Red Riding-Hood," "Cinderella," "The Three
Billy-Goats Gruff," "The Straw Ox," and "The Horned Women." For the
third grade, somewhat longer and more complex stories might be chosen.

About half a dozen fables might also be used appropriately in each of
the primary grades. Simple Aesopic fables in prose seem best for the
first two grades. More complex forms might be chosen for the third
grade, for example, "The Story of Alnaschar," "The Good Samaritan," "The
Discontented Pendulum," "The Musical Ass," "The Swan, the Pike, and the
Crab," and "The Hen with the Golden Eggs."

Much of the nature literature of the primary grades may be in the form
of verse, but some simple nature prose may be used successfully. From
the selections in this book, "Peter Rabbit" should be chosen for the
first grade, while "Johnny Chuck," and "Mr. 'Possum's Sick Spell" are
appropriate for the second and third grades.

The simplest of Andersen's _Fairy Tales_ may be used in the third grade,
and perhaps in the second. Some suitable stories are "The Real
Princess," "The Fir Tree," "The Tinder Box," "The Hardy Tin Soldier,"
and "The Ugly Duckling."

The ideal verse for the first grade is nursery rhymes, which may be
chosen from the first 135 selections of this book. These may be
supplemented by such simple verse as "The Three Kittens," "The Moon,"
"Ding Dong," "The Little Kitty," "Baby Bye," "Time to Rise," "Rain," "I
Like Little Pussy," and "The Star." In the second and third grades,
traditional verses from those following Number 135 in Section II may be
used. The poems by Stevenson are ideal for these grades, and those by
Field, Sherman, and Christina Rossetti are good. In addition the teacher
might select such poems as "The Brown Thrush," and "Who Stole the Bird's
Nest."

_Fourth, fifth, and sixth grades._ Although pupils in these intermediate
grades may be expected to read some library books, the teacher should
read and tell stories frequently, for this is the surest way to develop
in the pupil a taste for good literature. The teacher should remember,
too, that the story she recommends to the pupils as suitable reading
should be about two grades easier than those told or read by the
teacher. Probably every poem presented as literature in these grades
should be read or recited by the teacher because pupils are not likely
to get the charm of rhythm, melody, and rhyme if they do the reading.
Pupils who dislike poetry are pupils who have not heard good poetry well
read.

Myths are appropriate for each of the intermediate grades. Most teachers
prefer for the fourth grade the simpler classical myths, such as "A
Story of Springtime," "The Miraculous Pitcher," "The Narcissus," and
"The Apple of Discord." In the fifth grade, the teacher may use the more
difficult classical myths, reserving the Norse myths for the sixth
grade.

Modern fairy and fantastic stories are also appropriate for each of
these grades. Suitable stories for the fourth grade are "The Four-Leaved
Clover," "The Emperor's New Clothes," "The Nightingale," and "The Story
of Fairyfoot." Stories appropriate for the fifth grade are "The Happy
Prince," "The Knights of the Silver Shield," and "The Prince's Dream."
In the sixth grade, the teacher might use "Old Pipes and the Dryad" and
"The King of the Golden River."

Two or three symbolic stories or fables in verse from the last part of
Section V should be used in each of these grades.

Nature prose should appeal more and more to children as they advance
from the fourth to the eighth grade. Many pupils in the fourth grade
will enjoy reading for themselves books by Burgess and Paine, while
fifth- and sixth-grade pupils will get much pleasure from the simpler
books by Sharp, Seton, Long, Miller, and Roberts. In the intermediate
grades, the teacher may read such stories as "Wild Life in the Farm
Yard," "The Vendetta," "Pasha," "Moufflou," and "Bird Habits."

Stories of various other kinds may be read by the teacher in the
intermediate grades. "Goody Two-Shoes" and "Waste Not, Want Not," are
suitable for the fourth grade. The biographies "How Columbus Got His
Ships" and "Boyhood of Washington" are excellent in the fifth or sixth
grade as an introduction to history study, and the romance "Robin Hood
and the Merry Little Old Woman" may be used appropriately in any of
these grades, especially if it is made to supplement a discussion of the
Norman conquest.

Most of the poems up to about No. 342, and a few beyond that, are within
the range of the work for these grades.

_Seventh and eighth grades._ Although pupils in the seventh and eighth
grades may be expected to read simple narrative readily, the teacher
should read to the pupils frequently. It cannot be too much emphasized
that reading aloud to children is the surest way of developing an
appreciation of the best in literature. In poetry especially this is a
somewhat critical time, as the pupil is passing from the simpler and
more concrete verse to that which has a more prominent thought content.
The persuasion of the reading voice smooths over many obstacles here.
Outside the field of poetry, the teacher's work in these grades is
mainly one of guidance and direction in getting the children and the
right books in contact. Children at this period are likely to be
omnivorous readers, ready for any book that comes their way, and the job
of keeping them supplied with titles of enough available good books for
their needs is indeed one to tax all a teacher's knowledge and
experience.

The demand for highly sensational stories on the part of pupils in the
upper grades is so insistent that it constitutes a special problem for
the teacher. It is a perfectly natural demand, and no wise teacher will
attempt to stifle it. Such an attempt would almost certainly result in a
more or less surreptitious reading of a mass of unwholesome books which
have come to be known as "dime novels." Instead of trying to thwart this
desire for the thrilling story the teacher should be ready to recommend
books which have all the attractive adventure features of the "dime
novel," and which have in addition sound artistic and ethical qualities.
While many such books are mentioned in the bibliographies in the latter
part of this text, it has seemed well to bring together here a short
list of those which librarians over the country have found particularly
fitted to serve as substitutes for the dime novel.

  Alden, W. L., _The Moral Pirate_.

  Altsheler, Joseph A., _The Young Trailers_. _Horsemen of the
     Plains._

  Barbour, Ralph H., _The Crimson Sweater_.

  Bennett, John, _The Treasure of Peyre Gaillard_.

  Burton, Charles P., _The Boys of Bob's Hill_.

  Carruth, Hayden, _Track's End_.

  Cody, William F., _Adventures of Buffalo Bill_.

  Drysdale, William, _The Fast Mail_.

  Grinnell, George Bird, _Jack among the Indians_. _Jack, the
     Young Ranchman._

  Hunting, Henry G., _The Cave of the Bottomless Pool_.

  Janvier, Thomas A., _The Aztec Treasure House_.

  Kaler, James Otis, _Toby Tyler, or Ten Weeks with a Circus_.

  London, Jack, _The Call of the Wild_.

  Malone, Captain P. B., _Winning His Way to West Point_.

  Masefield, John, _Jim Davis_.

  Mason, Alfred B., _Tom Strong, Washington's Scout_.

  Matthews, Brander, _Tom Paulding_.

  Moffett, Cleveland, _Careers of Danger and Daring_.

  Munroe, Kirk, _Cab and Caboose_. _Derrick Sterling._

  O'Higgins, Harvey J., _The Smoke Eaters_.

  Quirk, Leslie W., _The Boy Scouts of the Black Eagle Patrol_.

  Sabin, Edwin L., _Bar B Boys_.

  Schultz, James Willard, _With the Indians in the Rockies_.

  Stevenson, Burton E., _The Young Train Despatcher_.

  Stevenson, Robert Louis, _Treasure Island_.

  Stoddard, William O., _Two Arrows_. _Talking Leaves._

  Trowbridge, John T., _Cudjo's Cave_. _The Young Surveyor._

  Verne, Jules, _20,000 Leagues under the Sea_.

  Wallace, Dillon, _Wilderness Castaways_.

  White, Stewart Edward, _The Magic Forest_.




SECTION II

MOTHER GOOSE JINGLES AND NURSERY RHYMES




BIBLIOGRAPHY


I. IMPORTANT IN TRACING THE MOTHER GOOSE CANON

        c. 1760. _Mother Goose's Melody._ [Published by
        John Newbery, London.]

        No copy of this issue known to be in existence.

c. 1783. Ritson, Joseph, _Gammer Gurton's Garland, or the Nursery
Parnassus_. [1810, enlarged.]

c. 1785. _Mother Goose's Melody._ [Reprint of Newbery, by Isaiah Thomas,
Worcester, Mass.]

        [1889. Whitmore, W. H., _The Original Mother
        Goose's Melody_, as first issued by John
        Newbery, of London, about A.D. 1760. Reproduced
        in _facsimile_ from the edition as reprinted by
        Isaiah Thomas, of Worcester, Mass., about A.D.
        1785. With introduction and notes.]

1824 ff. _Mother Goose's Quarto, or Melodies Complete._ [Various issues
by Munroe and Francis, Boston.]

        [Hale, Edward Everett, _The Only True Mother
        Goose Melodies_. Exact reproduction of the text
        and illustrations of the original edition
        (_Mother Goose's Melodies: The Only Pure
        Edition_) printed in Boston in 1834 by Monroe
        and Francis. With an introduction.]

1826. Chambers, Robert, _Popular Rhymes of Scotland_. [1870, enlarged.]

1834. Ker, John Bellenden, _An Essay on the Archaeology of Popular
English Phrases and Nursery Rhymes_. [Supplemented 1840 and 1842.]

1842. Halliwell (Phillips), J. O., _The Nursery Rhymes of England_.

1849. Halliwell (Phillips), J. O., _Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales_.

1864. Rimbault, Edward F., _Old Nursery Rhymes with Tunes_.


II. IMPORTANT MODERN COLLECTIONS

  Baring-Gould, Sabine, _A Book of Nursery Songs and Rhymes_.

  Headland, I. T., _Chinese Mother Goose Rhymes_.

  Jerrold, Walter, _The Big Book of Nursery Rhymes_.

  Lang, Andrew, _The Nursery Rhyme Book_.

  Newell, W. W., _Games and Songs of American Children_.

  Saintsbury, G. E. B., _National Rhymes of the Nursery_.

  Welsh, Charles, _A Book of Nursery Rhymes_.

  Wheeler, William A., _Mother Goose's Melodies_.


III. NURSERY RHYMES WITH MUSIC

  Crane, Walter, _The Baby's Bouquet, a Fresh Bunch of Old Rhymes
     and Tunes_.

  Homer, Sidney, _Songs from Mother Goose_.

  Le Mair, H. Willebeck, _Our Old Nursery Rhymes_.

  Le Mair, H. Willebeck, _Little Songs of Long Ago_.

  Perkins, Raymond, _Thirty Old-Time Nursery Songs_.


IV. STUDIES

  Bolton, H. C., _Counting-out Rhymes of Children, Their Antiquity,
     Origin, and Wide Distribution_.

  Earle, Alice Morse, _Child Life in Colonial Days_. [Especially
     chap. xiv.]

  Eckenstein, Lina, _Comparative Studies in Nursery Rhymes_.

  Godfrey, Elizabeth, _English Children in the Olden Time_.
     [Especially chap. ii.]

  Gomme, A. B., _The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and
     Ireland_. 2 vols.

  Green, P. B., _The History of Nursery Rhymes_.

  Halsey, Rosalie V., _Forgotten Books of the American Nursery_.

  Field, W. T., _Fingerposts to Children's Reading_, pp. 193 ff.

  Moses, M. J., _Children's Books and Reading_, pp. 40 ff.




SECTION II. MOTHER GOOSE JINGLES AND NURSERY RHYMES

INTRODUCTORY


_A flawless literature._ The one literature that is supremely adapted to
its purpose is the collection of rhymes associated with Mother Goose. To
every child it comes with an irresistible appeal. It has a power so
natural and fundamental that it defies explanation. The child takes it
for granted just as he does his parents. It has a perfection of rhythm
and structure not attainable by modern imitators. It has been perfected
through the generations by the surest of all tests, that of constant
popular use. Much of it is common to many different nations. It is an
international literature of childhood. While much of it is known to
children long before they enter school, these jingles, like all folk
literature, never lose their charm through repetition. The schools have
long since learned the value of the familiar in teaching. The process of
learning to read is usually based on some of the better known rhymes.
Teachers of literature in more advanced classes think they can generally
detect the students who have been especially "learned" in "Mother Goose
her ways" by their quick responsiveness to the facts of verbal rhythm
and rhythmical structure in more sophisticated products. "If we have no
love for poetry to-day, it may not impossibly be due to the fact that we
have ceased to prize the old, old tales which have been the delight of
the child and the child-man since the foundations of the world. If you
want your child to love Homer, do not withhold Mother Goose."

_Who was Mother Goose?_ The answer to this, as to other questions
suggested below, may be of no direct or special interest to the children
themselves. But teachers should know some of the main conclusions
arrived at by folklorists and others in their investigations of the
traditional materials used for basic work in literature. All the
evidence shows that Mother Goose as the name of the familiar old lady of
the nursery came to us from France. Andrew Lang discovered a reference
to her in a French poem of 1650, where she figures as a teller of
stories. In 1697 Perrault's famous fairy tales were published with a
frontispiece representing an old woman spinning, and telling tales to a
man, a girl, a little boy, and a cat. On this frontispiece was the
legend, _Tales of Our Mother Goose_. (See note to No. 161.)

As a teller of prose tales, Mother Goose came to England with the
translation of Perrault about 1730. We do not find her name connected
with verse until after the middle of the eighteenth century. About the
year 1760 a little book called _Mother Goose's Melody_ was issued by
John Newbery, a London publisher and a most important figure in the
history of the production of books for children. It is a pleasant and
not improbable theory that this first collection of nursery rhymes, upon
which later ones were built, was the work of Oliver Goldsmith, who was
for some years in Newbery's employ. However that may be, it is certain
that from this date the name of Mother Goose has been almost exclusively
associated with nursery rhymes.

Newbery's _Mother Goose's Melody_ was soon reprinted by Isaiah Thomas,
of Worcester, Massachusetts, and thus came into the hands of American
children early in our national life. A long-since exploded theory was
advanced about 1870 that Mother Goose was a real woman of Boston in the
early eighteenth century, whose rhymes were published by her son-in-law,
Thomas Fleet, in 1719. But no one has identified any such publication
and there is no evidence whatever that this old lady in cap and
spectacles is other than purely mythical.

_Whence came the jingles themselves?_ It is certain that many nursery
rhymes are both widespread geographically in distribution and of great
antiquity. Halliwell and others have found references to some of them in
old books which prove that many of the English rhymes go back several
centuries. They are of popular origin; that is, they took root
anonymously among the folk and were passed on by word of mouth. When a
rhyme can be traced to any known authority we generally find that the
folk have extracted what pleased, have forgotten or modified any
original historical or other application the rhymes may have possessed,
and in general have shaped the rhyme to popular taste. "Thus our old
nursery rhymes," says Andrew Lang, "are smooth stones from the book of
time, worn round by constant friction of tongues long silent. We cannot
hope to make new nursery rhymes, any more than we can write new fairy
tales."

Here are a few illustrations of what scholars have been able to tell us
of the sources of the rhymes: "Jack and Jill" preserves the Icelandic
myth of two children caught up into the moon, where they can still be
seen carrying a bucket on a pole between them. "Three Blind Mice" is
traced to an old book called _Deuteromalia_ (1609). "Little Jack Horner"
is all that is left of an extended chapbook story, _The Pleasant History
of Jack Horner, Containing His Witty Tricks_, etc. "Poor Old Robinson
Crusoe" is a fragment from a song by the character Jerry Sneak in
Foote's _Mayor of Garratt_ (1763). "Simple Simon" gives all that the
nursery has preserved of a long chapbook verse story. "A Swarm of Bees
in May" was found by Halliwell quoted in Miege's _Great French
Dictionary_ (1687). These and numerous like facts serve only to impress
us with the long and honorable history of the nursery rhyme.

_Can nursery rhymes be helpfully classified?_ This question seems of
more consequence to the teacher than the previous ones because it deals
with the practical organization of his material. The most superficial
observer can see that Nos. 3, 36, 46, 59, 62, and 113, on the following
pages, are riddles; that Nos. 22 and 30 are counting-out rhymes; that
Nos. 37, 38, 39, 40, and 41 are replies that might be made to one who
indulged unduly in suppositions; that No. 27 is a face game, No. 75 a
hand game, and No. 108 a toe game; that Nos. 42, 81, 82, 107, and 111
are riding songs; that Nos. 7, 10, 23, 67, and 137 are proverbial
sayings; that Nos. 64 and 89 are charms; and so one might continue with
groupings based on the immediate use made of the rhyme, not forgetting
the great number that lend themselves to the purposes of the crooned
lullaby or soothing song.

Halliwell made the first attempt at any complete classification in his
_Nursery Rhymes of England_ (1842), using eighteen headings: (1)
Historical, (2) Literal, (3) Tales, (4) Proverbs, (5) Scholastic, (6)
Songs, (7) Riddles, (8) Charms, (9) Gaffers and Gammers, (10) Games,
(11) Paradoxes, (12) Lullabies, (13) Jingles, (14) Love and Matrimony,
(15) Natural History, (16) Accumulative Stories, (17) Local, (18)
Relics. Andrew Lang follows Halliwell, but reduces the classes to
fourteen by combining (2) and (5), (7) and (11), (8) and (12), and by
omitting (17). These classifications are made from the standpoint of the
folklore scholar, and are based on the sources from which the rhymes
originally sprang. Professor Saintsbury scouts the value of any such
arrangement, since all belong equally in the one class, "jingles," and
he also rightly points out that "all genuine nursery rhymes . . . have
never become nursery rhymes until the historical fact has been
practically forgotten by those who used them, and nothing but the
metrical and musical attraction remains."

Without denying the great significance of popular rhymes to the student
of folklore, we must look elsewhere for any practical suggestion for the
teacher in the matter of arrangement. Such a suggestion will be found in
the late Charles Welsh's _Book of Nursery Rhymes_, a little volume that
every teacher interested in children's literature must make use of. The
rhymes are grouped into three main divisions: (1) Mother Play, (2)
Mother Stories, and (3) Child Play, with subordinate groupings under
each. About 250 rhymes are included in Welsh's collection, and the
arrangement suggests the best order for using them practically, without
dropping into any ironclad system.

It may be argued that any attempt at classification of material so
freely and variously used as the Mother Goose rhymes is sure to stiffen
the work of the class and render it less enjoyable. Spontaneity is more
vital here than at any other stage of one's literary education.

_What is the secret of the nursery rhyme's appeal to children?_ Here at
least we are face to face with what may be called a final fact, that
these jingles do make an appeal so universal and remarkable that any
attempt to explain it seems always to fall far short of completeness.
Perhaps the best start may be made with Mr. Welsh's suggestion that this
appeal is threefold: first, that which comes from the rhyming jingle, as
in "Higgledy, piggledy, my fat hen"; second, that which comes from the
nonsense surprises, as in "Hey diddle diddle," "Three wise men of
Gotham," and "I'll tell you a story"; third, that which comes from the
dramatic action, as in "Little Miss Muffet," and "Little Jack Horner."
This summary does not differ much from Mr. Walter Taylor Field's
conclusions: "The child takes little thought as to what _any_ of these
verses mean. There are perhaps four elements in them that appeal to
him,--first, the jingle, and with it that peculiar cadence which modern
writers of children's poetry strive in vain to imitate; second, the
nonsense,--with just enough of sense in it to connect the nonsense with
the child's thinkable world; third, the action,--for the stories are
quite dramatic in their way; and fourth, the quaintness." Mr. Field also
emphasizes the probable charm of mystery in the face of the unknown
facts beyond the child's horizon, which appear in many of the rhymes.

Other commentators do little beyond expanding some of these suggestions.
All of them agree in stressing the appeal made by rhythm, the jingle,
the emphatic meter. This seems a fundamental thing in all literature,
though readers are mainly conscious of it in poetry. Just how
fundamental it is in human life has not been better hinted than in a
sentence by Mrs. MacClintock: "One who is trying to write a sober
treatise in a matter-of-fact way dares not, lest he be set down as the
veriest mystic, say all the things that might be said about the
function of rhythm, especially in its more pronounced form of meter,
among a community of children, no matter what the size of the group--how
rhythmic motion, or the flow of measured and beautiful sounds,
harmonizes their differences, tunes them up to their tasks, disciplines
their conduct, comforts their hurts, quiets their nerves; all this apart
from the facts more or less important from the point of view of
literature, that it cultivates their ear, improves their taste, and
provides them a genuinely artistic pleasure."

Professor Saintsbury, as usual, adds a fascinating turn to the
discussion when, after agreeing that we may see in the rhymes, "to a
great extent, the poetical appeal of sound as opposed to that of meaning
in its simplest and most unmistakable terms," he continues: "And we
shall find something else, which I venture to call the attraction of the
inarticulate. . . . In moments of more intense and genuine feeling . . .
[man] does not as a rule use or at least confine himself to articulate
speech. . . . All children . . . fall naturally, long after they are able
to express themselves as it is called rationally, into a sort of pleasant
gibberish when they are alone and pleased or even displeased. . . . It must
be a not infrequent experience of most people that one frequently falls
into pure jingle and nonsense verse of the nursery kind. . . . I should
myself, though I may not carry many people with me, go farther than this
and say that this 'attraction of the inarticulate,' this allurement of
mere sound and sequence, has a great deal more to do than is generally
thought with the charm of the very highest poetry. . . . In the best
nursery rhymes, as in the simpler and more genuine ballads which have so
close a connection with them, we find this attraction of the
inarticulate--this charm of pure sound, this utilizing of alliteration
and rhyme and assonance." Those who have noticed the tendency of
children to find vocal pleasure even of a physical or muscular sort in
nonsense combinations of sounds, and who also realize their own tendency
in this direction, will feel that Professor Saintsbury has hit upon a
suggestive term in his claim for "the attraction of the inarticulate" as
a partial explanation of the Mother Goose appeal.

Through song, game, memorization, and dramatization, traditional or
original, the rhymes may be made to contribute to the child's
satisfaction in all of the directions pointed out.


SUGGESTIONS FOR READING

        (Books referred to by authors' names are listed
        in preceding bibliography.)

        For orientation read Chauncey B. Tinker, "In
        Praise of Nursery Lore," _Unpopular Review_,
        Vol. VI, p. 338 (Oct.-Dec., 1916). For a most
        satisfactory presentation of the whole subject
        read chap. x, "Mother Goose," in Field. For the
        origin of Mother Goose as a character consult
        Lang's introduction to his edition of
        _Perrault's Popular Tales_. For the theory of
        her American nativity see Wheeler and Whitmore.
        For the origins of the rhymes themselves the
        authorities are Halliwell and Eckenstein. For
        pedagogical suggestions see Welsh, also his
        article "Nursery Rhymes," _Cyclopedia of
        Education_ (ed. Monroe). For many interesting
        facts and suggestions on rhythm in nursery
        rhymes consult Charles H. Sears, "Studies in
        Rhythm," _Pedagogical Seminary_, Vol. VIII, p.
        3. For the whole subject of folk songs look
        into Martinengo-Cesaresco, _The Study of Folk
        Songs_. Books and periodicals dealing with
        primary education often contain brief
        discussions of value on the use of rhymes. Many
        Mother Goose records have been prepared by the
        educational departments of the various
        talking-machine companies, and may be used to
        advantage in the work in rhythm.

The shorter rhymes (Nos. 1-115) are arranged in alphabetical order.
There are many slight variations in the form of the text as found in
printed versions and in the oral versions used by children in different
communities. While Halliwell has been used as the basis for rhymes given
in his collection, the following versions try to reproduce the forms of
expression that seem generally most pleasing to children.



1

        A cat came fiddling out of a barn,
        With a pair of bagpipes under her arm;
        She could sing nothing but fiddle-de-dee,
        The mouse has married the bumble-bee;
        Pipe, cat--dance, mouse--
        We'll have a wedding at our good house.



2

              A diller, a dollar,
              A ten o'clock scholar,
        What makes you come so soon?
        You used to come at ten o'clock,
        And now you come at noon.



3

            As I was going to St. Ives,
            I met a man with seven wives;
            Every wife had seven sacks,
            Every sack had seven cats,
            Every cat had seven kits:
            Kits, cats, sacks, and wives,
        How many were there going to St. Ives?
                                        (_One._)



4

        As I was going up Pippen Hill,--
          Pippen Hill was dirty,--
        There I met a pretty miss,
          And she dropped me a curtsy.

        Little miss, pretty miss,
          Blessings light upon you;
        If I had half-a-crown a day,
          I'd spend it all upon you.



5

        As I went to Bonner,
          I met a pig
          Without a wig,
        Upon my word of honor.



6

        As Tommy Snooks and Bessie Brooks
          Were walking out one Sunday,
        Says Tommy Snooks to Bessie Brooks,
          "To-morrow will be Monday."



7

        A swarm of bees in May
        Is worth a load of hay;
        A swarm of bees in June
        Is worth a silver spoon;
        A swarm of bees in July
        Is not worth a fly.



8

        Baa, baa, black sheep,
          Have you any wool?
        Yes, marry, have I,
          Three bags full;
        One for my master,
          And one for my dame,
        And one for the little boy
          Who lives in the lane.



9

        Barber, barber, shave a pig,
        How many hairs will make a wig?
        "Four and twenty, that's enough."
        Give the barber a pinch of snuff.



10

        Birds of a feather flock together,
          And so will pigs and swine;
        Rats and mice will have their choice,
          And so will I have mine.



11

        Bless you, bless you, burnie bee;
        Say, when will your wedding be?
        If it be to-morrow day,
        Take your wings and fly away.



12

        Bobby Shafto's gone to sea,
        With silver buckles at his knee;
        He'll come back and marry me,--
          Pretty Bobby Shafto!

        Bobby Shafto's fat and fair,
        Combing out his yellow hair,
        He's my love for evermore,--
          Pretty Bobby Shafto!



13

        Bow, wow, wow,
        Whose dog art thou?
        Little Tom Tinker's dog,
        Bow, wow, wow.



14

        Bye, baby bunting,
        Daddy's gone a-hunting,
        To get a little rabbit skin
        To wrap the baby bunting in.



15

        Come when you're called,
          Do what you're bid,
        Shut the door after you,
          Never be chid.



16

          Cross patch,
          Draw the latch,
        And sit by the fire and spin;
          Take a cup,
          And drink it up,
        Then call your neighbors in.



17

        Curly locks! curly locks! wilt thou be mine?
        Thou shalt not wash the dishes, nor yet feed the swine.
        But sit on a cushion and sew a fine seam,
        And feed upon strawberries, sugar, and cream!



18

        Dance, little baby, dance up high,
        Never mind, baby, mother is by;
        Crow and caper, caper and crow,
        There, little baby, there you go;

        Up to the ceiling, down to the ground,
        Backward and forward, round and round;
        Dance, little baby, and mother will sing,
        With the merry coral, ding, ding, ding!



19

        Diddle, diddle, dumpling, my son John,
        He went to bed with his stockings on;
        One shoe off, the other shoe on,
        Diddle, diddle, dumpling, my son John.



20

        Ding, dong, bell!
        Pussy's in the well.
        Who put her in?
        Little Tommy Green.
        Who pulled her out?
        Little Johnny Stout.
        What a naughty boy was that,
        To drown the poor, poor pussy-cat,
        Who never did him any harm,
        But killed the mice in his father's barn.



21

          Doctor Foster
          Went to Glo'ster,
        In a shower of rain;
          He stepped in a puddle,
          Up to his middle,
        And never went there again.



22

        Eggs, butter, cheese, bread,
        Stick, stock, stone dead,
        Stick him up, stick him down,
        Stick him in the old man's crown.



23

        For every evil under the sun,
        There is a remedy, or there is none.
        If there be one, try to find it,
        If there be none, never mind it.



24

        Four-and-twenty tailors went to kill a snail,
        The bravest man among them dursn't touch her tail;
        The snail put out her horns, like a little Kyloe cow,
        Run, tailors, run, or she'll kill you all e'en now.



25

        Great A, little a,
          Bouncing B!
        The cat's in the cupboard,
          And she can't see.



26

          Hark, hark,
          The dogs do bark,
        The beggars are coming to town:
          Some in tags,
          Some in rags,
        And some in velvet gowns.



27

        Here sits the Lord Mayor,        (_touching forehead_)
          Here sit his two men,          (_eyes_)
        Here sits the cock,              (_right cheek_)
          Here sits the hen,             (_left cheek_)
        Here sit the little chickens,    (_tip of nose_)
          Here they all run in;          (_mouth_)
        Chinchopper, chinchopper,
          Chinchopper chin!              (_chuck the chin_)



28

        Here we go up, up, up,
          And here we go down, down, down;
        And here we go backwards and forwards,
          And here we go round, round, round.



29

        Given as usually known to children. In some
        older versions the word "craft" was used
        instead of "sport," thus making a rhyme. There
        is an old story of an overly serious parent who
        was greatly disturbed by the evident
        exaggerations in this jingle. After calling the
        attention of his children to the offensive
        improbabilities, the good man suggested the
        following "revised version."

          Hey diddle diddle,
          The cat and the fiddle,
        The cow jumped _under_ the moon;
          The little dog _barked_,
          To see the sport,
        And the _cat_ ran after the spoon!

          Hey! diddle, diddle,
          The cat and the fiddle,
        The cow jumped over the moon;
          The little dog laughed
          To see such sport,
        And the dish ran away with the spoon.



30

        Hickery, dickery, 6 and 7,
        Alabone Crackabone, 10 and 11,
        Spin, span, muskidan;
        Twiddle 'um, twaddle 'um, 21.



31

        Higgledy, Piggledy,
          My black hen,
        She lays eggs
          For gentlemen;
        Sometimes nine,
          And sometimes ten,
        Higgledy, Piggledy,
          My black hen!



32

        Hickory, dickory, dock,
        The mouse ran up the clock,
        The clock struck one,
        The mouse ran down;
        Hickory, dickory, dock.



33

        Hogs in the garden, catch 'em, Towser.
        Cows in the cornfield, run, boys, run;
        Cats in the cream-pot, run, girls, run, girls;
        Fire on the mountains, run, boys, run.



34

            Hot-cross buns!
            Hot-cross buns!
        One a penny, two a penny,
            Hot-cross buns!

            Hot-cross buns!
            Hot-cross buns!
        If you have no daughters,
            Give them to your sons.



35

        Hub a dub dub,
        Three men in a tub;
        The butcher, the baker,
        The candlestick-maker,
        They all fell out of a rotten potato.



36

        Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
        Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
        Threescore men and threescore more
        Cannot place Humpty Dumpty as he was before.
                                         (_An egg._)



37

        If all the sea were one sea,
        What a _great_ sea that would be!
        And if all the trees were one tree,
        What a _great_ tree that would be!
        And if all the axes were one axe,
        What a _great_ axe that would be!
        And if all the men were one man,
        What a _great_ man he would be!
        And if the _great_ man took the _great_ axe,
        And cut down the _great_ tree,
        And let it fall into the _great_ sea,
        What a splish splash _that_ would be!



38

        If all the world was apple-pie,
        And all the sea was ink,
        And all the trees were bread and cheese,
        What should we have for drink?



39

        If I'd as much money as I could spend,
        I never would cry, "Old chairs to mend!
        Old chairs to mend! Old chairs to mend!"
        I never would cry, "Old chairs to mend!"
