
"Who will you aim at?"

"Ruddy and Ditmore."

"All right, I'll aim at Snow; and I'll let Ruddy have one, too."

Again came a ringing war-cry, and in a moment more the battle was
continued. Back and forth swayed the lines of cadets, first towards one
end of the field and then towards the other. It was plainly to be seen
that the commands were about evenly matched.

"How long is this battle to last?" questioned Joe Nelson.

"Half an hour," answered Fred Century, who was beside him.

"Time is almost up, then," came from Bert Field, who had been fighting
so hard he was almost out of breath.

"Five minutes more!" came from the referee. "Now then, if either side
is going to do something, pitch in!"

"Forward!" came simultaneously from both captains, and forward plunged
Company A and Company B, and the snowballs commenced to fly as thickly
as before. Neither side would give ground, and at last the two lines
were within fifteen to twenty feet of each other, right in the center of
the field.

The time was almost up, and each command was getting rid of the last of
the snowballs, when Jack saw a snowball leave Coulter's hand and sail
swiftly towards Pepper. The Imp did not see it until it was quite close
to him and failed in his attempt to dodge. The snowball hit him full in
the temple and over he went as if struck with a club.

"Pepper!" cried the young major in horror, and started to rush to his
chum's assistance, when another snowball came flying through the air. It
struck Jack over the ear, and he, too, went down, all but knocked
unconscious.

A bugle blew, and the great snowballing contest came to an end.

"A tie! A tie!" was the cry. "Neither side wins!"

"Let the two captains shake hands and call it off!" said one cadet.

"I'm willing!" cried Bart, readily.

"So am I," added Henry, and then the pair shook hands, while a great
cheer rolled up from both sides. But the cheer came to an abrupt end
when Fred Century cried out:

"Pepper Ditmore is hurt!"

"And so is Major Ruddy!" came from Emerald Hogan.

A crowd quickly gathered around each wounded cadet. Pepper had a nasty
cut over the left eye and Jack had a lump behind his right ear.

"They must have been hit with soakers," was Dale's comment, as he bent
over Pepper.

"Looks as if Pepper was hit with a stone," came from Andy.

"A stone!" cried Bart Field.

"Yes, a stone! That cut was never made by a snowball, or a piece of ice,
either!"

"Shall I get a doctor?" asked Stuffer, anxiously.

"Oh, are they as bad as that?" asked Bob Grenwood.

"I don't know," answered Bert, soberly. "Wait a minute and we'll see if
they come around."

"Oh, what a crack!" murmured Jack, and then he sat up and stared around
him. Pepper was also stirring and he slowly put one hand to the cut on
his temple.

"Let us carry 'em to the Hall," suggested Bert. "It's getting too cold
out here and besides, they are all in a sweat from the snowballing."

When Pepper was picked up, Andy saw something lying beneath him in the
snow. He picked it up.

"Hello! look here!" he called out, and held the object up.

"A stone!"

"Where did it come from, Andy?"

"It was under Pepper's body. I believe it was in the snowball that hit
him!"

"Who would be so mean?"

"I rather guess I know," answered Pepper, and looked around for Ritter
and Coulter, but the bully and his crony had disappeared.

Pepper and Jack were carried tenderly into the Hall and placed in easy
chairs in the reception room. Presently both had recovered consciousness
fully, and each had his head bound up in bandages.

"Phew, but that was a crack I got!" sighed The Imp. "I thought a rock
had hit me!"

"It was Coulter who threw that snowball," said the young major. "I saw
him do it, and I was running to help you up when I got struck myself,
and went down."

"And I am pretty sure Ritter hit you, Jack," came from Andy. "Anyway, I
saw him aiming for you just before you staggered and fell."

"Andy, those fellows must have hit us with stones!" muttered The Imp.

"I feel sure they did. Ritter struck me with a snowball, on the hand,
and it left a deep scratch. Now, no ordinary snowball would do that.
Besides that, I picked up a sharp stone from where Pepper was lying."

"It was against the rules of the contest to use stones," put in Dale,
who was near.

"Sure it was!" cried Stuffer. "If those chaps really used stones they
ought to be punished for it."

The news quickly went the rounds, as was to be expected. When Henry Lee
heard it he quickly sought out Captain Bart.

"I hope you don't think I allowed any such underhand work," he said
anxiously.

"Not for a minute, Henry!" cried the captain of Company B. "If Ritter
and Coulter did it, they did it on their own responsibility. I think
them just mean enough, too, for they are down on Major Ruddy and Pepper
Ditmore."

"If they are guilty, I'd like to have them court-martialed!" muttered
the commander of Company A. "Such underhand work is a disgrace to Putnam
Hall!"

"Wait and see if it can be proven," answered Bart Conners. "Then, if it
is proven, we'll read Ritter and Coulter a lecture they won't forget in
a hurry!" he added significantly.




CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH MORE VALUABLES VANISH


That night it snowed again, and in the morning the storm raged furiously
around Putnam Hall, so that the landscape on all sides was completely
blotted out. The cadets had to remain indoors, and it was hard work to
keep a path clear to the gymnasium and the stables.

"We'll be snowbound and no mistake," observed Andy. "Well, I don't care
much; it will give me a chance to catch up in my lessons."

"Very far behind, Andy?" asked Jack.

"More than I like to think about, Jack. I want to graduate with honor,
you know."

"Oh, we all want to do that."

"How's the head?"

"Still sore. But I guess I'll be all right again in a few days."

"How about you, Pepper?"

"I'll be all right, too, Andy. But it was a fierce crack!" added
Pepper, as his hand went up gingerly to his plastered-up cut.

"Going to lodge a complaint against Ritter and Coulter?"

"What good would it do? We can't actually prove that they used stones?"

"Let it pass. If we make a complaint it will only stir up more bad
blood," said the young major. "But in the future I am going to watch
Ritter and Coulter pretty closely."

The boys were kept at the Hall for all of that week, getting no further
than the gymnasium for recreation. The wind blew furiously at times, so
that the snow was piled up into numerous drifts, one reaching almost to
the top of the carriage-shed, and another completely hiding the posts of
the gate entrance.

"This must be tough on some of the farmers," observed Dale. "Think of
trying to get the milk to the station in such weather."

"Well, a farmer usually has enough to eat," answered Stuffer. "That
counts for a good deal. Now if a fellow was snowbound and didn't have
any grub----" He did not finish but shook his head dolefully. To Stuffer
such a fate was beyond words.

As was to be expected, Ritter and Coulter kept out of the way of Jack
and Pepper. Once the young major met the pair on the stairs, but they
simply glared at him and passed on before he could say a word.

During all this time Captain Putnam had been doing his best to solve the
mystery concerning the disappearance of Jack's gold watch and chain.
But, though all the hired help and the cadets and teachers were watched
and questioned, nothing of importance came to light. Peleg Snuggers said
he had once seen a strange man near the stables, and Captain Putnam
wondered if that individual could have sneaked into the school and
committed the robbery.

"But if he did that, why didn't he take more?" he said, in speaking of
the matter to George Strong.

"I am sure I don't know, sir," answered the teacher. "For the matter of
that, why wouldn't any thief take more, if he had the chance?"

"I give it up, Strong. This thing makes me feel sick."

"Well, we must keep our eyes open," answered George Strong; and then the
conversation changed to the lessons for the next day.

On Tuesday morning, Pepper chanced to go to a bureau-drawer in which he
kept his collars, cuffs, neckties and jewelry. He commenced to look for
something and ended by turning out everything in the compartment.

"What's wrong, Pepper?" asked Jack. "Lost some diamonds?"

"It's my ruby scarfpin, Jack. Did you see it?"

"No, not for some time. Did you have it in that drawer?"

"I did."

"When did you wear it last?"

"The night we took dinner with the Fords."

"Are you sure you put it back when you came home?"

"Positive. I keep it in this case," and Pepper held up an empty jewelry
case.

"Gracious! This is becoming interesting!" murmured the young major.
"First my watch and chain and now your scarfpin!" He looked pointedly at
his chum. "Pepper, do you think----" He stopped short.

"Think what, Jack?"

"Oh, I'd hate to say it, Pepper," and the young major shrugged his
shoulders.

"Were you going to mention Ritter and Coulter?"

"I was. But maybe it wouldn't be fair. It's a terrible thing to think
anybody a thief."

"That is true. But maybe they took them as a joke and hid them."

"That is past a joke."

Pepper continued to hunt around until it was time to go below. Then he
marched straight to Captain Putnam's private office.

The captain listened with a sinking heart to what the cadet had to say.
It was terrible to think that a thief was at large in the school and
could not be caught.

"You are positive that you had the scarfpin when you came home,
Ditmore?" he questioned.

"Yes, sir."

"And you put it in the case in the drawer?"

"I did."

"Was the drawer locked?"

"Part of the time. Sometimes I forgot and left the key in the lock."

"What sort of a scarfpin was it?"

"It was a sort of a clover effect, of gold, with a ruby and three small
diamonds."

"And how much was it worth?"

"I believe my mother paid thirty-five dollars for it. It was a Christmas
gift, so I am not sure about the value."

"Well, take another look for it and report to me again to-morrow,"
answered Captain Putnam, with a heavy sigh. Then, of a sudden, he added:
"Do you suspect anybody of taking the scarfpin?"

"I have no clue whatever to the theft," answered Pepper, slowly.

"But have you any suspicions, Ditmore?" And the master's voice grew a
trifle stern.

"Only in a general way."

"Please explain yourself."

"I--er--I hardly know what to say, sir," stammered Pepper. "There may be
nothing in it at all."

"In what? Come, out with it."

"Why, you see, sir, some of the cadets in this school are not good
friends with me and Major Ruddy, and maybe they thought they would play
a trick on us by taking his watch and chain and my scarfpin."

"Humph! a mighty poor trick! Who are those cadets?"

"I don't want to accuse them, Captain Putnam."

"I understand. But who are the cadets?"

"Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter."

"Oh, yes, I remember now. You and Major Ruddy have had quite some
trouble with them in the past."

"Yes, sir. But I'd hate to think they did such a mean thing as this,"
added Pepper, hastily.

"Well, take a look around and report again to-morrow," returned Captain
Putnam; and then closed his desk slowly and thoughtfully.

Pepper did take a look around, but it was of no use. Not a trace of the
missing scarfpin could be found.

"This certainly beats the nation!" remarked Dale, when the cadets were
talking the affair over. "First Andy loses his jewelry, then Jack, and
now Pepper. Wonder if I hadn't better put my cuff-links in the captain's
safe?" And he cut a wry face. "They cost me a dollar and a quarter."

"I'll wager Captain Putnam would give a good deal to catch the thief,"
remarked Stuffer. "Say, Pep, I hope you don't suspect anybody in this
dormitory?" he added anxiously.

"No, Stuffer," was the quick answer. Then Pepper broke into a grin. "Of
course, if it was a doughnut, or a pie, I'd suspect you right off!"

"Huh! It's no crime to take something to eat!" grunted Stuffer.

"I'd hate to think any cadet was guilty," came from Emerald. "'Twould
blacken the character of the whole school, so it would!"

"Well, Jack and Pepper have some bitter enemies," said Dale,
significantly. And all present knew to whom he referred.

"Well, you can't always tell," said Dale, and shrugged his broad
shoulders.

At that moment Fred Century came hurrying into the dormitory.

"Have you heard the latest news?" he cried.

"No, what is it?" questioned Andy.

"Maybe we are going to have an extra holiday," suggested Pepper.

"Better yet, maybe old Crabtree has resigned," added Jack.

"Perhaps Fred is going to give us a spread," came from Stuffer. "I'd
like that first-rate."

"No, the news is more important than all that," came from Fred.

"Well, what is it, Fred?"

"Don't keep us on pins and needles any longer!"

"Well, the news is, that there have been more robberies committed here,"
answered Fred.

"More robberies!" came from half a dozen throats.

"Yes. The teachers were going to keep the thing quiet, but it leaked out
through Mumps and Nick Paxton.

"What has been taken now?" asked Jack, curiously.

"A watch, a scarfpin, and a five-dollar gold piece."

"And who was robbed?" burst out Andy.

"The watch was taken from Paxton, the scarfpin from Ritter, and Coulter
lost the five-dollar gold piece."

"Is it possible!" murmured the young major, and then he looked
meaningly at his chums. Here was news indeed!

"When did you learn of this, Fred?" asked Dale.

"Just a few minutes ago. Mumps told me, and Paxton told Frank Barringer.
Ritter, Coulter and Paxton went to the office to report. Mumps said
Ritter was as mad as hops. Ritter's watch was only a silver affair, but
he says it came down to him from his grandfather and was valuable as an
heirloom."

"Well, this is certainly getting interesting," was Pepper's comment. "If
that thief isn't caught he'll end up by cleaning out the whole school."

"After this, I am going to hide my valuables," said Dale.

"Ditto here," cried Stuffer. "I haven't got much, but what I own I want
to keep."

A little later the cadets filed out of the dormitory, leaving Jack,
Pepper and Andy together.

"Well, I am mighty glad I didn't accuse Ritter and Coulter," said the
young major. "This puts something of a different light on the subject."

"But who is guilty, do you think?" asked Andy.

"I don't know what to think," answered the young major.

"This will drive Captain Putnam wild," came from Pepper. And he was
right; the master of the Hall was worried as he had never been worried
before. He made a rigid investigation, but it brought nothing new to
light. According to the stories told by Ritter, Coulter and Paxton the
articles stolen had been taken from their bureau-drawers, and that was
all those cadets could tell about the mysterious affair.

"We must set a strict watch, Captain Putnam," said George Strong.

"And we must catch that thief," added Josiah. Crabtree, sourly. "I--I
shall be almost afraid to go to sleep after this!" he added nervously.
