"Pish, my dear!" said Pater. "There are no sea monsters. At worst," he
consoled her stoutly, "Junior may have been trapped in a tidepool."

"Oh, oh," gulped Mater. "He'll be eaten by a land monster."

"There ARE no land monsters!" snorted Pater. He straightened his stalk
so abruptly that the stone to which he and Mater were conjugally
attached creaked under them. "How often must I assure you, my dear,
that WE are the highest form of life?" (And, as for his world and
geologic epoch, he was quite right.)

"Oh, oh," gasped Mater.

Her spouse gave her up. "JUNIOR!" he roared in a voice that loosened
the coral along the reef.

       *       *       *       *       *

Round about, the couple's bereavement had begun attracting attention.
In the thickening dusk, tentacles paused from winnowing the sea for
their owners' suppers, stalked heads turned curiously here and there in
the colony. Not far away, a threesome of maiden aunts, rooted en brosse
to a single substantial boulder, twittered condolences and watched
Mater avidly.

"Discipline!" growled Pater. "That's what he needs! Just wait till I--"

"Now, dear--" began Mater shakily.

"Hi, folks!" piped Junior from overhead.

His parents swiveled as if on a single stalk. Their offspring was
floating a few fathoms above them, paddling lazily against the ebb;
plainly he had just swum from some crevice in the reef nearby. In one
pair of dangling tentacles he absently hugged a roundish stone, worn
sensuously smooth by pounding surf.

"WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN?"

"Nowhere," said Junior innocently. "Just playing hide-and-go-sink with
the squids."

"With the other polyps," Mater corrected him primly. She detested slang.

Pater was eyeing Junior with ominous calm. "And where," he asked, "did
you get that stone?"

Junior contracted guiltily. The surfstone slipped from his tentacles
and plumped to the sea-floor in a flurry of sand. He edged away,
stammering, "Well, I guess maybe ... I might have gone a little ways
toward the beach...."

"You guess! When I was a polyp," said Pater, "the small fry obeyed
their elders, and no guess about it!"

"Now, dear--" said Mater.

"And no spawn of mine," Pater warmed to his lecture, "is going to flout
my words! Junior--COME HERE!"

Junior paddled cautiously around the homesite, just out of
tentacle-reach. He said in a small voice, "I won't."

"DID YOU HEAR ME?"

"Yes," admitted Junior.

The neighbors stared. The three maiden aunts clutched one another with
muted shrieks, savoring beforehand the language Pater would now use.

But Pater said "Ulp!"--no more.

"Now, dear," put in Mater quickly. "We must be patient. You know all
children go through larval stages."

"When I was a polyp ..." Pater began rustily. He coughed out an
accidentally inhaled crustacean, and started over: "No spawn of
mine...." Trailing off, he only glared, then roared abruptly, "SPRAT!"
