milk-white light, humpbacked, a twisted giant in the sky whose reflected
radiance swept the lunar night and dimmed even the brightest of the
stars. Its beacon swept out through space, falling in Crater Arzachel
with a soft creamy sheen, outlining the structures of the plain with its
dim glow.

Larkwell and Nagel had finished the airlock. The rocket had been tested
and, despite a few minute leaks they had failed to locate, the space
cabin was sufficiently airtight to serve their purpose. But the rocket
had still to be lowered into the rill. Larkwell favored waiting for the
coming sun.

"It's only a few more days," he told Crag.

"We can't wait."

"We smashed this baby once by not waiting."

"Well have to risk it," Crag said firmly.

"Why? We're not that short of oxygen."

Crag debated. Sooner or later the others would have to be told about the
new threat from the sides. That morning Gotch had given him ominous
news. The computers indicated it was going to be close. Very close. He
looked around. They were watching him, waiting for him to give answer to
Larkwell's question.

He said softly: "Okay, I'll tell you why. There's a rocket homing in
with the name Arzachel on its nose."

"More visitors?" The plaintive query came from Nagel. Crag shook his
head negatively.

"We've got arms," Prochaska broke in confidently. He grinned "We'll
elect you Commander of the First Arzachel Infantry Company."

"This rocket isn't manned."

"No?"

"It's a warhead," Crag said grimly, "a nuclear warhead. If we're not
underground when it hits...." He left the sentence dangling and looked
around. The masked faces were blank, expressionless. It was a moment of
silence, of weighing, before Larkwell spoke.

"Okay," he said, "we drop her into the hole."

He turned back and gazed at Red Dog. Nagel didn't move. He kept his eyes
on Crag, seemingly rooted to the spot until Prochaska touched his arm.

"Come on, Gordon," he said kindly. "We've got work to do." Only then did
the oxygen man turn away. Crag had the feeling he was in a daze.

They worked four hours beyond the regular shift before Crag gave the
signal to stop. The cables had been fastened to Red Dog--the winches
set. Now it was poised on the brink of the rill, ready for lowering into
the black depths. Crag was impatient to push ahead but he knew the men
were too tired. Even the iron-bodied Larkwell was faltering. It would be
too risky. Yet he only reluctantly gave the signal to start back toward
Bandit.

They trudged across the plain--five black blobs, five shadows plodding
through a midnight pit. Crag led the way. The earth overhead gleamed
with a yellow-green light. The stars against the purple-black sky were
washed to a million glimmering pinpoints. The sky, the crater, the black
shadows etched against the blacker night bespoke the alienage of the
universe. Arzachel was the forgotten world. More, a world that never
was. It was solid matter created of nothingness, floating in
nothingness, a minute speck adrift in the terrible emptiness of the
cosmos. He shivered. It was an eery feeling.

He reached Bandit and waited for the others to arrive. Prochaska,
fresher than the others, was first on the scene. He threw a mock salute
to Crag and started up the ladder. Larkwell and Richter arrived moments
later. He watched them approach. They seemed stooped--like old men, he
thought--but they gave him a short nod before climbing to the space
cabin. He was beginning to worry before Nagel finally appeared. The
oxygen man was staggering with weariness, barely able to stand erect.
Crag stepped aside.

"After you, Gordon."

"Thanks, Skipper."

Crag anxiously watched while Gordon pulled his way up the rope ladder.
He paused halfway and rested his head on his arms. After a moment he
resumed the climb. Crag waited until he reached the cabin before
following. Could Nagel hold out? Could a man die of sheer exhaustion?
The worry nibbled at his mind. Maybe he should give him a day's
rest--let him monitor the communicator. Or just sleep. As it was his
contribution to their work was nil. He did little more than go through
the motions.

Crag debated the problem while they pressurized the cabin and removed
their suits. What would Gotch do? Gotch would drive him till he died.
That's what Gotch would expect him to do. No, he couldn't be soft. Even
Nagel's slight contribution might make the difference between success or
failure. Life or death. He would have to ride it out. Crag set his lips
grimly. He had felt kinder toward the oxygen man since that brief period
when Nagel had let him peer into his mind. Now ... now he felt like his
executioner. Just when he was beginning to understand the vistas of
Nagel's being. But understanding and sympathizing with Nagel made his
task all the more difficult. Impatiently he pushed the problem from his
mind. There were other, bigger things he had to consider. Like the
warhead.

Larkwell was getting out their rations when Prochaska slumped
wordlessly to the floor. Crag leaped to his side. The Chief's face was
white, drawn, twisted in a curious way. Crag felt bewildered. Odd but
his brain refused to function. He was struggling to make himself think
when he saw Nagel leap for his pressure suit. Understanding came. He
shouted to the others and grabbed for his own garments. He fought a wave
of dizziness while he struggled to get them on. His fingers were heavy,
awkward. He fumbled with the face plate for long precious seconds before
he managed to pull it shut and snap on the oxygen.

Nagel had finished and was trying to dress Prochaska. Crag sprang to
help him. Together they managed to get him into his suit and turn on his
oxygen. Only then did he speak.

"How did we lose oxygen, Gordon?"

"I don't know." He sounded frightened. "A slow leak." He got out his
test equipment and fumbled with it. The others watched, waiting
nervously until he finally spoke.

"A very slow leak. Must have been a meteorite strike."

"Can you locate it?"

Nagel shrugged in his suit "It'll take time--and cost some oxygen."

Crag looked at him and decided he was past the point of work. Past,
even, the point of caring.

"We'll take care of it," he said gently. "Get a little rest, Gordon."

"Thanks, Skipper." Nagel slumped down in one of the seats and buried his
head in his arms. Before long Prochaska began to stir. He opened his
eyes and looked blankly at Crag for a long moment before comprehension
came to his face.

"Oxygen?"

"Probably a meteorite strike. But it's okay ... now."

Prochaska struggled to his feet "Well, I needed the rest," he joked
feebly.

The leak put an end to all thoughts of rations. They would have to
remain in their suits until it was found and repaired. At Crag's
suggestion Nagel and Larkwell went to sleep. More properly, they simply
collapsed in their suits. Richter, however, insisted on helping search
for the break in the hull. Crag didn't protest; he was, in fact,
thankful.

It was Prochaska who found it--a small rupture hardly larger than a pea
in one corner of the cabin.

"Meteorite," he affirmed, examining the hole. "We're lucky it hasn't
happened before."

They patched the break and repressurized the cabin, then tested it.
Pressure remained constant. Crag gave a sigh of relief and started to
shuck his suit. Richter followed his example but Prochaska hesitated,
standing uncertainly.

"Makes you leery," he said.

"The chances of another strike are fairly low," Crag encouraged. "I feel
the same way but we can't live in these duds." He finished peeling off
his garments and Prochaska followed suit.

Despite his fatigue sleep didn't come easy to Crag. He tossed
restlessly, trying to push the problems out of his mind. Just before he
finally fell asleep thought of the saboteur popped into his mind. I'll
be a sitting duck, he told himself. He was trying to pull himself back
to wakefulness when his body rebelled.

He slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

They prepared to lower Red Dog into the rill. Earth was humpbacked in
the sky, almost a crescent, with a bright cone of zodiacal light in the
east. The light was a herald of the coming sun, a sun whose rays would
not reach the depths of Crater Arzachel for another forty-eight hours.

In the black pit of the crater the yellow torches of the work crew
played over the body of the rocket, making it appear like some
gargantuan monster pulled from the depths of the sea. It was poised on
the brink of the rill with cables encircling its body, running to
winches anchored nearby. The cables would be let out, slowly, allowing
the rocket to descend into the depths of the crevice. Larkwell on the
opposite side of the rill manned a power winch rigged to pull the rocket
over the lip of the crevice.

"Ready on winch one?" His voice was a brittle bark, edgy with strain.
Nagel spoke up.

"Ready on winch one."

"Ready on winch two?"

"Ready on winch two," Prochaska answered.

"Here we go." The line from Red Dog to Larkwell's winch tautened,
jerked, then tautened once more. Red Dog seemed to quiver, and began
rolling slowly toward the brink of the rill. Crag watched from a nearby
spur of rock. He smiled wryly. Lowering rockets on the moon was getting
to be an old story. The cables and winches all seemed familiar. Well,
this would be the last one they'd have to lower. He hoped. Richter stood
beside him, silent. The rocket hung on the lip of the crevice for a
moment before starting over.

"Take up slack." The lines to the anchor winches became taut and the
rocket hung, half-suspended in space.

"Okay." Larkwell's line tightened again and the rocket jerked clear of
the edge, held in space by the anchor winches.

"Lower away--slowly."

Crag moved to the edge of the rill, conscious of Richter at his heels.
The man's constant presence jarred him; yet, he was there by his orders.
He played his torch over the rocket. It was moving into the rill in a
series of jerks. Its tail struck the ashy floor. In another moment it
rested at the bottom of the crevice. They would make it. A wave of
exultation swept him. The biggest problems could be whipped if you just
got aboard and rode them. Well, he'd ridden this one--ridden it through
a night of Stygian blackness and unbelievable cold. Ridden it to
victory despite damnable odds. He felt jubilant.

But they would have to hurry if they were to get all their supplies and
gear moved from Bandit before the warhead struck. They still had to
cover Red Dog, burying it beneath a thick coat of ash. Would that be
enough? It was designed to protect them from the dangers of meteorite
dust, but would it withstand the rain of hell to come when the warhead
struck? Wearily he pushed the thought from his mind.

When the others had secured their gear, he gave the signal to return to
Bandit. They struck out, trudging through the blackness in single file,
following a serpentine path between the occasional rills and knolls
scattered between the two ships. Crag swung his arms in an effort to
keep warm. Tiny needles of pain stabbed at his hands and feet, and the
cold in his lungs was an agony. Even in the darkness the path between
the rockets had become a familiar thing.

Despite the discomfort and weariness he rather liked the long trek
between the rockets. It gave him time to think and plan, a time when
nothing was demanded of him except that he follow a reasonably straight
course. There was no warhead, no East World menace, no Gotch. There was
only the blackness and the solitude of Crater Arzachel. He even liked
the blackness of the lunar night, despite its attendant cold. The mantle
of darkness hid the crater's ugliness, erasing its menacing profile and
softening its features. He turned his eyes skyward as he walked. The
earth was huge, many times the size of the full moon as seen from its
mother planet, yet it seemed fragile, delicate, a pale ethereal wanderer
of the heavens.

Crag did not think of himself as an imaginative man. Yet when he beheld
the earth something stirred deep within him. The earth became not a
thing of rock and sea water and air, but a living being. He thought of
Earth as _she_. At times she was a ghost treading among the stars, a
waif lost in the immensity of the universe. And at times she was a
wanton woman, walking in solitary splendor, her head high and proud. The
stars were her lovers. Crag walked through the night, head up, wondering
if ever again he would answer her call.

He had almost reached Bandit when Nagel's voice broke excitedly into his
earphones.

"Something's wrong with Prochaska!"

Crag stopped in his tracks, gripped by a sudden fear.

"What?"

"He was somewhere ahead of me. I just caught up to him...."

"What's wrong with him?" Crag snapped irritably. Damn, wouldn't the man
stop beating around the bush?

"He's collapsed."

"Coming," Crag said. He hurried back through the darkness, cursing
himself for having let the party get strung out.

"Too late, Commander." It was Richter's voice. "His suit's deflated.
Must have been a meteorite strike."

"Stay there," Crag ordered. "Larkwell...?"

"I'm backtracking too...."

They were all there when he arrived, gathered around Prochaska's huddled
form. The yellow lights of their torches pinned his body against the
ashy plain. Larkwell, on his knees, was running his hands over the
electronic chief's body. Crag dropped to his side.

"Here it is!"

Larkwell's fingers had found the hole, a tiny rip just under the
shoulder. Crag examined it, conscious that something was wrong. It
didn't look like the kind of hole a meteorite would make. It looked, he
thought, like, a small rip. The kind of a rip a knife point might make.
He stared up at Larkwell. The construction boss's eyes met his and he
nodded his head affirmatively. Crag got to his feet and faced the
German.

"Where were you when this happened?"

"Ahead of him," Richter answered. "We were strung out. I think I was
next in line behind you."

Larkwell said softly: "You got here before I did. That would put you
behind me."

"I was ahead of you when we started." The German contemplated Larkwell
calmly. "I didn't see you pass me."

Crag turned to Nagel. "Where were you, Gordon?"

"At the rear, as usual." His voice was bitter.

"How far was Prochaska ahead of you?"

"I wouldn't know." He looked away into the blackness, then back to Crag.
"Would you expect me to?"

Crag debated. Clearly he wasn't getting anywhere with the interrogation.
He looked at Nagel. The man seemed on the verge of collapse.

"We'll carry Max back. Lend a hand, Richter." His voice turned cold. "I
want to examine that rip in the light."

The German nodded calmly.

"Stay together," Crag barked. "No stringing out Larkwell, you lead the
way."

"Okay." The construction boss started toward Bandit. Nagel fell in at
his heels. Crag and Richter, carrying Prochaska's body between them,
brought up at the rear.

It took the last of Crag's strength before they managed to get the body
into the space cabin.

The men were silent while he conducted his examination. He removed the
dead man's space suit, then stripped the clothing from the upper portion
of his body, examining the flesh in the area where the suit had been
punctured. The skin was unmarked. He studied the rip carefully. It was a
clean slit.

"No meteorite," he said, getting to his feet. His voice was cold,
dangerously low. Larkwell's face was grim. Nagel wore a dazed, almost
uncomprehending expression. Richter looked thoughtful. Crag's face was
an icy mask but his thoughts were chaotic. Fear crept into his mind.
This was the danger Gotch had warned him of.

Richter? The saboteur? His eyes swung from man to man, coming finally to
rest on the German. While he weighed the problem, one part of his mind
told him a warhead was scorching down from the sides. Time was running
out. He came to a decision. He ordered Larkwell and Richter to strip the
pressure gear from Prochaska's body and carry it down to the plain.

"Well bury him later--after the warhead."

"If we're here," Larkwell observed.

"I have every intention of being here," Crag said evenly.




CHAPTER 20

