who, like themselves, were on their way to the Yuba River.  They were
permitted to join them, and made an arrangement for a share of the
provisions.  This removed all anxiety and insured their reaching
their destination without further adventure.

The banks of the Yuba presented a busy and picturesque appearance.
On the banks was a line of men roughly clad, earnestly engaged in
scooping out gravel and pouring it into a rough cradle, called a
rocker.  This was rocked from side to side until the particles of
gold, if there were any, settled at the bottom and were picked out
and gathered into bags.  At the present time there are improved
methods of separating gold from the earth, but the rocker is still
employed by Chinese miners.

In the background were tents and rude cabins, and there was the
unfailing accessory of a large mining camp, the gambling tent, where
the banker, like a wily spider, lay in wait to appropriate the
hard-earned dust of the successful miner.

Joe and his friend took their station a few rods from the river and
gazed at the scene before them.

"Well, Mr. Bickford," said Joe, "the time has come when we are to try
our luck."

"Yes," said Joshua.  "Looks curious, doesn't it?  If I didn't know,
I'd think them chaps fools, stoopin' over there and siftin' mud.  It
'minds me of when I was a boy and used to make dirt pies."

"Suppose we take a day and look round a little.  Then we can find out
about how things are done, and work to better advantage."

"Just as you say, Joe, I must go to work soon, for I hain't nary red."

"I'll stand by you, Mr. Bickford."

"You're a fust-rate feller, Joe.  You seem to know just what to do."

"It isn't so long since I was a greenhorn and allowed myself to be
taken in by Hogan."

"You've cut your eye-teeth since then."

"I have had some experience of the world, but I may get taken in
again."

Joe and his friend found the miners social and very ready to give
them information.

"How much do I make a day?" said one in answer to a question from
Joshua.  "Well, it varies.  Sometimes I make ten dollars, and from
that all the way up to twenty-five.  Once I found a piece worth fifty
dollars.  I was in luck then."

"I should say you were," said Mr. Bickford.  "The idea of findin'
fifty dollars in the river.  It looks kind of strange, don't it, Joe?"

"Are any larger pieces ever found here?" asked Joe.

"Sometimes."

"I have seen larger nuggets on exhibition in San Francisco, worth
several hundred dollars.  Are any such to be found here?"

"Generally they come from the dry diggings.  We don't often find such
specimens in the river washings.  But these are more reliable."

"Can a man save money here?"

"If he'll be careful of what he gets.  But much of our dust goes
there."

He pointed, as he spoke, to a small cabin, used as a store and
gambling den at one and the same time.  There in the evening the
miners collected, and by faro, poker, or monte managed to lose all
that they had washed out during the day.

"That's the curse of our mining settlement," said their informant.
"But for the temptations which the gaming-house offers, many whom you
see working here would now be on their way home with a comfortable
provision for their families.  I never go there, but then I am in the
minority."

"What did you used to do when you was to hum?" inquired Joshua, who
was by nature curious and had no scruples about gratifying his
curiosity.

"I used to keep school winters.  In the spring and summer I assisted
my father on his farm down in Maine."

"You don't say you're from Maine?  Why, I'm from Maine myself,"
remarked Joshua.

"Indeed!  Whereabouts in Maine did you live?"

"Pumpkin Hollow."

"I kept school in Pumpkin Hollow one winter."

"You don't say so?  What is your name?" inquired Joshua earnestly.

"John Kellogg."

"I thought so!" exclaimed Mr. Bickford, excited.

"Why, I used to go to school to you, Mr. Kellogg."

"It is nine years ago, and you must have changed so much that I
cannot call you to mind."

"Don't you remember a tall, slab-sided youngster of thirteen, that
used to stick pins into your chair for you to set on?"

Kellogg smiled.

"Surely you are not Joshua Bickford?" he said.

"Yes, I am.  I am that same identical chap."

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Bickford," said his old school-teacher,
grasping Joshua's hand cordially.

"It seems kinder queer for you to call me Mr. Bickford."

"I wasn't so ceremonious in the old times," said Kellogg.

"No, I guess not.  You'd say, 'Come here, Joshua,' and you'd jerk me
out of my seat by the collar.  'Did you stick that pin in my chair?'
That's the way you used to talk.  And then you'd give me an all-fired
lickin'."

Overcome by the mirthful recollections, Joshua burst into an
explosive fit of laughter, in which presently he was joined by Joe
and his old teacher.

"I hope you've forgiven me for those whippings, Mr. Bickford."

"They were jest what I needed, Mr. Kellogg.  I was a lazy young
rascal, as full of mischief as a nut is of meat.  You tanned my hide
well."

"You don't seem to be any the worse for it now."

"I guess not.  I'm pretty tough.  I say, Mr. Kellogg," continued
Joshua, with a grin, "you'd find it a harder job to give me a lickin'
now than you did then."

"I wouldn't undertake it now.  I am afraid you could handle me."

"It seems cur'us, don't it, Joe?" said Joshua.  "When Mr. Kellogg
used to haul me round the schoolroom, it didn't seem as if I could
ever be a match for him."

"We change with the passing years," said Kellogg, in a moralizing
tone, which recalled his former vocation.  "Now you are a man, and we
meet here on the other side of the continent, on the banks of the
Yuba River.  I hope we are destined to be successful."

"I hope so, too," said Joshua, "for I'm reg'larly cleaned out."

"If I can help you any in the sway of information, I shall be glad to
do so."

Joe and Bickford took him at his word and made many inquiries,
eliciting important information.

The next day they took their places farther down the river and
commenced work.

Their inexperience at first put them at a disadvantage, They were
awkward and unskilful, as might have been expected.  Still, at the
end of the first day each had made about five dollars.

"That's something," said Joe.

"If I could have made five dollars in one day in Pumpkin Hollow,"
said Mr. Bickford, "I would have felt like a rich man.  Here it costs
a feller so much to live that he don't think much of it."

"We shall improve as we go along.  Wait till to-morrow night."

The second day brought each about twelve dollars, and Joshua felt
elated.

"I'm gettin' the hang of it," said he.  "As soon as I've paid up what
I owe you, I'll begin to lay by somethin'."

"I don't want you to pay me till you are worth five hundred dollars,
Mr. Bickford.  The sum is small, and I don't need it."

"Thank you, Joe.  You're a good friend.  I'll stick by you if you
ever want help."

In the evening the camp presented a lively appearance.

When it was chilly, logs would be brought from the woods, and a
bright fire would be lighted, around which the miners would sit and
talk of home and their personal adventures and experiences.  One
evening Mr. Bickford and Joe were returning from a walk, when, as
they approached the camp-fire, they heard a voice that sounded
familiar, and caught these words:

"I'm from Pike County, Missouri, gentlemen.  They call me the
Rip-tail Roarer.  I can whip my weight in wildcats."

"By gosh!" exclaimed Joshua, "if it ain't that skunk from Pike.  I
mean to tackle him."




CHAPTER XXXI

JUDGE LYNCH PRONOUNCES SENTENCE

The gentleman from Pike was sitting on a log, surrounded by miners,
to whom he was relating his marvelous exploits.  The number of
Indians, grizzly bears, and enemies generally, which, according to
his account, he had overcome and made way with, was simply enormous.
Hercules was nothing to him.  It can hardly be said that his
listeners credited his stories.  They had seen enough of life to be
pretty good judges of human nature, and regarded them as romances
which served to while away the time.

"It seems to me, my friend," said Kellogg, who, it will be
remembered, had been a schoolmaster, "that you are a modern Hercules."

"Who's he?" demanded the Pike man suspiciously, for he had never
heard of the gentleman referred to.

"He was a great hero of antiquity," exclaimed Kellogg, "who did many
wonderful feats."

"That's all right, then," said the Pike man.  "If you're friendly,
then I'm friendly.  But if any man insults me he'll find he's tackled
the wrong man.  I can whip my weight in wildcats------"

Here he was subjected to an interruption.

Mr. Bickford could no longer suppress his indignation when at a
little distance he saw his mustang, which this treacherous braggart
had robbed him of, quietly feeding.

"Look here, old Rip-tail, or whatever you call yourself, I've got an
account to settle with you."

The Pike man started as he heard Mr. Bickford's voice, which, being
of a peculiar nasal character, he instantly recognized.  He felt that
the meeting was an awkward one, and he would willingly have avoided
it.  He decided to bluff Joshua off if possible, and, as the best way
of doing it, to continue his game of brag.

"Who dares to speak to me thus?" he demanded with a heavy frown,
looking in the opposite direction.  "Who insults the Rip-tail Roarer?"

"Look this way if you want to see him," said Joshua.  "Put on your
specs if your eyes ain't good."

The man from Pike could no longer evade looking at his late comrade.
He pretended not to know him.

"Stranger," said he, with one hand on the handle of his knife, "are
you tired of life?"

"I am neither tired of life nor afraid of you," said Joshua manfully.

"You don't know me, or------"

"Yes, I do.  You're the man that says he can whip his weight in
wildcats.  I don't believe you dare to face your weight in tame cats."

"Sdeath!" roared the bully.  "Do you want to die on the spot?"

"Not particularly, old Rip-tail.  Don't talk sech nonsense.  I'll
trouble you to tell me why you stole my horse on the way out here."

"Let me get at him," said the Pike man in a terrible voice, but not
offering to get up from the log.

"Nobody henders your gettin' at me," said Mr. Bickford composedly.
"But that ain't answerin' my question."

"If I didn't respect them two gentlemen too much, I'd shoot you where
you stand," said the Pike man.

"I've got a shootin'-iron myself, old Rip-tail, and I'm goin' to use
it if necessary."

"What have you to say in answer to this man's charge?" asked one of
the miners, a large man who was looked upon as the leader of the
company.  "He charges you with taking his horse."

"He lies!" said the man from Pike.

"Be keerful, old Rip-tail," said Mr. Bickford in a warning tone.  "I
don't take sass any more than you do."

"I didn't steal your horse."

"No, you didn't exactly steal it, but you took it without leave and
left your own bag of bones in his place.  But that wasn't so bad as
stealin' all our provisions and leavin' us without a bite, out in the
wilderness.  That's what I call tarnation mean."

"What have you to say to these charges?" asked the mining leader
gravely.

"Say?  I say that man is mistaken.  I never saw him before in my
life."

"Well, that's cheeky," said Joshua, aghast at the man's impudence.
"Why, I know you as well as if we'd been to school together.  You are
the Rip-tail Roarer.  You are from Pike County, Missouri, you are.
You can whip your weight in wildcats.  That's he, gentlemen.  I leave
it to you."

In giving the description, Joshua imitated the boastful accents of
his old comrade with such success that the assembled miners laughed
and applauded.

"That's he!  You've got him!" they cried.

"Just hear that, old Rip-tail," said Mr. Bickford.  "You see these
gentlemen here believe me and they don't believe you."

"There's a man in this here country that looks like me," said the
Pike man, with a lame excuse.  "You've met him, likely."

"That won't go down, old Rip-tail.  There ain't but one man can whip
his weight in wildcats and tell the all-firedest yarns out.  That's
you, and there ain't no gettin' round it."

"This is a plot, gentlemen," said the man from Pike, glancing
uneasily at the faces around him, in which he read disbelief of his
statements.  "My word is as good as his."

"Maybe it is," said Mr. Bickford.  "I'll call another witness.  Joe,
jest tell our friends here what you know about the gentleman from
Pike.  If I'm lyin', say so, and I'll subside and never say another
word about it."

"All that my friend Bickford says is perfectly true," said Joe
modestly.  "This man partook of our hospitality and then repaid us by
going off early one morning when we were still asleep, carrying off
all our provisions and exchanging his own worn-out horse for my
friend's mustang, which was a much better animal."

The man from Pike had not at first seen Joe.  His countenance fell
when he saw how Mr. Bickford's case was strengthened, and for the
moment he could not think of a word to say.

"You are sure this is the man, Joe?" asked, the leader of the miners.

"Yes, I will swear to it.  He is not a man whom it is easy to
mistake."

"I believe you.  Gentlemen," turning to the miners who were sitting
or standing about him, "do you believe this stranger or our two
friends?"

The reply was emphatic, and the man from Pike saw that he was
condemned.

"Gentlemen," he said, rising, "you are mistaken, and I am the victim
of a plot.  It isn't pleasant to stay where I am suspected, and I'll
bid you good evening."

"Not so fast!" said the leader, putting his hand heavily on his
shoulder.  "You deserve to be punished, and you shall be.  Friends,
what shall we do with him?"

"Kill him!  String him up!" shouted some.

The Rip-tail Roarer's swarthy face grew pale as he heard these
ominous words.  He knew something of the wild, stern justice of those
days.  He knew that more than one for an offense like his had
expiated his crime with his life.

"It seems to me," said the leader, "that the man he injured should
fix the penalty.  Say you so?"

"Aye, aye!" shouted the miners.

"Will you two," turning to Joe and Bickford, "decide what shall be
done with this man?  Shall we string him up?"

The Pike man's nerve gave way.

He flung himself on his knees before Joshua and cried:

"Mercy!  mercy!  Don't let them hang me!"

Joshua was not hard-hearted.  He consulted with Joe and then said:

"I don't want the critter's life.  If there was any wild-cats round,
I'd like to see him tackle his weight in 'em, as he says he can.  As
there isn't, let him be tied on the old nag he put off on me, with
his head to the horse's tail, supplied with one day's provisions, and
then turned loose!"

This sentence was received with loud applause and laughter.

The horse was still in camp and was at once brought out.  The man
from Pike was securely tied on as directed, and then the poor beast
