conducted so shamelessly] is not only from the living, but is much
more ample from the dead.  Nor do they redeem the satisfactions of
the dead only by indulgences, but also by the sacrifice of the Mass.
In a word, the subject of satisfactions is infinite.  Among these
scandals (for we cannot enumerate all things) and doctrines of devils
lies buried the doctrine of the righteousness of faith in Christ and
the benefit of Christ.  Wherefore, all good men understand that the
doctrine of the sophists and canonists concerning repentance has been
censured for a useful and godly purpose.  For the following dogmas
are clearly false, and foreign not only to Holy Scripture, but also
to the Church Fathers:-I. That from the divine covenant we merit
grace by good works wrought without grace.

II. That by attrition we merit grace.

III. That for the blotting out of sin the mere detestation of the
crime is sufficient.

IV. That on account of contrition, and not by faith in Christ, we
obtain remission of sins.

V. That the power of the keys avails for the remission of sins, not
before God, but before the Church.

VI. That by the power of the keys sins are not remitted before God,
but that the power of the keys has been instituted to commute eternal
to temporal punishments, to impose upon consciences certain
satisfactions, to institute new acts of worship, and to obligate
consciences to such satisfactions and acts of worship.

VII. That according to divine right the enumeration of offenses in
confession, concerning which the adversaries teach, is necessary.

VIII. That canonical satisfactions are necessary for redeeming the
punishment of purgatory, or they profit as a compensation for the
blotting out of guilt.  For thus uninformed persons understand it.
[For, although in the schools satisfactions are made to apply only to
the punishment, everybody thinks that remission of guilt is thereby
merited.]

IX. That the reception of the sacrament of repentance _ex opere
operato_, without a good disposition on the part of the one using it,
i.e., without faith in Christ, obtains grace.

X. That by the power of the keys our souls are freed from purgatory
through indulgences

XI. That in the reservation of cases not only canonical punishment,
but the guilt also, ought to be reserved in reference to one who is
truly converted.

In order, therefore, to deliver pious consciences from these
labyrinths of the sophists, we have ascribed to repentance [or
conversion] these two parts, namely, contrition and faith.  If any
one desires to add a third namely, fruits worthy of repentance, i.e.,
a change of the entire life and character for the better [good works
which shall and must follow conversion], we will not make any
opposition.  From contrition we separate those idle and infinite
discussions, as to when we grieve from love of God, and when from
fear of punishment.  [For these are nothing but mere words and a
useless babbling of persons who have never experienced the state of
mind of a terrified conscience.] But we say that contrition is the
true terror of conscience, which feels that God is angry with sin,
and which grieves that it has sinned.  And this contrition takes
place in this manner when sins are censured by the Word of God,
because the sum of the preaching of the Gospel is this, namely, to
convict of sin, and to offer for Christ's sake the remission of sins
and righteousness, and the Holy Ghost, and eternal life, and that as
regenerate men we should do good works.  Thus Christ comprises the
sum of the Gospel when He says in the last chapter of Luke, v. 74:
That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in My name
among all nations.  And of these terrors Scripture speaks, as Ps. 38,
4. 8: For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as a heavy burden
they are too heavy for me...I am feeble and sore broken; I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of My heart.  And Ps. 6, 2. 3:
Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am weak; O Lord, heal me; for my
bones are vexed.  My soul is also sore vexed; but Thou, O Lord how
long!  And Is. 38, 10.13: I said in the cutting off of my days, I
shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of
my years....I reckoned till morning that, as a lion, so will He break
all my bones.  [Again, v. 14: Mine eyes fail with looking upward; 0
Lord, I am oppressed.] In these terrors, conscience feels the wrath
of God against sin, which is unknown to secure men walking according
to the flesh [as the sophists and their like].  It sees the turpitude
of sin, and seriously grieves that it has sinned; meanwhile it also
flees from the dreadful wrath of God, because human nature, unless
sustained by the Word of God, cannot endure it.  Thus Paul says, Gal.
2, 19: I through the Law am dead to the Law, For the Law only accuses
and terrifies consciences.  In these terrors our adversaries say
nothing of faith, they present only the Word, which convicts of sin.
When this is taught alone, it is the doctrine of the Law, not of the
Gospel.  By these griefs and terrors, they say, men merit grace,
provided they love God.  But how will men love God in true terrors
when they feel the terrible and inexpressible wrath of God What else
than despair do those teach who in these terrors, display only the
Law?

We therefore add as the second part of repentance, Of Faith in Christ,
that in these terrors the Gospel concerning Christ ought to be set
forth to consciences, in which Gospel the remission of sins is freely
promised concerning Christ.  Therefore, they ought to believe that
for Christ's sake sins are freely remitted to them.  This faith
cheers, sustains, and quickens the contrite, according to Rom. 5, 1:
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.  This faith obtains
the remission of sins.  This faith justifies before God, as the same
passage testifies: Being justified by faith.  This faith shows the
distinction between the contrition of Judas and Peter, of Saul and of
David.  The contrition of Judas or Saul is of no avail, for the
reason that to this there is not added this faith which apprehends
the remission of sins, bestowed as a gift for Christ's sake.
Accordingly, the contrition of David or Peter avails because to it
there is added faith, which apprehends the remission of sins granted
for Christ's sake.  Neither is love present before reconciliation has
been made by faith.  For without Christ the Law [God's Law or the
First Commandment] is not performed, according to [Eph. 2, 18; 3,12]
Rom. 5, 2: By Christ we have access to God.  And this faith grows
gradually and throughout the entire life, struggles with sin [is
tested by various temptations] in order to overcome sin and death.
But love follows faith, as we have said above.  And thus filial fear
can be clearly defined as such anxiety as has been connected with
faith, i.e., where faith consoles and sustains the anxious heart.  It
is servile fear when faith does not sustain the anxious heart [fear
without faith, where there is nothing but wrath and doubt].

Moreover, the power of the keys administers and presents the Gospel
through absolution, which [proclaims peace to me and] is the true
voice of the Gospel.  Thus we also comprise absolution when we speak
of faith, because faith cometh by hearing, as Paul says Rom. 10, 17.
For when the Gospel is heard and the absolution [i.e., the promise of
divine grace] is heard, the conscience is encouraged and receives
consolation.  And because God truly quickens through the Word, the
keys truly remit sins before God [here on earth sins are truly
canceled in such a manner that they are canceled also before God in
heaven] according to Luke 10,10: He that heareth you heareth Me
Wherefore the voice of the one absolving must be believed not
otherwise than we would believe a voice from heaven.  And absolution
[that blessed word of comfort] properly can be called a sacrament of
repentance, as also the more learned scholastic theologians speak.
Meanwhile this faith is nourished in a manifold way in temptations,
through the declarations of the Gospel [the hearing of sermons,
reading] and the use of the Sacraments.  For these are [seals and]
signs of [the covenant and grace in] the New Testament, i.e., signs
of [propitiation and] the remission of sins.  They offer, therefore,
the remission of sins, as the words of the Lord's Supper clearly
testify, Matt. 26, 26. 28: This is My body, which is given for you.
This is the cup of the New Testament, etc. Thus faith is conceived
and strengthened through absolution, through the hearing of the
Gospel, through the use of the Sacraments, so that it may not succumb
while it struggles with the terrors of sin and death.  This method of
repentance is plain and clear, and increases the worth of the power
of the keys and of the Sacraments, and illumines the benefit of
Christ, and teaches us to avail ourselves of Christ as Mediator and
Propitiator.

But as the Confutation condemns us for having assigned these two
parts to repentance, we must show that [not we, but] Scripture
expresses these as the chief parts in repentance or conversion.  For
Christ says Matt. 11, 28: Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.  Here there are two members.
The labor and the burden signify the contrition, anxiety, and terrors
of sin and of death.  To come to Christ is to believe that sins are
remitted for Christ's sake, when we believe, our hearts are quickened
by the Holy Ghost through the Word of Christ.  Here, therefore, there
are these two chief parts, contrition and faith.  And in Mark 1, 15
Christ says: Repent ye and believe the Gospel, where in the first
member He convicts of sins, in the latter He consoles us, and shows
the remission of sins.  For to believe the Gospel is not that general
faith which devils also have [is not only to believe the history of
the Gospel], but in the proper sense it is to believe that the
remission of sins has been granted for Christ's sake.  For this is
revealed in the Gospel.  You see also here that the two parts are
joined, contrition when sins are reproved and faith, when it is said:
Believe the Gospel.  If any one should say here that Christ includes
also the fruits of repentance or the entire new life, we shall not
dissent.  For this suffices us, that contrition and faith are named
as the chief parts.

Paul almost everywhere, when he describes conversion or renewal,
designates these two parts, mortification and quickening, as in Col.
2, 11: In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands, namely, by putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh.  And afterward, v. 12: Wherein also ye are risen with Him
through the faith of the operation of God.  Here are two parts.  [Of
these two parts he speaks plainly Rom. 6, 2. 4. 11, that we are dead
to sin, which takes place by contrition and its terrors, and that we
should rise again with Christ, which takes place when by faith we
again obtain consolation and life.  And since faith is to bring
consolation and peace into the conscience, according to Rom. 5, 1:
Being justified by faith, we have peace, it follows that there is
first terror and anxiety in the conscience.  Thus contrition and
faith go side by side.] One is putting off the body of sins; the
other is the rising again through faith.  Neither ought these words,
mortification, quickening, putting off the body of sins, rising again,
to be understood in a Platonic way, concerning a feigned change; but
mortification signifies true terrors, such as those of the dying,
which nature could not sustain unless it were supported by faith.  So
he names that as the putting off of the body of sins which we
ordinarily call contrition, because in these griefs the natural
concupiscence is purged away.  And quickening ought not to be
understood as a Platonic fancy, but as consolation which truly
sustains life that is escaping in contrition.  Here, therefore, are
two parts: contrition and faith.  For as conscience cannot be
pacified except by faith, therefore faith alone quickens, according
to the declaration, Hab. 2, 4; Rom. 1, 17: The just shall live by
faith.

And then in Col. 2, 14 it is said that Christ blots out the
handwriting which through the Law is against us.  Here also there are
two parts, the handwriting and the blotting out of the handwriting.
The handwriting, however, is conscience, convicting and condemning us.
The Law, moreover, is the word which reproves and condemns sins.
Therefore, this voice which says, I have sinned against the Lord, as
David says, 2 Sam. 12, 13, is the handwriting.  And wicked and secure
men do not seriously give forth this voice.  For they do not see,
they do not read the sentence of the Law written in the heart.  In
true griefs and terrors this sentence is perceived.  Therefore the
handwriting which condemns us is contrition itself.  To blot out the
handwriting is to expunge this sentence by which we declare that we
shall be condemned, and to engrave the sentence according to which we
know that we have been freed from this condemnation.  But faith is
the new sentence, which reverses the former sentence, and gives peace
and life to the heart.

However, what need is there to cite many testimonies since they are
everywhere obvious in the Scriptures?  Ps. 118, 18: The Lord hath
chastened me sore, but He hath not given me over unto death.  Ps. 119,
28: My soul melteth for heaviness; strengthen Thou me according unto
Thy word.  Here, in the first member, contrition is contained, and in
the second the mode is clearly described how in contrition we are
revived, namely, by the Word of God which offers grace.  This
sustains and quickens hearts.  And 1 Sam. 2, 6 The Lord killeth and
maketh alive; He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up.  By one
of these, contrition is signified, by the other, faith is signified.
And Is. 28, 21: The Lord shall be wroth that He may do His work, His
strange work, and bring to pass His act, His strange act.  He calls
it the strange work of the Lord when He terrifies because to quicken
and console is God's own work.  [Other works, as, to terrify and to
kill, are not God's own works, for God only quickens.] But He
terrifies, he says, for this reason, namely, that there may be a
place for consolation and quickening, because hearts that are secure
and do not feel the wrath of God loathe consolation.  In this manner
Scripture is accustomed to join these two the terrors and the
consolation, in order to teach that in repentance there are these
chief members, contrition, and faith that consoles and justifies.
Neither do we see how the nature of repentance can be presented more
clearly and simply.  [We know with certainty that God thus works in
His Christians in the Church.]

For the two chief works of God in men are these, to terrify, and to
justify and quicken those who have been terrified.  Into these two
works all Scripture has been distributed.  The one part is the Law,
which shows, reproves, and condemns sins.  The other part is the
Gospel, i.e., the promise of grace bestowed in Christ, and this
promise is constantly repeated in the whole of Scripture, first
having been delivered to Adam [I will put enmity, etc., Gen. 3, 15],
afterwards to the patriarchs; then, still more clearly proclaimed by
the prophets; lastly, preached and set forth among the Jews by Christ
and disseminated over the entire world by the apostles.  For all the
saints were justified by faith in this promise, and not by their own
attrition or contrition.

And the examples [how the saints became godly] show likewise these
two parts.  After his sin Adam is reproved and becomes terrified,
this was contrition.  Afterward God promises grace, and speaks of a
future seed (the blessed seed, i.e., Christ), by which the kingdom of
the devil, death, and sin will be destroyed, there He offers the
remission of sins.  These are the chief things.  For although the
punishment is afterwards added, yet this punishment does not merit
the remission of sin.  And concerning this kind of punishment we
shall speak after a while.

So David is reproved by Nathan, and, terrified, he says, 2 Sam. 12,
13: I have sinned against the Lord.  This is contrition.  Afterward
he hears the absolution: The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou
shalt not die.  This voice encourages David, and by faith sustains,
justifies, and quickens him.  Here a punishment is also added, but
this punishment does not merit the remission of sins.  Nor are
special punishments always added, but in repentance these two things
ought always to exist, namely, contrition and faith, as Luke 7, 37.
38. The woman, who was a sinner, came to Christ weeping.  By these
tears the contrition is recognized.  Afterward she hears the
absolution: Thy sins are forgiven; thy faith hath saved thee; go in
peace.  This is the second part of repentance, namely, faith, which
encourages and consoles her.  From all these it is apparent to godly
readers that we assign to repentance those parts which properly
belong to it in conversion, or regeneration, and the remission of sin.
Worthy fruits and punishments [likewise, patience that we be
willing to bear the cross and punishments, which God lays upon the
old Adam] follow regeneration and the remission of sin.  For this
reason we have mentioned these two parts, in order that the faith
which we require in repentance [of which the sophists and canonists
have all been silent] might be the better seen.  And what that faith
is which the Gospel proclaims can be better understood when it is set
over against contrition and mortification.

But as the adversaries expressly condemn our statement that men
obtain the remission of sins by faith, we shall add a few proofs from
which it will be understood that the remission of sins is obtained
not _ex opere operato_ because of contrition, but by that special
faith by which an individual believes that sins are remitted to him.
For this is the chief article concerning which we are contending with
our adversaries, and the knowledge of which we regard especially
necessary to all Christians.  As, however, it appears that we have
spoken sufficiently above concerning the same subject, we shall here
be briefer.  For very closely related are the topics of the doctrine
of repentance and the doctrine of justification.

When the adversaries speak of faith, and say that it precedes
repentance, they understand by faith, not that which justifies, but
that which, in a general way, believes that God exists, that
punishments have been threatened to the wicked [that there is a hell],
etc. In addition to this faith we require that each one believe that
his sins are remitted to him.  Concerning this special faith we are
disputing, and we oppose it to the opinion which bids us trust not in
the promise of Christ, but in the _opus operatum_, of contrition,
confession, and satisfactions, etc. This faith follows terrors in
such a manner as to overcome them, and render the conscience pacified.
To this faith we ascribe justification and regeneration, inasmuch
as it frees from terrors, and brings forth in the heart not only
peace and joy, but also a new life.  We maintain [with the help of
God we shall defend to eternity and against all the gates of hell]
that this faith is truly necessary for the remission of sins, and
accordingly place it among the parts of repentance.  Nor does the
Church of Christ believe otherwise, although our adversaries [like
mad dogs] contradict us.

Moreover, to begin with, we ask the adversaries whether to receive
absolution is a part of repentance, or not.  But if they separate it
from confession as they are subtile in making the distinction, we do
not see of what benefit confession is without absolution.  If,
however, they do not separate the receiving of absolution from
confession, it is necessary for them to hold that faith is a part of
repentance, because absolution is not received except by faith.  That
absolution, however is not received except by faith can be proved
from Paul, who teaches Rom. 4, 16, that the promise cannot be
received except by faith.  But absolution is the promise of the
remission of sins [nothing else than the Gospel, the divine promise
of God's grace and favor].  Therefore, it necessarily requires faith.
Neither do we see how he who does not assent to it may be said to
receive absolution.  And what else is the refusal to assent to
absolution but charging God with falsehood, If the heart doubts, it
regards those things which God promises as uncertain and of no
account.  Accordingly, in 1 John 5, 10 it is written: He that
believeth not God hath made Him a liar, because he believeth not the
record that God gave of His Son.

Secondly, we think that the adversaries acknowledge that the
remission of sins is either a part, or the end, or, to speak in their
manner, the _terminus ad quem_ of repentance.  [For what does
repentance help if the forgiveness of sins be not obtained?]
Therefore that by which the remission of sins is received is
correctly added to the parts [must certainly be the most prominent
part] of repentance.  It is very certain, however, that even though
all the gates of hell contradict us, yet the remission of sins cannot
be received except by faith alone, which believes that sins are
remitted for Christ's sake, according to Rom. 3, 25: Whom God hath
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood.  Likewise
Rom. 5, 2: By whom also we have access by faith unto grace, etc. For
a terrified conscience cannot set against God's wrath our works or
our love, but it is at length pacified when it apprehends Christ as
