perhaps seven, of them the tentacles were much more inflected at the
distal and proximal ends of the leaf (i.e.  towards the apex and base)
than on either side; and yet the tentacles on the sides stood as near
to the gland where the bit of meat lay as did those at the two ends. It
thus appeared as [page 237] if the motor impulse was transmitted from
the centre across the disc more readily in a longitudinal than in a
transverse direction; and as this appeared a new and interesting fact
in the physiology of plants, thirty-five fresh experiments were made to
test its truth. Minute bits of meat were placed on a single gland or on
a few glands, on the right or left side of the discs of eighteen
leaves; other bits of the same size being placed on the distal or
proximal ends of seventeen other leaves. Now if the motor impulse were
transmitted with equal force or at an equal rate through the blade in
all directions, a bit of meat placed at one side or at one end of the
disc ought to affect equally all the tentacles situated at an equal
distance from it; but this certainly is not the case. Before giving the
general results, it may be well to describe three or four rather
unusual cases.

[(1) A minute fragment of a fly was placed on one side of the disc, and
after 32 m. seven of the outer tentacles near the fragment were
inflected; after 10 hrs. several more became so, and after 23 hrs. a
still greater number; and now the blade of the leaf on this side was
bent inwards so as to stand up at right angles to the other side.
Neither the blade of the leaf nor a single tentacle on the opposite
side was affected; the line of separation between the two halves
extending from the footstalk to the apex. The leaf remained in this
state for three days, and on the fourth day began to re-expand; not a
single tentacle having been inflected on the opposite side.

(2) I will here give a case not included in the above thirty-five
experiments. A small fly was found adhering by its feet to the left
side of the disc. The tentacles on this side soon closed in and killed
the fly; and owing probably to its struggle whilst alive, the leaf was
so much excited that in about 24 hrs. all the tentacles on the opposite
side became inflected; but as they found no prey, for their glands did
not reach the fly, they re-expanded in the course of 15 hrs.; the
tentacles on the left side remaining clasped for several days.

(3) A bit of meat, rather larger than those commonly used, [page 238]
was placed in a medial line at the basal end of the disc, near the
footstalk; after 2 hrs. 30 m.  some neighbouring tentacles were
inflected; after 6 hrs. the tentacles on both sides of the footstalk,
and some way up both sides, were moderately inflected; after 8 hrs. the
tentacles at the further or distal end were more inflected than those
on either side; after 23 hrs. the meat was well clasped by all the
tentacles, excepting by the exterior ones on the two sides.

(4) Another bit of meat was placed at the opposite or distal end of
another leaf, with exactly the same relative results.

(5) A minute bit of meat was placed on one side of the disc; next day
the neighbouring short tentacles were inflected, as well as in a slight
degree three or four on the opposite side near the footstalk. On the
second day these latter tentacles showed signs of re-expanding, so I
added a fresh bit of meat at nearly the same spot, and after two days
some of the short tentacles on the opposite side of the disc were
inflected. As soon as these began to re-expand, I added another bit of
meat, and next day all the tentacles on the opposite side of the disc
were inflected towards the meat; whereas we have seen that those on the
same side were affected by the first bit of meat which was given.]

Now for the general results. Of the eighteen leaves on which bits of
meat were placed on the right or left sides of the disc, eight had a
vast number of tentacles inflected on the same side, and in four of
them the blade itself on this side was likewise inflected; whereas not
a single tentacle nor the blade was affected on the opposite side.
These leaves presented a very curious appearance, as if only the
inflected side was active, and the other paralysed. In the remaining
ten cases, a few tentacles became inflected beyond the medial line, on
the side opposite to that where the meat lay; but, in some of these
cases, only at the proximal or distal ends of the leaves. The
inflection on the opposite side always occurred considerably after that
on the same side, and in one instance not until the fourth day. We have
also seen [page 239] with No. 5 that bits of meat had to be added
thrice before all the short tentacles on the opposite side of the disc
were inflected.

The result was widely different when bits of meat were placed in a
medial line at the distal or proximal ends of the disc. In three of the
seventeen experiments thus made, owing either to the state of the leaf
or to the smallness of the bit of meat, only the immediately adjoining
tentacles were affected; but in the other fourteen cases the tentacles
at the opposite end of the leaf were inflected, though these were as
distant from where the meat lay as were those on one side of the disc
from the meat on the opposite side. In some of the present cases the
tentacles on the sides were not at all affected, or in a less degree,
or after a longer interval of time, than those at the opposite end. One
set of experiments is worth giving in fuller detail.  Cubes of meat,
not quite so small as those usually employed, were placed on one side
of the discs of four leaves, and cubes of the same size at the proximal
or distal end of four other leaves. Now, when these two sets of leaves
were compared after an interval of 24 hrs., they presented a striking
difference. Those having the cubes on one side were very slightly
affected on the opposite side; whereas those with the cubes at either
end had almost every tentacle at the opposite end, even the marginal
ones, closely inflected. After 48 hrs. the contrast in the state of the
two sets was still great; yet those with the meat on one side now had
their discal and submarginal tentacles on the opposite side somewhat
inflected, this being due to the large size of the cubes. Finally we
may conclude from these thirty-five experiments, not to mention the six
or seven previous ones, that the motor impulse is transmitted from any
single gland [page 240] or small group of glands through the blade to
the other tentacles more readily and effectually in a longitudinal than
in a transverse direction.

As long as the glands remain excited, and this may last for many days,
even for eleven, as when in contact with phosphate of lime, they
continue to transmit a motor impulse to the basal and bending parts of
their own pedicels, for otherwise they would re-expand. The great
difference in the length of time during which tentacles remain
inflected over inorganic objects, and over objects of the same size
containing soluble nitrogenous matter, proves the same fact. But the
intensity of the impulse transmitted from an excited gland, which has
begun to pour forth its acid secretion and is at the same time
absorbing, seems to be very small compared with that which it transmits
when first excited. Thus, when moderately large bits of meat were
placed on one side of the disc, and the discal and sub-marginal
tentacles on the opposite side became inflected, so that their glands
at last touched the meat and absorbed matter from it, they did not
transmit any motor influence to the exterior rows of tentacles on the
same side, for these never became inflected. If, however, meat had been
placed on the glands of these same tentacles before they had begun to
secrete copiously and to absorb, they undoubtedly would have affected
the exterior rows. Nevertheless, when I gave some phosphate of lime,
which is a most powerful stimulant, to several submarginal tentacles
already considerably inflected, but not yet in contact with some
phosphate previously placed on two glands in the centre of the disc,
the exterior tentacles on the same side were acted on.

When a gland is first excited, the motor impulse is discharged within a
few seconds, as we know from the [page 241] bending of the tentacle;
and it appears to be discharged at first with much greater force than
afterwards. Thus, in the case above given of a small fly naturally
caught by a few glands on one side of a leaf, an impulse was slowly
transmitted from them across the whole breadth of the leaf, causing the
opposite tentacles to be temporarily inflected, but the glands which
remained in contact with the insect, though they continued for several
days to send an impulse down their own pedicels to the bending place,
did not prevent the tentacles on the opposite side from quickly
re-expanding; so that the motor discharge must at first have been more
powerful than afterwards.

When an object of any kind is placed on the disc, and the surrounding
tentacles are inflected, their glands secrete more copiously and the
secretion becomes acid, so that some influence is sent to them from the
discal glands. This change in the nature and amount of the secretion
cannot depend on the bending of the tentacles, as the glands of the
short central tentacles secrete acid when an object is placed on them,
though they do not themselves bend.  Therefore I inferred that the
glands of the disc sent some influence up the surrounding tentacles to
their glands, and that these reflected back a motor impulse to their
basal parts; but this view was soon proved erroneous. It was found by
many trials that tentacles with their glands closely cut off by sharp
scissors often become inflected and again re-expand, still appearing
healthy. One which was observed continued healthy for ten days after
the operation. I therefore cut the glands off twenty-five tentacles, at
different times and on different leaves, and seventeen of these soon
became inflected, and afterwards re-expanded.  The re-expansion
commenced in about [page 242] 8 hrs. or 9 hrs., and was completed in
from 22 hrs. to 30 hrs. from the time of inflection.  After an interval
of a day or two, raw meat with saliva was placed on the discs of these
seventeen leaves, and when observed next day, seven of the headless
tentacles were inflected over the meat as closely as the uninjured ones
on the same leaves; and an eighth headless tentacle became inflected
after three additional days. The meat was removed from one of these
leaves, and the surface washed with a little stream of water, and after
three days the headless tentacle re-expanded for the second time. These
tentacles without glands were, however, in a different state from those
provided with glands and which had absorbed matter from the meat, for
the protoplasm within the cells of the former had undergone far less
aggregation. From these experiments with headless tentacles it is
certain that the glands do not, as far as the motor impulse is
concerned, act in a reflex manner like the nerve-ganglia of animals.

But there is another action, namely that of aggregation, which in
certain cases may be called reflex, and it is the only known instance
in the vegetable kingdom. We should bear in mind that the process does
not depend on the previous bending of the tentacles, as we clearly see
when leaves are immersed in certain strong solutions. Nor does it
depend on increased secretion from the glands, and this is shown by
several facts, more especially by the papillae, which do not secrete,
yet undergoing aggregation, if given carbonate of ammonia or an
infusion of raw meat. When a gland is directly stimulated in any way,
as by the pressure of a minute particle of glass, the protoplasm within
the cells of the gland first becomes aggregated, then that in the cells
immediately beneath the gland, and so lower and lower down the
tentacles to their bases;-- [page 243] that is, if the stimulus has
been sufficient and not injurious. Now, when the glands of the disc are
excited, the exterior tentacles are affected in exactly the same
manner: the aggregation always commences in their glands, though these
have not been directly excited, but have only received some influence
from the disc, as shown by their increased acid secretion. The
protoplasm within the cells immediately beneath the glands are next
affected, and so downwards from cell to cell to the bases of the
tentacles. This process apparently deserves to be called a reflex
action, in the same manner as when a sensory nerve is irritated, and
carries an impression to a ganglion which sends back some influence to
a muscle or gland, causing movement or increased secretion; but the
action in the two cases is probably of a widely different nature. After
the protoplasm in a tentacle has been aggregated, its redissolution
always begins in the lower part, and slowly travels up the pedicel to
the gland, so that the protoplasm last aggregated is first redissolved.
This probably depends merely on the protoplasm being less and less
aggregated, lower and lower down in the tentacles, as can be seen
plainly when the excitement has been slight. As soon, therefore, as the
aggregating action altogether ceases, redissolution naturally commences
in the less strongly aggregated matter in the lowest part of the
tentacle, and is there first completed.

Direction of the Inflected Tentacles.--When a particle of any kind is
placed on the gland of one of the outer tentacles, this invariably
moves towards the centre of the leaf; and so it is with all the
tentacles of a leaf immersed in any exciting fluid. The glands of the
exterior tentacles then form a ring round the middle part of the disc,
as shown in a previous figure (fig. 4, [page 244] p. 10). The short
tentacles within this ring still retain their vertical position, as
they likewise do when a large object is placed on their glands, or when
an insect is caught by them. In this latter case we can see that the
inflection of the short central tentacles would be useless, as their
glands are already in contact with their prey.

FIG. 10.  (Drosera rotundifolia.) Leaf (enlarged) with the tentacles
inflected over a bit of meat placed on one side of the disc.

The result is very different when a single gland on one side of the
disc is excited, or a few in a group. These send an impulse to the
surrounding tentacles, which do not now bend towards the centre of the
leaf, but to the point of excitement. We owe this capital observation
to Nitschke,* and since reading his paper a few years ago, I have
repeatedly verified it. If a minute bit of meat be placed by the aid of
a needle on a single gland, or on three or four together, halfway
between the centre and the circumference of the disc, the directed
movement of the surrounding tentacles is well exhibited. An accurate
drawing of a leaf with meat in this position is here reproduced (fig.
10), and we see the tentacles, including some of the exterior ones,
accurately directed to the point where the meat lay. But a much better

* 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1860, p. 240.  [page 245]

plan is to place a particle of the phosphate of lime moistened with
saliva on a single gland on one side of the disc of a large leaf, and
another particle on a single gland on the opposite side. In four such
trials the excitement was not sufficient to affect the outer tentacles,
but all those near the two points were directed to them, so that two
wheels were formed on the disc of the same leaf; the pedicels of the
tentacles forming the spokes, and the glands united in a mass over the
phosphate representing the axles. The precision with which each
tentacle pointed to the particle was wonderful; so that in some cases I
could detect no deviation from perfect accuracy. Thus, although the
short tentacles in the middle of the disc do not bend when their glands
are excited in a direct manner, yet if they receive a motor impulse
from a point on one side, they direct themselves to the point equally
well with the tentacles on the borders of the disc.

In these experiments, some of the short tentacles on the disc, which
would have been directed to the centre, had the leaf been immersed in
an exciting fluid, were now inflected in an exactly opposite direction,
viz. towards the circumference. These tentacles, therefore, had
deviated as much as 180o from the direction which they would have
assumed if their own glands had been stimulated, and which may be
considered as the normal one. Between this, the greatest possible and
no deviation from the normal direction, every degree could be observed
in the tentacles on these several leaves. Notwithstanding the precision
with which the tentacles generally were directed, those near the
circumference of one leaf were not accurately directed towards some
phosphate of lime at a rather distant point on the opposite side of the
disc. It appeared as if the motor [page 246] impulse in passing
transversely across nearly the whole width of the disc had departed
somewhat from a true course. This accords with what we have already
seen of the impulse travelling less readily in a transverse than in a
longitudinal direction. In some other cases, the exterior tentacles did
not seem capable of such accurate movement as the shorter and more
central ones.

Nothing could be more striking than the appearance of the above four
leaves, each with their tentacles pointing truly to the two little
masses of the phosphate on their discs. We might imagine that we were
looking at a lowly organised animal seizing prey with its arms. In the
case of Drosera the explanation of this accurate power of movement, no
doubt, lies in the motor impulse radiating in all directions, and
whichever side of a tentacle it first strikes, that side contracts, and
the tentacle consequently bends towards the point of excitement. The
pedicels of the tentacles are flattened, or elliptic in section. Near
the bases of the short central tentacles, the flattened or broad face
is formed of about five longitudinal rows of cells; in the outer
tentacles of the disc it consists of about six or seven rows; and in
the extreme marginal tentacles of above a dozen rows. As the flattened
bases are thus formed of only a few rows of cells, the precision of the
movements of the tentacles is the more remarkable; for when the motor
impulse strikes the base of a tentacle in a very oblique direction
relatively to its broad face, scarcely more than one or two cells
towards one end can be affected at first, and the contraction of these
cells must draw the whole tentacle into the proper direction. It is,
perhaps, owing to the exterior pedicels being much flattened that they
do not bend quite so accurately to the point of excitement as the [page
247] more central ones. The properly directed movement of the tentacles
is not an unique case in the vegetable kingdom, for the tendrils of
many plants curve towards the side which is touched; but the case of
Drosera is far more interesting, as here the tentacles are not directly
excited, but receive an impulse from a distant point; nevertheless,
they bend accurately towards this point.

FIG. 11.  (Drosera rotundifolia.) Diagram showing the distribution of
the vascular tissue in a small leaf.

On the Nature of the Tissues through which the Motor Impulse is
Transmitted.--It will be necessary first to describe briefly the course
of the main fibro-vascular bundles. These are shown in the accompanying
sketch (fig. 11) of a small leaf. Little vessels from the neighbouring
bundles enter all the many tentacles with which the surface is studded;
but these are not here represented. The central trunk, which runs up
the footstalk, bifurcates near the centre of the leaf, each branch
bifurcating again and again according to the size of the leaf. This
central trunk sends off, low down on each side, a delicate branch,
which may be called the sublateral branch. There is also, on each side,
a main lateral branch or bundle, which bifurcates in the same manner as
the others. Bifurcation does not imply that any single vessel divides,
but that a bundle [page 248] divides into two. By looking to either
side of the leaf, it will be seen that a branch from the great central
bifurcation inosculates with a branch from the lateral bundle, and that
there is a smaller inosculation between the two chief branches of the
lateral bundle. The course of the vessels is very complex at the larger
inosculation; and here vessels, retaining the same diameter, are often
formed by the union of the bluntly pointed ends of two vessels, but
whether these points open into each other by their attached surfaces, I
do not know. By means of the two inosculations all the vessels on the
same side of the leaf are brought into some sort of connection. Near
the circumference of the larger leaves the bifurcating branches also
come into close union, and then separate again, forming a continuous
zigzag line of vessels round the whole circumference. But the union of
the vessels in this zigzag line seems to be much less intimate than at
the main inosculation. It should be added that the course of the
vessels differs somewhat in different leaves, and even on opposite
sides of the same leaf, but the main inosculation is always present.

Now in my first experiments with bits of meat placed on one side of the
disc, it so happened that not a single tentacle was inflected on the
opposite side; and when I saw that the vessels on the same side were
all connected together by the two inosculations, whilst not a vessel
passed over to the opposite side, it seemed probable that the motor
impulse was conducted exclusively along them.

In order to test this view, I divided transversely with the point of a
lancet the central trunks of four leaves, just beneath the main
bifurcation; and two days afterwards placed rather large bits of raw
meat [page 249] (a most powerful stimulant) near the centre of the disc
above the incision--that is, a little towards the apex--with the
following results:--

[(1) This leaf proved rather torpid: after 4 hrs. 40 m. (in all cases
reckoning from the time when the meat was given) the tentacles at the
distal end were a little inflected, but nowhere else; they remained so
for three days, and re-expanded on the fourth day. The leaf was then
dissected, and the trunk, as well as the two sublateral branches, were
found divided.

(2) After 4 hrs. 30 m. many of the tentacles at the distal end were
well inflected. Next day the blade and all the tentacles at this end
were strongly inflected, and were separated by a distinct transverse
line from the basal half of the leaf, which was not in the least
affected. On the third day, however, some of the short tentacles on the
disc near the base were very slightly inflected. The incision was found
on dissection to extend across the leaf as in the last case.

(3) After 4 hrs. 30 m. strong inflection of the tentacles at the distal
end, which during the next two days never extended in the least to the
basal end. The incision as before.

(4) This leaf was not observed until 15 hrs. had elapsed, and then all
the tentacles, except the extreme marginal ones, were found equally
well inflected all round the leaf. On careful examination the spiral
vessels of the central trunk were certainly divided; but the incision
on one side had not passed through the fibrous tissue surrounding these
vessels, though it had passed through the tissue on the other side.*]

The appearance presented by the leaves (2) and (3) was very curious,
and might be aptly compared with that of a man with his backbone broken
and lower extremities paralysed.  Excepting that the line between the
two halves was here transverse instead of longitudinal, these leaves
were in the same state as some of those in the former experiments, with
bits of meat placed on one side of the disc. The case of leaf (4)

* M. Ziegler made similar experiments by cutting the spiral vessels of
Drosera intermedia('Comptes rendus,' 1874, p. 1417), but arrived at
conclusions widely different from mine.  [page 250]

proves that the spiral vessels of the central trunk may be divided, and
yet the motor impulse be transmitted from the distal to the basal end;
and this led me at first to suppose that the motor force was sent
through the closely surrounding fibrous tissue; and that if one half of
this tissue was left undivided, it sufficed for complete transmission.
But opposed to this conclusion is the fact that no vessels pass
directly from one side of the leaf to the other, and yet, as we have
seen, if a rather large bit of meat is placed on one side, the motor
impulse is sent, though slowly and imperfectly, in a transverse
direction across the whole breadth of the leaf. Nor can this latter
fact be accounted for by supposing that the transmission is effected
through the two inosculations, or through the circumferential zigzag
line of union, for had this been the case, the exterior tentacles on
the opposite side of the disc would have been affected before the more
central ones, which never occurred. We have also seen that the extreme
marginal tentacles appear to have no power to transmit an impulse to
the adjoining tentacles; yet the little bundle of vessels which enters
each marginal tentacle sends off a minute branch to those on both
sides, and this I have not observed in any other tentacles; so that the
marginal ones are more closely connected together by spiral vessels
than are the others, and yet have much less power of communicating a
motor impulse to one another.

But besides these several facts and arguments we have conclusive
evidence that the motor impulse is not sent, at least exclusively,
through the spiral vessels, or through the tissue immediately
surrounding them. We know that if a bit of meat is placed on a gland
(the immediately adjoining ones having been removed) on any part of the
disc, all the short sur- [page 251] rounding tentacles bend almost
simultaneously with great precision towards it. Now there are tentacles
on the disc, for instance near the extremities of the sublateral
bundles (fig. 11), which are supplied with vessels that do not come
into contact with the branches that enter the surrounding tentacles,
except by a very long and extremely circuitous course. Nevertheless, if
a bit of meat is placed on the gland of a tentacle of this kind, all
the surrounding ones are inflected towards it with great precision. It
is, of course, possible that an impulse might be sent through a long
and circuitous course, but it is obviously impossible that the
direction of the movement could be thus communicated, so that all the
surrounding tentacles should bend precisely to the point of excitement.
The impulse no doubt is transmitted in straight radiating lines from
the excited gland to the surrounding tentacles; it cannot, therefore,
be sent along the fibro-vascular bundles. The effect of cutting the
central vessels, in the above cases, in preventing the transmission of
the motor impulse from the distal to the basal end of a leaf, may be
attributed to a considerable space of the cellular tissue having been
divided. We shall hereafter see, when we treat of Dionaea, that this
same conclusion, namely that the motor impulse is not transmitted by
the fibro-vascular bundles, is plainly confirmed; and Prof. Cohn has
come to the same conclusion with respect to Aldrovanda--both members of
the Droseraceae.

As the motor impulse is not transmitted along the vessels, there
remains for its passage only the cellular tissue; and the structure of
this tissue explains to a certain extent how it travels so quickly down
the long exterior tentacles, and much more slowly across the blade of
the leaf.  We shall also see why it crosses [page 252] the blade more
quickly in a longitudinal than in a transverse direction; though with
time it can pass in any direction. We know that the same stimulus
causes movement of the tentacles and aggregation of the protoplasm, and
that both influences originate in and proceed from the glands within
the same brief space of time. It seems therefore probable that the
motor impulse consists of the first commencement of a molecular change
in the protoplasm, which, when well developed, is plainly visible, and
has been designated aggregation; but to this subject I shall return. We
further know that in the transmission of the aggregating process the
chief delay is caused by the passage of the transverse cell-walls; for
as the aggregation travels down the tentacles, the contents of each
successive cell seem almost to flash into a cloudy mass. We may
therefore infer that the motor impulse is in like manner delayed
chiefly by passing through the cell-walls.

The greater celerity with which the impulse is transmitted down the
long exterior tentacles than across the disc may be largely attributed
to its being closely confined within the narrow pedicel, instead of
radiating forth on all sides as on the disc. But besides this
confinement, the exterior cells of the tentacles are fully twice as
long as those of the disc; so that only half the number of transverse
partitions have to be traversed in a given length of a tentacle,
compared with an equal space on the disc; and there would be in the
same proportion less retardation of the impulse. Moreover, in sections
of the exterior tentacles given by Dr.  Warming,* the parenchymatous

* 'Videnskabelige Meddelelser de la Soc. d'Hist. nat. de Copenhague,'
Nos. 10-12, 1872, woodcuts iv. and v.  [page 253]

cells are shown to be still more elongated; and these would form the
most direct line of communication from the gland to the bending place
of the tentacle. If the impulse travels down the exterior cells, it
would have to cross from between twenty to thirty transverse
partitions; but rather fewer if down the inner parenchymatous tissue.
In either case it is remarkable that the impulse is able to pass
through so many partitions down nearly the whole length of the pedicel,
and to act on the bending place, in ten seconds. Why the impulse, after
having passed so quickly down one of the extreme marginal tentacles
(about 1/20 of an inch in length), should never, as far as I have seen,
affect the adjoining tentacles, I do not understand. It may be in part
accounted for by much energy being expended in the rapidity of the
transmission.

Most of the cells of the disc, both the superficial ones and the larger
cells which form the five or six underlying layers, are about four
times as long as broad. They are arranged almost longitudinally,
radiating from the footstalk. The motor impulse, therefore, when
transmitted across the disc, has to cross nearly four times as many
cell-walls as when transmitted in a longitudinal direction, and would
consequently be much delayed in the former case. The cells of the disc
converge towards the bases of the tentacles, and are thus fitted to
convey the motor impulse to them from all sides. On the whole, the
arrangement and shape of the cells, both those of the disc and
tentacles, throw much light on the rate and manner of diffusion of the
motor impulse. But why the impulse proceeding from the glands of the
exterior rows of tentacles tends to travel laterally and towards the
centre of the leaf, but not centrifugally, is by no means clear.  [page
254]

Mechanism of the Movements, and Nature of the Motor Impulse.--Whatever
may be the means of movement, the exterior tentacles, considering their
delicacy, are inflected with much force. A bristle, held so that a
length of 1 inch projected from a handle, yielded when I tried to lift
with it an inflected tentacle, which was somewhat thinner than the
bristle. The amount or extent, also, of the movement is great. Fully
expanded tentacles in becoming inflected sweep through an angle of
180o; and if they are beforehand reflexed, as often occurs, the angle
is considerably greater. It is probably the superficial cells at the
bending place which chiefly or exclusively contract; for the interior
cells have very delicate walls, and are so few in number that they
could hardly cause a tentacle to bend with precision to a definite
point. Though I carefully looked, I could never detect any wrinkling of
the surface at the bending place, even in the case of a tentacle
abnormally curved into a complete circle, under circumstances hereafter
to be mentioned.

All the cells are not acted on, though the motor impulse passes through
them. When the gland of one of the long exterior tentacles is excited,
the upper cells are not in the least affected; about halfway down there
is a slight bending, but the chief movement is confined to a short
space near the base; and no part of the inner tentacles bends except
the basal portion.  With respect to the blade of the leaf, the motor
impulse may be transmitted through many cells, from the centre to the
circumference, without their being in the least affected, or they may
be strongly acted on and the blade greatly inflected. In the latter
case the movement seems to depend partly on the strength of the
stimulus, and partly on [page 255] its nature, as when leaves are
immersed in certain fluids.

The power of movement which various plants possess, when irritated, has
been attributed by high authorities to the rapid passage of fluid out
of certain cells, which, from their previous state of tension,
immediately contract.* Whether or not this is the primary cause of such
movements, fluid must pass out of closed cells when they contract or
are pressed together in one direction, unless they at the same time
expand in some other direction. For instance, fluid can be seen to ooze
from the surface of any young and vigorous shoot if slowly bent into a
semi-circle.  In the case of Drosera there is certainly much movement
of the fluid throughout the tentacles whilst they are undergoing
