"Now that's a good motto, aunty, but you see I can't pack the drum, and
so it won't suit very well to say 'drums beat,'--will it?"

"There must be plenty of drums there, and perhaps Fani has one," said
his aunt. "And I'm sure the motto is a very good one. However, let me
hear the second. I've forgotten just how it goes."

    "'Come to our Festival! come all!
      Come from Switzerland!
    Conductor, let your tickets fall!
      And, fireman, stay your hand!
    You who make boots, or who brew beer,
    You one and all are welcome here.'

"Don't you think that is, after all, better than the other, aunty?"

"Yes, it is certainly very good, but it is too long. It would take
Elsli such a time to embroider it."

"That settles it, then," said Oscar, well pleased that his aunt found a
decisive reason for rejecting another. "Now, then, for the last, short
and energetic:--

    "'Freedom we shout! Freedom for all!
      Freedom for ever and aye!
    We will not yield till all chains fall,
      And tyrants are banished or die!'

"Do you hear that, aunty?"

"Yes, my dear, I can't help hearing it, and it's very spirited, but it
doesn't mean anything. I don't know of any 'tyrants' that need to be
banished or die, do you? It isn't to be thought of. Take the first, or,
if you don't like that, choose another from the list."

But Oscar was obstinate. The first he wouldn't have, and he must somehow
or other bring his aunt over to accept this one.

"But, aunty," he began in a tone of remonstrance, "there were tyrants
once; don't you remember the poem about Dionysius, the tyrant? And if
there have been once, there may be again, and then this verse would be
splendid; don't you think so?"

Before aunty could respond to this appeal, came a fearful pounding at
the door, which put a stop to the discussion. Fred and Emma, having
hunted over the rest of the house in vain, had at last bethought
themselves of this apartment; and, finding the door locked, they felt
sure that the objects of their search were within.

Emma called through the keyhole:--

"Come, aunty, please, quick! Supper is ready, and papa has come, and
mamma sent us to call you."

And Fred shouted in a still louder tone:--

"Come along, Oscar; papa is asking for you."

All was over. His aunt opened the door at once, and Oscar had to follow
her.

The next morning, when the carriage had been rolled out of the
coach-house and stood waiting for the horses, to which the groom was
giving the last polish in the stable, Dr. Stein came into the room where
the mother and aunt were putting the final touches to the preparation of
the children for the journey.

"I must say good-bye now. My patients cannot be kept waiting, and I must
go. One word to you, Oscar. Be careful not to carry your schemes too far
while you are visiting. Here, at home, every one knows you; and, if you
do a foolish thing, they say: 'It's the doctor's boy; he'll soon be set
right.' But now you will have only yourself to depend upon; so don't go
into anything heedlessly. Don't undertake anything which you are not
quite sure about, so that no unpleasant consequences may result either
for yourself or for the lady whose guest you are to be. You must
remember that you will displease Mrs. Stanhope if you do a wrong or
foolish thing. You are old enough to understand me without farther
explanation. Do not forget. Now good-bye, my boy, and you too, Emma;
good-bye, Fred. Be happy and be good."

With these words the father shook all three pairs of outstretched hands
and was off.

The mother drew Emma to the other side of the room for a word of
admonition. The big roll of paper and the book that the little girl had
been so anxious to have at Christmas, and was now so determined to take
with her, roused anxious thoughts in the mother's mind, and she felt
that she must speak seriously to the child, warning her not to instigate
Fani to any undertaking which Mrs. Stanhope might not approve. She
reminded Emma that Fani was now very well off, and that the prospect
before him was very bright, if Mrs. Stanhope should decide to take him
under her protection. But it was of the greatest importance that he
should do nothing to displease Mrs. Stanhope, and Emma would certainly
never forgive herself if she should be the means of leading him to act
contrary to his benefactress' wishes.

Emma understood the value of her mother's suggestion and promised to
heed her advice, adding earnestly that she would try to think of
different ways in which Fani could make himself agreeable to Mrs.
Stanhope.

"You'd far better not think about it at all, my child," replied her
mother. "Enjoy with Fani the pleasures and advantages of his life, and
don't try to bring about any special event, as you are so fond of doing.
And one thing more: don't forget to pray every day to God to protect you
and to help you to carry out all your good resolutions. Now that you are
leaving home, my only comfort is that our Father's hand is still about
you, there as well as here. Promise me that you will pray for the
heavenly blessing every night, as we do together at home."

Emma promised not to neglect her morning and evening prayers, and begged
her mother to have no anxiety about her.

Meanwhile, aunty had been standing by the window, talking with Fred.

"Pray be careful," she said, "never by any chance to let one of your
small creatures, even the prettiest one, escape out of your pockets upon
the table or the floor. In fact, you would do better not to put them
into your pockets at all, for fear of some such mishap, as often occurs
at home. It would spoil all the pleasure of your visit; for Mrs.
Stanhope would neither understand nor forgive such carelessness."

"Don't worry, aunty," replied the boy; "I'll fix them so they can't
stir. I'll bring them all safe home to you, and I'm sure you will be
delighted with them."

Rikli had been meanwhile listening to one person and another, catching
the words of warning and advice as they were given to the three
travellers, and dwelling with pride and pleasure at the thought that she
was the only one who did not need any caution.

To her aunt's closing words to Fred, she added quickly:--

"Yes, yes! how Mrs. Stanhope would stare to see a horrid frog or a red
snail or a blind worm come hopping over her white table-cloth!"

"Well, I think any one would stare, to see a snail or a worm hop
anywhere!" said the boy laughing.

"You'd see what she would say, and how she would put you out of the
house in no time, and take all your food away."

"I don't believe I should _see_ her say anything at all," retorted Fred,
with another laugh.

"You'd find out how it would be, when you were sent home in disgrace;
and you'd be ashamed to be seen in the railway carriage, and by the
children in school."

"I don't mean to find out anything of the kind," said Fred, and the
contest dropped.

The coachman cracked his whip as a signal that it was high time to
start. Hurried good-byes were said; the children seized their bags, and
seated themselves in the carriage; the horses started, and the journey
was begun. Mother and aunt stood by the road-side, and waved their
handkerchiefs till the carriage turned a corner and was lost to view.

"Oh! I wish I knew that they would meet with no accident, and would all
come home safe!" said the mother, with a sigh, as she turned back to the
house.

"That will be as God wills," said her sister; "we must trust them to
him, and pray him to send his angels to watch over them; that will be a
better protection than any that we two could afford them."




CHAPTER III.

ON THE BEAUTIFUL RHINE.


In the garden at Rosemount was such an excitement and running to and fro
as had never been seen there before. It was the day after the arrival of
the three guests. Great had been the surprise of the doctor's children,
yesterday evening, when they were shown up stairs, to find three large
rooms assigned for their use, one to each. For the house was so arranged
that there was but one bed in each room. The windows of all three rooms
overlooked the garden, and beyond could be seen the river. The children
had never before been so royally lodged. Emma planned directly to spend
long hours at her window, looking into the moonlight and listening to
the river, as late as she chose, for no one would come to send her off
to bed. Oscar looked about the large apartment, and thought what a fine
place it would be to spread out his banners. They would not be in any
one's way, as they were at home; and no one would come and clear them
out. Fred examined all the presses, tables, and drawers, and destined
them to his special uses.

The meeting of the five children was a most joyous one to them all. From
the first moment they found themselves on as intimate a footing as if
they had never been separated. Elsli and Fani were not changed as the
doctor's children had feared they might be; on the contrary, it seemed
as if they were even nearer to their old friends. Fani was merrier and
more lively than ever, and Elsli, although still somewhat shy, was more
confiding than before, and just as amiable and obliging; and they both
were so attractive in their nice clothes, that Emma took great delight
in merely looking at them.

The first morning was spent in emptying the big trunk, with Aunt
Clarissa's help, and in arranging the contents in the three rooms. In
the afternoon the children were allowed to explore the house and garden,
and to have a run in the meadows, that they might become acquainted with
Rosemount and its surroundings. What a pleasure for them all!

Emma's first wish was to get down to the river-side, under the lindens,
and to see the branches dip and rise and dip again into the swiftly
flowing stream. Fani had drawn her a picture of it, and she must see it.
It was Fani's favorite spot, and he was ready enough to show it to her;
so the two ran off together.

Fred did not know which way to turn. He was fairly bewildered by all
the living wonders that surrounded him; the glancing, gleaming, humming
world of the rose-garden. Here a golden beetle crept across the lawn;
there the air seemed full of gayly colored butterflies. On the edge of
the fountain sat a golden-green lizard in the sun. Over on the hedge a
great variety of wonderful insects swarmed on every leaf and twig! What
a harvest he could gather! He ran about in every direction; he was
beside himself with delight; discovering every moment something new and
unexpected. Nor was this in the garden only. Down by the river, under
the old trees, in the thick hedges, in the damp earth by the water-side,
between the cracks of the stones by the river, he felt sure of countless
treasures. He paid little attention to his friends or his brother and
sister; he seemed to swim in an ocean of wealth, undreamed of before,
and all within his grasp!

Oscar, meantime, under Elsli's guidance, had been examining every part
of the garden; carefully observing everything as he walked along down to
the Rhine, along the meadow-land and back to the court-yard, which was
all walled in, and where two big oak-trees cast a far-reaching shadow.
Around these oaks ran a wooden seat where one could sit in comfort under
the thick protection of the leafy cover. Here the two children seated
themselves; and Oscar looked thoughtfully across the broad meadow,
around which ran a high hedge; a broad paved path led from the
court-yard down to a gate-way of iron-work, which united the hedges that
enclosed the whole estate.

"And you say, Elsli," said Oscar presently, "that beyond the hedges the
land does not belong to Mrs. Stanhope at all?"

"No, Oscar; a very large vineyard belongs to her besides. It is so large
that you would not believe the quantity of grapes that she gets from it.
It lies on the other side of the house, towards the Rhine."

"I don't mean that," said Oscar; "Fani showed me that this morning. I
mean from the end of the meadow-land across the high-road there."

Elsli was quite sure that Mrs. Stanhope owned nothing beyond the
high-road.

"Do you see that little hill over there?" said Oscar, pointing in that
direction. "There's a wind-mill up there; see how finely the big wings
go turning round in the wind, like huge banners waving for a festival,
and inviting people from all sides to come and rejoice together. All
the people who are to come to our celebration might camp out around the
foot of that hill, and the speaker could stand up above there on that
platform, and those huge flags would wave to and fro behind him and show
where the festival was taking place, to all the neighboring country!"

Oscar uttered these words in such a tone of enthusiasm that his
companion caught the infection; but she hesitated.

"Yes, it would be fine," she said; "but don't you think we should have
to ask the miller's leave?"

Oscar thought this would not be at all necessary, as the meeting would
do no harm to the mill or to the grass, which was evidently very short.
He would go over and inspect the place himself.

"How is the banner getting on, Elsli?" he asked presently.

"Oh, I forgot it entirely!" said the girl, somewhat startled. "It is
all ready, and I meant to put it in your bedroom to welcome you. You
see, Oscar, I finished it; because Aunt Clarissa said that it would be
prettier without a motto, if I put a wreath of Alpine roses on the Swiss
flag, and so I embroidered one upon it."

But this did not suit Oscar at all; he wished to have his motto, his
verses, over which he had spent so much trouble and had had so many
discussions. He had no mind to drop it now; and he looked as if he had
suffered a severe loss. Elsli saw his disappointment, and she hastened
to propose a remedy. Why not put the motto on the other side of the
banner? Oscar could print the verse in large letters on a piece of
paper, and she would fasten it upon the banner, on the side opposite the
Alpine roses. That was a clever thought. Oscar's spirits rose again,
and the banner would be really in the end far handsomer than he had
expected.

"You are the smartest girl I know, Elsli," cried the lad; and this
unexpected praise brought the color into Elsli's cheeks, for she was
little accustomed to notice, much less to commendation.

"How many Swiss have you found and invited to join our society?"
continued Oscar.

Elsli confessed that she had discovered but one; the baker's boy who
brought fresh bread to the house every day; and she could not induce him
to join the society. "I am very sorry," she said, "that I could not do
as you asked me; but we are not allowed to go into the kitchen and talk
to the people that come there."

But Oscar was well satisfied. He only wanted to know at what time and
from which direction the baker's boy came every morning; and this Elsli
told him. "All right!" he said; "I can help myself, now."

Meanwhile, Fani and Emma were walking up and down by the river-side,
talking with constantly increasing eagerness. Emma had never been so
excited; she had had a tremendous surprise. Since Fani had left home,
she had never lost sight of her hope that he would become a great
artist. He had never mentioned the subject in his letters, and it had
been more and more evident that Mrs. Stanhope meant to educate the two
children, as she would have done her own, in various branches, without
any view to a special training for a life-work. Emma feared that Fani
would lose his ambition to be an artist, and she set herself to work to
counteract this danger. She had heard of a book called the "Lives of
Celebrated Painters," and she did not rest till her aunt promised to
procure it for her at Christmas; for she thought it would inspire Fani
with fresh enthusiasm to learn how artists had become great and
celebrated. She now brought the book with her, and told Fani about it,
in the hope that it would serve as a spur to arouse his dormant
energies. What was her astonishment when Fani pushed the book away, and
broke out passionately:--

"No, no; I will not read it! I will try not to think of it at all! You
see, Emma, I have a drawing lesson every day; only now of course I do
not, while you are here on a visit. And the more I draw, the more I want
to; I can do much better than I used to, and the teacher has told me
several times that I can certainly learn to be an artist."

Emma could not contain her joy at these words, and she cried out:--

"Now it's all right, Fani! You can be a painter, and I am sure you will
be a celebrated one, the most famous one in all the land. But why do not
you tell Mrs. Stanhope directly that you want to do that and nothing
