
All four looked into the receiver. With the great magnification
employed, the planet almost filled the visiplate. There were a few
fleecy wisps of cloud, but the entire surface upon which they gazed was
one sheet of the now familiar deep and glorious blue peculiar to the
waters of that cuprous solar system, with no markings whatever.

"What d'you make of it, Mart? That's water all right--copper-sulphate
solution, just like the Osnomian and Urvanian oceans--and nothing else
visible. How big would an island have to be for us to see it from here?"

"So much depends upon the contour and nature of the island, that it is
hard to say. If it were low and heavily covered with their green-blue
vegetation, we might not be able to see even a rather large one, whereas
if it were hilly and bare, we could probably see one only a few miles in
diameter."

"Well, one good thing, anyway, we're approaching it from the central
sun, and almost in line with their own sun, so it's daylight all over
it. As it turns and as we get closer, we'll see what we can see. Better
take turns watching it, hadn't we?" asked Seaton.

It was decided, and while the _Skylark_ was still some distance away,
several small islands became visible, and the period of rotation of the
planet was determined to be in the neighborhood of fifty hours.
Margaret, then at the controls, picked out the largest island visible
and directed the bar toward it. As they dropped down close to their
objective, they found that the air was of the same composition as that
of Osnome, but had a pressure of seventy-eight centimeters of mercury,
and that the surface gravity of the planet was ninety-five hundredths
that of the Earth.

"Fine business!" exulted Seaton. "Just about like home, but I don't see
much of any place to land without getting wet, do you? Those reflectors
are probably solar generators, and they cover the whole island except
for that lagoon right under us."

The island, perhaps ten miles long and half that in width, was entirely
covered with great parabolic reflectors, arranged so closely together
that little could be seen between them. Each reflector apparently
focussed upon an object in the center, a helix which seemed to writhe
luridly in that flaming focus, glowing with a nacreous, opalescent green
light.

"Well, nothing much to see there--let's go down," remarked Seaton as he
shot the _Skylark_ over to the edge of the island and down to the
surface of the water. But here again nothing was to be seen of the land
itself. The wall was one vertical plate of seamless metal, supporting
huge metal guides, between which floated metal pontoons. From these
gigantic floats metal girders and trusses went through slots in the wall
into the darkness of the interior. Close scrutiny revealed that the
large floats were rising steadily, although very slowly; while smaller
floats bobbed up and down upon each passing wave.

"Solar generators, tide-motors, and wave-motors, all at once!"
ejaculated Seaton. "_Some_ power-plant! Folks, I'm going to take a look
at that if I have to drill in with a ray!"

[Illustration: Some power plant! Folks, I'm going to take a look at
that....]

They circumnavigated the island without revealing any door or other
opening--the entire thirty miles was one stupendous battery of the
generators. Back at the starting point, the _Skylark_ hopped over the
structure and down to the surface of the small central lagoon previously
noticed. Close to the water, it was seen that there was plenty of room
for the vessel to move about beneath the roof of reflectors, and that
the island was one solid stand of tide-motors. At one end of the lagoon
was an open metal structure, the only building visible, and Seaton
brought the space-cruiser up to it and through the huge opening--for
door there was none. The interior of the room was lighted by long,
tubular lights running around in front of the walls, which were
veritable switchboards. Row after row and tier upon tier stood the
instruments, plainly electrical meters of enormous capacity and equally
plainly in full operation, but no wiring or bus-bar could be seen.
Before each row of instruments there was a narrow walk, with steps
leading down into the water of the lagoon. Every part of the great room
was plainly visible, and not a living being was even watching that vast
instrument-board.

"What do you make of it, Dick?" asked Crane, slowly.

"No wiring--tight beam transmission. The Fenachrone do it with two
matched-frequency separable units. Millions and millions of kilowatts
there, if I'm any judge. Absolutely automatic too, or else----" Seaton's
voice died away.

"Or else what?" asked Dorothy.

"Just a hunch. I wouldn't wonder if----"

"Hold it, Dicky! Remember I had to put you to bed after that last hunch
you had!"

"Here it is, anyway. Mart, what would be the logical line of evolution
when the planet has become so old that all the land has been eroded to a
level below that of the ocean? You picked us out an old one, all
right--so old that there's no land left. Would a highly civilized people
revert to fish? That seems like a backward move to me, but what other
answer is possible?"

"Probably not to true fishes--although they might easily develop some
fish-like traits. I do not believe, however, that they would go back to
gills or to cold blood."

"What _are_ you two saying?" interrupted Margaret. "Do you mean to say
that you think _fish_ live here instead of people, and that _fish_ did
all this?" as she waved her hand at the complicated machinery about
them.

"Not fish exactly, no." Crane paused in thought. "Merely a people who
have adjusted themselves to their environment through conscious or
natural selection. We had a talk about this very thing in our first
trip, shortly after I met you. Remember? I commented on the fact that
there must be life throughout the Universe, much of it that we could not
understand; and you replied that there would be no reason to suppose
them awful because incomprehensible. That may be the case here."

"Well, I'm going to find out," declared Seaton, as he appeared with a
box full of coils, tubes, and other apparatus.

"How?" asked Dorothy, curiously.

"Fix me up a detector and follow up one of those beams. Find its
frequency and direction, first, you know, then pick it up outside and
follow it to where it's going. It'll go through anything, of course, but
I can trap off enough of it to follow it, even if it's tight enough to
choke itself," said Seaton.

"That's one thing I got from that brain record."

       *       *       *       *       *

He worked deftly and rapidly, and soon was rewarded by a flaring crimson
color in his detector when it was located in one certain position in
front of one of the meters. Noting the bearing on the great circles, he
then moved the _Skylark_ along that exact line, over the reflectors, and
out beyond the island, where he allowed the vessel to settle directly
downwards.

"Now folks, if I've done this just right, we'll get a red flash
directly."

As he spoke the detector again burst into crimson light, and he set the
bar into the line and applied a little power, keeping the light at its
reddest while the other three looked on in fascinated interest.

"This beam is on something that's moving, Mart--can't take my eyes off
it for a second or I'll lose it entirely. See where we're going, will
you?"

"We are about to strike the water," replied Crane quietly.

"The water!" exclaimed Margaret.

"Fair enough--why not?"

"Oh, that's right--I forgot that the _Skylark_ is as good a submarine as
she is an airship."

Crane pointed number six visiplate directly into the line of flight and
started into the dark water.

"Mow deep are we, Mart?" asked Seaton after a time.

"Only about a hundred feet, and we do not seem to be getting any
deeper."

"That's good. Afraid this beam might be going to a station on the other
side of the planet--through the ground. If so, we'd have had to go back
and trace another. We can follow it any distance under water, but not
through rock. Need a light?"

"Not unless we go deeper."

For two hours Seaton held the detector upon that tight beam of energy,
traveling at a hundred miles an hour, the highest speed he could use and
still hold the beam.

"I'd like to be up above watching us. I bet we're making the water boil
behind us," remarked Dorothy.

"Yeah, we're kicking up quite a wake, I guess. It sure takes power to
drive the old can through this wetness."

"Slow down!" commanded Crane. "I see a submarine ahead. I thought it
might be a whale at first, but it is a boat and it is what we are aiming
for. You are constantly swinging with it, keeping it exactly in the
line."

"O.K." Seaton reduced the power and swung the visiplate over in front of
him, whereupon the detector lamp went out. "It's a relief to follow
something I can see, instead of trying to guess which way that beam's
going to wiggle next. Lead on, Macduff--I'm right on your tail!"

The _Skylark_ fell in behind the submersible craft, close enough to keep
it plainly visible in the telescopic visiplate. Finally the stranger
stopped and rose to the surface between two rows of submerged pontoons
which, row upon row, extended in every direction as far as the telescope
could reach.

"Well, Dot, we're where we're going, wherever that is."

"What do you suppose it is? It looks like a floating isleport, like what
it told about in that wild-story magazine you read so much."

"Maybe--but if so they can't be fish," answered Seaton. "Let's go--I
want to look it over," and water flew in all directions as the _Skylark_
burst out of the ocean and leaped into the air far above what was in
truth a floating city.

Rectangular in shape, it appeared to be about six miles long and four
wide. It was roofed with solar generators like those covering the island
just visited, but the machines were not spaced quite so closely
together, and there were numerous open lagoons. The water around the
entire city was covered with wave-motors. From their great height the
visitors could see an occasional submarine moving slowly under the city,
and frequently small surface craft dashed across the lagoons. As they
watched, a seaplane with short, thick wings curved like those of a gull,
rose from one of the lagoons and shot away over the water.

"Quite a place," remarked Seaton as he swung a visiplate upon one of the
lagoons. "Submarines, speedboats, and fast seaplanes. Fish or not,
they're not so slow. I'm going to grab off one of those folks and see
how much they know. Wonder if they're peaceable or warlike?"

"They look peaceable, but you know the proverb," Crane cautioned his
impetuous friend.

"Yes, and I'm going to be timid like a mice," Seaton returned as the
_Skylark_ dropped rapidly toward a lagoon near the edge of the island.

"You ought to put that in a gag book, Dick," Dorothy chuckled. "You
forget all about being timid until an hour afterwards."

"Watch me, Red-top! If they even point a finger at us, I'm going to run
a million miles a minute."

No hostile demonstration was made as they dropped lower and lower,
however, and Seaton, with one hand upon the switch actuating the zone of
force, slowly lowered the vessel down past the reflectors and to the
surface of the water. Through the visiplate he saw the crowd of people
coming toward them--some swimming in the lagoon, some walking along
narrow runways. They seemed to be of all sizes, and unarmed.

"I believe they're perfectly peaceable, and just curious, Mart. I've
already got the repellers on close range--believe I'll cut them off
altogether."

"How about the ray-screens?"

"All three full out. They don't interfere with anything solid, though,
and won't hurt anything. They'll stop any ray attack and this arenak
hull will stop anything else we are apt to get there. Watch this board,
will you, and I'll see if I can't negotiate with them."

Seaton opened the door. As he did so, a number of the smaller beings
dived headlong into the water, and a submarine rose quietly to the
surface less than fifty feet away with a peculiar tubular weapon and a
huge ray-generator trained upon the _Skylark_. Seaton stood motionless,
his right hand raised in the universal sign of peace, his left holding
at his hip an automatic pistol charged with X-plosive shells--while
Crane, at the controls, had the Fenachrone super-generator in line, and
his hand lay upon the switch, whose closing would volatilize the
submarine and cut an incandescent path of destruction through the city
lengthwise.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a moment of inaction, a hatch opened, a man stepped out upon the
deck of the submarine, and the two tried to converse, but with no
success. Seaton then brought out the mechanical educator, held it up for
the other's inspection, and waved an invitation to come aboard.
Instantly the other dived, and came to the surface immediately below
Seaton, who assisted him into the _Skylark_. Tall and heavy as Seaton
was, the stranger was half a head taller and almost twice as heavy. His
thick skin was of the characteristic Osnomian green and his eyes were
the usual black, but he had no hair whatever. His shoulders, though
broad and enormously strong, were very sloping, and his powerful arms
were little more than half as long as would have been expected had they
belonged to a human being of his size. The hands and feet were very
large and very broad, and the fingers and toes were heavily webbed. His
high domed forehead appeared even higher because of the total lack of
hair, otherwise his features were regular and well-proportioned. He
carried himself easily and gracefully, and yet with the dignity of one
accustomed to command as he stepped into the control room and saluted
gravely the three other Earth-beings. He glanced quickly around the
room, and showed unmistakable pleasure as he saw the power-plant of the
cruiser of space. Languages were soon exchanged and the stranger spoke,
in a bass voice vastly deeper than Seaton's own.

"In the name of our city and planet--I may say in the name of our solar
system, for you are very evidently from one other than our green
system--I greet you. I would offer you refreshment, as is our custom,
but I fear that your chemistry is but ill adapted to our customary fare.
If there be aught in which we can be of assistance to you, our resources
are at your disposal--but before you leave us, I shall wish to ask from
you a great gift."

"Sir, we thank you. We are in search of knowledge concerning forces
which we cannot as yet control. From the power systems you employ, and
from what I have learned of the composition of your suns and planets, I
assume you have none of the metal of power, and it is a quantity of that
element that is your greatest need?"

"Yes. Power is our only lack. We generate all we can with the materials
and knowledge at our disposal, but we never have enough. Our development
is hindered, our birth-rate must be held down to a minimum, many new
cities which we need cannot be built and many new projects cannot be
started, all for lack of power. For one gram of that metal I see plated
upon that copper cylinder, of whose very existence no scientist upon
Dasor has had even an inkling, we would do almost anything. In fact, if
all else failed, I would be tempted to attack you, did I not know that
our utmost power could not penetrate even your outer screen, and that
you could volatilize the entire planet if you so desired."

"Great Cat!" In his surprise Seaton lapsed from the formal language he
had been employing. "Have you figured us all out already, from a
standing start?"

"We know electricity, chemistry, physics, and mathematics fairly well.
You see, our race is many millions of years older than is yours."

"You're the man I've been looking for, I guess," said Seaton. "We have
enough of this metal with us so that we can spare you some as well as
not. But before you get it, I'll introduce you. Folks, this is Sacner
Carfon, Chief of the Council of the planet Dasor. They saw us all the
time, and when we headed for this, the Sixth City, he came over from the
capital, or First City, in the flagship of his police fleet, to welcome
us or to fight us, as we pleased. Carfon, this is Martin Crane--or say,
