they were approaching. "It's as dead as the other one."

The airship settled down in a field back of some of the mound houses.

"Now for supper!" cried Jack. "I'm as hungry as----"

He stopped short, for, seeming to rise from the very ground, all about
the ship, there appeared a throng of men. And such men as they were! For
not one was less than ten feet tall, and some were nearly fifteen!

"The giants have us!" cried Bill, as he saw the horde of creatures
surrounding the ship.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                           HELD BY THE ENEMY


"Keep the doors closed!" cried the professor. "It is our only hope! I
will send the ship up again!"

But it was too late. Washington, who had obeyed the signal from the
conning tower to shut off the engines, had disconnected most of them so
they could not be started again save from the main room. At the same
time there came a yell of dismay from the colored man, who had slid back
the steel covering of the main side entrance to the _Mermaid_.

"I'm caught!" cried Washington.

As the professor and the boys hurried from the tower, they could hear a
struggle from where Washington was, and his voice calling:

"Let me go! Let me go!"

Reaching the engine room, which opened directly on the side entrance,
the professor saw a pair of enormous hands and arms dragging poor
Washington, feet first, out of the ship. Bill and Tom were crouched in
one corner, pale with fright.

"Wait until I get my gun!" cried Andy, as he ran for his rifle.

"Hold on!" called the professor in a loud voice. "It will be folly to
shoot them! We must try strategy!"

Washington's cries ceased as he was drawn entirely from the ship, the
giant hands disappearing at the same time.

"Follow me!" yelled Mr. Henderson, running out of the door.

Hardly knowing what they did, the boys went after him, and their hearts
almost stopped beating in fright as they saw the terrible things, which,
in the glare of the changing lights, were on every side of them.

For the men were very repulsive looking. They were attired in clothes,
very similar in cut to those worn by the travelers, and which seemed to
be made of some sort of cloth. But they were loose and baggy and only
added to the queer appearance of the giants. Veritable giants they were
too. Their faces seemed as large as kegs, and they were so clumsy in
shape that Mark, even, frightened as he was, exclaimed:

"They look like men made of putty!" At the same time he saw they bore a
resemblance to the creature he had observed on the hill top.

"What shall we do?" asked Andy of the professor. "They are really
carrying Washington away!"

Three of the giants were dragging the colored man along the ground,
while the other terrible beings stood about as if waiting to see the
outcome of the first sally.

"I will try to speak to them," Mr. Henderson said. "I know several
languages. They may understand one."

But before he could start on his parley a surprising thing happened.
There was a struggle in the little group about Washington. The colored
man seemed to be fighting, though the odds, it would appear, were too
great to enable him to accomplish anything. But, making a desperate
effort to escape, Washington quickly wrenched himself free from the
giants' hands and then, striking out with his fists, knocked the three
down, one after another.

"I never knew Washington was so strong!" exclaimed Jack.

"Nor I," put in Mark. "Why I should think the men could carry him in one
arm as if he was a baby."

The three giants rose slowly to their feet. They uttered strange cries,
and motioned with their hands toward the professor, the boys, and the
others in the crowd.

"Look out! They're goin' t' grab yo'!" cried Washington.

Three of the giants approached Mark, and a like number closed in on
Jack.

"Back to the ship!" cried the professor. "We must defend ourselves!"

But by this time the big men had grabbed the two boys. Then a strange
thing took place. Mark and Jack, though they felt that the giants must
overcome them in a test of strength, struggled with all their might
against being captured. They fought, as a cornered rat will fight,
though it knows the odds to be overwhelming. But in this case the
unexpected happened.

Both boys found they could easily break the holds of the giants, and
Mark, by a vigorous effort, pushed the three men away from him, one at a
time violently so that they fell in a heap, one on top of the other.

"Hurrah! We can fight 'em!" cried Mark. "Don't be afraid. They're like
mush! They're putty men!"

And, so it seemed, the giants were. Though big in size they were flabby
and had nothing like the muscle they should have had in proportion to
their build. They went down like meal sacks and were slow to rise.

[Illustration: THE BIG MEN HAD GATHERED IN A COMPACT MASS]

Jack, seeing how successful his comrade was, attacked the three giants
who were striving to make him a captive. He succeeded in disposing of
them, knocking one down so hard that the man was unable to rise until
his companions helped him.

"That's the way!" cried Washington. "They're soft as snow men!"

The vanquished giants set up a sort of roar, which was answered by their
fellows, and soon there was a terrible din.

"All get together!" called the professor. "They are evidently going to
make a rush for us. If we stand by one another we may fight them off,
though they outnumber us a hundred to one. Besides it will soon be dark,
and we may be able to escape!"

Washington, Jack and Mark retreated toward the ship, in the direction of
which the others had also made their way. The big men had gathered in a
compact mass and were advancing on the adventurers.

"What do you suppose makes them so soft?" asked Mark. "I believe I could
manage half a dozen."

"It must be the effect of the climate and conditions here," the
professor replied. "Probably they have to be big to stand the pressure
of the thick water, and the increased attraction of gravitation. Then
too, being without the weight of the atmosphere to which we are
accustomed, they have probably expanded. If they were to go up to earth,
they might shrink to our size."

"Do you think that possible?"

"Of course. Why do you ask?"

"Nothing in particular," replied Mark. But to himself, he added: "That
would explain it all."

It was getting dusk now. The travelers had reached their ship, and
rushed inside and tried to close the doors in the face of the advancing
horde. But, by this time the giants were so close that one or two of
them thrust their big feet in, and prevented this movement. At the same
time they set up a great howling.

"Quick!" cried the professor. "We must start the ship and get away!"

"I can't close the door!" yelled Washington, who had been the last to
enter.

"Never mind that! _Go_ up with it open! Drag them along if they won't
let go!" answered Mr. Henderson, as he ran toward the engine room.

There was a sudden rush among the giants, and a sound as if something
was being thrown over the top and ends of the ship. Mark turned the gas
machine on, while Jack worked the negative gravity apparatus. They
waited for the ship to rise.

"Why don't we go up?" asked the professor.

"'Cause they've caught us!" called out Washington.

"Caught us? How?"

"They've thrown ropes over the top and ends of the ship, and fastened
them to their big houses!"

Running to a side window the professor saw that the _Mermaid_ was
fastened down by a score of cables, each one six inches thick. They were
held captives by the enemy.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                            A FRIEND INDEED


Though the giants, man for man, were no match for the travelers,
collectively the horde proved too much. They had swarmed about the ship,
and, by passing the big cables over her, effectively held her down.

"Let me get out and I'll cut 'em!" cried Andy. "We must get away from
these savages!"

"No, no, don't go out!" exclaimed the professor. "They would eventually
kill you, though you might fight them off for a time. We must wait and
see what develops. They can have no object in harming us, as we have not
injured them."

"I'd rather fight 'em," insisted the old hunter.

But the professor had his way and Andy was forced to obey. The giants
had withdrawn their big feet from the side door and Washington had
closed it. But nothing else had been accomplished, and the ship could
not rise. The gas and negative gravity machines were stopped, as they
were only under a useless strain.

Suddenly, the colored lights which had been growing dimmer and dimmer,
with the approach of night, went out altogether. Almost as suddenly,
Mark, who was watching the giants from the conning tower, as they made
fast the loose ends of the cables, saw them make a dash for the mound
houses.

"They're afraid of the dark!" he cried. "Come on! We can go out now and
loosen the ropes!"

He hurried to tell the professor what he had noticed.

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "Perhaps we can escape now!"

They waited a few minutes, listening to the sound of many big feet
running away from the ship, and then, Bill cautiously opened the side
door. The others were behind him, waiting, with knives and hatchets in
their hands, to rush out and cut the restraining cables.

"All ready!" called Bill. "There doesn't seem to be a one in sight!"

He stepped out but no sooner had he set foot on the ground than there
came a thud, and Bill went down as if some one had knocked his feet from
under him.

"Go back! Go back!" he cried. "They hit me with something. I'm being
smothered!"

"Bring a light!" cried the professor, for the sally had been started in
the dark.

Jack brought the portable electric it having been repaired and flashed
it out of the door. In the gleam of it, Bill was seen lying prostrate,
half covered by an orange, about half as big as himself. The fruit was
as soft and mushy as some of the giants themselves, or Bill would not
have fared so easily.

Then, as the others stood watching, and while Bill arose and wiped some
of the juice from his face, there came a regular shower of the monstrous
oranges.

"Get inside quick! We'll be smothered under them!" Mr. Henderson cried.

Pausing only to rescue Bill, the adventurers retreated inside the ship,
and made fast the door. Outside they could hear the thud as the oranges
were thrown, some hitting the _Flying Mermaid_ and many dropping all
about her.

"I guess they are going to have things their own way," observed Bill, as
he gazed down on his clothes, which were covered with juice from the
fruit.

The night was one of anxiety. The travelers took turns standing guard,
but nothing more occurred. The giants remained in their houses, and the
heavy ropes still held the ship fast.

"We must hold a council of war," the professor decided as they gathered
at breakfast, which was far from a cheerful meal.

With the return of the colored lights the giants again made their
appearance. They came swarming from the mound houses, and a great crowd
they proved to be. Several thousand at least, Jack estimated, and when
he went up into the conning tower and took a survey he could see the
strange and terrible creatures pouring in from the surrounding country.

"I'm afraid there will be trouble," he said, as he came down and
reported what he had seen.

"We must hold a council of war," repeated the professor. "Has any one
anything to suggest?"

"Get a lot of powder and blow 'em up!" cried Andy.

"Arrange electric wires and shock 'em to death!" was Bill's plan.

"Can't we slip the ropes in some way and escape?" asked Jack. "I don't
believe we can successfully fight the giants. They are too many, even if
they are weak, individually."

"I think you're right there," Mr. Henderson said. "We must try some sort
of strategy, but what? That is the question."

For a few minutes no one spoke. They were all thinking deeply, for their
lives might hang in the balance.

"I think I have a plan," said Mark, at length. "Did we bring any diving
suits with us?"

"There may be one or two," the professor replied. "But what good will
they do?"

"Two of us could put them on," continued Mark, "and, as they afford good
protection from any missiles like fruit, we could crawl out on the deck
of the ship. From there, armed with hatchets or knives we could cut the
ropes. Then the ship could rise."

"That's a good plan!" cried the scientist. "We'll try it at once!"

Search revealed that two diving suits were among the stores of the
_Mermaid_. Jack and Mark wanted to be the ones to don them, but as the
suits were rather large, and as the professor thought it would take more
strength than the boys had to do the work, it was decided that Andy and
Washington should make the attempt to cut the ropes.

The hunter and colored man lost little time in getting into the modern
armor. In the meanwhile Jack, who had been posted as a lookout, reported
that there seemed to be some activity among the giants. They were
running here and there, and some seemed to be going off toward the
woods, that were not far away.

"Now work quickly," urged the professor. "We will be on the watch, and
as soon as the last rope is cut we will start the machinery and send the
ship up. We will not wait for you to come back inside, so hold fast as
best you can when the _Mermaid_ rises."

"We will," answered Andy, just before the big copper helmet was fastened
on his head, and Washington nodded to show he understood.

The two who were to attempt the rescue of their comrades were soon on
deck. In the conning tower Jack and the professor kept anxious watch,
while Mark, Bill and Tom were at the various machines, ready, at the
signal, to start the engines.

The giants had now become so interested in whatever plan they had afoot,
that they paid little attention to the ship. Consequently Washington and
Andy, crawling along the deck in their diving suits, did not, at first
attract any attention.

In fact they had cut several of the big ropes, and it began to look as
if the plan would succeed, particularly as they were partly hidden from
view by the upper gas holder. They were working with feverish haste,
sawing away at the big cables with keen knives.

