bed to her apartment, and placed it in the bunk. It was not a bad fit.

"Now, Flora, I must leave you, and go for the rest of the things. You
can lie down in your bed, and I will cover you with blankets."

"I'm not cold. Shall you be gone long?" she asked.

"No."

"This is a very dismal place."

"You shall be on the broad river in the morning."

She lay down, and I left her to meet Sim at the landing-place. He had
arrived before me, and we loaded all the rest of the goods on the raft.

"What shall I do with the wheelbarrow?" asked Sim.

"Take it up into the open field, where they can see it. It might lie in
the swamp for a year before any one found it; and I don't mean to take a
single thing from Fishley. I carried back the saw I borrowed, and bought
a new one. I don't owe him anything now," I replied.

"I reckon he'll wonder where you and Miss Flora are, when he gets back,"
said Sim, with one of his broad grins.

"Let him wonder. I shall not charge him anything for wondering."

"I s'pose not," chuckled Sim, as he went off with the wheelbarrow.

While he was gone, I amused myself in picking up a quantity of dry wood
on the high ground for the stove, which I placed upon the raft. As soon
as Sim returned, we pushed off, and made our last trip through the
swamp. When we arrived at the raft, I found Flora had got up, and was
walking about the platform. She was so nervous she could not lie in bed.
I placed her chair in the large room, closed the shutters, and made a
fire in the stove. In a few minutes I had the pleasure of seeing her
seated before the fire, seemingly comfortable and happy.

Sim and I transferred the articles, including Flora's wagon, from the
small raft to the house on the large one. By this time it was quite
dark, and I lighted my lantern. My first work was in Flora's room, where
I made up the bed, and spread a rug on the floor. I drove nails into the
walls to hang her clothes upon, and arranged her boxes on some shelves I
had put up. The place looked very cosy to me, and Flora declared that it
was ever so much nicer than she had expected. I had taken great pains
with this part of the building, and carefully stopped every crack where
the wind could blow through upon her, and the roof had already been
tested in a heavy shower.

By nine o'clock, as nearly as I could guess the time, I had finished my
sister's room; but, though it was past her bedtime, she was not willing
to retire. I had hoped she would take to her bed at the usual hour, and
relieve me of all anxiety about her, for I was afraid she would catch
cold and be sick. But the excitement would not permit her to do so. The
stove warmed both of the rooms, and we were in more danger from the want
of ventilation than from the night air. She sat in her chair in her
room, with Sim and me before her, talking over the matter.

"Why don't you start, Buckland?" she asked, when I had detailed more
fully than before my plans.

"It is rather too early yet. You know the road to Riverport runs along
the bank of the creek, and I don't wish anybody in these parts to see
us," I replied.

"The sooner we start, the farther we shall get before morning," added
Sim, who was as impatient as Flora.

"We shall be far enough off in the morning. How fast do you suppose the
raft will go, Sim?"

"I dunno."

"It will go about as fast as the current without any help; and that is
three or four miles an hour. We shall be at least twenty miles from here
at five o'clock in the morning."

"But won't they miss us at the house, Buckland?" asked Flora.

"Certainly they will. Very likely they have missed us by this time."

"Suppose they should find us?"

"We should be no worse off than before. But there is not the remotest
chance that they will find us. Do you think they would look in the swamp
for you, Flora?"

She was satisfied, and we continued to discuss the future, until I
judged that it was late enough to commence the voyage. I wished to be
sure that Captain Fishley and his wife had returned from Riverport. The
night was quite dark, and I had no fear that the raft would be seen; but
even if it were, it was not a very uncommon thing for such a craft to go
down the river.

I had made a crooked steering oar, and built a platform to stand upon,
so that the helmsman could see over the house. I mounted this platform,
and took hold of the end of the oar.

"Now cast off the forward fast, Sim!" I called to my deck hand.

"All clear," replied Sim, when he had drawn in the line, which had been
passed round a tree so that it could be hauled in without going on
shore.

"Now let go the other!"

Sim untied one of the ends of the rope, and was pulling it in, when I
felt a consciousness that something was wrong, though I could not tell
what. It flashed across my mind that I was making a blunder.

"Hold on, Sim!" I shouted, jumping down from the platform, and trying to
catch the rope; but the end had gone ashore.

"What's the matter, Buck?" called Sim, apparently alarmed by my sudden
movements.

"I have forgotten my money!" I exclaimed, as I leaped on the small raft
which lay alongside.

I sprang for the tree to which the great raft was fastened, in order to
secure the rope; but it was too late. The current started the raft, and
dragged the rope off before I could catch hold of it. In the darkness
and the night the craft went off without me.

"Don't leave me, Buck!" called Sim.

"Take the steering oar, and run her up to the shore!" I replied.

I had the small raft, and I could follow at pleasure, and join my
companions; but if I pushed off, I could not return, for the branch of
the creek was too deep for me to use the pole. I could not think of
going without my money.

I saw Sim jump upon the platform, and work the steering oar vigorously,
but with more power than skill. He succeeded in running her up to the
bank.

"Now hold on to her!" I shouted. "I shall not be gone long!"

I pushed the raft to the tree where I had concealed the money; and,
though I had some difficulty in finding it, I succeeded; still, three
times as many minutes were wasted in the operation as I supposed would
be necessary. With the roll of bills in my pocket-book, I pushed off
again, and soon reached the stream. Launching out into the current, the
raft was borne with its flow towards the creek.

I could not see the light on the raft where I had left it, only a few
rods below the starting-point. My frail bark was not large enough to
float easily on the rapid stream, and in spite of my best efforts, it
would whirl round, for the pole in my hand had not blade enough to
enable me to steer with it. In a few moments I reached the place where I
had last seen the light through the window of Flora's room; but the raft
was not there. It was not to be seen before me; but the stream made a
bend a short distance below me.

The raft had probably broken loose, and Sim had been unable to stop it;
but it was not like my fellow-voyager to let it go without yelling at
the top of his lungs, and he had more voice than wits. Though all my
hopes were in the ark I had built, and Flora, whom I loved more than
life, was a passenger upon it, I was not alarmed. Sim would be able to
run it up to the shore, and probably had done so beyond the bend.

I always had a habit of looking on the bright side of things, and was
disposed never to despair; at least not till I had seen what was beyond
the next bend in the stream of life. I was quite confident I should find
the ark of my safety in a few moments more, and I did not even attempt
to hurry the crazy float on which I travelled. I reached the bend, and
strained my eyes to peer through the gloom, which hung deep and heavy
over the swamp. The stream was straight for half a mile ahead of me, but
no light gladdened my eyes.

I was startled, and even terrified, by the situation.




CHAPTER XVII.

NIGHT ON THE RIVER.


Sim Gwynn had a voice like a bull, and I wondered that he had not used
it, as he was in the habit of doing in all cases of peril or emergency.
The worst fear I had was, that he had fallen overboard; for it seemed to
me that nothing else could have prevented him from halloing. But I had
strong hopes that the next bend of the stream would remove my anxiety.

With the board I had torn from my raft I paddled with all my might; but
it seemed like an hour to me, in my deep solicitude for the fate of my
companions, before I reached the bend. At this point the stream made a
sharp turn, and I had the intense satisfaction of seeing the light on
the raft, on the right bank of the stream. The current set my craft
directly towards it, and I had only to use my paddle in keeping it from
whirling round.

A heavy load of anxiety was removed from my mind; but, as I approached
the light, I wondered that Sim was not on the lookout for me. I ran
alongside, and leaped upon the platform; but my clumsy assistant did not
present himself to give me a welcome. A cold chill crept through my
veins again, as I thought that he might have tumbled into the water, and
been swept away by the current. The door of the house was closed, as I
had left it, in order to keep the night air from Flora. Dreading lest
some mishap had overtaken her also, I pushed the door open and rushed
in.

My fears had been vain and foolish. Flora sat in her arm-chair at the
stove, just as I had so often seen her in the kitchen of Captain
Fishley, as calm and composed as though she had been on the dry land.
Opposite her Sim Gwynn sat on the floor, fat and happy, and wholly
undisturbed.

"What are you about, Sim?" I demanded, sharply; for I was vexed to see
him taking it so coolly, while I had almost worried the life out of me.

"About nothin'; been waiting for you," replied my deck hand, with his
customary grin.

"What did you let the raft go adrift for?"

"I didn't let it go adrift."

"Why didn't you keep her up to the shore?"

"She kept herself there."

"No, she didn't."

"Well, she's here--isn't she?"

"She is here, just where she ought not to be," I added, puzzled by the
apparent stupidity of Sim. "You ought to stay outside when I leave you
to take care of her."

"Miss Flora called me in to have me tell her what the matter was, and
she kept talking to me ever since," pleaded Sim.

"Don't scold him, Buckland. It was my fault; but I did not know anything
was wrong," interposed Flora.

"I'm not scolding him; but he should look out for the raft when I leave
her in his care."

"Well, I did look out for it. It didn't run away from me, and here it
is."

"If it didn't run away from you, it ran away with you."

"No, it didn't; here it is just as you left it."

"But the raft has come down stream more than half a mile since I left
it."

"Hookie! What's that?" asked Sim, opening his eyes.

"Didn't you know the raft had broken loose, and travelled down stream
half a mile or more?" I asked, filled with astonishment.

"I didn't know anything at all about it," protested Sim, vigorously.

"I'm sure I did not know that she had moved an inch," added Flora.

"That's strange," I continued, laughing. "When I came out of the swamp,
I couldn't find the raft, and I was afraid you would get to New Orleans
before I could catch you. Then I feared Sim had fallen overboard; and I
suffered a great deal in a very short time."

"I heven't been out of the house since you went away, and I heven't the
leastest idee that we were goin' on," said Sim. "I'll stay outside next
time."

"You must, Sim; for we shall never know where we are if you don't keep
your eyes wide open."

"What was it about the money, Buckland? Sim said you had forgotten your
money; but he did not know what you meant by it," asked Flora.

I explained what I meant, and that I had concealed my money in the swamp
to prevent the constable or the captain from finding it upon me.

"I am so sorry I called Sim!" pleaded poor Flora.

"It's no matter now. Perhaps it will be a good lesson for him and me to
learn at the start. Now we will push off and try again. It is lucky I
thought of the money when I did, for we could do nothing without that.
Come, Sim, bear a hand!"

"Buckland, can't I step out and see the raft go?" asked Flora. "I don't
like to stay in here."

"I'm afraid you will catch cold."

"No; I will wrap myself up in a blanket. I want to see how you manage
the raft."

I could not refuse her; and, wrapping her up in a blanket, I carried her
chair out to the side of the raised platform, and seated her in it. Sim
and I took the boards from the small raft, which had been so useful to
us in the swamp, and let the logs go adrift.

"Now take your pole, Sim, and push her off."

"She won't come off," replied the deck hand, after he had used all his
power in the attempt to shove her off.

I went forward, and found the end of the raft had run upon the root of a
tree, which held it fast. I was very grateful for the service this root
had rendered me, for the raft might have gone down to Riverport before
Sim discovered that anything was the matter. Fixing the poles
underneath, we pried the raft off, and the current started it on its
course again. I mounted the steering platform, and grasped the long oar.
The voyage had actually commenced.

My position was a novel one, for I had yet to learn even the art of
managing a raft. I found she had the same tendency to whirl around in
the current which had characterized her smaller counterpart; but the oar
was long enough to give the steersman a tremendous purchase, and the
erratic disposition of the craft could be overcome when taken in
season. I had to profit by experience, for before we reached the creek
she had whirled round three times, in spite of all my efforts to prevent
it. Before the raft was half way to Riverport, I had acquired the needed
skill, and she indulged in no more gyrations while I had the helm.

As we approached the steeples of Riverport, I heard the clock strike
one. Flora still sat in her chair by the platform, wondering how I could
see to steer the raft, and asked me a thousand questions. I tried to
have her go to bed, but she was not willing to do so till we had reached
the Wisconsin River, which she desired to see.

We were all excited, and did not feel sleepy. Sim took a luncheon, and
declared he never felt better in his life. It was the best fun he had
ever known, and he enjoyed every moment of it. Flora said she liked it
very much, but thought it would be pleasanter in the daytime, when the
ever-changing scene could be viewed in the sunshine.

"I'm sure I shall be happy on the raft for a month," she added. "There
will be something new to be seen every day."

"And we shall pass ever so many towns and cities, and the river will be
full of steamers and flat-boats," I continued, as the raft glided round
the bend into the great river. "Now we are in the Wisconsin, Flora; and
this is Riverport on the right of us."

"We can't see much of it."

"No; but you will find enough in the daytime to amuse you. I hope you
will sleep all night after this."

"I will go to bed now, Buckland," said she. "Good night."

"Good night, Flora."

She went into the house, and I heard nothing more from her till morning.
I know that she prayed for me that night, as she always did; and I
looked up to the shining stars, and commended her to the good Father.
More than ever before did I love her then, when her life and happiness
were more directly the care and study of my existence.

We were now on the broad river--broad compared with the creek, but small
in contrast with the mighty Mississippi, which we were yet to see. Sim
was forward, watching the dark outlines of the shores. Everything was
quiet without, though my bosom still bounded with excitement. I could
not forget that I was navigating the clumsy craft in which I had
embarked my fortunes, and which held the being most dear to me on earth.
I felt that a heavy responsibility rested upon me. Not a sound was to be
heard except the gentle ripple of the waters against the sides of the
raft; and the season was favorable to reflection.

But if the season was, Sim was not. He began to be weary of the solemn
silence and the deep gloom of the hour, and came aft to talk with me. I
saw that it would be necessary to keep him busy, in order to save him
from his own reflections, and the dulness which was sure to follow.
There was work enough on the raft to keep us both employed, and he was
in no danger of dying from inaction.

"Are you going to keep her a-going all night, Buck?" asked he, in a tone
so loud that it seemed to reverberate over the broad prairies which
bounded the river.

"Hush, Sim! Don't talk so loud," I replied, in a whisper. "You will keep
Flora awake if you do."

"Hookie! I didn't think of her," said he, slapping his great fist over
his mouth, in token of his intention to do better.

"We shall keep moving, night and day, Sim."

"Are you always going to set up all night?" he whispered.

"No; you must do it half the time. You must learn to steer, and you may
as well begin now."

"But I don't know how."

