this after-noon, and displayed a coolness and courage very unusual in
a boy of his age. But for him, I should be eight hundred dollars
poorer."

"Oh, well, you can give him fifty cents, and he will be well paid for
his services, as you call them."

"Fifty cents!" repeated her husband.

"Well, a dollar, if you like."

"I have given him a hundred dollars."

"A hundred dollars!" almost screamed Mrs. Preston, who was a very mean
woman. "Are you insane?"

"Not that I am aware of, my dear."

"It is perfectly preposterous to give such a sum to such a boy."

"I ought to say that I gave it to him for his mother. He was not
willing to accept it for himself."

"That's a likely story," said Mrs. Preston, incredulously. "He only
wants to make a favorable impression upon you--perhaps to get more out
of you."

"You misjudge him, my dear."

"I know he is an artful, intriguing young rascal. You give him a
hundred dollars, yet you refused to give Godfrey ten dollars last
week."

"For a very good reason. He has a liberal allowance, and must keep
within it. He did not need the money he asked for."

"Yet you lavish a hundred dollars on this boy."

"I felt justified in doing so. Which was better, to give him that sum,
or to lose eight hundred?"

"I don't like the boy, and I never shall. I suppose he will be
strutting around, boasting of his great achievement. If he had a gun
it was nothing to do."

"I suspect Godfrey would hardly have ventured upon it," said the
colonel, smiling.

"Oh, of course, Godfrey is vastly inferior to the Irish boy!" remarked
Mrs. Preston, ironically. "You admire the family so much that I
suppose if I were taken away, you would marry his mother and establish
her in my place."

"If you have any such apprehensions, my dear, your best course is to
outlive her. That will effectually prevent my marrying her, and I
pledge you my word that, while you are alive, I shall not think of
eloping with her."

"It is very well to jest about it," said Mrs. Preston, tossing her
head.

"I am precisely of your opinion, my dear. As you observe, that is
precisely what I am doing."

So the interview terminated. It was very provoking to Mrs. Preston
that her husband should have given away a hundred dollars to Andy
Burke's mother, but the thing was done, and could not be undone.
However, she wrote an account of the affair to Godfrey, who, she knew,
would sympathize fully with her view of the case. I give some extracts
from her letter:

"Your father seems perfectly infatuated with that low Irish boy. Of
course, I allude to Andy Burke. He has gone so far as to give him a
hundred dollars. Yesterday, in riding home from Melville, with eight
hundred dollars in his pocketbook, he says he was stopped by a
highwayman, who demanded his money or his life. Very singularly, Andy
came up just in the nick of time with a gun, and made a great show of
interfering, and finally drove the man away, as your father reports.
He is full of praise of Andy, and, as I said, gave him a hundred
dollars, when two or three would have been quite enough, even had the
rescue been real. But of this I have my doubts. It is very strange
that the boy should have been on the spot just at the right time,
still more strange that a full-grown man should have been frightened
away by a boy of fifteen. In fact, I think it is what they call a
'put-up job.' I think the robber and Andy were confederates, and that
the whole thing was cut and dried, that the man should make the
attack, and Andy should appear and frighten him away, for the sake of
a reward which I dare say the two have shared together. This is what I
think about the matter. I haven't said so to your father, because he
is so infatuated with the Irish boy that it would only make him angry,
but I have no doubt that you will agree with me. [It may be said here
that Godfrey eagerly adopted his mother's view, and was equally
provoked at his father's liberality to his young enemy.] Your father
says he won't give you the ten dollars you asked for. He can lavish a
hundred dollars on Andy, but he has no money to give his own son. But
sooner or later that boy will be come up with--sooner or later he will
show himself in his true colors, and your father will be obliged to
confess that he has been deceived. It puts me out of patience when I
think of him.

"We shall expect you home on Friday afternoon of next week, as usual."

Andy was quite unconscious of the large space which he occupied in the
thoughts of Mrs. Preston and Godfrey, and of the extent to which he
troubled them. He went on, trying to do his duty, and succeeding fully
in satisfying the Misses Grant, who had come to feel a strong interest
in his welfare.

Three weeks later, Sophia Grant, who had been to the village store on
an errand, returned home, looking greatly alarmed.

"What is the matter, Sophia?" asked her sister. "You look as if you
had seen a ghost."

"Just so, Priscilla," she said; "no, I don't mean that, but we may all
be ghosts in a short time."

"What do you mean?"

"Smallpox is in town!"

"Who's got it?"

"Colonel Preston; and his wife won't stay in the house. She is packing
up to go off, and I expect the poor man'll die all by himself, unless
somebody goes and takes care of him, and then it'll spread, and we'll
all die of it."

This was certainly startling intelligence. Andy pitied the colonel,
who had always treated him well. It occurred to him that his mother
had passed through an attack of smallpox in her youth, and could take
care of the colonel without danger. He resolved to consult her about
it at once.




CHAPTER XXI
A MODEL WIFE


Colonel Preston, returning from a trip to Boston, in which, probably,
he had been unconsciously exposed to the terrible disease referred to,
was taken sick, and his wife, wholly unsuspicious of her husband's
malady, sent for the doctor.

The latter examined his patient and, on leaving the sick-chamber,
beckoned Mrs. Preston to follow him.

"What is the matter with him, doctor?" asked Mrs. Preston. The
physician looked grave.

"I regret to say, Mrs. Preston, that he has the smallpox."

"The smallpox!" almost shrieked Mrs. Preston. "Oh! what will become of
me?"

Dr. Townley was rather disgusted to find her first thought was about
herself, not about her stricken husband.

"It's catching, isn't it, doctor?" she asked, in great agitation.

"I am sorry to say that it is, madam."

"Do you think I will take it?"

"I cannot take it upon myself to say."

"And I was in the same room with him," wailed Mrs. Preston, "and never
knew the awful danger! Oh, I wouldn't have the smallpox for this
world! If I didn't die, I should be all marked up for life."

"You haven't much beauty to spoil," thought the doctor; but this
thought he prudently kept to himself.

"I must leave the house at once. I will go to my brother's house till
he has recovered," said Mrs. Preston, in agitation.

"What!" exclaimed the doctor, in surprise, "and leave your husband
alone!"

"I can't take care of him--you must see that I can't," said Mrs.
Preston, fretfully. "I can't expose my life without doing him any
good."

"I expose myself every time I visit him," said the doctor. "I never
had the smallpox. Have you been vaccinated?"

"Yes, I believe so--I'm sure I don't know. But people sometimes take
the smallpox even after they have been vaccinated. I should be so
frightened that I could do no good."

"Then," said the doctor, gravely, "you have decided to leave your
husband?"

"Yes, doctor, I must. It is my duty--to my boy," answered Mrs.
Preston, catching at this excuse with eagerness. "I must live for him,
you know. Of course, if I could do any good, it would be different.
But what would Godfrey do if both his father and mother should die?"

She looked up into his face, hoping that he would express approval of
her intentions; but the doctor was too honest for this. In truth, he
was disgusted with the woman's selfishness, and would like to have
said so; but this politeness forbade. At any rate, he was not going to
be trapped into any approval of her selfish and cowardly
determination.

"What do you wish to be done, Mrs. Preston?" he asked. "Of course,
your husband must be taken care of."

"Hire a nurse, doctor. A nurse will do much more good than I could.
She will know just what to do. Most of them have had the smallpox. It
is really much better for my husband that it should be so. Of course,
you can pay high wages--anything she asks," added Mrs. Preston, whose
great fear made her, for once in her life, liberal.

"I suppose that will be the best thing to do. You wish me, then, to
engage a nurse?"

"Yes, doctor, if you will be so kind."

"When do you go away?"

"At once. I shall pack up my clothes immediately. On the whole, I
think I will go to the town where Godfrey is at school, and board
there for the present. I must see him, and prevent him from coming
home."

"You will go into your husband's chamber and bid him good-by?"

"No; I cannot think of it. It would only be useless exposure."

"What will he think?"

"Explain it to him, doctor. Tell him that I hope he will get well very
soon, and that I feel it my duty to go away now on Godfrey's account.
I am sure he will see that it is my duty."

"I wonder what excuse she would have if she had no son for a pretext?"
thought the doctor.

"Well," he said, "I will do as you request."

"See that he has the best of care. Get him two nurses, if you think
best. Don't spare expense."

"What extraordinary liberality in Mrs. Preston," thought the
physician.

He went back into the chamber of his patient.

"Doctor," said Colonel Preston, "you didn't tell me what was the
matter with me. Am I seriously sick?"

"I am sorry to say that you are."

"Dangerously?"

"Not necessarily. You have the smallpox."

"Have I?" said the patient, thoughtfully.

"It's an awkward thing to tell him that his wife is going to leave
him," the doctor said to himself. "However, it must be done."

"Have you told my wife, doctor?"

"I just told her."

"What does she say?"

"She is very much startled, and (now for it), thinks, under the
circumstances, she ought not to run the risk of taking care of you on
account of Godfrey."

"Perhaps she is right," said Colonel Preston, slowly.

He was not surprised to hear it, but it gave him a pang, nevertheless.

"She wants me to engage a nurse for you."

"Yes, that will be necessary."

There was a pause.

"When is she going?" he asked, a little later.

"As soon as possible. She is going to board near the school where
Godfrey is placed."

"Shall I see her?"

"She thinks it best not to risk coming into the chamber, lest she
should carry the infection to Godfrey."

"I suppose that is only prudent," returned the sick man, but in his
heart he wished that his wife had shown less prudence, and a little
more feeling for him.

"Have you thought of any nurse?" he asked.

"I have thought of the widow Burke."

"She might not dare to come."

"She has had the disease. I know this from a few slight marks still
left on her face. Of course, you would be willing to pay a liberal
price?"

"Any price," said Colonel Preston, energetically. "It is a service
which, I assure you, I shall not soon forget."

"I must see her at once, for your wife will leave directly."

"Pray, do so," said Colonel Preston. "Tell my wife," he said, after a
pause, "that I hope soon to have recovered, so that it may be safe for
her to come back."

There was a subdued bitterness in his voice, which the doctor
detected, and did not wonder at. He gave the message, as requested.

"I am sure I hope so, Dr. Townley," said Mrs. Preston. "I shall be
tortured with anxiety. I hope you will write me daily how my poor
husband is getting along?"

"Perhaps the paper might carry the infection," said the doctor,
testing the real extent of her solicitude.

"I didn't think of that," answered Mrs. Preston, hastily. "On the
whole, you needn't write, then. It might communicate the disease to
Godfrey."

"She finds Godfrey very useful," the doctor thought.

"I will bear my anxiety as I can," she continued. "Have you thought of
anyone for a nurse?"

"I have thought of Mrs. Burke."

"She is poor, and will come if you offer her a good price. Try to get
her."

"I think she will come. I must go at once, for your husband needs
immediate attention."

"Get her to come at once, Dr. Townley! Oh, do! My husband may want
something, and I can't go into the room. My duty to my dear, only son
will not permit me. I hope Mr. Preston understands my motives in going
away?"

"I presume he does," said the doctor, rather equivocally.

"Tell him how great a sacrifice it is for me to leave his bedside. It
is a terrible trial for me, but my duty to my son makes it
imperative."

The doctor bowed.

He drove at once to the humble dwelling of Mrs. Burke.

His errand was briefly explained.

"Can you come?" he asked. "I am authorized to offer you ten dollars a
week for the time you spend there."

"I would come in a minute, doctor, but what shall I do with Mary?"

"She shall stay at my house. I will gladly take charge of her."

"You are very kind, doctor. I wouldn't want to expose her, but I don't
mind myself. I don't think I am in danger, for I've had the smallpox
already."

"Can you be ready in five minutes? Tell Mary to pack up her things,
and go to my house at once. We'll take good care of her."

In less than an hour Mrs. Burke was installed at the bedside of the
sick man as his nurse. As she entered the house, Mrs. Preston left it,
bound for the railway depot.

"I'm so glad you're here," she said, greeting the widow Burke with
unwonted cordiality. "I am sure you will take the best care of my
husband. I have told the doctor to pay you whatever you ask."

"I'll do my best, Mrs. Preston, but not for the money," answered Mrs.
Burke. "Your husband shall get well, if good care can cure him."

"I've no doubt of it; but the carriage is here, and I must go. Tell my
husband how sorry I am to leave him."

So Mrs. Preston went away, leaving a stranger to fulfill her own
duties at the bedside of her husband.

Thus it happened that, when Andy came home, he found his mother
already gone, and his sister on the point of starting for the doctor's
house. His idea had already been carried out.




CHAPTER XXII
COLONEL PRESTON'S RECOVERY


Four weeks afterward, we will introduce the reader into the bedchamber
of Colonel Preston. His sickness has been severe. At times recovery
was doubtful, but Mrs. Burke has proved a careful and devoted nurse,
intelligent and faithful enough to carry out the directions of the
physician.

"How do you feel this morning, Colonel Preston?" asked the doctor, who
had just entered the chamber.

"Better, doctor. I feel quite an appetite."

"You are looking better--decidedly better. The disease has spent its
force, and retreated from the field."

"It is to you that the credit belongs, Dr. Townley."

"Only in part. The greater share belongs to your faithful nurse, Mrs.
Burke."
