
Jack nodded. "I know. That's what I mean. They were hollering their
heads off when we came back aboard. Why so quiet now?"

He crossed over to the viewscreen scanning the field below, and flipped
on the switch. For a moment he just stared. Then he said: "Come here a
minute. I don't like the looks of this at all."

Dal and Tiger crowded up to the screen. "What's the matter?" Tiger said.
"I don't see ... _wait a minute!_"

"Yes, you'd better look again," Jack said. "What do you think, Dal?"

"We'd better get down there fast," Dal said, "and see what's going on.
It looks to me like we've got a tiger by the tail...."

       *       *       *       *       *

They climbed down the ladder once again, with the antibody flasks and
sterile syringes strapped to their backs. But this time the greeting was
different from before.

The Bruckian spokesman and the others who had not yet been inoculated
drew back from them in terror as they stepped to the ground. Before, the
people on the field had crowded in eagerly around the ship; now they
were standing in silent groups staring at the doctors fearfully and
muttering among themselves.

But the doctors could see only the inoculated people in the two
roped-off areas. Off to the right among the infected Bruckians who had
received the antibody there were no new dead--but there was no change
for the better, either. The sick creatures drifted about aimlessly,
milling like animals in a cage, their faces blank, their jaws slack,
hands wandering foolishly. Not one of them had begun reacting normally,
not one showed any sign of recognition or recovery.

But the real horror was on the other side of the field. Here were the
healthy ones, the uninfected ones who had received preventative
inoculations. A few hours before they had been left standing in quiet,
happy groups, talking among themselves, laughing and joking....

But now they weren't talking any more. They stared across at the doctors
with slack faces and dazed eyes, their feet shuffling aimlessly in the
dust. All were alive, but only half-alive. The intelligence and
alertness were gone from their faces; they were like the empty shells of
the creatures they had been a few hours before, indistinguishable from
the infected creatures in the other compound.

Jack turned to the Bruckian spokesman in alarm. "What's happened here?"
he asked. "What's become of the ones we inoculated? Where have you taken
them?"

The spokesman shrank back as though afraid Jack might reach out to touch
him. "Taken them!" he cried. "We have moved none of them! Those are the
ones you poisoned with your needles. What have you done to make them
like this?"

"It--it must be some sort of temporary reaction to the injection," Jack
faltered. "There was nothing that we used that could possibly have given
them the disease, we only used a substance to help them fight it off."

The Bruckian was shaking his fist angrily. "It's no reaction, it is the
plague itself! What kind of evil are you doing? You came here to help
us, and instead you bring us more misery. Do we not have enough of that
to please you?"

Swiftly the doctors began examining the patients in both enclosures, and
on each side they found the same picture. One by one they checked the
ones that had previously been untouched by the plague, and found only
the sagging jaws and idiot stares.

"There's no sense examining every one," Tiger said finally. "They're all
the same, every one."

"But this is impossible," Jack said, glancing apprehensively at the
growing mob of angry Bruckians outside the stockades. "What could have
happened? What have we done?"

"I don't know," Tiger said. "But whatever we've done has turned into a
boomerang. We knew that the antibody might not work, and the disease
might just go right ahead, but we didn't anticipate anything like this."

"Maybe some foreign protein got into the batch," Dal said.

Tiger shook his head. "It wouldn't behave like _this_. And we were
careful getting it ready. All we've done was inject an antibody against
a specific virus. All it could have done was to kill the virus, but
these people act as though they're infected now."

"But they're not dying," Dal said. "And the sick ones we injected
stopped dying, too."

"So what do we do now?" Jack said.

"Get one of these that changed like this aboard ship and go over him
with a fine-toothed comb. We've got to find out what's happened."

He led one of the stricken Bruckians by the hand like a mindless dummy
across the field toward the little group where the spokesman and his
party stood. The crowd on the field were moving in closer; an angry cry
went up when Dal touched the sick creature.

"You'll have to keep this crowd under control," Dal said to the
spokesman. "We're going to take this one aboard the ship and examine him
to see what this reaction could be, but this mob is beginning to sound
dangerous."

"They're afraid," the spokesman said. "They want to know what you've
done to them, what this new curse is that you bring in your syringes."

"It's not a curse, but something has gone wrong. We need to learn what,
in order to deal with it."

"The people are afraid and angry," the spokesman said. "I don't know how
long I can control them."

And indeed, the attitude of the crowd around the ship was very strange.
They were not just fearful; they were terrified. As the doctors walked
back to the ship leading the stricken Bruckian behind them, the people
shrank back with dreadful cries, holding up their hands as if to ward
off some monstrous evil. Before, in the worst throes of the plague,
there had been no sign of this kind of reaction. The people had seemed
apathetic and miserable, resigned hopelessly to their fate, but now they
were reacting in abject terror. It almost seemed that they were more
afraid of these walking shells of their former selves than they were of
the disease itself.

But as the doctors started up the ladder toward the entrance lock the
crowd surged in toward them with fists raised in anger. "We'd better get
help, and fast," Jack said as he slammed the entrance lock closed behind
them. "I don't like the looks of this a bit. Dal, we'd better see what
we can learn from this poor creature here."

As Tiger headed for the earphones, Dal and Jack went to work once again,
checking the blood and other body fluids from the stricken Bruckian. But
now, incredibly, the results of their tests were quite different from
those they had obtained before. The blood sugar and protein
determinations fell into the pattern they had originally expected for a
creature of this type. Even more surprising, the level of the antibody
against the plague virus was high--far higher than it could have been
from the tiny amount that was injected into the creature.

"They must have been making it themselves," Dal said, "and our
inoculation was just the straw that broke the camel's back. All of those
people must have been on the brink of symptoms of the infection, and
all we did was add to the natural defenses they were already making."

"Then why did the symptoms appear?" Jack said. "If that's true, we
should have been _helping_ them, and look at them now!"

Tiger appeared at the door, scowling. "We've got real trouble, now," he
said. "I can't get through to a hospital ship. In fact, I can't get a
message out at all. These people are jamming our radios."

"But why?" Dal said.

"I don't know, but take a look outside there."

Through the viewscreen it seemed as though the whole field around the
ship had filled up with the crowd. The first reaction of terror now
seemed to have given way to blind fury; the people were shouting
angrily, waving their clenched fists at the ship as the spokesman tried
to hold them back.

Then there was a resounding crash from somewhere below, and the ship
lurched, throwing the doctors to the floor. They staggered to their feet
as another blow jolted the ship, and another.

"Let's get a screen up," Tiger shouted. "Jack, get the engines going.
They're trying to board us, and I don't think it'll be much fun if they
ever break in."

In the control room they threw the switches that activated a powerful
protective energy screen around the ship. It was a device that was
carried by all GPP Ships as a means of protection against physical
attack. When activated, an energy screen was virtually impregnable, but
it could only be used briefly; the power it required placed an enormous
drain on a ship's energy resources, and a year's nuclear fuel could be
consumed in a few hours.

Now the screen served its purpose. The ship steadied, still vibrating
from the last assault, and the noise from below ceased abruptly. But
when Jack threw the switches to start the engines, nothing happened at
all.

"Look at that!" he cried, staring at the motionless dials. "They're
jamming our electrical system somehow. I can't get any turn-over."

"Try it again," Tiger said. "We've got to get out of here. If they break
in, we're done for."

"They can't break through the screen," Dal said.

"Not as long as it lasts. But we can't keep it up indefinitely."

Once again they tried the radio equipment. There was no response but the
harsh static of the jamming signal from the ground below. "It's no
good," Tiger said finally. "We're stuck here, and we can't even call for
help. You'd think if they were so scared of us they'd be glad to see us
go."

"I think there's more to it than that," Dal said thoughtfully. "This
whole business has been crazy from the start. This just fits in with all
the rest." He picked Fuzzy off his perch and set him on his shoulder as
if to protect him from some unsuspected threat. "Maybe they're afraid of
us, I don't know. But I think they're afraid of something else a whole
lot worse."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was nothing to be done but wait and stare hopelessly at the mass
of notes and records that they had collected on the people of 31 Brucker
VII and the plague that afflicted them.

Until now, the _Lancet_'s crew had been too busy to stop and piece the
data together, to try to see the picture as a whole. But now there was
ample time, and the realization of what had been happening here began to
dawn on them.

They had followed the well-established principles step by step in
studying these incredible people, and nothing had come out as it should.
In theory, the steps they had taken should have yielded the answer. They
had come to a planet where an entire population was threatened with a
dreadful disease. They had identified the disease, found and isolated
the virus that caused it, and then developed an antibody that
effectively destroyed the virus--in the laboratory. But when they had
tried to apply the antibody in the afflicted patients, the response had
been totally unexpected. They had stopped the march of death among those
they had inoculated, and had produced instead a condition that the
people seemed to dread far more than death.

"Let's face it," Dal said, "we bungled it somehow. We should have had
help here right from the start. I don't know where we went wrong, but
we've done something."

"Well, it wasn't your fault," Jack said gloomily. "If we had the right
diagnosis, this wouldn't have happened. And I _still_ can't see the
diagnosis. All I've been able to come up with is a nice mess."

"We're missing something, that's all," Dal said. "The information is all
here. We just aren't reading it right, somehow. Somewhere in here is a
key to the whole thing, and we just can't see it."

They went back to the data again, going through it step by step. This
was Jack Alvarez's specialty--the technique of diagnosis, the ability to
take all the available information about a race and about its illness
and piece it together into a pattern that made sense. Dal could see that
Jack was now bitterly angry with himself, yet at every turn he seemed to
strike another obstacle--some fact that didn't jibe, a missing fragment
here, a wrong answer there. With Dal and Tiger helping he started back
over the sequence of events, trying to make sense out of them, and came
up squarely against a blank wall.

The things they had done should have worked; instead, they had failed. A
specific antibody used against a specific virus should have destroyed
the virus or slowed its progress, and there seemed to be no rational
explanation for the dreadful response of the uninfected ones who had
been inoculated for protection.

And as the doctors sifted through the data, the Bruckian they had
brought up from the enclosure sat staring off into space, making small
noises with his mouth and moving his arms aimlessly. After a while they
led him back to a bunk, gave him a medicine for sleep and left him
snoring gently. Another hour passed as they pored over their notes, with
Tiger stopping from time to time to mop perspiration from his forehead.
All three were aware of the moving clock hands, marking off the minutes
that the force screen could hold out.

And then Dal Timgar was digging into the pile of papers, searching
frantically for something he could not find. "That first report we got,"
he said hoarsely. "There was something in the very first information we
ever saw on this planet...."

"You mean the Confederation's data? It's in the radio log." Tiger pulled
open the thick log book. "But what...."

"It's there, plain as day, I'm sure of it," Dal said. He read through
the report swiftly, until he came to the last paragraph--a two-line
description of the largest creatures the original Exploration Ship had
found on the planet, described by them as totally unintelligent and only
observed on a few occasions in the course of the exploration. Dal read
it, and his hands were trembling as he handed the report to Jack. "I
knew the answer was there!" he said. "Take a look at that again and
think about it for a minute."

Jack read it through. "I don't see what you mean," he said.

"I mean that I think we've made a horrible mistake," Dal said, "and I
think I see now what it was. We've had this whole thing exactly 100 per
cent backward from the start, and that explains everything that's
happened here!"

Tiger peered over Jack's shoulder at the report. "Backward?"

"As backward as we could get it," Dal said. "We've assumed all along
that these flesh-and-blood creatures down there were the ones that were
calling us for help because of a virus plague that was attacking and
killing them. All right, look at it the other way. Just suppose that the
intelligent creature that called us for help was the _virus_, and that
those flesh-and-blood creatures down there with the blank, stupid faces
are the _real_ plague we ought to have been fighting all along!"




CHAPTER 11

DAL BREAKS A PROMISE


For a moment the others just stared at their Garvian crewmate. Then Jack
Alvarez snorted. "You'd better go back and get some rest," he said.
"This has been a tougher grind than I thought. You're beginning to show
