
"He will not stir," said Nemu laughing.  "For when I found him, I made
him so drunk with Ani's old wine that he lies there like a mummy.  It was
from him that I learned where Uarda was, and I went to her, and got her
to come with me by telling her that her father was very ill, and begged
her to go to see him once more.  She flew after me like a gazelle, and
when she saw the soldier lying there senseless she threw herself upon
him, and called for water to cool his head, for he was raving in his
dreams of rats and mice that had fallen upon him.  As it grew late she
wanted to return to her mistress, and we were obliged to prevent her.
How handsome she has grown, mother; you cannot imagine how pretty she
is."

"Aye, aye!"  said Hekt.  "You will have to keep an eye upon her when she
is your wife."

"I will treat her like the wife of a noble," said Nemu.  "And pay a real
lady to guard her.  But by this time Katuti has brought home her
daughter, Mena's wife; the stars are sinking and--there--that was the
first signal.  When Katuti whistles the third time we are to go to work.
Lend me your fire-box, mother."

"Take it," said Hekt.  "I shall never need it again.  It is all over with
me!  How your hand shakes!  Hold the wood firmly, or you will drop it
before you have brought the fire."

The dwarf bid the old woman farewell, and she let him kiss her without
moving.  When he was gone, she listened eagerly for any sound that might
pierce the silence of the night, her eyes shone with a keen light, and a
thousand thoughts flew through her restless brain.  When she heard the
second signal on Katuti's silver whistle, she sat upright and muttered:

"That gallows-bird Paaker, his vain aunt and that villain Ani, are no
match for Rameses, even when he is asleep.  Ani's hawk is dead; he has
nothing to hope for from Fortune, and I nothing to hope for from him.
But if Rameses--if the real king would promise me--then my poor old body
--Yes, that is the thing, that is what I will do."

She painfully raised herself on her feet with the help of her stick, she
found a knife and a small flask which she slipped into her dress, and
then, bent and trembling, with a last effort of her remaining strength
she dragged herself as far as Nemu's tent.  Here she found Uarda bound
hand and foot, and Kaschta lying on the ground in a heavy drunken
slumber.

The girl shrank together in alarm when she saw the old woman, and
Scherau, who crouched at her side, raised his hands imploringly to the
witch.

"Take this knife, boy," she said to the little one.  "Cut the ropes the
poor thing is tied with.  The papyrus cords are strong, saw them with the
blade."

     [Papyrus was used not only for writing on, but also for ropes.  The
     bridge of boats on which Xerxes crossed the Hellespont was fastened
     with cables of papyrus.]

While the boy eagerly followed her instructions with all his little
might, she rubbed the soldier's temples with an essence which she had in
the bottle, and poured a few drops of it between his lips.  Kaschta came
to himself, stretched his limbs, and stared in astonishment at the place
in which he found himself.  She gave him some water, and desired him to
drink it, saying, as Uarda shook herself free from the bonds:

"The Gods have predestined you to great things, you white maiden.  Listen
to what I, old Hekt, am telling you.  The king's life is threatened, his
and his children's; I purpose to save them, and I ask no reward but this-
that he should have my body embalmed and interred at Thebes.  Swear to me
that you will require this of him when you have saved him."

"In God's name what is happening?"  cried Uarda.  "Swear that you will
provide for my burial," said the old woman.

"I swear it!"  cried the girl.  "But for God's sake--"

"Katuti, Paaker, and Nemu are gone to set fire to the palace when Rameses
is sleeping, in three places.  Do you hear, Kaschta!  Now hasten, fly
after the incendiaries, rouse the servants, and try to rescue the king."

"Oh fly, father,"  cried the  girl, and they both rushed away in the
darkness.

"She is honest and will keep her word," muttered Hekt, and she tried to
drag herself back to her own tent; but her strength failed her half-way.
Little Scherau tried to support her, but he was too weak; she sank down
on the sand, and looked out into the distance.  There she saw the dark
mass of the palace, from which rose a light that grew broader and
broader, then clouds of black smoke, then up flew the soaring flame, and
a swarm of glowing sparks.

"Run into the camp, child," she cried, "cry fire, and wake the sleepers."

Scherau ran off shouting as loud as he could.

The old woman pressed her hand to her side, she muttered: "There it is
again."

"In the other world--Assa--Assa," and her trembling lips were silent for
ever.




CHAPTER XLIII.

Katuti had kept her unfortunate nephew Paaker concealed in one of her
servants' tents.  He had escaped wounded from the battle at Kadesh, and
in terrible pain he had succeeded, by the help of an ass which he had
purchased from a peasant, in reaching by paths known to hardly any one
but himself, the cave where he had previously left his brother.  Here he
found his faithful Ethiopian slave, who nursed him till he was strong
enough to set out on his journey to Egypt.  He reached Pelusium, after
many privations, disguised as an Ismaelite camel-driver; he left his
servant, who might have betrayed him, behind in the cave.

Before he was permitted to pass the fortifications, which lay across the
isthmus which parts the Mediterranean from the Red Sea, and which were
intended to protect Egypt from the incursions of the nomad tribes of the
Chasu, he was subjected to a strict interrogatory, and among other
questions was asked whether he had nowhere met with the traitor Paaker,
who was minutely described to him.  No one recognized in the shrunken,
grey-haired, one-eyed camel-driver, the broad-shouldered, muscular and
thick-legged pioneer.  To disguise himself the more effectually, he
procured some hair-dye--a cosmetic known in all ages--and blackened
himself.

     [In my papyrus there are several recipes for the preparation of
     hair-dye; one is ascribed to the Lady Schesch, the mother of Teta,
     wife of the first king of Egypt.  The earliest of all the recipes
     preserved to us is a prescription for dyeing the hair.]

Katuti had arrived at Pelusium with Ani some time before, to superintend
the construction of the royal pavilion.  He ventured to approach her
disguised as a negro beggar, with a palm-branch in his hand.  She gave
him some money and questioned him concerning his native country, for she
made it her business to secure the favor even of the meanest; but though
she appeared to take an interest in his answers, she did not recognize
him; now for the first time he felt secure, and the next day he went up
to her again, and told her who he was.

The widow was not unmoved by the frightful alteration in her nephew, and
although she knew that even Ani had decreed that any intercourse with the
traitor was to be punished by death, she took him at once into her
service, for she had never had greater need than now to employ the
desperate enemy of the king and of her son-in-law.

The mutilated, despised, and hunted man kept himself far from the other
servants, regarding the meaner folk with undiminished scorn.  He thought
seldom, and only vaguely of Katuti's daughter, for love had quite given
place to hatred, and only one thing now seemed to him worth living for--
the hope of working with others to cause his enemies' downfall, and of
being the instrument of their death; so he offered himself to the widow
a willing and welcome tool, and the dull flash in his uninjured eye when
she set him the task of setting fire to the king's apartments, showed her
that in the Mohar she had found an ally she might depend on to the
uttermost.

Paaker had carefully examined the scene of his exploit before the king's
arrival.  Under the windows of the king's rooms, at least forty feet from
the ground, was a narrow parapet resting on the ends of the beams which
supported the rafters on which lay the floor of the upper story in which
the king slept.  These rafters had been smeared with pitch, and straw had
been laid between them, and the pioneer would have known how to find the
opening where he was to put in the brand even if he had been blind of
both eyes.

When Katuti first sounded her whistle he slunk to his post; he was
challenged by no watchman, for the few guards who had been placed in the
immediate vicinity of the pavilion, had all gone to sleep under the
influence of the Regent's wine.  Paaker climbed up to about the height of
two men from the ground by the help of the ornamental carving on the
outside wall of the palace; there a rope ladder was attached, he
clambered up this, and soon stood on the parapet, above which were the
windows of the king's rooms, and below which the fire was to be laid.

Rameses' room was brightly illuminated.  Paaker could see into it without
being seen, and could bear every word that was spoken within.  The king
was sitting in an arm-chair, and looked thoughtfully at the ground;
before him stood the Regent, and Mena stood by his couch, holding in his
hand the king's sleeping-robe.

Presently Rameses raised his head, and said, as he offered his hand with
frank affection to Ani:

"Let me bring this glorious day to a worthy end, cousin.  I have found
you my true and faithful friend, and I had been in danger of believing
those over-anxious counsellors who spoke evil of you.  I am never prone
to distrust, but a number of things occurred together that clouded my
judgment, and I did you injustice.  I am sorry, sincerely sorry; nor am I
ashamed to apologize to you for having for an instant doubted your good
intentions.  You are my good friend--and I will prove to you that I am
yours.  There is my hand-take it; and all Egypt shall know that Rameses
trusts no man more implicitly than his Regent Ani.  I will ask you to
undertake to be my guard of honor to-night--we will share this room.
I sleep here; when I lie down on my couch take your place on the divan
yonder."  Ani had taken Rameses' offered hand, but now he turned pale as
he looked down.  Paaker could see straight into his face, and it was not
without difficulty that he suppressed a scornful laugh.

Rameses did not observe the Regent's dismay, for he had signed to Mena to
come closer to him.

"Before I sleep," said the king, "I will bring matters to an end with you
too.  You have put your wife's constancy to a severe test, and she has
trusted you with a childlike simplicity that is often wiser than the
arguments of sages, because she loved you honestly, and is herself
incapable of guile.  I promised you that I would grant you a wish if your
faith in her was justified.  Now tell me what is your will?"

Mena fell on his knees, and covered the king's robe with kisses.

"Pardon!"  he exclaimed.  "Nothing but pardon.  My crime was a heavy one,
I know; but I was driven to it by scorn and fury--it was as if I saw the
dishonoring hand of Paaker stretched out to seize my innocent wife, who,
as I now know, loathes him as a toad--"

"What was that?"  exclaimed the king.  "I thought I heard a groan
outside."
