


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

LOST AND FOUND.

"Try to be calm, Shank," said Charlie, in a soothing tone, as he kneeled
beside the shadow that had once been his sturdy chum, and put an arm on
his shoulder.  "It is indeed myself _this_ time.  I have come all the
way from England to seek you, for we heard, through Ritson, that you
were ill and lost in these wilds, and now, through God's mercy, I have
found you."

While Charlie Brooke was speaking, the poor invalid was breathing hard
and gazing at him, as if to make quite sure it was all true.

"Yes," he said at last, unable to raise his voice above a hoarse
whisper, "lost--and--and--found!  Charlie, my friend--my chum--my--"

He could say no more, but, laying his head like a little child on the
broad bosom of his rescuer, he burst into a passionate flood of tears.

Albeit strong of will, and not by any means given to the melting mood,
our hero was unable for a minute or two to make free use of his voice.

"Come, now, Shank, old man, you mustn't give way like that.  You
wouldn't, you know, if you had not been terribly reduced by illness--"

"Yes, I would! yes, I would!" interrupted the sick man, almost
passionately; "I'd howl, I'd roar, I'd blubber like a very idiot, I'd do
any mortal thing, if the doing of it would only make you understand how
I appreciate your great kindness in coming out here to save me."

"Oh no, you wouldn't," said Charlie, affecting an easy off-hand tone,
which he was far from feeling; "you wouldn't do anything to please me."

"What d'ye mean?" asked Shank, with a look of surprise.

"Well, I mean," returned the other, gently, "that you won't even do such
a trifle as to lie down and keep quiet to please me."

A smile lighted up the emaciated features of the sick man, as he
promptly lay back at full length and shut his eyes.

"There, Charlie," he said, "I'll behave, and let you do all the talking;
but don't let go my hand, old man.  Keep a tight grip of it.  I'm
terrified lest you drift off again, and--and melt away."

"No fear, Shank.  I'll not let go my hold of you, please God, till I
carry you back to old England."

"Ah! old England!  I'll never see it again.  I feel that.  But tell
me,"--he started up again, with a return of the excited look--"is father
any better?"

"N-no, not exactly--but he is no worse.  I'll tell you all about
everything if you will only lie down again and keep silent."

The invalid once more lay back, closed his eyes and listened, while his
friend related to him all that he knew about his family affairs, and the
kindness of old Jacob Crossley, who had not only befriended them when in
great distress, but had furnished the money to enable him, Charlie, to
visit these outlandish regions for the express purpose of rescuing Shank
from all his troubles and dangers.

At this point the invalid interrupted him with an anxious look.

"Have you the money with you?"

"Yes."

"All of it?"

"Yes.  Why do you ask?"

"Because," returned Shank, with something of a groan, "you are in a den
of thieves!"

"I know it, my boy," returned Charlie, with a smile, "and so, for better
security, I have given it in charge to our old chum, Ralph Ritson."

"What!" exclaimed Shank, starting up again with wide open eyes; "you
have met Ralph, then?"

"I have.  He conducted me here."

"And you have intrusted your money to _him_?"

"Yes--all of it; every cent!"

"Are you aware," continued Shank, in a solemn tone, "that Ralph Ritson
is Buck Tom--the noted chief of the outlaws?"

"I know it."

"And you trust him?"

"I do.  I have perfect confidence that he is quite incapable of
betraying an old friend."

For some time Shank looked at his companion in surprise; then an absent
look came into his eyes, and a variety of expressions passed over his
wan visage.  At last he spoke.

"I don't know how it is, Charlie, but somehow I think you are right.
It's an old complaint of mine, you know, to come round to your way of
thinking, whether I admit it or not.  In days of old I usually refused
to admit it, but believed in you all the same!  If any man had told me
this morning--ay, even half an hour since--that he had placed money in
the hands of Buck Tom for safe keeping, knowing who and what he is, I
would have counted him an incurable fool; but now, somehow, I do believe
that you were quite right to do it, and that your money is as safe as if
it were in the Bank of England."

"But I did not intrust it to Buck Tom, knowing who and what he _is_,"
returned Charlie, with a significant smile, "I put it into the hands of
Ralph Ritson, knowing who and what he _was_."

"You're a good fellow, Charlie," said Shank, squeezing the hand that
held his, "and I believe it is that very trustfulness of yours which
gives you so great power and influence with people.  I know it has
influenced me for good many a time in the past, and would continue to do
so still if I were not past redemption."

"No man is past redemption," said the other quietly; "but I'm glad you
agree with me about Ralph, for--"

He stopped abruptly, and both men turned their eyes towards the entrance
to the cave.

"Did you hear anything?" asked Shank, in a low voice.

"I thought so--but it must have been the shifting of a log on the fire,"
said the other, in a similarly low tone.

"Come, now, Charlie," said Shank, in his ordinary tones, "let me hear
something about yourself.  You have not said a word yet about what you
have been doing these three years past."

As he spoke a slight noise was again heard in the passage, and, next
moment Buck Tom re-entered carrying a lump of meat.  Whether he had been
listening or not they had no means of knowing, for his countenance was
quite grave and natural in appearance.

"I suppose you have had long enough, you two, to renew your old
acquaintance," he said.  "It behoves me now to get ready some supper for
the boys against their return, for they would be ill-pleased to come
home to an empty kettle, and their appetites are surprisingly strong.
But you needn't interrupt your conversation.  I can do my work without
disturbing you."

"We have no secrets to communicate, Buck," returned Shank, "and I have
no doubt that the account of himself, which our old chum was just going
to give, will be as interesting to you as to me."

"Quite as interesting," rejoined Buck; "so pray go on, Brooke.  I can
listen while I look after the cookery."

Thus urged, our hero proceeded to relate his own adventures at sea--the
wreck of the _Walrus_, the rescue by the whaler, and his various
experiences both afloat and ashore.

"The man, Dick Darvall, whom I have mentioned several times," said
Charlie, in conclusion, "I met with again in New York, when I was about
to start to come here, and as I wanted a companion, and he was a most
suitable man, besides being willing to come, I engaged him.  He is a
rough and ready, but a handy and faithful, man, who had some experience
in woodcraft before he went to sea, but I have been forced to leave him
behind me at a ranch a good many miles to the south of David's store,
owing to the foolish fellow having tried to jump a creek in the dark and
broken his horse's leg.  We could not get another horse at the time, and
as I was very anxious to push on--being so near my journey's end--and
the ranch was a comfortable enough berth, I left him behind, as I have
said, with directions to stay till I should return, or to push on if he
could find a safe guide."

While Charlie Brooke was relating the last part of his experience, it
might have been observed that the countenance of Buck Tom underwent a
variety of curious changes, like the sky of an April day.  A somewhat
stern frown settled on it at last but neither of his companions observed
the fact being too much interested in each other.

"What was the name o' the ranch where your mate was left?" asked Buck
Tom, when his guest ceased speaking.

"The ranch of Roaring Bull," answered Charlie.  "I should not wonder,"
he added, "if its name were derived from its owner's voice, for it
sounded like the blast of a trombone when he shouted to his people."

"Not only his ranch but himself is named after his voice," returned
Buck.  "His real name is Jackson, but it is seldom used now.  Every one
knows him as Roaring Bull.  He's not a bad fellow at bottom, but
something overbearing, and has made a good many enemies since he came to
this part of the country six years ago."

"That may be so," remarked Brooke, "but he was very kind to us the day
we put up at his place, and Dick Darvall, at all events, is not one of
his enemies.  Indeed he and Roaring Bull took quite a fancy to each
other.  It seemed like love at first sight.  Whether Jackson's pretty
daughter had anything to do with the fancy on Dick's part of course I
can't say.  Now, I think of it, his readiness to remain behind inclines
me to believe it had!"

"Well, come outside with me, and have a chat about old, times.  It is
too hot for comfort here.  I dare say our friend Shank will spare you
for quarter of an hour, and the pot can look after itself.  By the way,
it would be as well to call me Buck Tom--or Buck.  My fellows would not
understand Ralph Ritson.  They never heard it before.  Have a cigar?"

"No, thank you, I have ceased to see the advantage of poisoning
one's-self merely because it is the fashion to do so."

"The poison is wonderfully slow," said Buck.

"But not less wonderfully sure," returned Charlie, with a smile.

"As you will," rejoined Buck, rising and going outside with his visitor.

The night was very still and beautiful, and, the clouds having cleared
away, the moonbeams struggled through the foliage and revealed the
extreme wildness and seclusion of the spot which had been chosen by the
outlaws as their fortress.

Charlie now saw that the approach to the entrance of the cave was a
narrow neck of rock resembling a natural bridge, with a deep gully on
either side, and that the cliff which formed the inner end of the cavern
overhung its base, so that if an enemy were to attempt to hurl rocks
down from above these would drop beyond the cave altogether.  This much
he saw at a glance.  The minute details and intricacies of the place of
course could not be properly seen or understood in the flickering and
uncertain light which penetrated the leafy canopy, and, as it were,
played with the shadows of the fallen rocks that strewed the ground
everywhere, and hung in apparently perilous positions on the mountain
slopes.

The manner of the outlaw changed to that of intense earnestness the
moment he got out to the open air.

"Charlie Brooke," he said, with more of the tone and air of old familiar
friendship than he had yet allowed himself to assume, "it's of no use
exciting poor Shank unnecessarily, so I brought you out here to tell you
that your man Dick Darvall is in deadly peril, and nothing but immediate
action on my part can save him; I must ride without delay to his rescue.
You cannot help me in this.  I know what you are going to propose, but
you must trust and obey me if you would save your friend's life.  To
accompany me would only delay and finally mar my plans.  Now, will
you--"

A peculiar whistle far down the gorge caused the outlaw to cease
abruptly and listen.

The whistle was repeated, and Buck answered it at once with a look of
great surprise.

"These are my fellows back already!" he said.

"You seem surprised.  Did you, then, not expect them so soon?"

"I certainly did not; something must have gone wrong," replied Buck,
with a perplexed look.  Then, as if some new idea had flashed upon him,
"Now, look here, Brooke, I must ask you to trust me implicitly and to
act a part.  Your life may depend on your doing this."

"The first I can do with ease, but as to the latter, my agreeing to do
so depends on whether the action you require of me is honourable.  You
must forgive me, Rits--"

"Hush!  Don't forget that there is no such man as Ralph Ritson in these
mountains.  _My_ life may depend on your remembering that.  Of course I
don't expect you to act a dishonourable part,--all I want you to do just
now is to lie down and pretend to go to sleep."

"Truly, if that is all, I am ready," said Charlie; "at all events I will
shut my eyes and hold my tongue."

"A useful virtue at times, and somewhat rare," said Buck, leading his
guest back into the cavern.  "Now, then, Brooke, lie down there,"
pointing to a couch of pine-brush in a corner, "and try to sleep if you
can."

Our hero at once complied, stretched himself at full length with his
face to the light, and apparently went to sleep, but with his left arm
thrown over his forehead as if to protect his eyes from the glare of the
fire.  Thus he was in a position to see as well as hear all that went
on.  Buck Tom went to the sick man and whispered something to him.
Then, returning to the fire, he continued to stir the big pot, and sniff
its savoury contents with much interest.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

FRIENDS AND FOES--PLOTS AND COUNTERPLOTS--THE RANCH IN DANGER.

In a few minutes the sound of heavy feet and gruff voices was heard in
the outside passage, and next moment ten men filed into the room and
saluted their chief heartily.

Charlie felt an almost irresistible tendency to open his eyes, but knew
that the risk was too great, and contented himself with his ears.  These
told him pretty eloquently what was going on, for suddenly, the noise of
voices and clattering of footsteps ceased, a dead silence ensued, and
Charlie knew that the whole band were gazing at him with wide open eyes
and, probably, open mouths.  Their attention had been directed to the
stranger by the chief.  The silence was only momentary, however.

"Now, don't begin to whisper, pards," said Buck Tom, in a slightly
sarcastic tone.  "When will ye learn that there is nothing so likely to
waken a sleeper as whisperin'?  Be natural--be natural, and tell me, as
softly as ye can in your natural tones, what has brought you back so
soon.  Come, Jake, you have got the quietest voice.  The poor man is
pretty well knocked up and needs rest.  I brought him here."

"Has he got much?" the sentence was completed by Jake significantly
slapping his pocket.

"A goodish lot.  But come, sit down and out wi' the news.  Something
must be wrong."

"Wall, I guess that somethin' _is_ wrong.  Everything's wrong, as far as
I can see.  The Redskins are up, an' the troops are out, an' so it
seemed o' no use our goin' to bust up the ranch of Roarin' Bull, seein'
that the red devils are likely to be there before us.  So we came back
here, an' I'm glad you've got suthin' in the pot, for we're about as
empty as kettledrums."

"Humph!" ejaculated Buck, "didn't I tell you not to trouble Roarin'
Bull--that he and his boys could lick you if you had been twenty instead
of ten.  But how came ye to hear o' this cock-and-bull story about the
Redskins?"

"We got it from Hunky Ben, an' he's not the boy to go spreadin' false
reports."

Charlie Brooke ventured at this point to open his eye-lids the smallest
possible bit, so that any one looking at him would have failed to
observe any motion in them.  The little slit however, admitted the whole
scene to the retina, and he perceived that ten of the most
cut-throat-looking men conceivable were seated in a semicircle in the
act of receiving portions from the big pot into tin plates.  Most of
them were clothed in hunters' leathern costume, wore long boots with
spurs, and were more or less bronzed and bearded.

Buck Tom, _alias_ Ralph Ritson, although as tall and strong as any of
them, seemed a being of quite angelic gentleness beside them.  Yet Buck
was their acknowledged chief.  No doubt it was due to the superiority of
mind over matter, for those out-laws were grossly material and
matter-of-fact!

"There must be some truth in the report if Hunky Ben carried it," said
Buck, looking up quickly, "but I left Ben sitting quietly in David's
store not many hours ago."

"No doubt that's true, Captain," said Jake, as he ladled the soup into
his capacious mouth; "nevertheless we met Hunky Ben on the pine-river
prairie scourin' over the turf like all possessed on Black Polly.  We
stopped him of course an' asked the news."

"`News!' cried he, `why, the Redskins have dug up the hatchet an' riz
like one man.  They've clar'd out Yellow Bluff, an' are pourin' like
Niagara down upon Rasper's Creek.  It's said that they'll visit Roarin'
Bull's ranch to-morrow.  No time for more talk, boys.  Oratin' ain't in
my line.  I'm off to Quester Creek to rouse up the troops.'  Wi' that
Hunky wheeled round an' went off like a runaway streak o' lightnin'.  I
sent a couple o' shots after him, for I'd took a fancy to Black Polly--
but them bullets didn't seem to hit somehow."

"Boys," cried Buck Tom, jumping up when he heard this, "if Hunky Ben
said all that, you may depend on't it's true, an' we won't have to waste
time this night if we're to save the ranch of Roarin' Bull."

"But we don't want to save the ranch of Roarin' Bull, as far as I'm
consarned," said Jake rather sulkily.

Buck wheeled round on the man with a fierce glare, but, as if suddenly
changing his mind, he said in a tone of well-feigned surprise--

"What! _you_, Jake, of all men--such a noted lady-killer--indifferent
about the fate of the ranch of Roaring Bull, and pretty Miss Mary
Jackson in it at the mercy of the Redskins!"
