"There is no time to lose," she cried. "They may drown at any moment.
Come! Come quickly, and help me save them."

The man looked at her with a strange, far-away expression in his eyes.

"Don't you hear me?" cried Grace in an agony of impatience. "Are you
deaf?"

He shook his head stupidly, touching his ears and mouth.

"Deaf and dumb!" she exclaimed in despair.

Holding up two fingers, Grace pointed toward the water. Then she made a
swimming motion. Perhaps he had understood. She could not tell, but her
quick eye had caught sight of a long, thin plank on the shore.

Pulling off one of her mittens, she showed him a little pearl and
turquoise ring her mother had given her for a birthday present, indicating
that she would give it to him if he would help her. Then she seized one
end of the plank and made a sign for him to take the other; but the
stubborn creature began to unload the chips from the wagon.

Grace ran blindly ahead, dragging the plank alone.

"He's feeble-minded," she quivered. "I suppose I shall have to work this
thing by myself."

When she had reached the bank, Grace heard him trotting behind her with
his little wagon. In another moment there was a tug at the board. She
turned and shook her fist angrily at him; but, without regarding her in
the least, he lifted the plank and rested it on the wagon. Then motioning
her to hold up the back end, he started on a run down the bank.

"The poor soul thinks he's a horse, I suppose," she said to herself, "but
what difference does it make, if we can only get the plank to Tom and
Julia?"

Grace soon saw, however, that the idea was not entirely idiotic. Later she
was to offer up a prayer of thanks for that same child's wagon. The deaf
and dumb man was wearing heavy Arctic rubbers, which kept him from
slipping; while Grace, whose soles were as smooth as glass, kept her
balance admirably by means of the other end of the plank.

Tom and Julia Crosby had now been nearly ten minutes in the water. Twice
the ice had broken under Tom's grasp, while Julia, who seemed unable to
help herself, had thrown all her weight on the poor boy, while she called
wildly for help and heaped Grace with reproaches for running away.

"If it were not for the fact that it would be the act of a coward,"
exclaimed Tom at last, his teeth chattering with cold, "I would let go of
your arm and give up the job of supporting you in this ice water for
talking about Grace like that. Of course she has gone for help. Haven't
you found out long ago that she is the right sort?"

"Well, why did she go in the wrong direction?" sobbed Julia. "Everybody is
over on the other bank. There is nothing but an ice house over here."

"You may trust to her to have had some good, sensible reason," retorted
Tom loyally.

"I don't think I can keep up much longer," exclaimed Julia, beginning to
cry again.

"Keep on crying," replied Tom exasperated. "It will warm you--and remember
that I am doing the keeping up. I don't see that you are making any
special effort in that direction."

Once Tom had endeavored to lift Julia out of the hole, and he believed,
and always insisted, in telling the story afterwards, that if she had been
willing to help herself it could have been accomplished. But Julia Crosby,
triumphant leader of her class, and Julia Crosby cold and wet as a result
of her own recklessness, were two different beings altogether.

"Grace Harlowe has left us to drown," she sobbed. "I am so wretched. She
is a selfish girl."

"No such thing," replied Tom vigorously. "Here she comes now, bringing
help as I expected I should think you'd be ashamed of yourself." He gave a
sigh of relief when he saw Grace and the strange man approaching at a
quick trot, the wagon and plank between them. His confidence in Grace had
not been misplaced. He felt that they would soon be released from their
perilous predicament.

[Illustration: Grace and the Strange Man Quickly Approached.]

"All right," called Grace cheerfully as she approached. "Keep up a little
while longer. We'll have you both out in a jiffy."

Both rescuers slid the plank on the ice until one end projected over the
hole.

Then the man and Grace both lay flat down on the other end and Grace
called "ready."

Julia Crosby seized the board and pulled herself out of the water, safe,
now, from the breaking of thin ice at the edge.

"Now, Tom," cried Grace.

But Julia's considerable weight had already weakened the wood. When Tom
attempted to draw himself up, crack! went the board, and a jagged piece
broke off. This would not have been so serious if the ice had not given
way. Then, into the water, with many strange, guttural cries, slipped the
deaf and dumb man. Grace herself was wet through by the rush of water over
the ice, and just saved herself by slipping backward.

There was still a small portion of the plank left, and, with Julia
Crosby's help, Grace thought they might manage to pull the two men out.

But Julia looked hardly able to help herself. She sat shivering on the
bank trying to remove her skates.

"Julia," called Grace desperately. "You must help me now or these two men
will drown. Help me hold down this plank."

Aroused by Grace's appeal, Julia meekly obeyed, and, still shivering
violently, knelt beside Grace on the plank. But it was too short; when
Tom Gray seized one end of it he nearly upset both the girls into the
water.

"Oh, what shall we do?" cried Grace in despair when suddenly there came
the thought of the little wagon.

Quickly untwisting a long muffler of red silk from about her neck, Grace
tied it securely in the middle, around the cross piece of the tongue of
the stout little vehicle. Then she pushed it gently until it stood on the
edge of the hole. Giving one end of the muffler to Julia, Grace took the
other herself.

"Catch hold of the tail piece, Tom," she cried.

Fortunately the ice was very rough where the girls were standing, or they
would certainly have slipped and fallen. They pulled and tugged until
gradually the ice in front of them, with Tom's additional weight on it,
instead of breaking began to sink. But Tom Gray was out of the hole now;
helped by the wagon he slipped easily along the half-submerged ice, then
finally rolled over with a cry of relief upon the firm surface.

In the same way they pulled out the deaf and dumb man, who had certainly
been brave and patient during the ordeal, although he had uttered the most
fearful sounds.

As soon as his feet touched the solid ice, he seized his wagon and made
for the bank. Grace, remembering she had promised him her ring, hurried
after him, but she was chilled to the bone and could not run. By the time
she reached the bank he had rounded the corner of the ice house and was
out of sight.

"He evidently doesn't care to be thanked," said Tom Gray as Grace returned
to where he and Julia stood waiting.

"We had better get home as soon as possible or we'll all be laid up with
colds."

The three half-frozen young people made their way home as best they could.
Their clothes had frozen stiff, making it impossible for them to hurry.
Julia Crosby said not a word during the walk, but when she left them at
the corner where she turned into her own street, she said huskily: "Thank
you both for what you did for me to-day, I owe my life to you."

"That was a whole lot for her to say," said Grace.

"She ought to be grateful," growled Tom. "She was the cause of all this
mess," pointing to his wet clothes.

"I believe she will be," said Grace softly, "After all, 'It's an ill wind
that blows no one good.'"

Grace's mother was justly horrified when Grace, in her bedraggled
condition, walked into the living room. She insisted on putting her to
bed, wrapping her in blankets and giving her hot drinks. Grace fell into a
sound sleep from which she did not awaken until evening. Then she rose,
dressed and appeared at the supper table apparently none the worse for her
wetting.

Meanwhile Tom Gray had gone to his aunt's, given himself a brisk rubbing
down and changed his wet clothing for another suit he fortunately happened
to have with him. Thanks to his strong constitution and vigorous health,
he felt no bad effects.

He then went down to the kitchen, asked the cook for a cup of hot coffee,
and, after hastily swallowing it, rushed off to find David, Hippy and
Reddy and tell them the news. He was filled with admiration for Grace.

"She is the finest, most resolute girl I ever knew!" he exclaimed as he
finished his story.

"Hurrah for Grace Harlowe!" shouted Reddy.

"Let's go down to-night and see if she's all right?" suggested David.

Before seven o'clock the four boys were on their way to the Harlowe's.
They crept quietly up to the living-room window. Grace sat by the fire
reading. Very softly they began a popular song that was a favorite of
hers. Grace's quick ears caught the sound of the music. She was out of
the house like a flash, and five minutes later the four boys were seated
around the fire going over the day's adventure.

"The deaf and dumb man who helped you out is quite a character," said
Hippy. "I know him well. He used to work for my father. He isn't half so
foolish as he looks, either. As for that wagon you used as a life
preserver, I am proud to say that it was once mine."

"It must have been made especially strong," observed Reddy.

"It was. Hickory and iron were the materials used, I believe. I played
with it when but a toddling che-ild," continued Hippy, "and also smashed
three before my father had this one made to order. ''Twas ever thus from
childhood's earliest hour,'" he added mournfully. "I always had to have
things made to order."

There was a shout of laughter at Hippy's last remark. From infancy Hippy
had been the prize fat boy of Oakdale.

"It's only seven o'clock," said David. I move that we hunt up the girls
and have a party. That is, if Grace is willing."

"That will be fine," cried Grace.

Hippy and Reddy were despatched to find Nora and Jessica. While David took
upon himself the pleasant task of going for Anne. Tom remained with
Grace. He had a boyish admiration for this straightforward, gray-eyed girl
and made no secret of his preference for her.

Inside of an hour the sound of girls' voices outside proclaimed the fact
that the boys' mission had not been in vain. The girls had been informed
by their escorts of the afternoon's happenings, but Grace and Tom were
obliged to tell the story all over again.

"I hope Julia Crosby's ice bath will have a subduing effect upon her,"
said Nora. "I am glad, of course, that she didn't lose her life, but I'm
not sorry she got a good ducking. She deserved something for the way she
dragged Anne into that game of crack the whip."

"Let's talk about something pleasant," proposed Reddy.

"Me, for instance," said Hippy, with a Cheshire cat grin. "I am a thing of
beauty, and, consequently, a joy forever."

"Smother him with a sofa pillow!" commanded Tom. "He is too conceited to
live."

Reddy seized the unfortunate Hippy by the back of the neck, while David
covered the fat youth with pillows until only his feet were visible and
the smothering process was carried on with great glee until Nora
mercifully came to his rescue.




CHAPTER XV

A BELATED REPENTANCE


The following Monday as Grace Harlowe was about to leave the schoolroom,
Julia Crosby's younger sister, one of the freshman class, handed her a
note. It was from Julia, and read as follows:

    "DEAR GRACE:

    "Will you come and see me this afternoon when school is over? I
    have a severe cold, and am unable to be out of bed. I have
    something I must say to you that cannot wait until I get back to
    school.

    "Your sincere friend,

                      "JULIA"

"Oh, dear!" thought Grace. "I don't want to go up there. Her mother will
fall upon my neck and weep, and tell me I saved Julia's life. I know her
of old. She's one of the weeping kind. I suppose it's my duty to go,
however."

Grace's prognostication was fulfilled to the letter. Mrs. Crosby clasped
her in a tumultuous embrace the moment she entered the hall. Grace finally
escaped from her, and was shown up to Julia's room.

She looked about her with some curiosity. It was a light airy room,
daintily furnished. Julia was lying on the pretty brass bed in one corner
of the room. She wore a dressing gown of pale blue eiderdown, and Grace
thought she had never seen her old enemy look better.

"How do you do, Julia?" she said, walking over to the bed and holding out
her hand to the invalid.

"Not very well," responded Julia hoarsely. "I have a bad cold and am too
weak to be up."

"I'm sorry," said Grace, "the wetting didn't hurt me in the least. But, of
course, I wasn't in the water like you were. It didn't hurt Tom, either."

"I'm glad you are both all right," said Julia.

She looked solemnly at Grace, and then said hesitatingly, "Grace, I didn't
deserve to be rescued the other day. I've been awfully mean to you." She
buried her face in the bed clothing and sobbed convulsively.

"Julia, Julia, please don't cry," said Grace, her quick sympathy aroused
by the distress of another. "Did you think we would leave you to drown?
You would have done the same for me. Don't you know that people never
think of petty differences when real trouble arises?"

She laid her hand upon the head of the weeping girl. After a little the
sobs ceased and Julia sat up and wiped her eyes.

"Bring that chair over and sit down beside me, Grace. I want to tell you
everything," she said. "Last year I was perfectly horrid to you and that
little Pierson girl, for no earthly reason either, I thought it was smart
to annoy you and torment you. After we had the quarrel that day in the
gymnasium, I was really angry with you, and determined to pay you back.

"You know, of course, that I purposely tripped you the day of the
basketball game. I was awfully shocked when I found you had sprained your
ankle, but I was too cowardly to confess that I did it. Miss Thompson
would have suspended me from school. I didn't know whether you knew that I
had done it until I met you that day in the corridor, and the way you
looked at me made me feel miserable. Then we got hold of your signals."

She paused.

Grace leaned forward in her chair in an agony of suspense.

"Julia," she said, "I don't care what you did to me; but won't you please
say that Anne didn't give you those signals?"

"Miss Pierson did not give them to me," was the quick reply.

"I'm so glad to hear you say it," Grace answered. "I knew she was
innocent, but the girls have distrusted her all year. She lost the list
accidentally, you know, but they wouldn't believe that she did."

"Yes, I heard that she did," said Julia. "The list was given to me, but I
am not at liberty to tell who gave it. It was not your Anne, although I
was too mean to say so, even when I knew that she had been accused. I'll
write you a statement to that effect if you want me to do so. That will
clear her."

"Oh, Julia, will you truly? I want it more than anything else in the whole
world. A statement from you will carry more weight with the girls than
anything I could possibly tell them. It will convince the doubters, you
know. There are sure to be some who will insist on being skeptical."

Acting under Julia's direction, Grace brought a little writing case from a
nearby table, Julia opened it, selected a sheet of paper and wrote in a
firm, clear hand:

"To the members of the sophomore class, and to all those whom it may
concern:
