"Then I'll take some, too."

The other two sailors, unheeding the remonstrances of Bunsby and the
captain, followed the example of Jack. They felt relief for the moment,
but soon their torments became unendurable. With parched throats,
gasping for breath, they lay back in agony. Suffering themselves,
Captain Rushton and Bunsby regarded with pity the greater sufferings of
their wretched companions.

"This is horrible," said the captain.

"Yes," said Bunsby, sadly. "It can't last much longer now."

His words were truer than he thought. Unable to endure his suffering,
the sailor named Jack suddenly staggered to his feet.

"I can't stand it any longer," he said, wildly; "good-by, boys," and
before his companions well knew what he intended to do, he had leaped
over the side of the boat, and sunk in the ocean waves.

There was a thrilling silence, as the waters closed over his body.

Then the second sailor also rose to his feet.

"I'm going after Jack," he said, and he, too, plunged into the waves.

The captain rose as if to hinder him, but Bunsby placed his hand upon
his arm.

"It's just as well, captain. We must all come to that, and the sooner,
the more suffering is saved."

"That's so," said the other sailor, tormented like the other two by
thirst, aggravated by his draughts of seawater. "Good-by, Bunsby!
Good-by, captain! I'm going!"

He, too, plunged into the sea, and Bunsby and the captain were left
alone.

"You won't desert me, Bunsby?" said the captain.

"No, captain. I haven't swallowed seawater like those poor fellows. I
can stand it better."

"There is no hope of life," said the captain, quietly; "but I don't like
to go unbidden into my Maker's presence."

"Nor I. I'll stand by you, captain."

"This is a fearful thing, Bunsby. If it would only rain."

"That would be some relief."

As if in answer to his wish, the drops began to fall--slowly at first,
then more copiously, till at last their clothing was saturated, and the
boat partly filled with water. Eagerly they squeezed out the welcome
dregs from their clothing, and felt a blessed relief. They filled two
bottles they had remaining with the precious fluid.

"If those poor fellows had only waited," said the captain.

"They are out of suffering now," said Bunsby.

The relief was only temporary, and they felt it to be so. They were
without food, and the two bottles of water would not last them long.
Still, there was a slight return of hope, which survives under the most
discouraging circumstances.




CHAPTER XXVII.


FRANK PRICE.

The ship _Argonaut_, bound for Calcutta, was speeding along with a fair
wind, when the man at the lookout called:

"Boat in sight!"

"Where away?"

The sailor pointed, out a small boat a mile distant, nearly in the
ship's track, rising and falling with the billows.

"Is there any one in it?"

"I see two men lying in the bottom. They are motionless. They may be
dead."

The boat was soon overtaken. It was the boat from the ill-fated
_Norman_, Captain Rushton and Bunsby were lying stretched out in the
bottom, both motionless and apparently without life. Bunsby was really
dead. But there was still some life left in the captain, which, under
the care of the surgeon of the ship, was carefully husbanded until he
was out of immediate danger. But his system, from the long privation of
food, had received such a shock, that his mind, sympathizing with it, he
fell into a kind of stupor, mental and physical, and though strength and
vigor came slowly back, Captain Rushton was in mind a child. Oblivion of
the past seemed to have come over him. He did not remember who he was,
or that he had a wife and child.

"Poor man!" said the surgeon; "I greatly fear his mind has completely
given way."

"It is a pity some of his friends were not here," said the captain of
the ship that had rescued him. "The sight of a familiar face might
restore him."

"It is possible, but I am not sure of even that."

"Is there any clew to his identity?"

"I have found none."

It will at once occur to the reader that the receipt would have supplied
the necessary information, since it was dated Millville, and contained
the captain's name. But this was concealed in an inner pocket in Captain
Rushton's vest, and escaped the attention of the surgeon. So, nameless
and unknown, he was carried to Calcutta, which he reached without any
perceptible improvement in his mental condition.

Arrived at Calcutta, the question arose: "What shall we do with him?" It
was a perplexing question, since if carried back to New York, it might
be difficult to identify him there, or send him back to his friends.
Besides, the care of a man in his condition would be a greater
responsibility than most shipmasters would care to undertake. It was at
this crisis that a large-hearted and princely American merchant,
resident in Calcutta, who had learned the particulars of the captain's
condition, came forward, saying: "Leave him here. I will find him a home
in some suitable boarding-house, and defray such expenses as may be
required. God has blessed me with abundant means. It is only right that
I should employ a portion in His service. I hope, under good treatment,
he may recover wholly, and be able to tell me who he is, and where is
his home. When that is ascertained, if his health is sufficiently good,
I will send him home at my own expense."

The offer was thankfully accepted, and the generous merchant was as good
as his word. A home was found for Captain Rushton in the boarding-house
of Mrs. Start, a widow, who, thrown upon her own exertions for support,
had, by the help of the merchant already referred to, opened a
boarding-house, which was now quite remunerative.

"He will require considerable care, Mrs. Start," said Mr. Perkins, the
merchant, "but I am ready and willing to compensate you for all the
trouble to which you are put. Will you take him?"

"Certainly I will," said the warm-hearted widow, "if only because you
ask it. But for you, I should not be earning a comfortable living, with
a little money laid up in the bank, besides."

"Thank you, Mrs. Start," said the merchant. "I know the poor man could
be in no better hands. But you mustn't let any considerations of
gratitude interfere with your charging a fair price for your trouble. I
am able and willing to pay whatever is suitable."

"I don't believe we shall quarrel on that point," said the widow,
smiling. "I will do all I can for your friend. What is his name?"

"That I don't know."

"We shall have to call him something."

"Call him Smith, then. That will answer till we find out his real name,
as we may some day, when his mind comes back, as I hope it may."

From that time, therefore, Captain Rushton was known as Mr. Smith. He
recovered in a considerable degree his bodily health, but mentally he
remained in the same condition. Sometimes he fixed his eyes upon Mrs.
Start, and seemed struggling to remember something of the past; but
after a few moments his face would assume a baffled look, and he would
give up the attempt as fruitless.

One day when Mrs. Start addressed him as Mr. Smith, he asked:

"Why do you call me by that name?"

"Is not that your name?" she asked.

"No."

"What, then, is it?"

He put his hand to his brow, and seemed to be thinking. At length he
turned to the widow, and said, abruptly:

"Do you not know my name?"

"No."

"Nor do I," he answered, and left the room hastily.

She continued, therefore, to address him as Mr. Smith, and he gradually
became accustomed to it, and answered to it.

Leaving Captain Rushton at Calcutta, with the assurance that, though
separated from home and family, he will receive all the care that his
condition requires, we will return to our hero, shut up on shipboard
with his worst enemy. I say this advisedly, for though Halbert Davis
disliked him, it was only the feeling of a boy, and was free from the
intensity of Ben Haley's hatred.

No doubt, it was imprudent for him to reject the mate's hand, but Robert
felt that he could not grasp in friendship the hand which had deprived
him of a father. He was bold enough to brave the consequences of this
act, which he foresaw clearly.

Ben Haley, however, was in no hurry to take the vengeance which he was
fully resolved sooner or later to wreak upon our young hero. He was
content to bide his time. Had Robert been less watchful, indeed, he
might have supposed that the mate's feelings toward him had changed.
When they met, as in the narrow limits of the ship they must do every
day, the forms of courtesy passed between them. Robert always saluted
the mate, and Haley responded by a nod, or a cool good-morning, but did
not indulge in any conversation.

Sometimes, however, turning suddenly, Robert would catch a malignant
glance from the mate, but Haley's expression immediately changed, when
thus surprised, and he assumed an air of indifference.

With Captain Evans, on the other hand, Robert was on excellent terms.
The captain liked the bold, manly boy, and talked much with him of the
different countries he had visited, and seemed glad to answer the
questions which our hero asked.

"Robert," said the captain, one day, "how is it that you and Mr. Haley
seem to have nothing to say to each other?"

"I don't think he likes me, Captain Evans," said Robert.

"Is there any reason for it, or is it merely a prejudice?"

"There is a reason for it, but I don't care to mention it. Not that it
is anything I have reason to regret, or to be ashamed of," he added,
hastily. "It is on Mr. Haley's account that I prefer to keep it secret."

"Is there no chance of your being on better terms?" asked the captain,
good-naturedly, desirous of effecting a reconciliation.

Robert shook his head.

"I don't wish to be reconciled, captain," he said. "I will tell you this
much, that Mr. Haley has done me and my family an injury which, perhaps,
can never be repaired. I cannot forget it, and though I am willing to be
civil to him, since we are thrown together, I do not want his
friendship, even if he desired mine, as I am sure he does not."

Captain Evans was puzzled by this explanation, which threw very little
light upon the subject, and made no further efforts to bring the two
together.

Time passed, and whatever might be Ben Haley's feelings, he abstained
from any attempt to injure him. Robert's suspicions were lulled to
sleep, and he ceased to be as vigilant and watchful as he had been.

His frank, familiar manner made him a favorite on shipboard. He had a
friendly word for all the sailors, which was appreciated, for it was
known that he was the _protege_ of the owner. He was supposed by some to
be a relation, or, at any rate, a near connection, and so was treated
with unusual respect. All the sailors had a kind word for him, and many
were the praises which he received in the forecastle.

Among those most devoted to him was a boy of fourteen, Frank Price, who
had sailed in the capacity of cabin-boy. The poor boy was very seasick
at first, and Captain Evans had been indulgent, and excused him from
duty until he got better. He was not sturdy enough for the life upon
which he had entered, and would gladly have found himself again in the
comfortable home which a mistaken impulse had led him to exchange for
the sea.

With this boy, Robert, who was of about the same age, struck up a
friendship, which was returned twofold by Frank, whose heart, naturally
warm, was easily won by kindness.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


THE NEW CAPTAIN.

The voyage was more than half completed, and nothing of importance had
occurred to mark it. But at this time, Captain Evans fell sick. His
sickness proved to be a fever, and was very severe. The surgeon was in
constant attendance, but the malady baffled all his skill. At the end of
seven days, it terminated fatally, to the great grief of all on board,
with whom the good-natured captain was very popular. There was one
exception, however, to the general grief. It is an ill wind that blows
good to no one, and Ben Haley did not lament much for an event which
promoted him to the command of the vessel. Of course, he did not show
this feeling publicly, but in secret his heart bounded with exultation
at the thought that he was, for the time, master of the ship and all on
board. He was not slow in asserting his new position. Five minutes after
the captain breathed his last, one of the sailors approached him, and
asked for orders, addressing him as "Mr. Haley."

"Captain Haley!" roared the new commander. "If you don't know my
position on board this ship, it's time you found it out!"

"Ay, ay, sir," stammered the sailor, taken aback at his unexpected
violence.

Robert mourned sincerely at the death of Captain Evans, by whom he had
always been treated with the utmost kindness. Even had he not been
influenced by such a feeling, he would have regarded with apprehension
the elevation to the command of one whom he well knew to be actuated by
a feeling of enmity to himself. He resolved to be as prudent as
possible, and avoid, as far as he could, any altercation with Haley. But
the latter was determined, now that he had reached the command, to pick
a quarrel with our hero, and began to cast about for a fitting occasion.

Now that Captain Evans was dead, Robert spent as much time as the
latter's duties would permit with Frank Price. The boys held long and
confidential conversations together, imparting to each other their
respective hopes and wishes. Haley observed their intimacy and mutual
attachment, and, unable to assert his authority over Robert, who was a
passenger, determined to strike at him through his friend. His
determination was strengthened by a conversation which he overheard
between the boys when they supposed him beyond earshot.

"I wish Captain Evans were alive," said Frank. "I liked him, and I don't
like Captain Haley."

"Captain Evans was an excellent man," said Robert.

"He knew how to treat a fellow," said Frank. "As long as he saw us doing
our best, he was easy with us. Captain Haley is a tyrant."

"Be careful what you say, Frank," said Robert. "It isn't safe to say
much about the officers."

"I wouldn't say anything, except to you. You are my friend."

"I am your true friend, Frank, and I don't want you to get into any
trouble."

"I am sure you don't like the captain any better than I do."

"I don't like the captain, for more reasons than I can tell you; but I
shall keep quiet, as long as I am on board this ship."

"Are you going back with us?"

"I don't know. It will depend upon circumstances. I don't think I shall,
though I might have done so had Captain Evans remained in command."

"I wish I could leave it, and stay with you."

"I wish you could, Frank. Perhaps you can."

"I will try."

Haley overheard the last part of this conversation. He took particular
notice of Robert's remark that he would keep quiet as long as he
remained on board the ship, and inferred that on arrival at the destined
port our hero would expose all he knew about him. This made him uneasy,
for it would injure, if not destroy, his prospect of remaining in
command of the _Argonaut_. He resented also the dislike which Robert had
cautiously expressed, and the similar feeling cherished by the
cabin-boy. He had half a mind to break in upon their conversation on the
spot; but, after a moment's thought, walked away, his neighborhood
unsuspected by the two boys.

"They shall both rue their impudence," he muttered. "They shall find out
that they cannot insult me with impunity."

The next day, when both boys were on deck, Captain Haley harshly ordered
Frank to attend to a certain duty which he had already performed.

"I have done so, sir," said Frank, in a respectful tone.

"None of your impudence, you young rascal!" roared the captain, lashing
himself into a rage.

Frank looked up into his face in astonishment, unable to account for so
violent an outbreak.

"What do you mean by looking me in the face in that impudent manner?"
demanded Captain Haley, furiously.

"I didn't mean to be impudent, Captain Haley," said Frank. "What have I
done?"

"What have you done? You, a cabin-boy, have dared to insult your
captain, and, by heavens, you shall rue it! Strip off your jacket."

Frank turned pale. He knew what this order meant. Public floggings were
sometimes administered on shipboard, but, under the command of Captain
Evans, nothing of the kind had taken place.

Robert, who had heard the whole, listened, with unmeasured indignation,
to this wanton abuse on the part of Captain Haley. His eyes flashed, and
his youthful form dilated with righteous indignation.

Robert was not the only one who witnessed with indignation the captain's
brutality. Such of the sailors as happened to be on deck shared his
feelings. Haley, looking about him, caught the look with which Robert
regarded him, and triumphed inwardly that he had found a way to chafe
him.

"What have you got to say about it?" he demanded, addressing our hero,
with a sneer.

"Since you have asked my opinion," said Robert, boldly, "I will express
it. Frank Price has not been guilty of any impudence, and deserves no
punishment."

This was a bold speech to be made by a boy to a captain on his own deck,
and the sailors who heard it inwardly applauded the pluck of the boy who
uttered it.

