The driver merely grunted at this, slowing down as they ran through
a field of broken rock. "What is it you want?" he asked.

"We want to make a detailed examination of one of the magter. Alive
or dead, it doesn't make any difference. You wouldn't happen to have
one around?"

"No. We've fought with them often enough, but always on their home
grounds. They keep all their casualties, and a good number of ours.
What good will it do you anyway? A dead one won't tell you where the
bombs or the jump-space projector is."

"I don't see why I should explain that to you--unless you are in
charge. You are Hys, aren't you?"

The driver gave an angry sound, and then was silent while he drove.
Finally he asked, "What makes you think that?"

"Call it a hunch. You don't act very much like a sand-car driver,
for one thing. Of course your army may be all generals and no
privates--but I doubt it. I also know that time has almost run out
for all of us. This is a long ride and it would be a complete waste
of time if you just sat out in the desert and waited for me. By
driving me yourself you could make your mind up before we arrived.
Could have a decision ready as to whether you are going to help me
or not. Are you?"

"Yes--I'm Hys. But you still haven't answered my question. What do
you want the body for?"

"We're going to cut it open and take a good long look. I don't think
the magter are human. They are something living among men and
disguised as men--but still not human."

"Secret aliens?" Hys exploded the words in a mixture of surprise
and disgust.

"Perhaps. The examination will tell us that."

"You're either stupid or incompetent," Hys said bitterly. "The heat
of Dis has cooked your brains in your head. I'll be no part of this
kind of absurd plan."

"You must," Brion said, surprised at his own calmness. He could
sense the other man's interest hidden behind his insulting manner.
"I don't even have to give you my reasons. In another day this world
ends and you have no way to stop it. I just might have an idea that
could work, and you can't afford to take any chances--not if you are
really sincere. Either you are a murderer, killing Disans for
pleasure, or you honestly want to stop the war. Which is it?"

"You'll have your body all right," Hys grated, hurling the car
viciously around a spire of rock. "Not that it will accomplish
anything--but I can find no fault with killing another magter. We
can fit your operation into our plans without any trouble. This is
the last night and I have sent every one of my teams out on raids.
We're breaking into as many magter towers as possible before dawn.
There is a slim chance that we might uncover something. It's really
just shooting in the dark, but it's all we can do now. My own team
is waiting and you can ride along with us. The others left earlier.
We're going to hit a small tower on this side of the city. We raided
it once before and captured a lot of small arms they had stored
there. There is a good chance that they may have been stupid enough
to store something there again. Sometimes the magter seem to suffer
from a complete lack of imagination."

"You have no idea just how right you are," Brion told him.

The sand car slowed down now, as they approached a slab-sided mesa
that rose vertically from the desert. They crunched across broken
rocks, leaving no tracks. A light blinked on the dashboard, and Hys
stopped instantly and killed the engine. They climbed out,
stretching and shivering in the cold desert night.

It was dark walking in the shadow of the cliff and they had to feel
their way along a path through the tumbled boulders. A sudden blaze
of light made Brion wince and shield his eyes. Near him, on the
ground, was the humming shape of a cancellation projector, sending
out a fan-shaped curtain of vibration that absorbed all the light
rays falling upon it. This incredible blackness made a lightproof
wall for the recessed hollow at the foot of the cliff. In this
shelter, under the overhang of rock, were three open sand cars. They
were large and armor-plated, warlike in their scarred grey paint.
Men sprawled, talked, and polished their weapons. Everything stopped
when Hys and Brion appeared.

"Load up," Hys called out. "We're going to attack now, same plan I
outlined earlier. Get Telt over here." In talking to his own men
some of the harshness was gone from his voice. The tall soldiers of
Nyjord moved in ready obeyance of their commander. They loomed over
his bent figure, most of them twice as tall as he, but there was no
hesitation in jumping when he commanded. They were the body of the
Nyjord striking force--he was the brains.

A square-cut, compact man rolled up to Hys and saluted with a
leisurely flick of his hand. He was weighted and slung about with
packs and electronic instruments. His pockets bulged with small
tools and spare parts.

"This is Telt," Hys said to Brion. "He'll take care of you. Telt's
my personal technical squad. He goes along on all my operations with
his meters to test the interiors of the Disan forts. So far he's
found no trace of a jump-space generator, or excess radioactivity
that might indicate a bomb. Since he's useless and you're useless,
you both take care of each other. Use the car we came in."

Telt's wide face split in a froglike grin; his voice was hoarse and
throaty. "Wait. Just wait! Someday those needles gonna flicker and
all our troubles be over. What you want me to do with the stranger?"

"Supply him with a corpse--one of the magter," Hys said. "Take it
wherever he wants and then report back here." Hys scowled at Telt.
"Someday your needles will flicker! Poor fool--this is the last
day." He turned away and waved the men into their sand cars.

"He likes me," Telt said, attaching a final piece of equipment.
"You can tell because he calls me names like that. He's a great man,
Hys is, but they never found out until it was too late. Hand me that
meter, will you?"

Brion followed the technician out to the car and helped him load his
equipment aboard. When the larger cars appeared out of the darkness,
Telt swung around after them. They snaked forward in a single line
through the rocks, until they came to the desert of rolling sand
dunes. Then they spread out in line abreast and rushed towards their
goal.

Telt hummed to himself hoarsely as he drove. He broke off suddenly
and looked at Brion. "What you want the dead Dis for?"

"A theory," Brion answered sluggishly. He had been half napping in
the chair, taking the opportunity for some rest before the attack.
"I'm still looking for a way to avert the end."

"You and Hys," Telt said with satisfaction. "Couple of idealists.
Trying to stop a war you didn't start. They never would listen to
Hys. He told them in the beginning exactly what would happen, and
he was right. They always thought his ideas were crooked, like him.
Growing up alone in the hill camp, with his back too twisted and too
old to be fixed when he finally did come out. Ideas twisted the same
way. Made himself an authority on war. Hah! War on Nyjord--that's
like being an ice-cube specialist in hell. But he knew all about it,
though they never would let him use what he knew. Put granddaddy
Krafft in charge instead."

"But Hys is in charge of an army now?"

"All volunteers, too few of them and too little money. Too little
and too damned late to do any good. I'll tell you we did our best,
but it could never be good enough. And for this we get called
butchers." There was a catch in Telt's voice now, an undercurrent of
emotion he couldn't suppress. "At home they think we like to kill.
Think we're insane. They can't understand we're doing the only thing
that has to be done--"

He broke off as he quickly locked on the brakes and killed the
engine. The line of sand cars had come to a stop. Ahead, just
visible over the dunes, was the summit of a dark tower.

"We walk from here," Telt said, standing and stretching. "We can
take our time, because the other boys go in first, soften things up.
Then you and I head for the sub-cellar for a radiation check and
find you a handsome corpse."

Walking at first, then crawling when the dunes no longer shielded
them, they crept up on the Disan keep. Dark figures moved ahead of
them, stopping only when they reached the crumbling black walls.
They didn't use the ascending ramp, but made their way up the sheer
outside face of the ramparts.

"Line-throwers," Telt whispered. "Anchor themselves when the missile
hits, have some kind of quick-setting goo. Then we go up the
filament with a line-climbing motor. Hys invented them."

"Is that the way you and I are going in?" Brion asked.

"No, we get out of the climbing. I told you we hit this rock once
before. I know the layout inside." He was moving while he talked,
carefully pacing the distance around the base of the tower. "Should
be right about here."

High-pitched keening sliced the air and the top of the magter
building burst into flame. Automatic weapons hammered above them.
Something fell silently through the night and hit heavily on the
ground near them.

"Attack's started," Telt shouted. "We have to get through now,
while all the creepies are fighting it out on top." He pulled
a plate-shaped object from one of his bags and slapped it hard
against the wall. It hung there. He twisted the back of it, pulled
something and waved Brion to the ground. "Shaped charge. Should blow
straight in, but you never can tell."

The ground jumped under them and the ringing thud was a giant fist
punching through the wall. A cloud of dust and smoke rolled clear
and they could see the dark opening in the rock, a tunnel driven
into the wall by the directional force of the explosion. Telt shone
a light through the hole at the crumbled chamber inside.

"Nothing to worry about from anybody who was leaning against this
wall. But let's get in and out of this black beehive before the ones
upstairs come down to investigate."

Shattered rock was thick on the floor, and they skidded and tumbled
over it. Telt pointed the way with his light, down a sharply angled
ramp. "Underground chambers in the rock. They always store their
stuff down there--"

A smoking, black sphere arced out of the tunnel's mouth, hitting at
their feet. Telt just gaped, but even as it hit the floor Brion was
jumping forward. He caught it with the side of his foot, kicking it
back into the dark opening of the tunnel. Telt hit the ground next
to him as the orange flame of an explosion burst below. Bits of
shrapnel rattled from the ceiling and wall behind them.

"Grenades!" Telt gasped. "They've only used them once before--can't
have many. Gotta warn Hys." He plugged a throat mike into the
transmitter on his tack and spoke quickly into it. There was a
stirring below and Brion poured a rain of fire into the tunnel.

"They're catching it bad on top, too! We gotta pull out. Go first
and I'll cover you."

"I came for my Disan--I'm not leaving until I get one."

"You're crazy! You're dead if you stay!"

Telt was scrambling back towards the crumbled entrance as he talked.
His back was turned when Brion fired. The magter had appeared
silently as the shadow of death. They charged without a sound,
running with expressionless faces into the bullets. Two died at
once, curling and folding; the third one fell at Brion's feet. Shot,
pierced, dying, but not yet dead. Leaving a crimson track, it
hunched closer, lifting its knife to Brion. He didn't move. How many
times must you murder a man? Or was it a man? His mind and body
rebelled against the killing, and he was almost ready to accept
death himself, rather than kill again.

Telt's bullets tore through the body and it dropped with grim finality.

"There's your corpse--now get it out of here!" Telt screeched.

Between them they worked the sodden weight of the dead magter
through the hole, their exposed backs crawling with the expectation
of instant death. No further attack came as they ran from the tower,
other than a grenade that exploded too far behind them to do any
harm.

One of the armored sand cars circled the keep, headlights blazing,
keeping up a steady fire from its heavy weapons. The attackers
climbed into it as they beat a retreat. Telt and Brion dragged
the Disan behind them, struggling through the loose sand towards
the circling car. Telt glanced over his shoulder and broke into
a shambling run.

"They're following us!" he gasped. "The first time they ever chased
us after a raid!"

"They must know we have the body," Brion said.

"Leave it behind ..." Telt choked. "Too heavy to carry ... anyway!"

"I'd rather leave you," Brion said sharply. "Let me have it." He
pulled the corpse away from the unresisting Telt and heaved it
across his own shoulders. "Now use your gun to cover us!"

Telt threw a rain of slugs back towards the dark figures following
them. The driver of the sand car must have seen the flare of their
fire, because the truck turned and started towards them. It braked
in a choking cloud of dust and ready hands reached to pull them up.
Brion pushed the body in ahead of himself and scrambled after it.
The truck engine throbbed and they churned away into the blackness,
away from the gutted tower.

"You know, that was more like kind of a joke, when I said I'd leave
the corpse behind," Telt told Brion. "You didn't believe me, did
you?"

"Yes," Brion said, holding the dead weight of the magter against
the truck's side. "I thought you meant it."

"Ahhh," Telt protested, "you're as bad as Hys. You take things
too seriously."

Brion suddenly realized that he was wet with blood, his clothing
sodden. His stomach rose at the thought and he clutched the edge of
the sand car. Killing like this was too personal. Talking
abstractedly about a body was one thing, but murdering a man, then
lifting his dead flesh and feeling his blood warm upon you is an
entirely different matter. But the magter weren't human, he knew
that. The thought was only mildly comforting.

After they had reached the other waiting sand cars, the raiding
party split up. "Each one goes in a different direction," Telt said,
"so they can't track us to the base." He clipped a piece of paper
next to the compass and kicked the motor into life. "We'll make a
big U in the desert and end up in Hovedstad. I got the course here.
Then I'll dump you and your friends and beat it back to our camp.
You're not still burned at me for what I said, are you? Are you?"

Brion didn't answer. He was staring fixedly out of the side window.

"What's doing?" Telt asked. Brion pointed out at the rushing darkness.

"Over there," he said, pointing to the growing light on the horizon.

"Dawn," Telt said. "Lotta rain on your planet? Didn't you ever see
the sun come up before?"

"Not on the last day of a world."

"Lock it up," Telt grumbled. "You give me the crawls. I know they're
going to be blasted. But at least I know I did everything I could to
stop it. How do you think they are going to be feeling at home--on
Nyjord--from tomorrow on?"

"Maybe we can still stop it," Brion said, shrugging off the feeling
of gloom. Telt's only answer was a wordless sound of disgust.

By the time they had cut a large loop in the desert the sun was well
up in the sky, the daily heat begun. Their course took them through
a chain of low, flinty hills that cut their speed almost to zero.
They ground ahead in low gear while Telt sweated and cursed,
struggling with the controls. Then they were on firm sand and
picking up speed towards the city.

As soon as Brion saw Hovedstad clearly he felt a clutch of fear.
From somewhere in the city a black plume of smoke was rising. It
could have been one of the deserted buildings aflame, a minor blaze.
Yet the closer they came, the greater his tension grew. Brion didn't
dare put it into words himself; it was Telt who vocalized the
thought.

"A fire or something. Coming from your area, somewhere close to
your building."

Within the city they saw the first signs of destruction. Broken
rubble on the streets. The smell of greasy smoke in their nostrils.
More and more people appeared, going in the same direction they
were. The normally deserted streets of Hovedstad were now almost
crowded. Disans, obvious by their bare shoulders, mixed with the
few offworlders who still remained.

Brion made sure the tarpaulin was well wrapped around the body
before they pushed the sand car slowly through the growing crowd.
