
Separating these into two bodies, he took the command of the smaller
himself, and entrusted the larger to the leadership of Greensheve.

"Now, Kit," said he to this last, "take me your men to the near angle of
the garden wall upon the beach.  Post them strongly, and wait till that
ye hear me falling on upon the other side.  It is those upon the sea
front that I would fain make certain of, for there will be the leader.
The rest will run; even let them.  And now, lads, let no man draw an
arrow; ye will but hurt friends.  Take to the steel, and keep to the
steel; and if we have the uppermost, I promise every man of you a gold
noble when I come to mine estate."

Out of the odd collection of broken men, thieves, murderers, and ruined
peasantry, whom Duckworth had gathered together to serve the purposes of
his revenge, some of the boldest and the most experienced in war had
volunteered to follow Richard Shelton.  The service of watching Sir
Daniel's movements in the town of Shoreby had from the first been irksome
to their temper, and they had of late begun to grumble loudly and
threaten to disperse.  The prospect of a sharp encounter and possible
spoils restored them to good humour, and they joyfully prepared for
battle.

Their long tabards thrown aside, they appeared, some in plain green
jerkins, and some in stout leathern jacks; under their hoods many wore
bonnets strengthened by iron plates; and, for offensive armour, swords,
daggers, a few stout boar-spears, and a dozen of bright bills, put them
in a posture to engage even regular feudal troops.  The bows, quivers,
and tabards were concealed among the gorse, and the two bands set
resolutely forward.

Dick, when he had reached the other side of the house, posted his six men
in a line, about twenty yards from the garden wall, and took position
himself a few paces in front.  Then they all shouted with one voice, and
closed upon the enemy.

These, lying widely scattered, stiff with cold, and taken at unawares,
sprang stupidly to their feet, and stood undecided.  Before they had time
to get their courage about them, or even to form an idea of the number
and mettle of their assailants, a similar shout of onslaught sounded in
their ears from the far side of the enclosure.  Thereupon they gave
themselves up for lost and ran.

In this way the two small troops of the men of the Black Arrow closed
upon the sea front of the garden wall, and took a part of the strangers,
as it were, between two fires; while the whole of the remainder ran for
their lives in different directions, and were soon scattered in the
darkness.

For all that, the fight was but beginning.  Dick's outlaws, although they
had the advantage of the surprise, were still considerably outnumbered by
the men they had surrounded.  The tide had flowed, in the meanwhile; the
beach was narrowed to a strip; and on this wet field, between the surf
and the garden wall, there began, in the darkness, a doubtful, furious,
and deadly contest.

The strangers were well armed; they fell in silence upon their
assailants; and the affray became a series of single combats.  Dick, who
had come first into the mellay, was engaged by three; the first he cut
down at the first blow, but the other two coming upon him, hotly, he was
fain to give ground before their onset.  One of these two was a huge
fellow, almost a giant for stature, and armed with a two-handed sword,
which he brandished like a switch.  Against this opponent, with his reach
of arm and the length and weight of his weapon, Dick and his bill were
quite defenceless; and had the other continued to join vigorously in the
attack, the lad must have indubitably fallen.  This second man, however,
less in stature and slower in his movements, paused for a moment to peer
about him in the darkness, and to give ear to the sounds of the battle.

The giant still pursued his advantage, and still Dick fled before him,
spying for his chance.  Then the huge blade flashed and descended, and
the lad, leaping on one side and running in, slashed sideways and upwards
with his bill.  A roar of agony responded, and, before the wounded man
could raise his formidable weapon, Dick, twice repeating his blow, had
brought him to the ground.

The next moment he was engaged, upon more equal terms, with his second
pursuer.  Here there was no great difference in size, and though the man,
fighting with sword and dagger against a bill, and being wary and quick
of fence, had a certain superiority of arms, Dick more than made it up by
his greater agility on foot.  Neither at first gained any obvious
advantage; but the older man was still insensibly profiting by the ardour
of the younger to lead him where he would; and presently Dick found that
they had crossed the whole width of the beach, and were now fighting
above the knees in the spume and bubble of the breakers.  Here his own
superior activity was rendered useless; he found himself more or less at
the discretion of his foe; yet a little, and he had his back turned upon
his own men, and saw that this adroit and skilful adversary was bent upon
drawing him farther and farther away.

Dick ground his teeth.  He determined to decide the combat instantly; and
when the wash of the next wave had ebbed and left them dry, he rushed in,
caught a blow upon his bill, and leaped right at the throat of his
opponent.  The man went down backwards, with Dick still upon the top of
him; and the next wave, speedily succeeding to the last, buried him below
a rush of water.

While he was still submerged, Dick forced his dagger from his grasp, and
rose to his feet, victorious.

"Yield ye!" he said.  "I give you life."

"I yield me," said the other, getting to his knees.  "Ye fight, like a
young man, ignorantly and foolhardily; but, by the array of the saints,
ye fight bravely!"

Dick turned to the beach.  The combat was still raging doubtfully in the
night; over the hoarse roar of the breakers steel clanged upon steel, and
cries of pain and the shout of battle resounded.

"Lead me to your captain, youth," said the conquered knight.  "It is fit
this butchery should cease."

"Sir," replied Dick, "so far as these brave fellows have a captain, the
poor gentleman who here addresses you is he."

"Call off your dogs, then, and I will bid my villains hold," returned the
other.

There was something noble both in the voice and manner of his late
opponent, and Dick instantly dismissed all fears of treachery.

"Lay down your arms, men!" cried the stranger knight.  "I have yielded
me, upon promise of life."

The tone of the stranger was one of absolute command, and almost
instantly the din and confusion of the mellay ceased.

"Lawless," cried Dick, "are ye safe?"

"Ay," cried Lawless, "safe and hearty."

"Light me the lantern," said Dick.

"Is not Sir Daniel here?" inquired the knight.

"Sir Daniel?" echoed Dick.  "Now, by the rood, I pray not.  It would go
ill with me if he were."

"Ill with _you_, fair sir?" inquired the other.  "Nay, then, if ye be not
of Sir Daniel's party, I profess I comprehend no longer.  Wherefore,
then, fell ye upon mine ambush? in what quarrel, my young and very fiery
friend? to what earthly purpose? and, to make a clear end of questioning,
to what good gentleman have I surrendered?"

But before Dick could answer, a voice spoke in the darkness from close
by.  Dick could see the speaker's black and white badge, and the
respectful salute which he addressed to his superior.

"My lord," said he, "if these gentlemen be unfriends to Sir Daniel, it is
pity, indeed, we should have been at blows with them; but it were tenfold
greater that either they or we should linger here.  The watchers in the
house--unless they be all dead or deaf--have heard our hammering this
quarter-hour agone; instantly they will have signalled to the town; and
unless we be the livelier in our departure, we are like to be taken, both
of us, by a fresh foe."

"Hawksley is in the right," added the lord.  "How please ye, sir?
Whither shall we march?"

"Nay, my lord," said Dick, "go where ye will for me.  I do begin to
suspect we have some ground of friendship, and if, indeed, I began our
acquaintance somewhat ruggedly, I would not churlishly continue.  Let us,
then, separate, my lord, you laying your right hand in mine; and at the
hour and place that ye shall name, let us encounter and agree."

"Y' are too trustful, boy," said the other; "but this time your trust is
not misplaced.  I will meet you at the point of day at St. Bride's Cross.
Come, lads, follow!"

The strangers disappeared from the scene with a rapidity that seemed
suspicious; and, while the outlaws fell to the congenial task of rifling
the dead bodies, Dick made once more the circuit of the garden wall to
examine the front of the house.  In a little upper loophole of the roof
he beheld a light set; and as it would certainly be visible in town from
the back windows of Sir Daniel's mansion, he doubted not that this was
the signal feared by Hawksley, and that ere long the lances of the Knight
of Tunstall would arrive upon the scene.

He put his ear to the ground, and it seemed to him as if he heard a
jarring and hollow noise from townward.  Back to the beach he went
hurrying.  But the work was already done; the last body was disarmed and
stripped to the skin, and four fellows were already wading seaward to
commit it to the mercies of the deep.

A few minutes later, when there debauched out of the nearest lanes of
Shoreby some two score horsemen, hastily arrayed and moving at the gallop
of their steeds, the neighbourhood of the house beside the sea was
entirely silent and deserted.

Meanwhile, Dick and his men had returned to the ale-house of the Goat and
Bagpipes to snatch some hours of sleep before the morning tryst.



CHAPTER III--ST. BRIDE'S CROSS


St. Bride's cross stood a little way back from Shoreby, on the skirts of
Tunstall Forest.  Two roads met: one, from Holywood across the forest;
one, that road from Risingham down which we saw the wrecks of a
Lancastrian army fleeing in disorder.  Here the two joined issue, and
went on together down the hill to Shoreby; and a little back from the
point of junction, the summit of a little knoll was crowned by the
ancient and weather-beaten cross.

Here, then, about seven in the morning, Dick arrived.  It was as cold as
ever; the earth was all grey and silver with the hoarfrost, and the day
began to break in the east with many colours of purple and orange.

Dick set him down upon the lowest step of the cross, wrapped himself well
in his tabard, and looked vigilantly upon all sides.  He had not long to
wait.  Down the road from Holywood a gentleman in very rich and bright
armour, and wearing over that a surcoat of the rarest furs, came pacing
on a splendid charger.  Twenty yards behind him followed a clump of
lances; but these halted as soon as they came in view of the
trysting-place, while the gentleman in the fur surcoat continued to
advance alone.

His visor was raised, and showed a countenance of great command and
dignity, answerable to the richness of his attire and arms.  And it was
with some confusion of manner that Dick arose from the cross and stepped
down the bank to meet his prisoner.

"I thank you, my lord, for your exactitude," he said, louting very low.
"Will it please your lordship to set foot to earth?"

"Are ye here alone, young man?" inquired the other.

"I was not so simple," answered Dick; "and, to be plain with your
lordship, the woods upon either hand of this cross lie full of mine
honest fellows lying on their weapons."

"Y' 'ave done wisely," said the lord.  "It pleaseth me the rather, since
last night ye fought foolhardily, and more like a salvage Saracen lunatic
than any Christian warrior.  But it becomes not me to complain that had
the undermost."

"Ye had the undermost indeed, my lord, since ye so fell," returned Dick;
"but had the waves not holpen me, it was I that should have had the
worst.  Ye were pleased to make me yours with several dagger marks, which
I still carry.  And in fine, my lord, methinks I had all the danger, as
well as all the profit, of that little blind-man's mellay on the beach."

"Y' are shrewd enough to make light of it, I see," returned the stranger.

"Nay, my lord, not shrewd," replied Dick, "in that I shoot at no
advantage to myself.  But when, by the light of this new day, I see how
stout a knight hath yielded, not to my arms alone, but to fortune, and
the darkness, and the surf--and how easily the battle had gone otherwise,
with a soldier so untried and rustic as myself--think it not strange, my
lord, if I feel confounded with my victory."

"Ye speak well," said the stranger.  "Your name?"

"My name, an't like you, is Shelton," answered Dick.

"Men call me the Lord Foxham," added the other.

"Then, my lord, and under your good favour, ye are guardian to the
sweetest maid in England," replied Dick; "and for your ransom, and the
ransom of such as were taken with you on the beach, there will be no
uncertainty of terms.  I pray you, my lord, of your goodwill and charity,
yield me the hand of my mistress, Joan Sedley; and take ye, upon the
other part, your liberty, the liberty of these your followers, and (if ye
will have it) my gratitude and service till I die."

"But are ye not ward to Sir Daniel?  Methought, if y' are Harry Shelton's
son, that I had heard it so reported," said Lord Foxham.

"Will it please you, my lord, to alight?  I would fain tell you fully who
I am, how situate, and why so bold in my demands.  Beseech you, my lord,
take place upon these steps, hear me to a full end, and judge me with
allowance."

And so saying, Dick lent a hand to Lord Foxham to dismount; led him up
the knoll to the cross; installed him in the place where he had himself
been sitting; and standing respectfully before his noble prisoner,
related the story of his fortunes up to the events of the evening before.

Lord Foxham listened gravely, and when Dick had done, "Master Shelton,"
he said, "ye are a most fortunate-unfortunate young gentleman; but what
fortune y' 'ave had, that ye have amply merited; and what unfortune, ye
have noways deserved.  Be of a good cheer; for ye have made a friend who
is devoid neither of power nor favour.  For yourself, although it fits
not for a person of your birth to herd with outlaws, I must own ye are
both brave and honourable; very dangerous in battle, right courteous in
peace; a youth of excellent disposition and brave bearing.  For your
estates, ye will never see them till the world shall change again; so
long as Lancaster hath the strong hand, so long shall Sir Daniel enjoy
them for his own.  For my ward, it is another matter; I had promised her
before to a gentleman, a kinsman of my house, one Hamley; the promise is
old--"

"Ay, my lord, and now Sir Daniel hath promised her to my Lord Shoreby,"
interrupted Dick.  "And his promise, for all it is but young, is still
the likelier to be made good."

"'Tis the plain truth," returned his lordship.  "And considering,
moreover, that I am your prisoner, upon no better composition than my
bare life, and over and above that, that the maiden is unhappily in other
hands, I will so far consent.  Aid me with your good fellows"--

"My lord," cried Dick, "they are these same outlaws that ye blame me for
consorting with."

"Let them be what they will, they can fight," returned Lord Foxham.
"Help me, then; and if between us we regain the maid, upon my knightly
honour, she shall marry you!"

Dick bent his knee before his prisoner; but he, leaping up lightly from
the cross, caught the lad up and embraced him like a son.

"Come," he said, "an y' are to marry Joan, we must be early friends."


