
"Leave me alone," she replied, becoming calm again; "I can return home."

"Well, then, good-bye!  It may be for the last time," he impulsively
added, catching her, his one arm clasped about her yielding form and
drawing her to him.  Then, while she only faintly resisted, he kissed
her passionately, as a lover kisses the queen of his heart when he
believes he is bidding her farewell forever.

Suddenly, Ashman felt both of the willowy arms about his own neck, and
she returned his caresses with a fervor equal to his own.

"Heaven bless and keep you!" he murmured; "I now have everything to
live for!  I shall fight hard, for it is not the life of my friends or
my own that it is at stake!  It is _you_! It is YOU!"

The startled Ziffak had paused but an instant, when he read aright the
meaning of the sounds of guns from the village.  The explorers had been
attacked by the Murhapas.  King Haffgo must have given the order.  He
had violated his pledge for the first time in his life.  Great was his
provocation!

The bosom of the giant heaved with indignation.  He stood glaring like
a lion at the keepers who are torturing his mate to death, while he is
barred within the cage and cannot rush to her help.

Then, wheeling about, he broke into a run straight for his home, whence
came the shots that left no doubt that Professor Grimcke, Jared Long,
and perchance their servants were fighting for their lives.

The chieftain had not far to go, and half the distance was passed, when
he paused as suddenly as he had started.  A new and startling decision
had formed itself in his mind.

Again he wheeled and dashed toward the spot where he had left the
lovers a minute before.

They saw him coming, and Ashman released his beloved and started to
join the chieftain, who he suspected had come for him.

"Back!" he commanded, waving his immense arms; "neither of you must go
to the village!"

"But what shall we do?" asked Ariel, pausing in front of the excited
giant.

"Flee at once!  Delay not a moment!  If you do not, Haffgo will slay
both of you!  They are searching for Ariel!  They suspect she is with
you!  They will soon know it and death awaits each!"




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE FLIGHT.

Never had Ziffak shown such fearful excitement.  He swung his arms, and
in his wild agitation uttered some of his words in Murhapa, but his
meaning was caught by Ashman, who was infected by his overwhelming
emotion.  He was distraught for the moment, and stood undecided what to
do.

It was the lovely Ariel who showed the most self-command.

"Whither shall we go, Ziffak?" she asked in English.

"To the enchanted lake; to the burning mountain!  You know the way!
Nothing else will save you, and you are lost if you wait another
minute!"

And laying hands on the young man, he whirled him about and gave him a
shove which nearly threw him off his feet.  Then he reached to catch
her, but she eluded him and slipped like a bird to the side of her
lover.

"We will go!" said she; "leave us alone!"

Ashman turned his head and seizing the hand of his companion, said,

"You are my guide now!  Lead on, and I will follow you to the death!"

She made no answer, but moved rapidly through the wood until they came
to the open space along the river.  Here, since there were no
obstructions, they increased their pace almost to a run.  He sought to
maintain his place beside her, but she moved so fast, with little
apparent effort that it was hard to do so.

He had his Winchester and revolver, and he glanced behind to learn
whether they were followed.  Ziffak had vanished, and no one was in
sight.  It was well that such was the fact; for he would not have
hesitated to shoot down any that might appear.

The extraordinary flight continued for a furlong, and then Ariel paused
on the edge of the Xingu.  Her lover saw the reason: a small canoe lay
against the shore.

"Is this to be used?" he asked, glancing in her pale face.

She nodded her head, and, lifting her skirts, stepped daintily within,
and sat down near the stern.  He shoved the boat clear, sprang in and
sat down near the middle, as he seized the broad thin paddle.

Although considerably above the rapids, which had been the cause of all
his difficulty, Ashman noticed that the current was not so swift as
that encountered at many places leagues below; and, since the width was
no greater, it followed that that portion of the Upper Xingu was of
unusual depth.

In the strange excitement of the occasion, the lovers spoke few words.
They had said much, and, when the opportunity should again come, they
would say a great deal more; but they were fleeing for their lives, and
any distraction of their whole interest and effort was likely to be
fatal.

Ariel realized this as fully as did Ashman.  She continually glanced in
every direction, especially toward the village which was fast receding
behind them.  Fred swung the paddle powerfully, but with as little
noise as possible.

In such crises of a man's life he thinks rapidly.  While the young
man's heart was aglow with the ecstacy of a promised fulfillment of his
love--a more glorious fulfillment than he had dared to dream of--he saw
that a desperate struggle was not only certain but close at hand.

Very soon the flight of Ariel must be discovered, and her infuriated
father would stop at nothing to punish the elopers.  He could command
hundreds of the most valiant warriors of the Matto Grosso, and any one,
except such a lover as Fred Ashman, would have shrunk from the
prodigious task before him.

When the flight of the canoe had continued for several minutes, and he
could breathe a little more freely, he asked of his companion, whether
she was familiar with the region they expected to visit.

The reply was singular.  King Haffgo was accustomed to make regular
excursions to the wonderful place, and he rarely did so without Ariel
as his companion.  He had guards stationed night and day to watch for
the approach of strangers, for there was wealth enough to awaken the
avarice even of the Emperor of Brazil himself.

Leaving his warriors at the entrance to the lake, with instructions to
prevent any one following him, Haffgo would paddle the frail craft out
upon the lake, with his daughter as his only companion.

They explored much of the strange locality, visiting places unknown, so
far as they were aware, to every one else.

Ashman reflected that this was extremely fortunate so far as Ariel was
concerned, for it gave her the very knowledge that was so necessary in
their flight; but, unfortunately, their bitterest and most unrelenting
enemy possessed the same knowledge.

Now the Xingu broadened, and the flow became still more moderate.
Ashman held his paddle suspended and looked around.

"Are we entering the lake?"

"Not yet," she replied with a shake of her lovely head.

The oar was dipped again, and the light boat shot forward like a water
fowl over the smooth surface.

He had noticed that the boat was similar to that used by Ziffak, being
composed of a species of bark, the seams of which were skilfully joined
with tendons, and the outside covered with a gum which rendered it
close enough to exclude even air itself.

What seemed to be a creek a hundred feet wide, suddenly opened on the
right, winding through an exuberant forest whose branches overhung the
water.  She motioned with her hand for him to guide the boat into this,
adding that it was the entrance to the enchanted lake of which he had
heard such glowing accounts, and whose existence, he remembered, had
been denied by Ziffak, though it had been admitted by him only a brief
while before.

The course of the canoe was changed, and Ashman involuntarily slackened
the pace, while he gazed around with increasing wonder.

The distance was not far, when a towering rock was observed jutting out
from the bank.  It was fully twenty feet high, rough, jagged and
massive and obtruded half-way across the stream.

She whispered to him to proceed as cautiously as he could, for on the
rock was stationed one of the lookouts of King Haffgo, whose duty it
was to challenge every one on his way to the enchanted lake.  Ashman
was told to keep his lips mute, in case they were hailed, as they were
likely to be, and to leave to her any explanation it might be necessary
to make.

In the bright moonlight, the sentinel was sure to notice the presence
of a white man in the boat, but would be likely to believe he was
either Waggaman or Burkhardt, while he would not dare to question the
daughter of the king, however much he might be astonished at her
presence at this time.

Ashman saw the figure of a Murhapa, but instead of being erect, he was
seated on a ledge of the rock, his body half prone and in a motionless
posture.  The paddle was dipped more softly than ever as the craft came
opposite him, but he did not speak, or stir.

"He's asleep?" whispered Ashman, looking inquiringly at her.

She nodded her head, and he did not require to be told of the great
gain that would be secured, if they could pass without awaking him.

With that view, he used the utmost care, causing only the faintest
ripple, as he propelled the light craft over the mirror-like surface.

In a few seconds, the massive rock was passed, and still the sentinel
remained as motionless, as if he were a part of the solid stone, on
which he was seated.  He surely was a negligent servant to lose his
consciousness thus early in the night.

A few more strokes, and a turn in the creek left him out of sight.
_That_ danger was safely passed, and Fred Ashman drew a sigh of relief,
accepting it as a good omen of their future.

He now dipped the paddle deeper, and, within the following five
minutes, the canoe and its occupants debouched upon the waters of the
wonderful enchanted lake.




CHAPTER XXVII.

SHUT IN.

The situation in which the visitors to the dominions of King Haffgo
were placed, was such as to sharpen their wits to the keenest edge.

After the departure of Fred Ashman, Ziffak talked more plainly with the
Professor and New Englander.  The head chieftain told his white friends
what they had suspected; Haffgo was enraged at Ashman's presumption
with his daughter.  He was in that mood indeed, in which, but for his
promise, he would have hurled his javelin at the youth before he left
the audience chamber.

Ziffak, however, was hopeful that the anger of his royal brother would
cool sufficiently to allow the visitors to remain there two days; but
he doubted whether, after all, they would want to stay that long under
the strained condition of things.

When the chieftain took his departure, it was without any hint that he
wished to have an eye to the young gentleman, but Grimcke and Long
suspected it, and their conversation became of the gravest character,
for they fully realized their peril.

They regretted the mad infatuation of their young friend with Ariel the
princess, and yet they did not blame him, for, as the New Englander
remarked, could they have believed there was any hope for them, they
would have fallen as irrestrainably in love as he.

But they did not, and, therefore, were in a frame of mind to consider
the situation more coolly than the hot-headed lover.

Both agreed that the stroll taken by Ashman was likely to bring about
trouble, but they were powerless to do anything.  Ziffak was the only
individual who could manage matters in such an emergency.

It will be remembered that night had fully come at the time of the
chieftain's departure.  The interior of the room would have been
wrapped in gloom, had not the mother of Ziffak made her appearance and
started a fire on the hearth at the further end of the apartment.

The white men watched her closely to see how the Murhapas were
accustomed to secure ignition.  But they were disappointed.  She raked
aside the ashes until some embers were disclosed beneath, which were
readily fanned into a flame.  This caused the apartment to shine with a
light like that at mid-day.

She had brought in an earthen vessel of water and began broiling
several thin slices of meat on the coals.  They were quickly finished,
and she then handed to each of her guests the prepared meat on an
earthen plate.  All ate heartily, using their fingers for knives and
forks, while the cool water could not have been more refreshing.

Bippo and Pedros had been sleeping and resting so long that they
desired to get out doors.  Since they were not likely to be recognized
in the night, if they used caution, Grimcke and Long told them to go,
but to take care they did not lose themselves.

They had hardly departed when their hostess also left, passing out by
the rear way.  She did not speak, but as she was disappearing, gave the
two men such a strange look that their suspicions were awakened.  Both
at that moment were reflecting upon the ominous news brought them by
Ziffak.

By a common impulse, both hastened to the rear to learn all they could
about the building in which they might be compelled to fight for their
lives.

The result was rather pleasing.  The structure was heavier and more
compact than the ordinary buildings, and, in addition to the usual
opening in front, had one at the rear, through which the woman
undoubtedly passed on her way to her royal son.

Neither of these openings were provided with anything in the nature of
a door that could be closed.  Whenever the rare occasions arose for
such a sealing of the inhabitants of a house, it was done by means of
furs suspended in front of the entrance.

The white men noted this with quick eyes, and then went back to the
front apartment.

"In the event of attack," said the Professor with the utmost coolness,
"you can take the rear door and I the front."

Long nodded his head; he understood and was ready.

They had hardly entered the front apartment, when both were struck by
the unusual chatter of voices on the outside.  There must have been a
large gathering of people who were growing excited about something.

The Professor was about to step into the opening to learn what it
meant, when Bippo burst into the apartment, the picture of fright and
terror.

"Going to kill us!" was his alarming exclamation; "make me run--almost
kill me!"

"Where's Pedros?" asked Long.

"He scared--run into woods--won't come back--run all way to Am'zon!"

"I think he'll have to stop once or twice to get breath before he
reaches there," was the characteristic comment of the Professor, who
standing near the door, listened more closely to the threatening words
and exclamations on the outside.

It sounded singular to recognize more than one expression uttered in
English by these people, who, until a few years before were unaware
that such people were living.

But for the proof Ziffak had given of his loyalty the whites might have
connected his absence with the ugly signs outside; but the confidence
even of Jared Long in his friendship was unshaken.

"Bippo," said the Professor, speaking with the same quiet
self-possession he had shown in the first place, "they are going to
attack us; more than likely we shall be killed, but there is a chance
for you, because you are dressed like these people, and, so long as you
can keep in the shadow, you can pass for one of them; you can slip out
by the opening at the rear without being noticed; steal away, find
Pedros if you can, and leave."

The eyes of the servant seemed to protrude from his head, as he grasped
the fearful meaning of these words.  Then, clutching his spear in his
hand, he whisked like a shadow into the rear apartment beyond sight.

Grimcke and Long smiled in each other's face; they could not blame the
fellow for thinking of his own safety.

"The music will begin in a few minutes," added the Professor.  "I think
you had better guard the rear; you understand, Jared, that it's no time
to throw away any powder."

"I don't propose to waste my ammunition," muttered the New Englander,
as he stepped softly into the rear apartment.

Only a slight reflection from the fire on the hearth found its way into
that part of the house, which had no window; but by the dim light Jared
Long saw a dusky figure come rapidly from the door toward him.  He was
on the point of raising his gun, when it spoke:

"It's me--Bippo."

"I thought you had left.  Why didn't you go?"

"Love my white folks--can't leave 'em, stay die wid 'em."

This sounded very fine, but the New Englander was incredulous.  He
believed that their servant was more afraid to leave than to stay.  He
had probably taken a look outside and decided that he was safer under
the shelter of those three Winchesters (for the weapon of poor Aaron
Johnston was still in the possession of his friends).

Long was inclined to ask him to take charge of the extra rifle, and use
it in helping to defend themselves; but, recalling the antipathy of the
fellow against handling firearms, he decided that he would only throw
away his cartridges.

He, therefore, cautioned him to keep out of the reach of any of the
missiles that were likely to come flying into the apartment, and urged
him, in case he saw any opening, to dart out among the people and do
his best to escape.

Professor Grimcke firmly believed that the impending fight would be to
the death, and that the only issue would be the slaying of himself and
companion.  It was the same danger they had faced many times, with the
difference that this was to be the last.

He surveyed his surroundings, like a general making ready to receive
the assault of a foe, and die fighting in the last ditch.

There was the door in front and the two windows, through which the
attack could be made.  He could cover all three with his repeating
rifle, and, when the last struggle came, appeal to his revolver and
knife.  He smiled, grimly at the reflection, that he had every ground
for believing, that the victory of the Murhapas would prove the most
