fault. Joe will dodge, but I won't, so make your mind easy.

"We sha'n't hear the last of this in a hurry," responded Gus, relieved,
yet anxious, as he thought of the reprimand his father would give him.

"I hope mother won't hear of it till I tell her quietly myself. She will
be so frightened, and think I'm surely smashed up, if she is told in a
hurry;" and Frank gave a shiver, as all the danger he had run came over
him suddenly.

"I thought we were done for when we saw that train. Guess we should have
been if you had not had your wits about you. I always said you were a
cool one;" and Gus patted Frank's back with a look of great admiration,
for, now that it was all over, he considered it a very remarkable
performance.

"Which do you suppose it will be, fine or imprisonment?" asked Frank,
after sitting in a despondent attitude for a moment.

"Shouldn't wonder if it was both. Running off with an engine is no joke,
you know."

"What did possess me to be such a fool?" groaned Frank, repenting, all
too late, of yielding to the temptation which assailed him.

"Bear up, old fellow, I'll stand by you; and if the worst comes, I'll
call as often as the rules of the prison allow," said Gus, consolingly,
as he gave his afflicted friend an arm, and they walked away, both
feeling that they were marked men from that day forth.

Meantime, Joe, as soon as he recovered from the shock of seeing the
boys actually go off, ran away, as fast as his legs could carry him, to
prepare Mrs. Minot for the loss of her son; for the idea of their
coming safely back never occurred to him, his knowledge of engines being
limited. A loud ring at the bell brought Mrs. Pecq, who was guarding the
house, while Mrs. Minot entertained a parlor full of company.

"Frank's run off with No. 11, and he'll be killed sure. Thought I'd come
up and tell you," stammered Joe, all out of breath and looking wild.

He got no further, for Mrs. Pecq clapped one hand over his mouth, caught
him by the collar with the other, and hustled him into the ante-room
before any one else could hear the bad news.

"Tell me all about it, and don't shout. What's come to the boy?" she
demanded, in a tone that reduced Joe to a whisper at once.

"Go right back and see what has happened to him, then come and tell me
quietly. I'll wait for you here. I wouldn't have his mother startled for
the world," said the good soul, when she knew all.

"Oh, I dar'sn't! I opened the switch as they told me to, and Bill will
half kill me when he knows it!" cried Joe, in a panic, as the awful
consequences of his deed rose before him, showing both boys mortally
injured and several trains wrecked.

"Then take yourself off home and hold your tongue. I'll watch the door,
for I won't have any more ridiculous boys tearing in to disturb my
lady."

Mrs. Pecq often called this good neighbor "my lady" when speaking of
her, for Mrs. Minot was a true gentlewoman, and much pleasanter to live
with than the titled mistress had been.

Joe scudded away as if the constable was after him, and presently Frank
was seen slowly approaching with an unusually sober face and a pair of
very dirty hands.

"Thank heaven, he's safe!" and, softly opening the door, Mrs. Pecq
actually hustled the young master into the ante-room as unceremoniously
as she had hustled Joe.

"I beg pardon, but the parlor is full of company, and that fool of a Joe
came roaring in with a cock-and-bull story that gave me quite a turn.
What is it, Mr. Frank?" she asked eagerly, seeing that something was
amiss.

He told her in a few words, and she was much relieved to find that no
harm had been done.

"Ah, the danger is to come," said Frank, darkly, as he went away to wash
his hands and prepare to relate his misdeeds.

It was a very bad quarter of an hour for the poor fellow, who so seldom
had any grave faults to confess; but he did it manfully, and his mother
was so grateful for the safety of her boy that she found it difficult to
be severe enough, and contented herself with forbidding any more visits
to the too charming No. 11.

"What do you suppose will be done to me?" asked Frank, on whom the idea
of imprisonment had made a deep impression.

"I don't know, dear, but I shall go over to see Mr. Burton right after
tea. He will tell us what to do and what to expect. Gus must not suffer
for your fault."

"He'll come off clear enough, but Joe must take his share, for if he
hadn't opened that confounded switch, no harm would have been done. But
when I saw the way clear, I actually couldn't resist going ahead," said
Frank, getting excited again at the memory of that blissful moment when
he started the engine.

Here Jack came hurrying in, having heard the news, and refused to
believe it from any lips but Frank's. When he could no longer doubt, he
was so much impressed with the daring of the deed that he had nothing
but admiration for his brother, till a sudden thought made him clap his
hands and exclaim exultingly,--

"His runaway beats mine all hollow, and now he can't crow over me! Won't
that be a comfort? The good boy has got into a scrape. Hooray!"

This was such a droll way of taking it, that they had to laugh; and
Frank took his humiliation so meekly that Jack soon fell to comforting
him, instead of crowing over him.

Jill thought it a most interesting event; and, when Frank and his mother
went over to consult Mr. Burton, she and Jack planned out for the dear
culprit a dramatic trial which would have convulsed the soberest of
judges. His sentence was ten years' imprisonment, and such heavy fines
that the family would have been reduced to beggary but for the sums made
by Jill's fancy work and Jack's success as a champion pedestrian.

They found such comfort and amusement in this sensational programme that
they were rather disappointed when Frank returned, reporting that a fine
would probably be all the penalty exacted, as no harm had been done,
and he and Gus were such respectable boys. What would happen to Joe, he
could not tell, but he thought a good whipping ought to be added to his
share.

Of course, the affair made a stir in the little world of children; and
when Frank went to school, feeling that his character for good behavior
was forever damaged, he found himself a lion, and was in danger of being
spoiled by the admiration of his comrades, who pointed him out with
pride as "the fellow who ran off with a steam-engine."

But an interview with Judge Kemble, a fine of twenty-five dollars, and
lectures from all the grown people of his acquaintance, prevented him
from regarding his escapade as a feat to boast of. He discovered, also,
how fickle a thing is public favor, for very soon those who had praised
began to tease, and it took all his courage, patience, and pride to
carry him through the next week or two. The lads were never tired of
alluding to No. 11, giving shrill whistles in his ear, asking if his
watch was right, and drawing locomotives on the blackboard whenever they
got a chance.

The girls, too, had sly nods and smiles, hints and jokes of a milder
sort, which made him color and fume, and once lose his dignity entirely.
Molly Loo, who dearly loved to torment the big boys, and dared attack
even solemn Frank, left one of Boo's old tin trains on the door-step,
directed to "Conductor Minot," who, I regret to say, could not refrain
from kicking it into the street, and slamming the door with a bang
that shook the house. Shrieks of laughter from wicked Molly and her
coadjutor, Grif, greeted this explosion of wrath, which did no good,
however, for half an hour later the same cars, all in a heap, were on
the steps again, with two headless dolls tumbling out of the cab, and
the dilapidated engine labelled, "No. 11 after the collision."

No one ever saw that ruin again, and for days Frank was utterly
unconscious of Molly's existence, as propriety forbade his having it out
with her as he had with Grif. Then Annette made peace between them, and
the approach of the Twenty-second gave the wags something else to think
of.

But it was long before Frank forgot that costly prank; for he was a
thoughtful boy, who honestly wanted to be good; so he remembered this
episode humbly, and whenever he felt the approach of temptation he made
the strong will master it, saying to himself "Down brakes!" thus saving
the precious freight he carried from many of the accidents which befall
us when we try to run our trains without orders, and so often wreck
ourselves as well as others.




Chapter XII. The Twenty-Second of February


Of course, the young ladies and gentlemen had a ball on the evening of
that day, but the boys and girls were full of excitement about their
"Scenes from the Life of Washington and other brilliant tableaux,"
as the programme announced. The Bird Room was the theatre, being very
large, with four doors conveniently placed. Ralph was in his element,
putting up a little stage, drilling boys, arranging groups, and uniting
in himself carpenter, scene-painter, manager, and gas man. Mrs. Minot
permitted the house to be turned topsy-turvy, and Mrs. Pecq flew about,
lending a hand everywhere. Jill was costumer, with help from Miss
Delano, who did not care for balls, and kindly took charge of the girls.
Jack printed tickets, programmes, and placards of the most imposing
sort, and the work went gayly on till all was ready.

When the evening came, the Bird Room presented a fine appearance. One
end was curtained off with red drapery; and real footlights, with tin
shades, gave a truly theatrical air to the little stage. Rows of chairs,
filled with mammas and little people, occupied the rest of the space.
The hall and Frank's room were full of amused papas, uncles, and old
gentlemen whose patriotism brought them out in spite of rheumatism.
There was a great rustling of skirts, fluttering of fans, and much
lively chat, till a bell rang and the orchestra struck up.

Yes, there really was an orchestra, for Ed declared that the national
airs _must_ be played, or the whole thing would be a failure. So he had
exerted himself to collect all the musical talent he could find, a horn,
a fiddle, and a flute, with drum and fife for the martial scenes. Ed
looked more beaming than ever, as he waved his baton and led off with
Yankee Doodle as a safe beginning, for every one knew that. It was fun
to see little Johnny Cooper bang away on a big drum, and old Mr. Munson,
who had been a fifer all his days, blow till he was as red as a lobster,
while every one kept time to the music which put them all in good
spirits for the opening scene.

Up went the curtain and several trees in tubs appeared, then a stately
gentleman in small clothes, cocked hat, gray wig, and an imposing cane,
came slowly walking in. It was Gus, who had been unanimously chosen not
only for Washington but for the father of the hero also, that the family
traits of long legs and a somewhat massive nose might be preserved.

"Ahem! My trees are doing finely," observed Mr. W., senior, strolling
along with his hands behind him, casting satisfied glances at the
dwarf orange, oleander, abutilon, and little pine that represented his
orchard.

Suddenly he starts, pauses, frowns, and, after examining the latter
shrub, which displayed several hacks in its stem and a broken limb with
six red-velvet cherries hanging on it, he gave a thump with his cane
that made the little ones jump, and cried out,--

"Can it have been my son?"

He evidently thought it _was_, for he called, in tones of thunder,--

"George! George Washington, come hither this moment!"

Great suspense on the part of the audience, then a general burst of
laughter as Boo trotted in, a perfect miniature of his honored parent,
knee breeches, cocked hat, shoe buckles and all. He was so fat that the
little tails of his coat stuck out in the drollest way, his chubby legs
could hardly carry the big buckles, and the rosy face displayed, when
he took his hat off with a dutiful bow, was so solemn, the real George
could not have looked more anxious when he gave the immortal answer.

"Sirrah, did you cut that tree?" demanded the papa, with another rap
of the cane, and such a frown that poor Boo looked dismayed, till Molly
whispered, "Put your hand up, dear." Then he remembered his part, and,
putting one finger in his mouth, looked down at his square-toed shoes,
the image of a shame-stricken boy.

"My son, do not deceive me. If you have done this deed I shall chastise
you, for it is my duty not to spare the rod, lest I spoil the child. But
if you lie about it you disgrace the name of Washington forever."

This appeal seemed to convulse George with inward agony, for he squirmed
most effectively as he drew from his pocket a toy hatchet, which would
not have cut a straw, then looking straight up into the awe-inspiring
countenance of his parent, he bravely lisped,--

"Papa, I tannot tell a lie. I did tut it with my little hanchet."

"Noble boy--come to my arms! I had rather you spoilt _all_ my cherry
trees than tell one lie!" cried the delighted gentleman, catching his
son in an embrace so close that the fat legs kicked convulsively, and
the little coat-tails waved in the breeze, while cane and hatchet fell
with a dramatic bang.

The curtain descended on this affecting tableau; but the audience called
out both Washingtons, and they came, hand in hand, bowing with the
cocked hats pressed to their breasts, the elder smiling blandly, while
the younger, still flushed by his exertions, nodded to his friends,
asking, with engaging frankness, "Wasn't it nice?"

The next was a marine piece, for a boat was seen, surrounded by
tumultuous waves of blue cambric, and rowed by a party of stalwart men
in regimentals, who with difficulty kept their seats, for the boat was
only a painted board, and they sat on boxes or stools behind it. But few
marked the rowers, for in their midst, tall, straight, and steadfast as
a mast, stood one figure in a cloak, with folded arms, high boots, and,
under the turned-up hat, a noble countenance, stern with indomitable
courage. A sword glittered at his side, and a banner waved over him, but
his eye was fixed on the distant shore, and he was evidently unconscious
of the roaring billows, the blocks of ice, the discouragement of his
men, or the danger and death that might await him. Napoleon crossing
the Alps was not half so sublime, and with one voice the audience cried,
"Washington crossing the Delaware!" while the band burst forth with,
"See, the conquering hero comes!" all out of tune, but bound to play it
or die in the attempt.

It would have been very successful if, all of a sudden, one of the
rowers had not "caught a crab" with disastrous consequences. The oars
were not moving, but a veteran, who looked very much like Joe, dropped
the one he held, and in trying to turn and pummel the black-eyed warrior
behind him, he tumbled off his seat, upsetting two other men, and
pulling the painted boat upon them as they lay kicking in the cambric
deep. Shouts of laughter greeted this mishap, but George Washington
never stirred. Grasping the banner, he stood firm when all else went
down in the general wreck, and the icy waves engulfed his gallant crew,
leaving him erect amid a chaos of wildly tossing boots, entangled oars,
and red-faced victims. Such god-like dignity could not fail to impress
the frivolous crowd of laughers, and the curtain fell amid a round of
applause for him alone.

"Quite exciting, wasn't it? Didn't know Gus had so much presence of
mind," said Mr. Burton, well pleased with his boy.

"If we did not know that Washington died in his bed, December 14, 1799,
I should fear that we'd seen the last of him in that shipwreck," laughed
an old gentleman, proud of his memory for dates.

Much confusion reigned behind the scenes; Ralph was heard scolding, and
Joe set every one off again by explaining, audibly, that Grif tickled
him, and he couldn't stand it. A pretty, old-fashioned picture of the
"Daughters of Liberty" followed, for the girls were determined to do
honor to the brave and patient women who so nobly bore their part in the
struggle, yet are usually forgotten when those days are celebrated. The
damsels were charming in the big caps, flowered gowns, and high-heeled
shoes of their great-grandmothers, as they sat about a spider-legged
table talking over the tax, and pledging themselves to drink no more
tea till it was taken off. Molly was on her feet proposing, "Liberty
forever, and down with all tyrants," to judge from her flashing eyes
as she held her egg-shell cup aloft, while the others lifted theirs to
drink the toast, and Merry, as hostess, sat with her hand on an antique
teapot, labelled "Sage," ready to fill again when the patriotic ladies
were ready for a second "dish."

This was much applauded, and the curtain went up again, for the proud
parents enjoyed seeing their pretty girls in the faded finery of a
hundred years ago. The band played "Auld Lang Syne," as a gentle hint
that our fore-mothers should be remembered as well as the fore-fathers.

It was evident that something very martial was to follow, for a great
tramping, clashing, and flying about took place behind the scenes
while the tea-party was going on. After some delay, "The Surrender of
Cornwallis" was presented in the most superb manner, as you can believe
when I tell you that the stage was actually lined with a glittering
array of Washington and his generals, Lafayette, Kosciusko, Rochambeau
and the rest, all in astonishing uniforms, with swords which were
evidently the pride of their lives. Fife and drum struck up a march, and
in came Cornwallis, much cast down but full of manly resignation, as he
surrendered his sword, and stood aside with averted eyes while his army
marched past, piling their arms at the hero's feet.

