The Project Gutenberg EBook of Satellite System, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Satellite System

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Illustrator: Summers

Release Date: September 14, 2009 [EBook #29990]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATELLITE SYSTEM ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

 This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction October 1960.
 Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
 this publication was renewed.


                              SATELLITE

                                SYSTEM


                            By H. B. FYFE


         _Fyfe's quite right ... there's nothing like a satellite
          system for a cold storage arrangement. Keeps things handy,
          but out of the way...._

                        Illustrated by Summers

       *       *       *       *       *




Having released the netting of his bunk, George Tremont floated
himself out. He ran his tongue around his mouth and grimaced.

"Wonder how long I slept ... feels like too long," he muttered. "Well,
they would have called me."

The "cabin" was a ninety-degree wedge of a cylinder hardly eight feet
high. From one end of its outer arc across to the other was just over
ten feet, so that it had been necessary to bevel two corners of the
hinged, three-by-seven bunk to clear the sides of the wedge. Lockers
flattened the arc behind the bunk.

Tremont maneuvered himself into a vertical position in the eighteen
inches between the bunk and a flat surface that cut off the point of
the wedge. He stretched out an arm to remove towel and razor from one
of the lockers, then carefully folded the bunk upward and hooked it
securely in place.

With room to turn now, he swung around and slid open a double door in
the flat surface, revealing a shaft three feet square whose center was
also the theoretical intersection of his cabin walls. Tremont pulled
himself into the shaft. From "up" forward, light leaked through a
partly open hatch, and he could hear a murmur of voices as he
jackknifed in the opposite direction.

"At least two of them are up there," he grunted.

He wondered which of the other three cabins was occupied, meanwhile
pulling himself along by the ladder rungs welded to one corner of the
shaft. He reached a slightly wider section aft, which boasted
entrances to two air locks, a spacesuit locker, a galley, and a head.
He entered the last, noting the murmur of air-conditioning machinery
on the other side of the bulkhead.

Tremont hooked a foot under a toehold to maintain his position facing
a mirror. He plugged in his razor, turned on the exhauster in the slot
below the mirror to keep the clippings out of his eyes, and began to
shave. As the beard disappeared, he considered the deals he had come
to Centauri to put through.

"A funny business!" he told his image. "Dealing in ideas! Can you
really sell a man's thoughts?"

Beginning to work around his chin, he decided that it actually was
practical. Ideas, in fact, were almost the only kind of import worth
bringing from Sol to Alpha Centauri. Large-scale shipments of
