
The weather, as always in the Venus Central State, was warm--a luxurious
tropic warmth. And now I felt--as I had seen from above--the languorous,
sensuous quality of it all. Music, mingled with the ripple of girlish
laughter and cheers, came from the houses as we passed. Soft, fragrant
flower-petals deluged us. The very air was laden heavy with exotic
perfumes from the flowers which were everywhere.

We arrived at last at what appeared to be a palace--a broad, low
building of polished stone, on an island of its own. It was the building
I had noticed when first we saw the Great City from above. Gardens were
about the building, and on its roof. Flowers lined its many balconies.

We drew up to a stone landing-place.

"The palace of the Princess Maida," Wolfgar whispered.

But I had no time to question him. Attendants appeared. A queer mixture.
Incongruous men of science, armed with belts of instruments. They
greeted Tarrano humbly; escorted him away.

Other attendants. Natives of the city, in the flowing, bright-colored
robes we had seen everywhere. A group of them--laughing young
girls--descended upon us.

"The Princess Maida bids you welcome."

They hurried us into the building. I was surprised. Tarrano had
seemingly ignored us. It was quite as though we were honored guests,
arriving in the Central State when Maida was its ruler.

Led by the girls, we passed upward into the building past splashing
fountains, cascades of perfumed water with tubes of silver light
gleaming in its midst; and were thrust at last into a room.

The girls withdrew. Across the floor-polished stone, with heavy woven
rugs upon it--Georg and the Princess Maida advanced upon us.

Our greetings were brief. I could have talked to them both for a day,
questioning them; and they, no doubt, had as much to ask of us. But they
were solemn, grave and anxious.

"Not now, Jac," Georg said to check me. "Elza dear--I have been so
worried over you."

"But----" I demanded.

"Jac--the situation here--our own cause--the safety of our Earth
itself--this Tarrano--"

But Maida stopped him. "The very air has ears. Not now." Her glance
turned to Wolfgar; her slim hands went out to greet him. "Wolfgar, my
friend. It is good to see you here."

Wolfgar knelt before her, gazed for one instant into her eyes, and then
with head bowed, brushed the hem of her robe to his face.

She laughed gently. "Stand up, Wolfgar. I would not be the Princess
Maida to you now. Only--your friend. Your grateful friend."

There was a sudden soundless flash. From across the room a beam of
violet flame darted at us. It struck just between Maida and Wolfgar, as
he rose from his knee. Both of them involuntarily stepped backward,
apart from each other. And between them, breast high, the flame hung
level across the room. Maida was on one side of it; all the rest of us,
on the other.

I turned. At the door, Argo had appeared. From a black object in his
hand, the beam was streaming. He rested the black thing on a wall ledge
so that the beam hung level.

"Stand where you are, all of you." He started toward Maida, behind the
beam from the rest of us.

Georg made as though to leap forward, but Wolfgar restrained him. "Wait!
You don't understand--that's death!"

I saw now that the violet light had encircled us. Only Maida and Argo
were outside it. He was approaching her, with a cylinder in his hand.
The ray from it struck her without power of movement or speech. Her
eyes, terrified, turned to us. Again Georg would have leaped, but
Wolfgar shouted, "Wait! That's death! Don't you understand?"

Argo was leering. "Death? Yes! If you touch that violet light! Death, of
course. But you won't touch it! You will stand and watch--stand silently
for you know that if you shout, the vibrations will bring the beam upon
you. You won't move--you'll stand and watch me kill your Princess
Maida--not quickly--she is too beautiful for that. You, Georg
Brende--you, Wolfgar, traitor from Mars. You shall see your Princess
Maida die--this would-be traitoress to my Master Tarrano!"

With all the strength of his puny body Wolfgar flung Georg
backward--safely away from the deadly violet beam. And then, without
warning, without a cry which would endanger us, the little Mars man
sprang headlong, into and through the violet beam of death.




CHAPTER XVIII

_Passing of a Friend_


Wolfgar was not dead; but when we picked him up it was obvious that he
was dying. The violet beam vanished as his body struck it--vanished with
a hiss and splutter, and a puff of sulphuric smoke that mingled with the
smell of burning garments and flesh.

Georg and I leaped forward. Argo was standing transfixed by surprise at
what Wolfgar had done; and as the beam died, Georg was upon him.

"One moment!"

The quiet, commanding voice of Tarrano. He must have come quickly, when
informed by the finders of Argo's treachery. Yet he stood now at the
arcade entrance, drawn to his full height, frowning with lowered brows,
but wholly without appearance of haste.

"One moment--stand aside, all of you."

Argo cowered. The rest of us moved aside. Elza came toward me, and I put
my arm around her. Poor little Elza! She was shivering with fright.

Tarrano seemed not to need information as to what had transpired. His
eyes, roving over us, saw the lifeless, seared body of Wolfgar lying on
the floor.

"Too bad," he said. Then his gaze swung to Argo.

"Master----"

"Silence!"

There was on Tarrano's face and in his voice an expression, a tone quite
new to me. A quiet grimness. More than that. A quality of deadliness--of
inexorable deadliness which could well have chilled the stoutest heart
that fronted it.

"Come here, Argo." Tarrano stood quite motionless. "Argo!"

"Master! Master, you----"

"Come!"

Argo was on the floor. Shaking with terror--for he, probably better than
any of us, understood what was coming--dragged himself to Tarrano's
feet.

"Stand up!"

"Master, have mercy----"

"Stand up! Are you a man?"

Argo's legs would barely support him, but he struggled to get himself
erect. With a wrench, Tarrano tore the robe from Argo's chest.

"Master! Master! Have mercy!"

In Tarrano's hand I saw a needle-like piece of steel. A dagger, yet it
was more like a needle.

"Master--Oh----"

Tarrano had stabbed it gently into the man's chest. A mere prick into
the flesh, and a tiny drop of blood oozed out.

For a moment Argo stood swaying. Eyes white-rimmed with mortal terror as
he stupidly looked down at the drop of blood. A moment, then the
injected poison took effect. He tottered, flung his arms above his head
and fell. Lay writhing an instant; then twitching; and then quite still.

Tarrano turned away, his face impassive. "Unfortunate. He was a good man
in many ways--I shall be sorry to lose his services." He saw me with my
arm around Elza, and he frowned.

"So?"

Instinctively, involuntarily--and I hated myself for it--I dropped my
arm.

Georg exclaimed: "Wolfgar--he----"

Tarrano turned from me. "He is not dead--but he will die. There is
nothing we can do. I'm very sorry--very sorry indeed."

A sincere regret was in his tone. We lifted Wolfgar up, carried him to a
depression in the floor by the wall--a shallow, couch-like bowl
half-filled with down.

On the floor we gathered, seated on cushions; and presently Wolfgar
regained consciousness. His face was not burned. It lighted with a dazed
smile; and his eyes, searching us, picked out Maida.

"You are safe--I'm--so glad."

His voice was low and labored; and at once his eyes closed again as
though the effort of speaking were too great.

Maida was sitting near me at Wolfgar's head, bending over him. She had
recovered from her terror of Argo; and as she leaned down, gazing at the
dying Wolfgar, I think I have never seen so gentle, so compassionate an
expression upon the face of any woman.

Elza whispered: "There must be something we can do. The men of
medicine--the lights--the healing lights! Georg! Cannot you use
father's----"

They were only an overwrought girl's excited ideas, of course. Wolfgar's
lungs were seared; even as Elza spoke, he coughed, and blood welled from
his mouth--blood which Georg quickly wiped away.

Tarrano was on his feet behind us, with folded arms; and as he looked
down, I saw on his face also--the face which a few moments before had
been grim with deadly menace--a look now of gentle compassion very much
like Maida's.

"No use," he said softly. "We can do nothing. He will die."

Again Wolfgar's eyes opened. "Die--of course." He tried to raise one of
his burned hands, but dropped it back. "Die? Yes--of course. In just a
moment...." His eyes, already dulled, swung about. "Who is that--crying?
There's no need--to cry."

It was little Elza beside me, struggling to suppress her sobs.

Wolfgar's slow, labored voice demanded: "That isn't--my Princess Maida
crying--is it? I don't want--her to cry----"

"No," said Georg gently. "Maida is here--right here by you. She isn't
crying."

His gaze found Maida's face. "Oh, yes--I can see you--Princess Maida.
You're not crying--that's good. There's nothing to--cry about."

He seemed for a moment to gather a little strength; he moved his head
and saw Tarrano standing there behind us.

"Master?" He used the old term with a whimsical smile. "I--called you
that--for a long time, didn't I? You have a right to consider me a
traitor----"

"A spy," said Tarrano very gently. "Not a traitor. That you would have
been had you served me--a traitor to your Princess."

Wolfgar's head tried to nod; relief was on his face. "I'm--glad you
understand. I would not want to die--having you think harshly of me----"

"You are a man--I honor you." Abruptly Tarrano turned away and strode
across the room. And always since I have wondered if he left that scene
of death because of the emotion he could not hide.

Georg said: "You should not talk, Wolfgar."

"But I--want to talk. I have--only a few minutes. Just these--last few
minutes--I want to talk to my--Princess Maida. You'll--excuse us--the
Princess Maida and me--won't you? Just for these last--few minutes?"

We withdrew beyond his fading sight.

"My--Princess Maida----"

His voice still reached us. She leaned closer over him. Her tears were
falling now, but as she spoke she strove for calmness.

"Wolfgar----"

His eyes were glazing, but they dung to her. "Princess----"

"No," she said. "Just Maida--your friend. The woman you have given your
life for." Her voice almost broke. "Oh, Wolfgar! Never shall I forget
that. To give your life----"

"It is--a great honor." The gesture he made to check her words of thanks
exhausted him. His eyes closed; for a moment he seemed not to breathe.
As Maida leaned down in alarm, her beautiful white hair tumbled forward
over her shoulders. A lock of it brushed Wolfgar. He could not lift his
hands, but they groped for the tresses, found them and clung. Her white
waves of hair, with his fingers, shriveled, burned black, entwined in
them.

Again his eyelids came up. "You won't leave me--Princess Maida. Not for
these--last few minutes?"

"No," she half whispered.

"You--cannot--if you would." His whimsical smile returned. "You see? I
am--holding you."

For a moment he was silent. His eyes stayed open, staring dully at her.
His face and lips were drained now of their blood.

"You're--still there?"

"Yes, Wolfgar."

"Yes--of course I know you are. But I--cannot see you very well--now.
You look--so far away."

She put her face down quite close to him. Her eyes were brimming with
tears.

"Oh--yes," he said. "That's better--much better. Now I can--see
you--very plainly. I was thinking--I wanted to--tell you something.
It--wouldn't be right to tell you--except that I'll soon--be gone where
it won't make any difference."

He gathered all his last remaining strength. "I--love you--Princess
Maida."

She forced a gentle smile through her tears. "Yes, Wolfgar."

"I mean," he persisted, "not as my Princess--just as--a woman.
The--woman I've always loved. That's been my secret. You see? It
would--always have been--my secret--the little Mars man Wolfgar--in love
with his Princess Maida. You--don't think it too impertinent of me--do
you? I mean--confessing it now--just at--the end?"

"No," she whispered. "No, Wolfgar."

"Thank you--very much." His breath exhaled with a faint sigh. "Thank
you--very much. I wanted to tell you that--before I--go. And--if you
wouldn't mind--I want to--call you--just Maida."

"Just Maida, Wolfgar. Yes, of course, I want you to call me that." Her
voice was broken. She brushed away her tears that he might not notice
them.

"Yes," he agreed. His staring eyes were trying to see her. "My Maida.
You're--very beautiful--my Maida. I--wonder--you see, I'm taking
advantage of you--I wonder if you'd say you--love me? I'd be so
happy--just to hear you say it."

As I sat there behind them, I prayed then that she might say it.

"I love you, Wolfgar."

"Oh," he whispered. "You _did_ say it! My Maida says that she loves me!"
Happiness transfigured his livid face. But his smile was whimsical
still. "You're--very kind to me. Please--say it again."

"I love you, Wolfgar."

"Yes--that's how I always dreamed it would sound.
I--love--you--Wolfgar."

His voice trailed away; a film was settling over his staring eyes. Then
again his lips moved. "Maida says--'I love you, Wolfgar' ... I'm--so
happy...."

Quite suddenly she realized that he was gone. Her pent-up emotion came
with a sob.

"Wolfgar! My friend--my wonderful, loyal friend--don't die, Wolfgar!
Don't die!"




CHAPTER XIX

_Waters of Eternal Peace_


Little Wolfgar was gone. It seemed at first very strange, unreal. It lay
a shadow of grief upon our spirits, for many hours a deeper shadow than
all those grave events impending upon which hung the fate of three
worlds.

Tarrano ordered for Wolfgar a public burial of ceremony and honor in the
waters of eternal peace--ordered it for that same evening. Once again
Tarrano demonstrated the strangeness of his nature. His arrival to take
possession of Venus had been made the occasion of a great festival. "The
Water Festival," they called it, which was held only at times of
universal public rejoicing. It was planned now to do honor to
Tarrano--planned for this same evening. But he postponed it a night;
tonight was for Wolfgar.

We were still captives in Tarrano's hands, as we had been on Earth in
Venia. Yet here in the Great City of Venus a curious situation arose.
Tarrano himself explained it to us that afternoon. An embarrassing
situation for him, he termed it.

"Very embarrassing," he said, with eyes that smiled at us quizzically.
"Just for your ears alone, you understand, I am willing to admit that I
must handle these Great City people very carefully. You, Princess
Maida--you are greatly beloved of your people."

"Yes," she said.

He nodded. "For that reason they would not like to know you are
virtually a captive. And you, Georg Brende--really, they are beginning
to look on you as a savior--to save them from disease and death. It is
rather unflattering to me----"

He broke off, then with sudden decision added:

"Soon you two will realize that to join me will be your best course. And
best for all the worlds, for it will bring to them all peace and health
and happiness.... No, I ask no decision from you now. Nor from you, Lady
Elza." His gaze softened as he regarded her--softened almost to a
quantity of wistfulness. "_You_ know, Lady Elza, for what I am striving.
I may--indeed I shall--conquer the worlds. But you hold in the palm of
your little white hand, my real reward.... Enough!"

And then he offered us a sort of pseudo-liberty. We might all come and
go about the Great City at will. Apparently--to the public eye--allied
to Tarrano. The Princess Maida--as before--hereditary honored ruler;
with Tarrano guiding the business affairs of State, as on Earth our
Presidents and their Councils rule the legendary Kings and Queens. The
one ruling in fact; the other, an affair of pretty sentiment.

It was this condition which Tarrano now desired to bring about. With
Georg already beloved for his medical knowledge; and flying rumors
(started no doubt by Tarrano) that the handsome Earth man would some day
marry their Princess.

Myself--the irony of it!--I was appointed a sort of bodyguard to the
Lady Elza--the little Earth girl whose presence in the Great City would
help conciliate the Earth and bring about universal peace--with Venus in
control.
