
"The inevitable effect of slavery is enervating and demoralizing. It is
a canker that eats into the vitals of any nation that harbors it, no
matter what form it assumes. The free territory had all the vigor,
wealth and capacity for long endurance that self-dependence gives. It
was in every respect prepared for a long and severe struggle. Its forces
were collected in the name of the united government.

"Considering the marked inequality of the combatants the war would
necessarily have been of short duration. But political corruption had
crept into the trust places of the government, and unscrupulous
politicians and office-seekers saw too many opportunities to harvest
wealth from a continuation of the war. It was to their interest to
prolong it, and they did. They placed in the most responsible positions
of the army, military men whose incapacity was well known to them, and
sustained them there while the country wept its maimed and dying sons.

"The slave territory brought to the front its most capable talent. It
would have conquered had not the resources against which it contended
been almost unlimited. Utterly worn out, every available means of supply
being exhausted, it collapsed from internal weakness.

"The general government, in order to satisfy the clamors of the
distressed and impatient people whose sons were being sacrificed, and
whose taxes were increasing, to prolong the war had kept removing and
reinstating military commanders, but always of reliable incapacity.

"A man of mediocre intellect and boundless self-conceit happened to be
the commander-in-chief of the government army when the insurrection
collapsed. The politicians, whose nefarious scheming had prolonged the
war, saw their opportunity for furthering their own interests by
securing his popularity. They assumed him to be the greatest military
genius that the world had ever produced; as evidenced by his success
where so many others had failed. It was known that he had never risked a
battle until he was assured that his own soldiers were better equipped
and outnumbered the enemy. But the politicians asserted that such a
precaution alone should mark him as an extraordinary military genius.
The deluded people accepted him as a hero.

"The politicians exhausted their ingenuity in inventing honors for him.
A new office of special military eminence, with a large salary attached,
was created for him. He was burdened with distinctions and emoluments,
always worked by the politicians, for their benefit. The nation,
following the lead of the political leaders, joined in their adulation.
It failed to perceive the dangerous path that leads to anarchy and
despotism--the worship of one man. It had unfortunately selected one who
was cautious and undemonstrative, and who had become convinced that he
really was the greatest prodigy that the world had ever produced.

"He was made President, and then the egotism and narrow selfishness of
the man began to exhibit itself. He assumed all the prerogatives of
royalty that his position would permit. He elevated his obscure and
numerous relatives to responsible offices. Large salaries were paid them
and intelligent clerks hired by the Government to perform their official
duties.

"Corruption spread into every department, but the nation was blind to
its danger. The few who did perceive the weakness and presumption of the
hero were silenced by popular opinion.

"A second term of office was given him, and then the real character of
the man began to display itself before the people. The whole nature of
the man was selfish and stubborn. The strongest mental trait possessed
by him was cunning.

"His long lease of power and the adulation of his political
beneficiaries, acting upon a superlative self-conceit, imbued him with
the belief that he had really rendered his country a service so
inestimable that it would be impossible for it to entirely liquidate it.
He exalted to unsuitable public offices his most intimate friends. They
grew suddenly exclusive and aristocratic, forming marriages with eminent
families.

"He traveled about the country with his entire family, at the expense of
the Government, to gradually prepare the people for the ostentation of
royalty. The cities and towns that he visited furnished fetes,
illuminations, parades and every variety of entertainment that could be
thought of or invented for his amusement or glorification. Lest the
parade might not be sufficiently gorgeous or demonstrative he secretly
sent agents to prepare the programme and size of his reception, always
at the expense of the city he intended to honor with his presence.

"He manifested a strong desire to subvert the will of the people to his
will. When informed that a measure he had proposed was unconstitutional,
he requested that the constitution be changed. His intimate friends he
placed in the most important and trustworthy positions under the
Government, and protected them with the power of his own office.

"Many things that were distasteful and unlawful in a free government
were flagrantly flaunted in the face of the people, and were followed by
other slow, but sure, approaches to the usurpation of the liberties of
the Nation. He urged the Government to double his salary as President,
and it complied.

"There had long existed a class of politicians who secretly desired to
convert the Republic into an Empire, that they might secure greater
power and opulence. They had seen in the deluded enthusiasm of the
people for one man, the opportunity for which they had long waited and
schemed. He was unscrupulous and ambitious, and power had become a
necessity to feed the cravings of his vanity.

"The Constitution of the country forbade the office of President to be
occupied by one man for more than two terms. The Empire party proposed
to amend it, permitting the people to elect a President for any number
of terms, or for life if they choose. They tried to persuade the people
that the country owed the greatest General of all time so distinctive an
honor. They even claimed that it was necessary to the preservation of
the Government; that his popularity could command an army to sustain him
if he called for it.

"But the people had begun to penetrate the designs of the hero, and
bitterly denounced his resolution to seek a third term of power. The
terrible corruptions that had been openly protected by him, had
advertised him as criminally unfit for so responsible an office. But,
alas! the people had delayed too long. They had taken a young elephant
into the palace. They had petted and fed him and admired his bulky
growth, and now they could not remove him without destroying the
building.

"The politicians who had managed the Government so long, proved that
they had more power than the people They succeeded, by practices that
were common with politicians in those days, in getting him nominated for
a third term. The people, now thoroughly alarmed, began to see their
past folly and delusion. They made energetic efforts to defeat his
election. But they were unavailing. The politicians had arranged the
ballot, and when the counts were published, the hero was declared
President for life. When too late the deluded people discovered that
they had helped dig the grave for the corpse of their civil liberty, and
those who were loyal and had been misled saw it buried with unavailing
regret. The undeserved popularity bestowed upon a narrow and selfish
nature had been its ruin. In his inaugural address he declared that
nothing but the will of the people governed him. He had not desired the
office; public life was distasteful to him, yet he was willing to
sacrifice himself for the good of his country.

"Had the people been less enlightened, they might have yielded without a
murmur; but they had enjoyed too long the privileges of a free
Government to see it usurped without a struggle. Tumult and disorder
prevailed over the country. Soldiers were called out to protect the new
Government, but numbers of them refused to obey. The consequence was
they fought among themselves. A dissolution of the Government was the
result. The General they had lauded so greatly failed to bring order out
of chaos; and the schemers who had foisted him into power, now turned
upon him with the fury of treacherous natures when foiled of their prey.
Innumerable factions sprung up all over the land, each with a leader
ambitious and hopeful of subduing the whole to his rule. They fought
until the extermination of the race became imminent, when a new and
unsuspected power arose and mastered.

"The female portion of the nation had never had a share in the
Government. Their privileges were only what the chivalry or kindness of
the men permitted. In law, their rights were greatly inferior. The evils
of anarchy fell with direct effect upon them. At first, they organized
for mutual protection from the lawlessness that prevailed. The
organizations grew, united and developed into military power. They used
their power wisely, discreetly, and effectively. With consummate skill
and energy they gathered the reins of Government in their own hands.

"Their first aim had been only to force the country into peace. The
anarchy that reigned had demoralized society, and they had suffered
most. They had long pleaded for an equality of citizenship with men, but
had pleaded in vain. They now remembered it, and resolved to keep the
Government that their wisdom and power had restored. They had been
hampered in educational progress. Colleges and all avenues to higher
intellectual development had been rigorously closed against them. The
professional pursuits of life were denied them. But a few, with sublime
courage and energy, had forced their way into them amid the revilings of
some of their own sex and opposition of the men. It was these brave
spirits who had earned their liberal cultivation with so much
difficulty, that had organized and directed the new power. They
generously offered to form a Government that should be the property of
all intelligent adult citizens, not criminal.

"But these wise women were a small minority. The majority were ruled by
the remembrance of past injustice. _They_ were now the power, and
declared their intention to hold the Government for a century.

"They formed a Republic, in which they remedied many of the defects that
had marred the Republic of men. They constituted the Nation an integer
which could never be disintegrated by States' Rights ideas or the
assumption of State sovereignty.

"They proposed a code of laws for the home government of the States,
which every State in the Union ratified as their State Constitution,
thus making a uniformity and strength that the Republic of men had never
known or suspected attainable.

"They made it a law of every State that criminals could be arrested in
any State they might flee to, without legal authority, other than that
obtained in the vicinity of the crime. They made a law that criminals,
tried and convicted of crime, could not be pardoned without the sanction
of seventy-five out of one hundred educated and disinterested people,
who should weigh the testimony and render their decision under oath. It
is scarcely necessary to add that few criminals ever were pardoned. It
removed from the office of Governor the responsibility of pardoning, or
rejecting pardons as a purely personal privilege. It abolished the
power of rich criminals to bribe their escape from justice; a practice
that had secretly existed in the former Republic.

"In forming their Government, the women, who were its founders, profited
largely by the mistakes or wisdom displayed in the Government of men.
Neither the General Government, nor the State Government, could be
independent of the other. A law of the Union could not become such until
ratified by every State Legislature. A State law could not become
constitutional until ratified by Congress.

"In forming the State Constitutions, laws were selected from the
different State Constitutions that had proven wise for State Government
during the former Republic. In the Republic of men, each State had made
and ratified its own laws, independent of the General Government. The
consequence was, no two States possessed similar laws.

"To secure strength and avoid confusion was the aim of the founders of
the new Government. The Constitution of the National Government provided
for the exclusion of the male sex from all affairs and privileges for a
period of one hundred years.

"_At the end of that time not a representative of the sex was in
existence._"




CHAPTER III.


I expressed my astonishment at her revelation. Their social life existed
under conditions that were incredible to me. Would it be an impertinence
to ask for an explanation that I might comprehend? Or was it really the
one secret they possessed and guarded from discovery, a mystery that
must forever surround them with a halo of doubt, the suggestion of
uncanny power? I spoke as deprecatingly as I could. The Preceptress
turned upon me a calm but penetrating gaze.

"Have we impressed you as a mysterious people?" she asked.

"Very, very much!" I exclaimed. "I have at times been oppressed by it."

"You never mentioned it," she said, kindly.

"I could not find an opportunity to," I said.

"It is the custom in Mizora, as you have no doubt observed, never to
make domestic affairs a topic of conversation outside of the family, the
only ones who would be interested in them; and this refinement has kept
you from the solution of our social system. I have no hesitancy in
gratifying your wish to comprehend it. The best way to do it is to let
history lead up to it, if you have the patience to listen."

I assured her that I was anxious to hear all she chose to tell. She then
resumed:

"The prosperity of the country rapidly increased under the rule of the
female Presidents. The majority of them were in favor of a high state of
morality, and they enforced it by law and practice. The arts and
sciences were liberally encouraged and made rapid advancement. Colleges
and schools flourished vigorously, and every branch of education was now
open to women.

"During the Republic of men, the government had founded and sustained a
military and naval academy, where a limited number of the youth of the
country were educated at government expense. The female government
re-organized the institutions, substituting the youth of their own sex.
They also founded an academy of science, which was supplied with every
facility for investigation and progress. None but those having a marked
predilection for scientific research could obtain admission, and then it
was accorded to demonstrated ability only. This drew to the college the
best female talent in the country. The number of applicants was not
limited.

"Science had hitherto been, save by a _very_ few, an untrodden field to
women, but the encouragement and rare facilities offered soon revealed
latent talent that developed rapidly. Scarcely half a century had
elapsed before the pupils of the college had effected by their
discoveries some remarkable changes in living, especially in the
prevention and cure of diseases.

"However prosperous they might become, they could not dwell in political
security with a portion of the citizens disfranchised. The men were
resolved to secure their former power. Intrigues and plots against the
government were constantly in force among them. In order to avert
another civil war, it was finally decided to amend the constitution, and
give them an equal share in the ballot. They had no sooner obtained that
than the old practices of the former Republic were resorted to to secure
their supremacy in government affairs. The women looked forward to their
former subjugation as only a matter of time, and bitterly regretted
their inability to prevent it. But at the crisis, a prominent scientist
proposed to let the race die out. Science had revealed the Secret of
Life."

She ceased speaking, as though I fully understood her.

"I am more bewildered than ever," I exclaimed. "I cannot comprehend
you."

"Come with me," she said.

I followed her into the Chemist's Laboratory. She bade me look into a
microscope that she designated, and tell her what I saw.

"An exquisitely minute cell in violent motion," I answered.

"Daughter," she said, solemnly, "you are now looking upon the germ of
_all_ Life, be it animal or vegetable, a flower or a human being, it has
that one common beginning. We have advanced far enough in Science to
control its development. Know that the MOTHER is the only important part
of all life. In the lowest organisms no other sex is apparent."

I sat down and looked at my companion in a frame of mind not easily
