The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hymns from the East, by John Brownlie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hymns from the East
       Being Centos and Suggestions from the Office Books of the
       Holy Eastern Church

Author: John Brownlie

Release Date: April 2, 2009 [EBook #28479]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYMNS FROM THE EAST ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and Charles Coulston









                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST




                _Hymnological Works by the Same Author._


HYMNS FROM THE GREEK OFFICE BOOKS. Crown 8vo, 3/6 net.

HYMNS OF THE HOLY EASTERN CHURCH. Translated from the Service Books; with
Introductory Chapters on the History, Doctrine, and Worship of the
Church. Crown 8vo, 3/6 net.

                       Alexander Gardner, Paisley.


HYMNS OF THE GREEK CHURCH. Being Translations from the Service Books;
with Introduction and Notes. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

                 Oliphant Anderson & Ferrier, Edinburgh.


HYMNS AND HYMN-WRITERS OF THE CHURCH HYMNARY. Crown 8vo, 3/6.

                 Henry Frowde, Oxford University Press.


HYMNS FROM EAST AND WEST. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

HYMNS OF THE EARLY CHURCH. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

HYMNS OF OUR PILGRIMAGE. Crown 8vo, 2/-.

ZIONWARD: HYMNS OF THE PILGRIM LIFE. Crown 8vo, 1/-.

THE REST OF GOD. Crown 8vo, 1/6 net.

PILGRIM SONGS. Crown 8vo, 1/-.

                    James Nisbet & Co., Ltd., London.




                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST
                                  BEING
                         CENTOS AND SUGGESTIONS
                         FROM THE SERVICE BOOKS
                       OF THE HOLY EASTERN CHURCH


                                  WITH
                              INTRODUCTION

                                 BY THE
                           REV. JOHN BROWNLIE

                               _Author of_
            "_Hymns and Hymn Writers of the Church Hymnary_,"
  "_Hymns of the Greek Church_," "_Hymns from the Greek Office Books_,"
                  "_Hymns of the Holy Eastern Church_,"
                               _&c., &c._

                       PAISLEY: ALEXANDER GARDNER

           Publisher by Appointment to the late Queen Victoria

                                 MCMVII


                                 LONDON:
              SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO., LMD.

                  PRINTED BY ALEXANDER GARDNER, PAISLEY


    {TOIS AGIOIS EN DEXIA, THEOU KAI PISTOIS EN CHRISTO, ANATITHEMI}




                          INDEX OF FIRST LINES


                                                                     PAGE
  INTRODUCTION,                                                         9
  MORNING--
      Now, God of Light, the morn appears,                             25
      Up, up my soul! with gladness rise,                              27
      The saffron tints appear,                                        29
      Now glows the morn in beauty rare,                               31
  EVENING--
      When night her sable curtain spreads,                            35
      A crown of gold surpassing rare,                                 37
  CHRISTMAS--
      The Lord of Life to earth came down,                             41
      Jerusalem rejoice!                                               44
      The best that heaven could bring,                                46
      Out from the rising of the sun,                                  47
  EASTER--
      O woeful hour, when from the night,                              51
      Crown the Lord of glory,                                         53
      O Christ, when on the shameful tree,                             55
      O God of Love, Whose mercy came,                                 57
      When hades held the Lord of Life,                                59
      When Thou, O Christ, upon the tree,                              61
      To Thy Cross and Resurrection,                                   63
      Light is dawning 'mong the hills,                                65
      Hail! rising morn, for He hath risen,                            67
      We worship, Lord, before Thee now,                               69
      Heavy laden with thy grief,                                      70
      To Thee, O Christ, our God,                                      72
      Glory shone within the gloom,                                    74
      When Adam heard the voice of sin,                                76
      Within the garden's sombre shade,                                78
  PENTECOST--
      Even as Thou saidst, the Spirit came,                            83
      O may the Spirit of all grace,                                   85
  COMMUNION--
      Let Thy blood in mercy poured,                                   89
      O Lord of bounty, let this bread,                                91
  JUDGMENT--
      When in the clouds the Lord appears,                             95
      The Bridegroom comes, my soul awake!                             98
      O Judge of all, when sinful men,                                100
      I brought my merits to the throne,                              102
      The time is drawing nigh,                                       104
  ASPIRATIONS--
      I sought the Lord at early morn,                                109
      O touch my heart and bring to mind,                             111
      The wealth of high estate,                                      113
      I lift my hands, and with my heart,                             115
      Arise, my soul, and gaily sing,                                 117
      The King shall come when morning dawns,                         119
      Think on me, Lord, for Thou art kind,                           121
      Because Thy mercy is so great,                                  123
      I cannot lift mine eyes,                                        125
      When at Thy feet oppressed,                                     127
      Because I was brought low,                                      129
      O God of Life, in Whom we live,                                 131
      By Thine own hand the gift was given,                           133
      Lord, Thou art good and kind,                                   134
      O Lord of Life, when mortals call,                              136
      I wandered sore distressed,                                     138
      God sent me to the desert wild,                                 140




                              INTRODUCTION


This fourth series of Hymns from the Office Books of The Holy Eastern
Church, differs from the preceding three in this, that the hymns are less
translations or renderings, and more centos and suggestions.

One cannot continue long to interest himself in any work, and receive
from time to time the observations and criticisms of his fellows,
without, if he have his eyes and mind open to receive impressions,
feeling himself impelled to alter his methods in some particular or
other.

In previous volumes the author has been careful to give, for the most
part, carefully executed--that is to say, truthfully rendered
translations from the originals. Work of that kind is useful, and
absolutely necessary for certain purposes; but, unless for the
hymnologist, or for the liturgiologist, it is far from being attractive.
To be true, renderings can hardly be graceful, and they must lack much of
the literary charm which attaches itself to productions which are more
untrammelled. Hence, unless, as has been said, to the few who are
specialists, translations are not much in favour. They have earned a
reputation, and that reputation adheres to them: they are cold and
uninspiring. Such is their reputation, not always just, but who can say
that it has not, on the whole, been earned?

Perhaps it would be wrong to say that there is any prejudice against
translations from the Greek or any other language whatever, as such. The
reluctance to welcome translations is really reluctance to welcome poems
which do not find their way to the heart. For this reason there is
perhaps not more than a score of translations which have won their way
from permanent hymnals to a permanent place in the affections of our
devout fellow-countrymen. In this connection it is to be noted that we
speak of _translations_, and not of _suggestions_ such as, "Art thou
weary," or "O, happy band of pilgrims," and many others, which have
advanced into great favour, and are termed translations, but are not.

True hymns are sacred lyrics, and a lyric to be lyrical and heart
appealing, must be _inevitable_. It must be the spontaneous expression of
the heart of the author--an expression which _had_ to come. It is the
latent secret of the power of true hymns, for what _must_ be uttered will
assuredly, sooner or later, find its way to some heart. Such jets of
living poetry must be awaited: they cannot be forced. But a translator
must deliberately sit down at his desk and work--manufacture, if you
will--and endeavour to turn on the lathe of graceful culture, elegancies
which readers may admire, but will never feel.

Perhaps translators from the Greek have a singular temptation to eschew.
Hymns from the Offices have to be created in Greek, as has been pointed
out in a former Introduction, before they can be the source of living
poetic inspiration. No doubt the necessity of forming a cento is also the
privilege, but it may easily entice a translator to be satisfied with a
lifeless stringing of inept fragments. All this and much more has been
brought home to the writer times without number.

If one would have his work to be permanently useful; if he would aim at
any particular employment of his hymns, he must observe the conditions
which such an aim implies. A translator who aims at the use of his work
in public worship, must aim at pellucid simplicity both of phraseology
and of structure; and if they are to be widely, permanently, or
deservedly popular, they must be gifted with becoming grace. This cannot
be done in translations pure and simple. The present collection gives the
result of an experiment. The Greek has been used as a basis, a theme, a
motive; oriental colour, and it is to be hoped some of the oriental
warmth has been preserved. Now and again an oriental figure is retained,
and to those who have any knowledge of the worship of the Eastern Church,
it must be obvious that the peculiar themes of her praise are in abundant
evidence.

What, then, is the net result? To an unpractised eye, if no indication of
the source of these hymns had been given, could anything about them have
suggested their source? To the unpractised eye, nothing. But no one who
knows the Greek Offices will travel far before he overtakes well-known
landmarks. This is just as it should be. It is sufficient that a fertile
source of suggestion has been found--of theme, thought, form, colour--and
that from this ancient source it is possible to procure much that is
beautiful for the adornment of the worship of God's house to-day. And
this gratifying fact is made plain, that the themes of Greek Church
praise are the grand themes of the praise of the Church in our land and
in all Christian lands;--The Christ in all the Might and Glory of His
Person and Work: the need of our humanity, and the way in which Christ
met it: His miraculous birth, which is not shorn of any of its mystery,
and the embellishments of the event, which are never toned down, but, in
true oriental fashion, made, if possible, more dazzling: His Passion and
His Death, and the fulness of their atoning efficacy. But, as is to be
expected, the grand theme of the Greek singers, as became those who, more
than we have done, caught the first inspiration of their praise from the
apostles, is the glorious Resurrection of our Lord from the dead. Here,
the praise of the Greek Church touches its highest note, and pours forth
its most enchanting melody. "Christ is risen," and the glad response, "He
is risen indeed"--these words constitute the keynote of all that is best
and most beautiful in Greek worship. The Knowledge and the Wisdom of God
are everywhere extolled, and the attribute of Light is continually and
cordially applied to the Deity.

One cannot acquaint himself with the Church of the Apostles, with its
glowing service, and with the noble stand it has made, and still
maintains, for the truth of God and for the Kingdom of Christ in the
world, and not feel pained with the fact, so little to the credit of the
Church of the West, that, of our sympathy it has little or none. This is
largely due to our ignorance. But is ignorance in many cases not
culpable? Is it not so in our case? A little more acquaintance with the
Eastern Church would vastly alter our attitude towards it, and speedily
remove most of our prejudices.

More than once have we listened to depreciations of the Greek Church, and
