Alert as a hawk, the bowman stroked for the shore; and his stroke was
answered by all paddles.  If the water were high enough to carry the
canoes above rocks, and the rapids were not too violent, several of the
boatmen leaped out to knees in water, and "tracked" the canoes up
stream; but this was unusual with loaded craft.  The bowman steadied
the beached keel.  Each man landed with pack on his back, lighted his
pipe, and trotted away over portages so dank and slippery that only a
moccasined foot could gain hold.  On long portages, camp-fires were
kindled and the kettles slung on the crotched sticks for the evening
meal.  At night, the voyageurs slept under the overturned canoes, or
lay on the sand with bare faces to the sky.  Morning mist had not risen
till all the boats were once more breasting the flood of the Ottawa.
For a month the canoe prows met the current when a portage lifted the
fleet out of the Ottawa into a shallow stream flowing toward Lake
Nipissing, and from Lake Nipissing to Lake Huron.  The change was a
welcome relief.  The canoes now rode with the current; and when a wind
sprang up astern, blanket sails were hoisted that let the boatmen lie
back, paddles athwart.  Going with the stream, the _voyageurs_ would
"run"--"_sauter les rapides_"--the safest of the cataracts.  Bowman,
not steersman, was the pilot of such "runs."  A faint, far swish as of
night wind, little forward leaps and swirls of the current, the blur of
trees  on  either bank, were signs to the bowman.  He rose in his
place.  A thrust of the steel-shod pole at a rock in mid-stream--the
rock raced past; a throb of the keel to the live waters below--the
bowman crouches back, lightening the prow just as a rider "lifts" his
horse to the leap; a sudden splash--the thing has happened--the canoe
has run the rapids or shot the falls.

[Illustration:  "Each man landed with pack on his back, and trotted
away over portages."]

Pause was made at Lake Huron for favorable weather; and a rear wind
would carry the canoes at a bouncing pace clear across to
Michilimackinac, at the mouth of Lake Michigan.  This was the chief fur
post of the lakes at that time.  All the boats bound east or west,
Sioux and Cree and Iroquois and Fox, traders' and priests' and
outlaws'--stopped at Michilimackinac.  Vice and brandy and religion
were the characteristics of the fort.

[Illustration: A Cree Indian of the Minnesota Borderlands.]

This was familiar ground to De la Verendrye.  It was at the lonely fur
post of Nepigon, north of Michilimackinac, in the midst of a wilderness
forest, that he had eaten his heart out with baffled ambition from 1728
to 1730, when he descended to Montreal to lay before M. de Beauharnois,
the governor, plans for the discovery of the Western Sea.  Born at
Three Rivers in 1686, where the passion for discovery and Radisson's
fame were in the very air and traders from the wilderness of the Upper
Country wintered, young Pierre Gaultier de Varennes de la Verendrye, at
the ambitious age of fourteen, determined that he would become a
discoverer.[2]  At eighteen he was fighting in New England, at nineteen
in Newfoundland, at twenty-three in Europe at the battle of Malplaquet,
where he was carried off the field with nine wounds.  Eager for more
distinguished service, he returned to Canada in his twenty-seventh
year, only to find himself relegated to an obscure trading post in far
Northern wilds.  Then the boyhood ambitions reawakened.  All France and
Canada, too, were ringing with projects for the discovery of the
Western Sea.  Russia was acting.  France knew it.  The great priest
Charlevoix had been sent to Canada to investigate plans for the
venture, and had recommended an advance westward through the country of
the Sioux; but the Sioux[3] swarmed round the little fort at Lake Pepin
on the Mississippi like angry wasps.  That way, exploration was plainly
barred.  Nothing came of the attempt except a brisk fur trade and a
brisker warfare on the part of the Sioux.  At the lonely post of
Nepigon, vague Indian tales came to De la Verendrye of "a great river
flowing west" and "a vast, flat country devoid of timber" with "large
herds of cattle."  Ochagach, an old Indian, drew maps on birch bark
showing rivers that emptied into the Western Sea.  De la Verendrye's
smouldering ambitions kindled.  He hurried to Michilimackinac.  There
the traders and Indians told the same story.  Glory seemed suddenly
within De la Verendrye's grasp.  Carried away with the passion for
discovery that ruled his age, he took passage in the canoes bound for
Quebec.  The Marquis Charles de Beauharnois had become governor.  His
brother Claude had taken part in the exploration of the Mississippi.
The governor favored the project of the Western Sea.  Perhaps Russia's
activity gave edge to the governor's zest; but he promised De la
Verendrye the court's patronage and prestige.  This was not money.
France would not advance the enthusiast one sou, but granted him a
monopoly of the fur trade in the countries which he might discover.
The winter of 1731-1732 was spent by De la Verendrye as the guest of
the governor at Chateau St. Louis, arranging with merchants to furnish
goods for trade; and on May 19 the agreement was signed.  By a lucky
coincidence, the same winter that M. de la Verendrye had come down to
Quebec, there had arrived from the Mississippi fort, his nephew,
Christopher Dufrost, Sieur de la Jemmeraie, who had commanded the Sioux
post and been prisoner among the Indians.  So M. de la Verendrye chose
Jemmeraie for lieutenant.

And now the explorer was back at Michilimackinac, on the way to the
accomplishment of the daring ambition of his life.  The trip from
Montreal had fatigued the _voyageurs_.  Brandy flowed at the lake post
freely as at a modern mining camp.  The explorer kept military
discipline over his men.  They received no pay which could be
squandered away on liquor.  Discontent grew rife.  Taking Father
Messaiger, the Jesuit, as chaplain, M. de la Verendrye ordered his
grumbling _voyageurs_ to their canoes, and, passing through the Straits
of the Sault, headed his fleet once more for the Western Sea.  Other
explorers had preceded him on this part of the route.  The Jesuits had
coasted the north shore of Lake Superior.  So had Radisson.  In 1688 De
Noyon of Three Rivers had gone as far west as the Lake of the Woods
towards what is now Minnesota and Manitoba; and in 1717 De Lanoue had
built a fur post at Kaministiquia, near what is now Fort William on
Lake Superior.  The shore was always perilous to the boatman of frail
craft.  The harbors were fathoms deep, and the waves thrashed by a
cross wind often proved as dangerous as the high sea.  It took M. de la
Verendrye's canoemen a month to coast from the Straits of Mackinaw to
Kaministiquia, which they reached on the 26th of August, seventy-eight
days after they had left Montreal.  The same distance is now traversed
in two days.

Prospects were not encouraging.  The crews were sulky.  Kaministiquia
was the outermost post in the West.  Within a month, the early Northern
winter would set in.  One hunter can scramble for his winter's food
where fifty will certainly starve; and the Indians could not be
expected back from the chase with supplies of furs and food till
spring.  The canoemen had received no pay.  Free as woodland denizens,
they chafed under military command.  Boats were always setting out at
this season for the homeland hamlets of the St. Lawrence; and perhaps
other hunters told De la Verendrye's men that this Western Sea was a
will-o'-the-wisp that would lead for leagues and leagues over strange
lands, through hostile tribes, to a lonely death in the wilderness.
When the explorer ordered his men once more in line to launch for the
Western Sea, there was outright mutiny.  Soldiers and boatmen refused
to go on.  The Jesuit Messaiger threatened and expostulated with the
men.  Jemmeraie, who had been among the Sioux, interceded with the
_voyageurs_.  A compromise was effected.  Half the boatmen would go
ahead with Jemmeraie if M. de la Verendrye would remain with the other
half at Lake Superior as a rear guard for retreat and the supply of
provisions.  So the explorer suffered his first check in the advance to
the Western Sea.


III

1732-1736

Equipping four canoes, Lieutenant de la Jemmeraie and young Jean
Ba'tiste de la Verendrye set out with thirty men from Kaministiquia,
_portaged_ through dense forests over moss and dank rock past the high
cataract of the falls, and launched westward to prepare a fort for the
reception of their leader in spring.  Before winter had closed
navigation, Fort St. Pierre--named in honor of the explorer--had been
erected on the left bank or Minnesota side of Rainy Lake, and the two
young men not only succeeded in holding their mutinous followers, but
drove a thriving trade in furs with the Crees.  Perhaps the furs were
obtained at too great cost, for ammunition and firearms were the price
paid, but the same mistake has been made at a later day for a lesser
object than the discovery of the Western Sea.  The spring of 1732 saw
the young men back at Lake Superior, going post-haste to
Michilimackinac to exchange furs for the goods from Montreal.

On the 8th of June, exactly a year from the day that he had left
Montreal, M. de la Verendrye pushed forward with all his people for
Fort St. Pierre.  Five weeks later he was welcomed inside the
stockades.  Uniformed soldiers were a wonder to the awe-struck Crees,
who hung round the gateway with hands over their hushed lips.  Gifts of
ammunition won the loyalty of the chiefs.  Not to be lacking in
generosity, the Indians collected fifty of their gaudiest canoes and
offered to escort the explorer west to the Lake of the Woods.  De la
Verendrye could not miss such an offer.  Though his _voyageurs_ were
fatigued, he set out at once.  He had reached Fort St. Pierre on July
14.  In August his entire fleet glided over the Lake of the Woods.  The
threescore canoes manned by the Cree boatmen threaded the shadowy
defiles and labyrinthine channels of the Lake of the Woods--or Lake of
the Isles--coasting island after island along the south or Minnesota
shore westward to the opening of the river at the northwest angle.
This was the border of the Sioux territory.  Before the boatmen opened
the channel of an unknown river.  Around them were sheltered harbors,
good hunting, and good fishing.  The Crees favored this region for
winter camping ground because they could hide their families from the
Sioux on the sheltered islands of the wooded lake.  Night frosts had
painted the forests red.  The flacker of wild-fowl overhead, the skim
of ice forming on the lake, the poignant sting of the north wind--all
fore-warned winter's approach.  Jean de la Verendrye had not come up
with the supplies from Michilimackinac.  The explorer did not tempt
mutiny by going farther.  He ordered a halt and began building a fort
that was to be the centre of operations between Montreal and the
unfound Western Sea.  The fort was named St. Charles in honor of
Beauharnois.  It was defended by four rows of thick palisades fifteen
feet high.  In the middle of the enclosure stood the living quarters,
log cabins with thatched roofs.

[Illustration: A Group of Cree Indians.]

By October the Indians had scattered to their hunting-grounds like
leaves to the wind.  The ice thickened.  By November the islands were
ice-locked and snow had drifted waist-high through the forests.  The
_voyageurs_ could still fish through ice holes for food; but where was
young Jean who was to bring up provisions from Michilimackinac?  The
commander did not voice his fears; and his men were too deep in the
wilds for desertion.  One afternoon, a shout sounded from the silent
woods, and out from the white-edged evergreens stepped a figure on
snowshoes--Jean de la Verendrye, leading his boatmen, with the
provisions packed on their backs, from a point fifty miles away where
the ice had caught the canoes.  If the supplies had not come, the
explorer could neither have advanced nor retreated in spring.  It was a
risk that De la Verendrye did not intend to have repeated.  Suspecting
that his merchant partners were dissatisfied, he sent Jemmeraie down to
Montreal in 1733 to report and urge the necessity for prompt forwarding
of all supplies.  With Jemmeraie went the Jesuit Messaiger; but their
combined explanations failed to satisfy the merchants of Montreal.  De
la Verendrye had now been away three years.  True, he had constructed
two fur posts and sent East two cargoes of furs.  His partners were
looking for enormous wealth.  Disappointed and caring nothing for the
Western Sea; perhaps, too, secretly accusing De la Verendrye of making
profits privately, as many a gentleman of fortune did,--the merchants
decided to advance provisions only in proportion to earnings.  What
would become of the fifty men in the Northern wilderness the partners
neither asked nor cared.

Young Jean had meanwhile pushed on and built Fort Maurepas on Lake
Winnipeg; but his father dared not leave Fort St. Charles without
supplies.  De la Verendrye's position was now desperate.  He was
hopelessly in debt to his men for wages.  That did not help discipline.
His partners were not only withholding supplies, but charging up a high
rate of interest on the first equipment.  To turn back meant ruin.  To
go forward he was powerless.  Leaving Jemmeraie in command, and
permitting his eager son to go ahead with a few picked men to Fort
Maurepas on Lake Winnipeg, De la Verendrye took a small canoe and
descended with all swiftness to Quebec.  The winter of 1634-1635 was
spent with the governor; and the partners were convinced that they must
either go on with the venture or lose all.  They consented to continue
supplying goods, but also charging all outlay against the explorer.

Father Aulneau went back with De la Verendrye as chaplain.  The trip
was made at terrible speed, in the hottest season, through stifling
forest fires.  Behind, at slower pace, came the provisions.  De la
Verendrye reached the Lake of the Woods in September.  Fearing the
delay of the goods for trade, and dreading the danger of famine with so
many men in one place, De la Verendrye despatched Jemmeraie to winter
with part of the forces at Lake Winnipeg, where Jean and Pierre, the
second son, had built Fort Maurepas.  The worst fears were realized.
Ice had blocked the Northern rivers by the time the supplies had come
to Lake Superior.  Fishing failed.  The hunt was poor.  During the
winter of 1736 food became scantier at the little forts of St. Pierre,
St. Charles, and Maurepas.  Rations were reduced from three times to
once and twice a day.  By spring De la Verendrye was put to all the
extremities of famine-stricken traders, his men subsisting on
parchment, moccasin leather, roots, and their hunting dogs.

He was compelled to wait at St. Charles for the delayed supplies.
While he waited came blow upon blow: Jean and Pierre arrived from Fort
Maurepas with news that Jemmeraie had died three weeks before on his
way down to aid De la Verendrye.  Wrapped in a hunter's robe, his body
was buried in the sand-bank of a little Northern stream, La Fourche des
Roseaux.  Over the lonely grave the two brothers had erected a cross.
Father and sons took stock of supplies.  They had not enough powder to
last another month, and already the Indians were coming in with furs
and food to be traded for ammunition.  If the Crees had known the
weakness of the white men, short work might have been made of Fort St.
Charles.  It never entered the minds of De la Verendrye and his sons to
give up.  They decided to rush three canoes of twenty _voyageurs_ to
Michilimackinac for food and powder.  Father Aulneau, the young priest,
accompanied the boatmen to attend a religious retreat at
Michilimackinac.  It had been a hard year for the youthful missionary.
The ship that brought him from France had been plague-stricken.  The
trip to Fort St. Charles had been arduous and swift, through stifling
heat; and the year passed in the North was one of famine.

Accompanied by the priest and led by Jean de la Verendrye, now in his
twenty-third year, the _voyageurs_ embarked hurriedly on the 8th of
June, 1736, five years to a day from the time that they left
Montreal--and a fateful day it was--in the search for the Western Sea.
The Crees had always been friendly; and when the boatmen landed on a
sheltered island twenty miles from Fort St. Charles to camp for the
night, no sentry was stationed.  The lake lay calm as glass in the hot
June night, the camp-fire casting long lines across the water that
could be seen for miles.  An early start was to be made in the morning
and a furious pace to be kept all the way to Lake Superior, and the
_voyageurs_ were presently sound asleep on the sand.  The keenest ears
could scarcely have distinguished the soft lapping of muffled paddles;
and no one heard the moccasined tread of ambushed Indians
reconnoitring.  Seventeen Sioux stepped from their canoes, stole from
cover to cover, and looked out on the unsuspecting sleepers.  Then the
Indians as noiselessly slipped back to their canoes to carry word of
the discovery to a band of marauders.

[Illustration: "The soldiers marched out from Mount Royal."]

Something had occurred at Fort St. Charles without M. de la Verendrye's
knowledge.  Hilarious with their new possessions of firearms, and
perhaps, also, mad with the brandy of which Father Aulneau had
complained, a few mischievous Crees had fired from the fort on
wandering Sioux of the prairie.

"Who--fire--on--us?" demanded the outraged Sioux.

"The French," laughed the Crees.

The Sioux at once went back to a band of one hundred and thirty
warriors.  "Tigers of the plains" the Sioux were called, and now the
tigers' blood was up.  They set out to slay the first white man seen.
By chance, he was one Bourassa, coasting by himself.  Taking him
captive, they had tied him to burn him, when a slave squaw rushed out,
crying: "What would you do?  This Frenchman is a friend of the Sioux!
He saved my life!  If you desire to be avenged, go farther on!  You
will find a camp of Frenchmen, among whom is the son of the white
chief!"

The _voyageur_ was at once unbound, and scouts scattered to find the
white men.  Night had passed before the scouts had carried news of Jean
de la Verendrye's men to the marauding warriors.  The ghostly gray of
dawn saw the _voyageurs_ paddling swiftly through the morning mist from
island to island of the Lake of the Woods.  Cleaving the mist behind,
following solely by the double foam wreaths rippling from the canoe
prows, came the silent boats of the Sioux.  When sunrise lifted the
fog, the pursuers paused like stealthy cats.  At sunrise Jean de la
Verendrye landed his crews for breakfast.  Camp-fires told the Indians
where to follow.


A few days later bands of Sautaux came to the camping ground of the
French.  The heads of the white men lay on a beaver skin.  All had been
scalped.  The missionary, Aulneau, was on his knees, as if in morning
prayers.  An arrow projected from his head.  His left hand was on the
earth, fallen forward, his right hand uplifted, invoking Divine aid.
Young Verendrye lay face down, his back hacked to pieces, a spear sunk
in his waist, the headless body mockingly decorated with porcupine
quills.  So died one of the bravest of the young nobility in New France.

The Sautaux erected a cairn of stones over the bodies of the dead.  All
that was known of the massacre was vague Indian gossip.  The Sioux
reported that they had not intended to murder the priest, but a
crazy-brained fanatic had shot the fatal arrow and broken from
restraint, weapon in hand.  Rain-storms had washed out all marks of the
fray.

In September the bodies of the victims were carried to Fort St.
Charles, and interred in the chapel.  Eight hundred Crees besought M.
de la Verendrye to let them avenge the murder; but the veteran of
Malplaquet exhorted them not to war.  Meanwhile, Fort St. Charles
awaited the coming of supplies from Lake Superior.


IV

1736-1740

A week passed, and on the 17th of June the canoe loads of ammunition
and supplies for which the murdered _voyageurs_ had been sent arrived
at Fort St. Charles.  In June the Indian hunters came in with the
winter's hunt; and on the 20th thirty Sautaux hurried to Fort St.
Charles, to report that they had found the mangled bodies of the
massacred Frenchmen on an island seven leagues from the fort.  Again La
Verendrye had to choose whether to abandon his cherished dreams, or
follow them at the risk of ruin and death.  As before, when his men had
mutinied, he determined to advance.
