The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astronomy of To-day, by Cecil G. Dolmage

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astronomy of To-day
       A Popular Introduction in Non-Technical Language

Author: Cecil G. Dolmage

Release Date: April 21, 2009 [EBook #28570]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMY OF TO-DAY ***




Produced by Brenda Lewis, Scott Marusak, Greg Bergquist
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






Transcriber's Note

The punctuation and spelling from the original text have been faithfully
preserved. Only obvious typographical errors have been corrected. The
advertisement from the beginning of the book has been joined with the
other advertisements near the end of the book.

Greek words are spelled out and represented as [word]. Greek letters are
represented as [a] "for alpha".




ASTRONOMY OF TO-DAY

[Illustration: THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN OF AUGUST 30TH, 1905.

The Corona; from a water-colour sketch, made at Burgos, in Spain, during
the total phase, by the French Artist, Mdlle. ANDREE MOCH.]




  ASTRONOMY OF
  TO-DAY

  _A POPULAR INTRODUCTION IN
  NON-TECHNICAL LANGUAGE_

  By

  CECIL G. DOLMAGE, M.A., LL.D., D.C.L.

  Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society; Member of
  the British Astronomical Association; Member of
  the Astronomical Society of the Pacific; Membre
  de la Societe Astronomique de France;
  Membre de la Societe Belge
  d'Astronomie



  With a Frontispiece in Colour
  and 45 Illustrations & Diagrams


  _THIRD EDITION_


  LONDON
  SEELEY AND CO. LIMITED
  38 GREAT RUSSELL STREET
  1910




PREFACE


The object of this book is to give an account of the science of
Astronomy, as it is known at the present day, in a manner acceptable to
the _general reader_.

It is too often supposed that it is impossible to acquire any useful
knowledge of Astronomy without much laborious study, and without
adventuring into quite a new world of thought. The reasoning applied to
the study of the celestial orbs is, however, of no different order from
that which is employed in the affairs of everyday life. The science of
mathematics is perhaps responsible for the idea that some kind of
difference does exist; but mathematical processes are, in effect, no
more than ordinary logic in concentrated form, the _shorthand of
reasoning_, so to speak. I have attempted in the following pages to take
the main facts and theories of Astronomy out of those mathematical forms
which repel the general reader, and to present them in the _ordinary
language of our workaday world_.

The few diagrams introduced are altogether supplementary, and are not
connected with the text by any wearying cross-references. Each diagram
is complete in itself, being intended to serve as a pictorial aid, in
case the wording of the text should not have perfectly conveyed the
desired meaning. The full page illustrations are also described as
adequately as possible at the foot of each.

As to the coloured frontispiece, this must be placed in a category by
itself. It is the work of the _artist_ as distinct from the scientist.

The book itself contains incidentally a good deal of matter concerned
with the Astronomy of the past, the introduction of which has been found
necessary in order to make clearer the Astronomy of our time.

It would be quite impossible for me to enumerate here the many sources
from which information has been drawn. But I acknowledge my especial
indebtedness to Professor F.R. Moulton's _Introduction to Astronomy_
(Macmillan, 1906), to the works on Eclipses of the late Rev. S.J.
Johnson and of Mr. W.T. Lynn, and to the excellent _Journals of the
British Astronomical Association_. Further, for those grand questions
concerned with the Stellar Universe at large, I owe a very deep debt to
the writings of the famous American astronomer, Professor Simon Newcomb,
and of our own countryman, Mr. John Ellard Gore; to the latter of whom I
am under an additional obligation for much valuable information
privately rendered.

In my search for suitable illustrations, I have been greatly aided by
the kindly advice of Mr. W. H. Wesley, the Assistant Secretary of the
Royal Astronomical Society. To those who have been so good as to permit
me to reproduce pictures and photographs, I desire to record my best
thanks as follows:--To the French Artist, Mdlle. Andree Moch; to the
Astronomer Royal; to Sir David Gill, K.C.B., LL.D., F.R.S.; to the
Council of the Royal Astronomical Society; to Professor E.B. Frost,
Director of the Yerkes Observatory; to M.P. Puiseux, of the Paris
Observatory; to Dr. Max Wolf, of Heidelberg; to Professor Percival
Lowell; to the Rev. Theodore E.R. Phillips, M.A., F.R.A.S.; to Mr. W.H.
Wesley; to the Warner and Swasey Co., of Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.; to the
publishers of _Knowledge_, and to Messrs. Sampson, Low & Co. For
permission to reproduce the beautiful photograph of the Spiral Nebula in
Canes Venatici (Plate XXII.), I am indebted to the distinguished
astronomer, the late Dr. W.E. Wilson, D.Sc., F.R.S., whose untimely
death, I regret to state, occurred in the early part of this year.

Finally, my best thanks are due to Mr. John Ellard Gore, F.R.A.S.,
M.R.I.A., to Mr. W.H. Wesley, and to Mr. John Butler Burke, M.A., of
Cambridge, for their kindness in reading the proof-sheets.

CECIL G. DOLMAGE.

LONDON, S.W.,
_August 4, 1908._




PREFATORY NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION


The author of this book lived only long enough to hear of the favour
with which it had been received, and to make a few corrections in view
of the second edition which it has so soon reached.

_December 1908._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I
                                            PAGE
  THE ANCIENT VIEW                            17

  CHAPTER II
  THE MODERN VIEW                             20

  CHAPTER III
  THE SOLAR SYSTEM                            29

  CHAPTER IV
  CELESTIAL MECHANISM                         38

  CHAPTER V
  CELESTIAL DISTANCES                         46

  CHAPTER VI
  CELESTIAL MEASUREMENT                       55

  CHAPTER VII
  ECLIPSES AND KINDRED PHENOMENA              61

  CHAPTER VIII
  FAMOUS ECLIPSES OF THE SUN                  83

  CHAPTER IX
  FAMOUS ECLIPSES OF THE MOON                101

  CHAPTER X
  THE GROWTH OF OBSERVATION                  105

  CHAPTER XI
  SPECTRUM ANALYSIS                          121

  CHAPTER XII
  THE SUN                                    127

  CHAPTER XIII
  THE SUN--_continued_                       134

  CHAPTER XIV
  THE INFERIOR PLANETS                       146

  CHAPTER XV
  THE EARTH                                  158

  CHAPTER XVI
  THE MOON                                   183

  CHAPTER XVII
  THE SUPERIOR PLANETS                       209

  CHAPTER XVIII
  THE SUPERIOR PLANETS--_continued_          229

  CHAPTER XIX
  COMETS                                     247

  CHAPTER XX
  REMARKABLE COMETS                          259

  CHAPTER XXI
  METEORS OR SHOOTING STARS                  266

  CHAPTER XXII
  THE STARS                                  278

  CHAPTER XXIII
  THE STARS--_continued_                     287

  CHAPTER XXIV
  SYSTEMS OF STARS                           300

  CHAPTER XXV
  THE STELLAR UNIVERSE                       319

  CHAPTER XXVI
  THE STELLAR UNIVERSE--_continued_          329

  CHAPTER XXVII
  THE BEGINNING OF THINGS                    333

  CHAPTER XXVIII
  THE END OF THINGS                          342

  INDEX                                      351




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


LIST OF PLATES

  PLATE
  THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN
  OF AUGUST 30, 1905                       _Frontispiece_

  I. THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN
     OF MAY 17, 1882                   _To face page_  96

  II. GREAT TELESCOPE OF HEVELIUS        "    "       110

  III. A TUBELESS, OR "AERIAL" TELESCOPE "    "       112

  IV. THE GREAT YERKES TELESCOPE         "    "       118

  V. THE SUN, SHOWING SEVERAL
     GROUPS OF SPOTS                     "    "       134

  VI. PHOTOGRAPH OF A SUNSPOT            "    "       136

  VII. FORMS OF THE SOLAR CORONA
       AT THE EPOCHS OF SUNSPOT
       MAXIMUM AND SUNSPOT
       MINIMUM RESPECTIVELY.
      (A) THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF
      THE SUN OF DECEMBER 22, 1870.
      (B) THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF
      THE SUN OF MAY 28, 1900            "    "       142

  VIII. THE MOON                       _To face page_ 196

  IX. MAP OF THE MOON, SHOWING
      THE PRINCIPAL "CRATERS,"
      MOUNTAIN RANGES AND
      "SEAS"                             "    "       198

  X. ONE OF THE MOST INTERESTING
     REGIONS ON THE MOON                 "    "       200

  XI. THE MOON (SHOWING SYSTEMS
      OF "RAYS")                         "    "       204

  XII. A MAP OF THE PLANET MARS          "    "       216

  XIII. MINOR PLANET TRAILS              "    "       226

  XIV. THE PLANET JUPITER                "    "       230

  XV. THE PLANET SATURN                  "    "       236

  XVI. EARLY REPRESENTATIONS OF
       SATURN                            "    "       242

  XVII. DONATI'S COMET                   "    "       256

  XVIII. DANIEL'S COMET OF 1907          "    "       258

  XIX. THE SKY AROUND THE NORTH
       POLE                              "    "       292

  XX. ORION AND HIS NEIGHBOURS           "    "       296

  XXI. THE GREAT GLOBULAR CLUSTER
       IN THE SOUTHERN CONSTELLATION
       OF CENTAURUS                      "    "       306

  XXII. SPIRAL NEBULA IN THE CONSTELLATION
        OF CANES VENATICI                "    "       314

  XXIII. THE GREAT NEBULA IN THE
         CONSTELLATION OF ANDROMEDA    _To face page_ 316

  XXIV. THE GREAT NEBULA IN THE
        CONSTELLATION OF ORION           "    "       318




LIST OF DIAGRAMS


  FIG.                                         PAGE
  1. THE PTOLEMAIC IDEA OF THE UNIVERSE          19

  2. THE COPERNICAN THEORY OF THE SOLAR
     SYSTEM                                      21

  3. TOTAL AND PARTIAL ECLIPSES OF THE MOON      64

  4. TOTAL AND PARTIAL ECLIPSES OF THE SUN       67

  5. "BAILY'S BEADS"                             70

  6. MAP OF THE WORLD ON MERCATOR'S PROJECTION,
     SHOWING A PORTION OF THE PROGRESS
     OF THE TOTAL SOLAR ECLIPSE OF
     AUGUST 30, 1905, ACROSS THE SURFACE
     OF THE EARTH                                81

  7. THE "RING WITH WINGS"                       87

  8. THE VARIOUS TYPES OF TELESCOPE             113

  9. THE SOLAR SPECTRUM                         123

  10. A SECTION THROUGH THE SUN, SHOWING HOW
      THE PROMINENCES RISE FROM THE
      CHROMOSPHERE                              131

  11. ORBIT AND PHASES OF AN INFERIOR PLANET    148

  12. THE "BLACK DROP"                          153

  13. SUMMER AND WINTER                         176

  14. ORBIT AND PHASES OF THE MOON              184

  15. THE ROTATION OF THE MOON ON HER AXIS      187

  16. LAPLACE'S "PERENNIAL FULL MOON"           191

  17. ILLUSTRATING THE AUTHOR'S EXPLANATION OF
      THE APPARENT ENLARGEMENT OF CELESTIAL
      OBJECTS                                   195

  18. SHOWING HOW THE TAIL OF A COMET IS
      DIRECTED AWAY FROM THE SUN                248

  19. THE COMET OF 1066, AS REPRESENTED IN THE
      BAYEUX TAPESTRY                           263

  20. PASSAGE OF THE EARTH THROUGH THE THICKEST
      PORTION OF A METEOR SWARM                 269




ASTRONOMY OF TO-DAY




CHAPTER I

THE ANCIENT VIEW


It is never safe, as we know, to judge by appearances, and this is
perhaps more true of astronomy than of anything else.

For instance, the idea which one would most naturally form of the earth
and heaven is that the solid earth on which we live and move extends to
a great distance in every direction, and that the heaven is an immense
dome upon the inner surface of which the stars are fixed. Such must
needs have been the idea of the universe held by men in the earliest
times. In their view the earth was of paramount importance. The sun and
moon were mere lamps for the day and for the night; and these, if not
gods themselves, were at any rate under the charge of special deities,
whose task it was to guide their motions across the vaulted sky.

Little by little, however, this simple estimate of nature began to be
overturned. Difficult problems agitated the human mind. On what, for
instance, did the solid earth rest, and what prevented the vaulted
heaven from falling in upon men and crushing them out of existence?
Fantastic myths sprang from the vain attempts to solve these riddles.
The Hindoos, for example, imagined the earth as supported by four
elephants which stood upon the back of a gigantic tortoise, which, in
its turn, floated on the surface of an elemental ocean. The early
Western civilisations conceived the fable of the Titan Atlas, who, as a
punishment for revolt against the Olympian gods, was condemned to hold
up the expanse of sky for ever and ever.

Later on glimmerings of the true light began to break in upon men. The
Greek philosophers, who busied themselves much with such matters,
gradually became convinced that the earth was spherical in shape, that
is to say, round like a ball. In this opinion we now know that they were
