"Yes, of course," the Queen said. She smiled, and put up a hand to pat
at her white hair under the Elizabethan skullcap. "I think I should
like to go to the Palace," she said. "After all, isn't that where a
Queen should be?"

Boyd said, in a kind of explosion: "London? England?"

"Oh, dear me...." the Queen began, and Barbara said:

"I'm afraid that I simply can't allow anything like that. Overseas--"

"I didn't mean overseas, dear," Her Majesty said. "Sir Kenneth, please
explain to these people."

The Palace, Malone knew, was more properly known as the Golden Palace.
It was right in Las Vegas--convenient to all sources of money.

As a matter of fact, it was one of the biggest gambling houses along
the Las Vegas strip, a veritable chaos of wheels, cards, dice, chips
and other such devices. Malone explained all this to the others,
wondering meanwhile why Miss Thompson wanted to go there.

"Not Miss Thompson, _please_, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said.

"Not Miss Thompson what?" Boyd said. "What's going on anyhow?"

"She's reading my mind," Malone said.

"Well, then," Boyd snapped, "tell her to keep it to herself." The car
started up again with a roar and Malone and the others were thrown
around again, this time toward the back. There was a chorus of groans
and squeals, and they were on their way once more.

"To reply to your question, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said.

Lady Barbara said, with some composure: "What question--Your Majesty?"

The Queen nodded regally at her. "Sir Kenneth was wondering why I
wished to go to the Golden Palace," she said. "And my reply is this:
it is none of your business why I want to go there. After all, is my
word law, or isn't it?"

There didn't seem to be a good enough answer to that, Malone thought
sadly. He kept quiet and was relieved to note that the others did the
same. However, after a second he thought of something else.

"Your Majesty," he began carefully, "we've got to go to Yucca Flats
tomorrow. Remember?"

"Certainly," the Queen said. "My memory is quite good, thank you. But
that is tomorrow morning. We have the rest of the night left. It's
only a little after nine, you know."

"Heavens," Barbara said. "Is it that late?"

"It's even later," Boyd said sourly. "It's much later than you think."

"And it's getting later all the time," Malone added. "Pretty soon the
sun will go out and all life on earth will end. Won't that be nice and
peaceful?"

"I'm looking forward to it," Boyd said.

"I'm not," Barbara said. "But I've got to get some sleep tonight, if
I'm going to be any good at all tomorrow."

_You're pretty good right now_, Malone thought, but he didn't say a
word. He felt the Queen's eye on him but didn't turn around. After
all, she was on his side--wasn't she?

At any rate, she didn't say anything.

"Perhaps it would be best," Barbara said, "if you and I--Your
Majesty--just went home and rested up. Some other time, then, when
there's nothing vital to do, we could--"

"No," the Queen said. "We couldn't. Really, Lady Barbara, how often
will I have to remind you of the duties you owe your sovereign--not
the least of which is obedience, as dear old Ben used to say."

"Ben?" Malone said, and immediately wished he hadn't.

"Johnson, dear boy," the Queen said. "Really a remarkable man--and
such a good friend to poor Will. Why, did you ever hear the story of
how he actually paid Will's rent in London once upon a time? That was
while Will and that Anne of his were having one of their arguments, of
course. I didn't tell you that story, did I?"

"No," Malone said truthfully, but his voice was full of foreboding.
"If I might remind Your Majesty of the subject," he added tentatively,
"I should like to say--"

"Remind me of the subject!" the Queen said, obviously delighted. "What
a lovely pun! And how much better because purely unconscious! My, my,
Sir Kenneth, I never suspected you of a pointed sense of humor--could
you be a descendant of Sir Richard Greene, I wonder?"

"I doubt it," Malone said. "My ancestors were all poor but Irish." He
paused. "Or, if you prefer, Irish, but poor." Another pause, and then
he added: "If that means anything at all. Which I doubt."

"In any case," the Queen said, her eyes twinkling, "you were about to
enter a new objection to our little visit to the Palace, were you
not?"

Malone admitted as much. "I really think that--"

Her eyes grew suddenly cold. "If I hear any more objections, Sir
Kenneth, I shall not only rescind your knighthood and--when I regain
my rightful kingdom--deny you your dukedom, but I shall refuse to
cooperate any further in the business of Project Isle."

Malone turned cold. His face, he knew without glancing in the mirror,
was white and pale. He thought of what Burris would do to him if he
didn't follow through on his assigned job.

Even if he wasn't as good as Burris thought he was, he really liked
being an FBI agent. He didn't want to be fired.

And Burris had said: _"Give her anything she wants."_

He gulped and tried to make his face look normal. "All right," he
said. "Fine. We'll go to the Palace."

He tried to ignore the pall of apprehension that fell over the car.


                                  6

The management of the Golden Palace had been in business for many
long, dreary, profitable years, and each member of the staff thought
he or she had seen just about everything there was to be seen. And
those that were new felt an obligation to _look_ as if they'd seen
everything.

Therefore, when the entourage of Queen Elizabeth I strolled into the
main salon, not a single eye was batted. Not a single gasp was heard.

Nevertheless, the staff kept a discreet eye on the crew. Drunks, rich
men or Arabian millionaires were all familiar. But a group out of the
Sixteenth Century was something else again.

Malone almost strutted, conscious of the sidelong glances the group
was drawing. But it was obvious that Sir Thomas was the major
attraction. Even if you could accept the idea of people in strange
costumes, the sight of a living, breathing absolute duplicate of King
Henry VIII was a little too much to take. It has been reported that
two ladies named Jane, and one named Catherine, came down with sudden
headaches and left the salon within five minutes of the group's
arrival.

Malone felt he knew, however, why he wasn't drawing his full share of
attention. He felt a little out of place.

The costume was one thing, and, to tell the truth, he was beginning to
enjoy it. Even with the weight of the stuff, it was going to be a
wrench to go back to single-breasted suits and plain white shirts. But
he did feel that he should have been carrying a sword.

Instead, he had a .44 Magnum Colt snuggled beneath his left armpit.

Somehow, a .44 Magnum Colt didn't seem as romantic as a sword. Malone
pictured himself saying: "Take that, varlet." Was varlet what you
called them, he wondered. Maybe it was valet.

"Take that, valet," he muttered. No, that sounded even worse. Oh,
well, he could look it up later.

The truth was that he had been born in the wrong century. He could
imagine himself at the Mermaid Tavern, hob-nobbing with Shakespeare
and all the rest of them. He wondered if Richard Greene would be
there. Then he wondered who Richard Greene was.

Behind Sir Kenneth, Sir Thomas Boyd strode, looking majestic, as if he
were about to fling purses of gold to the citizenry. As a matter of
fact, Malone thought, he was. They all were.

Purses of good old United States of America gold.

Behind Sir Thomas came Queen Elizabeth and her Lady-in-Waiting, Lady
Barbara Wilson. They made a beautiful foursome.

"The roulette table," Her Majesty said with dignity. "Precede me."

They pushed their way through the crowd. Most of the customers were
either excited enough, drunk enough, or both to see nothing in the
least incongruous about a Royal Family of the Tudors invading the
Golden Palace. Very few of them, as a matter of fact, seemed to notice
the group.

They were roulette players. They noticed nothing but the table and the
wheel. Malone wondered what they were thinking about, decided to ask
Queen Elizabeth, and then decided against it. He felt it would make
him nervous to know.

Her Majesty took a handful of chips.

The handful was worth, Malone knew, exactly five thousand dollars.
That, he'd thought, ought to last them an evening, even in the Golden
Palace. In the center of the strip, inside the city limits of Las
Vegas itself, the five thousand would have lasted much longer--but Her
Majesty wanted the Palace, and the Palace it was.

Malone began to smile. Since he couldn't avoid the evening, he was
determined to enjoy it. It was sort of fun, in its way, indulging a
sweet harmless old lady. And there was nothing they could do until the
next morning, anyhow.

His indulgent smile faded very suddenly.

Her Majesty plunked the entire handful of chips--_five thousand
dollars!_ Malone thought dazedly--onto the table. "Five thousand," she
said in clear, cool measured tones, "on number one."

The croupier blinked only slightly. He bowed. "Yes, Your Majesty," he
said.

Malone was briefly thankful, in the midst of his black horror, that he
had called the management and told them that the Queen's plays were
backed by the United States Government. Her Majesty was going to get
unlimited credit--and a good deal of awed and somewhat puzzled
respect.

Malone watched the spin begin with mixed feelings. There was five
thousand dollars riding on the little ball. But, after all, Her
Majesty was a telepath. Did that mean anything?

He hadn't decided by the time the wheel stopped, and by then he didn't
have to decide.

"Thirty-four," the croupier said tonelessly. "Red, Even and High."

He raked in the chips with a nonchalant air.

Malone felt as if he had swallowed his stomach. Boyd and Lady Barbara,
standing nearby, had absolutely no expressions on their faces. Malone
needed no telepath to tell him what they were thinking.

They were exactly the same as he was. They were incapable of thought.

But Her Majesty never batted an eyelash. "Come, Sir Kenneth," she
said. "Let's go on to the poker tables."

She swept out. Her entourage followed her, shambling a little, and
blank-eyed. Malone was still thinking about the five thousand dollars.
Oh, well, Burris had said to give the lady anything she wanted. _But
my God!_ he thought. _Did she have to play for royal stakes?_

"I am, after all, a Queen," she whispered back to him.

Malone thought about the National Debt. He wondered if a million more
or less would make any real difference. There would be questions asked
in committees about it. He tried to imagine himself explaining the
evening to a group of Congressmen. "Well, you see, gentlemen, there
was this roulette wheel--"

He gave it up.

Then he wondered how much hotter the water was going to get, and he
stopped thinking altogether in self-defense.

In the next room, there were scattered tables. At one, a poker game
was in full swing. Only five were playing; one, by his white-tie-and-
tails uniform, was easily recognizable as a house dealer. The other
four were all men, one of them in full cowboy regalia. The Tudors
descended upon them with great suddenness, and the house dealer looked
up and almost lost his cigarette.

"We haven't any money, Your Majesty," Malone whispered.

She smiled up at him sweetly, and then drew him aside. "If you were a
telepath," she said, "how would _you_ play poker?"

Malone thought about that for a minute, and then turned to look for
Boyd. But Sir Thomas didn't even have to be given instructions.
"Another five hundred?" he said.

Her Majesty sniffed audibly. "Another five thousand," she said
regally.

Boyd looked Malonewards. Malone looked defeated.

Boyd turned with a small sigh and headed for the cashier's booth.
Three minutes later, he was back with a fat fistful of chips.

"Five grand?" Malone whispered to him.

"Ten," Boyd said. "I know when to back a winner."

Her Majesty went over to the table. The dealer had regained control,
but looked up at them with a puzzled stare.

"You know," the Queen said, with an obvious attempt to put the man at
his ease, "I've always wanted to visit a gambling hall."

"Sure, lady," the dealer said. "Naturally."

"May I sit down?"

The dealer looked at the group. "How about your friends?" he said
cautiously.

The queen shook her head. "They would rather watch, I'm sure."

For once Malone blessed the woman's telepathic talent. He, Boyd and
Barbara Wilson formed a kind of Guard of Honor around the chair which
Her Majesty occupied. Boyd handed over the new pile of chips, and was
favored with a royal smile.

"This is a poker game, ma'am," the dealer said to her quietly.
