
"You speak mysteriously--you know of some pressing and present danger,"
said the Lady Hameline.

"I have read it in his eye for this hour past!" exclaimed the Lady
Isabelle, clasping her hands. "Sacred Virgin, what will become of us?"

"Nothing, I hope, but what you would desire," answered Durward. "And now
I am compelled to ask--gentle ladies, can you trust me?"

"Trust you?" answered the Countess Hameline. "Certainly. But why the
question? Or how far do you ask our confidence?"

"I, on my part," said the Countess Isabelle, "trust you implicitly, and
without condition. If you can deceive us, Quentin, I will no more look
for truth, save in Heaven!"

"Gentle lady," replied Durward, highly gratified, "you do me but
justice. My object is to alter our route, by proceeding directly by
the left bank of the Maes to Liege, instead of crossing at Namur. This
differs from the order assigned by King Louis and the instructions given
to the guide. But I heard news in the monastery of marauders on the
right bank of the Maes, and of the march of Burgundian soldiers to
suppress them. Both circumstances alarm me for your safety. Have I your
permission so far to deviate from the route of your journey?"

"My ample and full permission," answered the younger lady.

"Cousin," said the Lady Hameline, "I believe with you that the youth
means us well--but bethink you--we transgress the instructions of King
Louis, so positively iterated."

"And why should we regard his instructions?" said the Lady Isabelle. "I
am, I thank Heaven for it, no subject of his, and, as a suppliant, he
has abused the confidence he induced me to repose in him. I would not
dishonour this young gentleman by weighing his word for an instant
against the injunctions of yonder crafty and selfish despot."

"Now, may God bless you for that very word, lady," said Quentin,
joyously, "and if I deserve not the trust it expresses, tearing with
wild horses in this life and eternal tortures in the next were e'en too
good for my deserts."

So saying, he spurred his horse, and rejoined the Bohemian. This worthy
seemed of a remarkably passive, if not a forgiving temper. Injury or
threat never dwelt, or at least seemed not to dwell in his recollection,
and he entered into the conversation which Durward presently commenced,
just as if there had been no unkindly word betwixt them in the course of
the morning.

The dog, thought the Scot, snarls not now, because he intends to clear
scores with me at once and for ever, when he can snatch me by the very
throat, but we will try for once whether we cannot foil a traitor at his
own weapons.

"Honest Hayraddin," he said, "thou hast travelled with us for ten days,
yet hast never shown us a specimen of your skill in fortune telling,
which you are, nevertheless, so fond of practising that you must needs
display your gifts in every convent at which we stop, at the risk of
being repaid by a night's lodging under a haystack."

"You have never asked me for a specimen of my skill," said the gipsy.
"You are, like the rest of the world, contented to ridicule those
mysteries which they do not understand."

"Give me then a present proof of your skill," said Quentin and,
ungloving his hand, he held it out to the gipsy.

Hayraddin carefully regarded all the lines which crossed each other on
the Scotchman's palm, and noted, with equally Scrupulous attention, the
little risings or swellings at the roots of the fingers, which were
then believed as intimately connected with the disposition, habits, and
fortunes of the individual, as the organs of the brain are pretended to
be in our own time.

"Here is a hand," said Hayraddin, "which speaks of toils endured, and
dangers encountered. I read in it an early acquaintance with the hilt
of the sword, and yet some acquaintance also with the clasps of the mass
book."

"This of my past life you may have learned elsewhere," said Quentin,
"tell me something of the future."

"This line from the hill of Venus," said the Bohemian, "not broken off
abruptly, but attending and accompanying the line of life, argues a
certain and large fortune by marriage, whereby the party shall be raised
among the wealthy and the noble by the influence of successful love."

"Such promises you make to all who ask your advice," said Quentin, "they
are part of your art."

"What I tell you is as certain," said Hayraddin, "as that you shall
in brief space be menaced with mighty danger, which I infer from
this bright blood red line cutting the table line transversely, and
intimating stroke of sword, or other violence, from which you shall only
be saved by the attachment of a faithful friend."

"Thyself, ha?" said Quentin, somewhat indignant that the chiromantist
should thus practise on his credulity, and endeavour to found a
reputation by predicting the consequences of his own treachery.

"My art," replied the Zingaro, "tells me naught that concerns myself."

"In this, then, the seers of my land," said Quentin, "excel your boasted
knowledge, for their skill teaches them the dangers by which they are
themselves beset. I left not my hills without having felt a portion of
the double vision with which their inhabitants are gifted, and I will
give thee a proof of it, in exchange for thy specimen of palmistry.
Hayraddin, the danger which threatens me lies on the right bank of the
river--I will avoid it by travelling to Liege on the left bank."

The guide listened with an apathy, which, knowing the circumstances in
which Maugrabin stood, Quentin could not by any means comprehend.

"If you accomplish your purpose," was the Bohemian's reply, "the
dangerous crisis will be transferred from your lot to mine."

"I thought," said Quentin, "that you said but now, that you could not
presage your own fortune?"

"Not in the manner in which I have but now told you yours," answered
Hayraddin, "but it requires little knowledge of Louis of Valois, to
presage that he will hang your guide, because your pleasure was to
deviate from the road which he recommended."

"The attaining with safety the purpose of the journey, and ensuring its
happy termination," said Quentin, "must atone for a deviation from the
exact line of the prescribed route."

"Ay," replied the Bohemian, "if you are sure that the King had in his
own eye the same termination of the pilgrimage which he insinuated to
you."

"And of what other termination is it possible that he could have been
meditating? or why should you suppose he had any purpose in his thought,
other than was avowed in his direction?" inquired Quentin.

"Simply," replied the Zingaro, "that those who know aught of the Most
Christian King, are aware that the purpose about which he is most
anxious, is always that which he is least willing to declare. Let our
gracious Louis send twelve embassies, and I will forfeit my neck to
the gallows a year before it is due, if in eleven of them there is not
something at the bottom of the ink horn more than the pen has written in
the letters of credence."

"I regard not your foul suspicions," answered Quentin, "my duty is plain
and peremptory--to convey these ladies in safety to Liege, and I take
it on me to think that I best discharge that duty in changing our
prescribed route, and keeping the left side of the river Maes. It is
likewise the direct road to Liege. By crossing the river, we should lose
time and incur fatigue to no purpose--wherefore should we do so?"

"Only because pilgrims, as they call themselves, destined for Cologne,"
said Hayraddin, "do not usually descend the Maes so low as Liege, and
that the route of the ladies will be accounted contradictory of their
professed destination."

"If we are challenged on that account," said Quentin, "we will say that
alarms of the wicked Duke of Gueldres, or of William de la Marck, or of
the Ecorcheurs [flayers; a name given to bands of wandering troops on
account of their cruelty] and lanzknechts, on the right side of the
river, justify our holding by the left, instead of our intended route."

"As you will, my good seignior," replied the Bohemian. "I am, for my
part, equally ready to guide you down the left as down the right side of
the Maes. Your excuse to your master you must make out for yourself."

Quentin, although rather surprised, was at the same time pleased with
the ready, or at least the unrepugnant acquiescence of Hayraddin in
their change of route, for he needed his assistance as a guide, and yet
had feared that the disconcerting of his intended act of treachery would
have driven him to extremity. Besides, to expel the Bohemian from their
society would have been the ready mode to bring down William de la
Marck, with whom he was in correspondence, upon their intended route,
whereas, if Hayraddin remained with them Quentin thought he could manage
to prevent the Moor from having any communication with strangers unless
he was himself aware of it.

Abandoning, therefore, all thoughts of their original route, the little
party followed that by the left bank of the broad Maes, so speedily and
successfully that the next day early brought them to the proposed end of
their journey. They found that the Bishop of Liege, for the sake of
his health, as he himself alleged, but rather, perhaps, to avoid being
surprised by the numerous and mutinous population of the city, had
established his residence in his beautiful Castle of Schonwaldt, about a
mile without Liege.

Just as they approached the Castle, they saw the Prelate returning
in long procession from the neighbouring city, in which he had been
officiating at the performance of High Mass. He was at the head of a
splendid train of religious, civil and military men, mingled together,
or, as the old ballad maker expresses it,


     "With many a cross bearer before,
     And many a spear behind."


The procession made a noble appearance, as winding along the verdant
banks of the broad Maes, it wheeled into, and was as it were devoured
by, the huge Gothic portal of the Episcopal residence.

But when the party came more near, they found that circumstances around
the Castle argued a doubt and sense of insecurity, which contradicted
that display of pomp and power which they had just witnessed. Strong
guards of the Bishop's soldiers were heedfully maintained all around the
mansion and its immediate vicinity, and the prevailing appearances in
an ecclesiastical residence seemed to argue a sense of danger in the
reverend Prelate, who found it necessary thus to surround himself with
all the defensive precautions of war.

The Ladies of Croye, when announced by Quentin, were reverently ushered
into the great Hall, where they met with the most cordial reception from
the Bishop, who met them there at the head of his little Court. He would
not permit them to kiss his hand, but welcomed them with a salute, which
had something in it of gallantry on the part of a prince to fine women,
and something also of the holy affection of a pastor to the sisters of
his flock.

Louis of Bourbon, the reigning Bishop of Liege, was in truth a generous
and kind hearted prince, whose life had not indeed been always confined,
with precise strictness, within the bounds of his clerical profession,
but who, notwithstanding, had uniformly maintained the frank and
honourable character of the House of Bourbon, from which he was
descended.

In latter times, as age advanced, the Prelate had adopted habits more
beseeming a member of the hierarchy than his early reign had exhibited,
and was loved among the neighbouring princes, as a noble ecclesiastic,
generous and magnificent in his ordinary mode of life, though preserving
no very ascetic severity of character, and governing with an easy
indifference, which, amid his wealthy and mutinous subjects, rather
encouraged than subdued rebellious purposes.

The Bishop was so fast an ally of the Duke of Burgundy that the latter
claimed almost a joint sovereignty in his bishopric, and repaid the
good natured ease with which the Prelate admitted claims which he might
easily have disputed, by taking his part on all occasions with the
determined and furious zeal which was a part of his character. He
used to say he considered Liege as his own, the Bishop as his brother
(indeed, they might be accounted such, in consequence of the Duke's
having married for his first wife, the Bishop's sister), and that he who
annoyed Louis of Bourbon, had to do with Charles of Burgundy, a threat
which, considering the character and the power of the prince who used
it, would have been powerful with any but the rich and discontented city
of Liege, where much wealth had, according to the ancient proverb, made
wit waver.

The Prelate, as we have said, assured the Ladies of Croye of such
intercession as his interest at the Court of Burgundy, used to the
uttermost, might gain for them, and which, he hoped, might be the more
effectual, as Campobasso, from some late discoveries, stood rather lower
than formerly in the Duke's personal favour. He promised them also such
protection as it was in his power to afford, but the sigh with which he
gave the warrant seemed to allow that his power was more precarious than
in words he was willing to admit.

"At every event, my dearest daughters," said the Bishop, with an air
in which, as in his previous salute, a mixture of spiritual unction
qualified the hereditary gallantry of the House of Bourbon, "Heaven
forbid I should abandon the lamb to the wicked wolf, or noble ladies
to the oppression of faitours. I am a man of peace, though my abode now
rings with arms, but be assured I will care for your safety as for my
own, and should matters become yet more distracted here, which, with Our
Lady's grace, we trust will be rather pacified than inflamed, we will
provide for your safe conduct to Germany, for not even the will of our
brother and protector, Charles of Burgundy, shall prevail with us to
dispose of you in any respect contrary to your own inclinations. We
cannot comply with your request of sending you to a convent, for, alas!
such is the influence of the sons of Belial among the inhabitants of
Liege, that we know no retreat to which our authority extends, beyond
the bounds of our own castle, and the protection of our soldiery. But
here you are most welcome, and your train shall have all honourable
entertainment, especially this youth whom you recommend so particularly
to our countenance, and on whom in especial we bestow our blessing."

Quentin kneeled, as in duty bound, to receive the Episcopal benediction.

"For yourselves," proceeded the good Prelate, "you shall reside here
with my sister Isabelle, a Canoness of Triers, with whom you may dwell
in all honour, even under the roof of so gay a bachelor as the Bishop of
Liege."

He gallantly conducted the ladies to his sister's apartment, as he
concluded the harangue of welcome, and his Master of the Household,
an officer who, having taken Deacon's orders, held something between
a secular and ecclesiastical character, entertained Quentin with the
hospitality which his master enjoined, while the other personages of
the retinue of the Ladies of Croye were committed to the inferior
departments.

In this arrangement Quentin could not help remarking that the presence
of the Bohemian, so much objected to in the country convents, seemed, in
the household of this wealthy, and perhaps we might say worldly prelate,
to attract neither objection nor remark.



CHAPTER XIX: THE CITY

     Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
     To any sudden act of mutiny.

     JULIUS CAESAR


Separated from the Lady Isabelle, whose looks had been for so many days
his loadstar, Quentin felt a strange vacancy and chillness of the heart,
which he had not yet experienced in any of the vicissitudes to which
his life had subjected him. No doubt the cessation of the close and
unavoidable intercourse and intimacy betwixt them was the necessary
consequence of the Countess's having obtained a place of settled
residence, for under what pretext could she, had she meditated such an
impropriety, have had a gallant young squire such as Quentin in constant
attendance upon her?

But the shock of the separation was not the more welcome that it seemed
unavoidable, and the proud heart of Quentin swelled at finding he was
parted with like an ordinary postilion, or an escort whose duty is
discharged, while his eyes sympathised so far as to drop a secret tear
or two over the ruins of all those airy castles, so many of which he had
employed himself in constructing during their too interesting journey.
He made a manly, but, at first, a vain effort to throw off this mental
dejection, and so, yielding to the feelings he could not suppress,
he sat him down in one of the deep recesses formed by a window which
lighted the great Gothic hall of Schonwaldt, and there mused upon his
hard fortune, which had not assigned him rank or wealth sufficient to
prosecute his daring suit.

Quentin tried to dispel the sadness which overhung him by dispatching
Charlet, one of the valets, with letters to the court of Louis,
announcing the arrival of the Ladies of Croye at Liege. At length his
natural buoyancy of temper returned, much excited by the title of an old
romaunt [a poetical romance] which had been just printed at Strasbourg,
and which lay beside him in the window, the title of which set forth--


     How the Squire of lowe degree
     Loved the King's daughter of Hungarie.

[An old English poem reprinted in Hazlitt's Remains of Early Popular
Poetry of England.]


While he was tracing the "letters blake" of the ditty so congenial to
his own situation, Quentin was interrupted by a touch on the shoulder,
and, looking up, beheld the Bohemian standing by him.



Hayraddin, never a welcome sight, was odious from his late treachery,
and Quentin sternly asked him why he dared take the freedom to touch a
Christian and a gentleman?

"Simply," answered the Bohemian, "because I wished to know if the
Christian gentleman had lost his feeling as well as his eyes and ears.
I have stood speaking to you these five minutes, and you have stared
on that scrap of yellow paper, as if it were a spell to turn you into a
statue, and had already wrought half its purpose."

"Well, what dost thou want? Speak, and begone!"

"I want what all men want, though few are satisfied with it," said
Hayraddin, "I want my due, ten crowns of gold for guiding the ladies
hither."

"With what face darest thou ask any guerdon beyond my sparing thy
worthless life?" said Durward, fiercely, "thou knowest that it was thy
purpose to have betrayed them on the road."

"But I did not betray them," said Hayraddin, "if I had, I would have
asked no guerdon from you or from them, but from him whom their keeping
on the right hand side of the river might have benefited. The party that
I have served is the party who must pay me."

"Thy guerdon perish with thee, then, traitor," said Quentin, telling out
the money. "Get thee to the Boar of Ardennes, or to the devil! but keep
hereafter out of my sight, lest I send thee thither before thy time."

"The Boar of Ardennes!" repeated the Bohemian, with a stronger emotion
of surprise than his features usually expressed--"it was then no vague
guess--no general suspicion--which made you insist on changing the
road?--Can it be--are there really in other lands arts of prophecy more
sure than those of our wandering tribes? The willow tree under which
we spoke could tell no tales. But no--no--no--dolt that I was!--I have
it--I have it!--the willow by the brook near yonder convent--I saw you
look towards it as you passed it, about half a mile from yon hive of
drones--that could not indeed speak, but it might hide one who could
hear! I will hold my councils in an open plain henceforth, not a bunch
of thistles shall be near me for a Scot to shroud amongst.--Ha! ha! the
Scot hath beat the Zingaro at his own subtle weapons. But know,
Quentin Durward, that you have foiled me to the marring of thine own
fortune.--Yes! the fortune I have told thee of, from the lines on thy
hand, had been richly accomplished but for thine own obstinacy."

"By Saint. Andrew," said Quentin, "thy impudence makes me laugh in spite
of myself.--How, or in what, should thy successful villainy have been of
service to me? I heard, indeed, that you did stipulate to save my life,
which condition your worthy allies would speedily have forgotten, had we
once come to blows--but in what thy betrayal of these ladies could have
served me, but by exposing me to death or captivity, is a matter beyond
human brains to conjecture."

"No matter thinking of it, then," said Hayraddin, "for I mean still to
surprise you with my gratitude. Had you kept back my hire, I should have
held that we were quit, and had left you to your own foolish guidance.
As it is, I remain your debtor for yonder matter on the banks of the
Cher."

"Methinks I have already taken out the payment in cursing and abusing
thee," said Quentin.

"Hard words, or kind ones," said the Zingaro, "are but wind, which
make no weight in the balance. Had you struck me, indeed, instead of
threatening--"

"I am likely enough to take out payment in that way, if you provoke me
longer."

"I would not advise it," said the Zingaro, "such payment, made by a rash
hand, might exceed the debt, and unhappily leave a balance on your side,
which I am not one to forget or forgive. And now farewell, but not for a
long space--I go to bid adieu to the Ladies of Croye."

"Thou?" said Quentin, in astonishment--"thou be admitted to the presence
of the ladies, and here, where they are in a manner recluses under the
protection of the Bishop's sister, a noble canoness? It is impossible."

"Marthon, however, waits to conduct me to their presence," said the
Zingaro, with a sneer, "and I must pray your forgiveness if I leave you
something abruptly."

He turned as if to depart, but instantly coming back, said, with a tone
of deep and serious emphasis, "I know your hopes--they are daring, yet
not vain if I aid them. I know your fears, they should teach prudence,
not timidity. Every woman may be won. A count is but a nickname, which
will befit Quentin as well as the other nickname of duke befits Charles,
or that of king befits Louis."

Ere Durward could reply, the Bohemian had left the hall. Quentin
instantly followed, but, better acquainted than the Scot with the
passages of the house, Hayraddin kept the advantage which he had
gotten, and the pursuer lost sight of him as he descended a small back
staircase. Still Durward followed, though without exact consciousness of
his own purpose in doing so. The staircase terminated by a door opening
into the alley of a garden, in which he again beheld the Zingaro
hastening down a pleached walk.

On two sides, the garden was surrounded by the buildings of the
castle--a huge old pile, partly castellated, and partly resembling an
ecclesiastical building, on the other two sides, the enclosure was a
high embattled wall. Crossing the alleys of the garden to another part
of the building, where a postern door opened behind a large massive
buttress, overgrown with ivy, Hayraddin looked back, and waved his hand
in a signal of an exulting farewell to his follower, who saw that
in effect the postern door was opened by Marthon, and that the vile
Bohemian was admitted into the precincts, as he naturally concluded,
of the apartment of the Countesses of Croye. Quentin bit his lips with
indignation, and blamed himself severely that he had not made the ladies
sensible of the full infamy of Hayraddin's character, and acquainted
with his machinations against their safety. The arrogating manner in
which the Bohemian had promised to back his suit added to his anger and
his disgust, and he felt as if even the hand of the Countess Isabelle
would be profaned, were it possible to attain it by such patronage.

"But it is all a deception," he said, "a turn of his base, juggling
artifice. He has procured access to those ladies upon some false
pretence, and with some mischievous intention. It is well I have learned
where they lodge. I will watch Marthon, and solicit an interview with
them, were it but to place them on their guard. It is hard that I must
use artifice and brook delay, when such as he have admittance openly
and without scruple. They shall find, however, that though I am excluded
from their presence, Isabelle's safety is the chief subject of my
vigilance."

While the young lover was thus meditating, an aged gentleman of the
Bishop's household approached him from the same door by which he had
himself entered the garden, and made him aware, though with the greatest
civility of manner, that the garden was private, and reserved only for
the use of the Bishop and guests of the very highest distinction.

Quentin heard him repeat this information twice ere he put the proper
construction upon it, and then starting as from a reverie, he bowed and
hurried out of the garden, the official person following him all the
way, and overwhelming him with formal apologies for the necessary
discharge of his duty. Nay, so pertinacious was he in his attempts to
remove the offence which he conceived Durward to have taken, that
he offered to bestow his own company upon him, to contribute to his
entertainment until Quentin, internally cursing his formal foppery,
found no better way of escape, then pretending a desire of visiting
the neighbouring city, and setting off thither at such a round pace
as speedily subdued all desire in the gentleman usher to accompany him
farther than the drawbridge. In a few minutes, Quentin was within the
walls of the city of Liege, then one of the richest in Flanders, and of
course in the world.

Melancholy, even love melancholy, is not so deeply seated, at least
in minds of a manly and elastic character, as the soft enthusiasts
who suffer under it are fond of believing. It yields to unexpected and
striking impressions upon the senses, to change of place, to such scenes
as create new trains of association, and to the influence of the busy
hum of mankind. In a few minutes, Quentin's attention was as much
engrossed by the variety of objects presented in rapid succession by the
busy streets of Liege, as if there had been neither a Countess Isabelle
nor a Bohemian in the world.

The lofty houses--the stately, though narrow and gloomy streets--the
splendid display of the richest goods and most gorgeous armour in the
warehouses and shops around--the walks crowded by busy citizens of every
description, passing and repassing with faces of careful importance or
eager bustle--the huge wains, which transported to and fro the subjects
of export and import, the former consisting of broadcloths and serge,
arms of all kinds, nails and iron work, while the latter comprehended
every article of use or luxury, intended either for the consumption of
an opulent city, or received in barter, and destined to be transported
elsewhere--all these objects combined to form an engrossing picture
of wealth, bustle, and splendour, to which Quentin had been hitherto a
stranger. He admired also the various streams and canals, drawn from
and communicating with the Maes, which, traversing the city in various
directions, offered to every quarter the commercial facilities of water
carriage, and he failed not to hear a mass in the venerable old Church
of Saint Lambert, said to have been founded in the eighth century.

It was upon leaving this place of worship that Quentin began to observe
that he, who had been hitherto gazing on all around him with the
eagerness of unrestrained curiosity, was himself the object of attention
to several groups of substantial looking burghers, who seemed assembled
to look upon him as he left the church, and amongst whom arose a buzz
and whisper, which spread from one party to another, while the number of
gazers continued to augment rapidly, and the eyes of each who added to
it were eagerly directed to Quentin with a stare which expressed much
interest and curiosity, mingled with a certain degree of respect.

At length he now formed the centre of a considerable crowd, which yet
yielded before him while he continued to move forward, while those who
followed or kept pace with him studiously avoided pressing on him, or
impeding his motions. Yet his situation was too embarrassing to be long
endured, without making some attempt to extricate himself and to obtain
some explanation.

Quentin looked around him, and fixing upon a jolly, stout made,
respectable man, whom, by his velvet cloak and gold chain, he concluded
to be a burgher of eminence, and perhaps a magistrate, he asked him
whether he saw anything particular in his appearance, to attract public
attention in a degree so unusual? or whether it was the ordinary custom
of the people of Liege thus to throng around strangers who chanced to
visit their city?

"Surely not, good seignior," answered the burgher, "the Liegeois are
neither so idly curious as to practise such a custom, nor is there
anything in your dress or appearance saving that which is most welcome
to this city, and which our townsmen are both delighted to see and
desirous to honour."

"This sounds very polite, worthy sir," said Quentin, "but, by the Cross
of Saint Andrew, I cannot even guess at your meaning."

"Your oath," answered the merchant of Liege, "as well as your accent,
convinces me that we are right in our conjecture."

"By my patron Saint Quentin!" said Durward, "I am farther off from your
meaning than ever."

"There again now," rejoined the Liegeois, looking, as he spoke, most
provokingly, yet most civilly, politic and intelligent.

"It is surely not for us to see that which you, worthy seignior, deem it
proper to conceal: But why swear by Saint Quentin, if you would not have
me construe your meaning?--We know the good Count of Saint Paul, who
lies there at present, wishes well to our cause."

"On my life," said Quentin, "you are under some delusion.--I know
nothing of Saint Paul."

"Nay, we question you not," said the burgher, "although, hark ye--I say,
hark in your ear--my name is Pavillon."

"And what is my business with that, Seignior Pavillon?" said Quentin.

"Nay, nothing--only methinks it might satisfy you that I am
trustworthy.--Here is my colleague Rouslaer, too."

Rouslaer advanced, a corpulent dignitary, whose fair round belly, like
a battering ram, "did shake the press before him," and who, whispering
caution to his neighbour, said in a tone of rebuke, "You forget, good
colleague, the place is too open--the seignior will retire to your house
or mine, and drink a glass of Rhenish and sugar, and then we shall
hear more of our good friend and ally, whom we love with all our honest
Flemish hearts."

"I have no news for any of you," said Quentin, impatiently, "I will
drink no Rhenish, and I only desire of you, as men of account and
respectability, to disperse this idle crowd, and allow a stranger to
leave your town as quietly as he came into it."

"Nay, then, sir," said Rouslaer, "since you stand so much on your
incognito, and with us, too, who are men of confidence, let me ask
you roundly, wherefore wear you the badge of your company if you would
remain unknown in Liege."

"What badge, and what order?" said Quentin, "you look like reverend men
and grave citizens, yet, on my soul you are either mad yourselves, or
desire to drive me so."

"Sapperment!" said the other burgher, "this youth would make Saint
Lambert swear! Why, who wear bonnets with the Saint Andrew's cross and
fleur de lys, save the Scottish Archers of King Louis's Guards?"

"And supposing I am an Archer of the Scottish Guard, why should you
make a wonder of my wearing the badge of my company?" said Quentin
impatiently.

"He has avowed it, he has avowed it!" said Rouslaer and Pavillon,
turning to the assembled burghers in attitudes of congratulation, with
waving arms, extended palms, and large round faces radiating with
glee. "He hath avowed himself an Archer of Louis's Guard--of Louis, the
guardian of the liberties of Liege!"

A general shout and cry now arose from the multitude, in which were
mingled the various sounds of "Long live Louis of France! Long live
the Scottish Guard! Long live the valiant Archer! Our liberties,
our privileges, or death! No imposts! Long live the valiant Boar of
Ardennes! Down with Charles of Burgundy! and confusion to Bourbon and
his bishopric!" Half stunned by the noise, which began anew in one
quarter so soon as it ceased in another, rising and falling like the
billows of the sea, and augmented by thousands of voices which roared in
chorus from distant streets and market places, Quentin had yet time to
form a conjecture concerning the meaning of the tumult, and a plan for
regulating his own conduct:

He had forgotten that, after his skirmish with Orleans and Dunois, one
of his comrades had, at Lord Crawford's command, replaced the morion,
cloven by the sword of the latter, with one of the steel lined bonnets
which formed a part of the proper and well known equipment of the
Scottish Guards. That an individual of this body, which was always kept
very close to Louis's person, should have appeared in the streets of a
city whose civil discontents had been aggravated by the agents of that
King, was naturally enough interpreted by the burghers of Liege into a
determination on the part of Louis openly to assist their cause, and
the apparition of an individual archer was magnified into a pledge of
immediate and active support from Louis--nay, into an assurance that his
auxiliary forces were actually entering the town at one or other, though
no one could distinctly tell which, of the city gates.

To remove a conviction so generally adopted, Quentin easily saw was
impossible--nay, that any attempt to undeceive men so obstinately
prepossessed in their belief, would be attended with personal risk,
which, in this case, he saw little use of incurring. He therefore
hastily resolved to temporize, and to get free the best way he could,
and this resolution he formed while they were in the act of conducting
him to the Stadthouse [town house], where the notables of the town were
fast assembling, in order to hear the tidings which he was presumed to
have brought, and to regale him with a splendid banquet.
