worthy was smiling meaningly and had already arisen to follow the
Professor. Reluctantly Perry got to his feet and the three proceeded to
climb a rickety stairway to the third floor. The guide turned at the
head of the stairs and entered a long dark corridor. Here the floor was
covered with a thick carpet which, as they trod upon it, gave forth not
the slightest sound.

The hall gave upon several rooms, all dark and gloomy and giving the
same dismal impression of long disuse. How could the savant endure such
a depressing abode! The accumulation of dust and cobwebs in these long
forgotten chambers, the general evidence of decay--all told of possible
horrors ahead. They became wary.

But they were not wary enough!

The uncouth figure ahead of them had stopped and was fumbling with the
lock of an ancient door. Instinctively Perry noted that it was of great
thickness and of heavy oak. Now the Professor had it open and was
motioning for them to enter. Handlon started forward eagerly, but
hurriedly drew back as he felt the grip of the other reporter's hand on
his arm.

"Get back, you fool!" The words were hissed into the ear of the
incautious one. Then, to the Professor, Perry observed: "If you have no
objection we would prefer that you precede us."

A look of insane fury leaped to the face of the old man, lingered but an
instant and was gone. Though the expression was but momentary, both men
had seen, and seeing had realized their danger.

       *       *       *       *       *

They followed him into the chamber, which was soon illumined fitfully by
a smoky kerosene lamp. Both took a rapid survey of the place.
Conceivably it might have been the scene of scientific experiments, but
its aspect surely belied such a supposition. The average imagination
would instantly pronounce it the abode of a maniac, or the lair of an
alchemist. Again, that it might be the laboratory of an extremely
slovenly veterinary was suggested by the several filthy cages to be seen
resting against the wall. All of these were unoccupied except one in a
dark corner, from which issued a sound of contented purring, evidently
telling of some well-satisfied cat.

The air was close and foul, being heavy with the odor of musty, decaying
drugs. In every possible niche and cranny the omnipresent dust had
settled in a uniform sheen of gray which showed but few signs of recent
disturbance.

"Here, gentlemen," their host was saying, "is where I carry on my work.
It is rather gloomy here after dark, but then I do not spend much time
here during the night. I have decided to acquaint you with some of the
details of one or two of my experiments. Doubtless you will find them
interesting."

While speaking he had, mechanically it seemed, reached for a glass
humidor in which were perhaps a dozen cigars. Silently he selected one
and extended the rest to the two visitors.

After all three had puffed for a moment at the weeds, the old man began
to talk, rapidly it seemed to them. Perry from time to time took notes,
as the old man proceeded, an expression of utter amazement gradually
overspreading his face. Handlon pulled away contentedly at his cigar,
and on his features there grew an almost ludicrous expression of
well-being. Was the simple photographer so completely at ease that he
had at length forsaken all thought of possible danger?

As Professor Kell talked on he seemed to warm to his subject. At the end
of five minutes he began uncovering a peculiar apparatus which had
rested beneath the massive old table before which they were sitting. The
two men caught the flash of light on glass, and a jumble of coiled wires
became visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Was the air in the laboratory getting unbearably close? Or was the queer
leaden feeling that had taken possession of Perry's lungs but an
indication of his overpowering weariness? He felt a steadily increasing
irritation, as if for some strange reason he suddenly resented the words
of their host, which seemed to be pouring out in an endless stream. The
cigar had, paradoxically, an oddly soothing quality, and he puffed away
in silence.

Why had the room suddenly taken on so hazy an aspect? Why did Handlon
grin in that idiotic manner? And the Professor ... he was getting
farther and farther away ... that perfecto ... or was it an El Cabbajo?
What was the old archfiend doing to him anyhow?... Why was he laughing
and leering at them so horribly?... Confound it all ... that cigar ...
where was it?... Just one more puff....

Blindly he groped for the missing weed, becoming aware of a cackle of
amusement nearby. Professor Kell was standing near the spot where he had
fallen and now began prodding him contemptuously with his toe.

"Fools!" he was saying. "You thought to interfere with my program. But
you are in my power and you have no hope of escape. I am unexpectedly
provided with more subjects for my experiments. You will...." His words
became hazy and unintelligible, for the hapless reporter was drifting
off into a numb oblivion. He had long since lost the power to move a
muscle. Out of the corner of an eye, just before he lost consciousness
altogether, he perceived Handlon lying upon the floor still puffing at
the fateful drugged cigar.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eons passed.

To the reporter came a vision of a throbbing, glaring inferno, wherein
he was shaken and tossed by terrific forces. His very vital essence
seemed to respond to a mighty vibration. Now he was but a part of some
terrific chaos. Dimly he became aware of another being with whom he must
contend. Now he was in a death struggle, and to his horror he found
himself being slowly but surely overpowered. A demoniac grin played upon
the features of the other as he forced the reporter to his knees. It was
Handlon.... Once more he was sinking into soft oblivion, the while a
horrid miasma assailed his nostrils. He was nothing....

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly, and with infinite effort, Perry felt himself returning to
consciousness, though he had no clear conception of his surroundings.
His brain was as yet but a whirling vortex of confused sounds, colors
and--yes, odors. A temporary rift came in the mental cloud which
fettered his faculties, and things began to take definite shape. He
became aware that he was lying upon his back at some elevation from the
floor. Again the cloudy incubus closed in and he knew no more.

When he finally recovered the use of his faculties it was to discover
himself the possessor of a violent headache. The pain came in such
fearsome throbs that it was well nigh unendurable. The lamp still
sputtered dimly where the professor had left it. At the moment it was on
the point of going out altogether. The reporter noticed this, and over
him stole a sense of panic. What if the light should fail altogether,
leaving him lying in the dark in this frightful place! Still dizzy and
sick, he managed to rise upon his elbows enough to complete a survey of
the room. He was still in the laboratory of Professor Kell, but that
worthy had disappeared. Of Handlon there was no sign. The mysterious
apparatus, of which he now had but a vague remembrance, also had
vanished.

His thoughts became confused again, and wearily he passed a hand over
his brow in the effort to collect all of his faculties. The lamp began
to sputter, arousing him to action. Desperately he fought against the
benumbing sensation that was even again stealing over him. Gradually he
gained the ascendancy. He struggled dizzily to his feet and took a few
tentative steps.

Where was Handlon? He decided his friend had probably recovered from the
drug first and was gone, possibly to get a doctor for him, Perry.
However, he must make some search to determine if Skip had really left
the premises.

As he walked through the open door the lamp in his hand gave a last
despairing flicker and went out. From there he was forced to grope his
way down the dark hall to the stairs. Just how he reached the lower
floor he was never able to remember, for as yet all the effect of the
powerful drug had not worn off. He had a dim recollection of being
thankful to the ancestor of Kell who had provided such thick carpets in
these halls. Thanks to them his footsteps had been noiseless, at any
rate.

What was Kell's real object in giving them those drugged cigars? he
wondered. How long had they been under the influence of the lethal
stuff? Surely several hours. Upon glancing through a hall window he
found that outside was the blackness of midnight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cautiously he explored the desolate chambers on the ground floor: the
kitchen--where it could be plainly seen that cooking of a sort had been
done--the barn, and woodshed. Not a living thing could he find, not even
the huge wolf-hound which had attacked them in so strange a manner that
afternoon.

By now he was quite frankly worried on Handlon's account. At that
moment, could he have known the actual fate that had overtaken his
companion, it is quite probable he would have gone mad. He stumbled
back and into the dark front hall, shouting his friend's name. The
response was a hollow echo, and once or twice he thought he heard the
ghost of a mocking chuckle.

At length he gave up the search and started for the door, intent now
only upon flight from the accursed place. He would report the whole
thing to the office and let Bland do what he pleased about it. Doubtless
Handlon had already left. Then he stumbled over Handlon's camera.
Evidently the Professor had neglected to take possession of it. That
must be rescued, at all costs. He picked it up and felt the exposed
plate still inside. He started again for the door.

What little light there was faded out and he felt stealing over him a
horrid sensation of weakness. Again came a period of agony during which
he felt the grip of unseen forces. Once more it seemed that he was
engaged in mortal strife with Skip Handlon. Malevolently Handlon glared
at him as he endeavored with all his strength to overcome Perry. This
time, however, the latter seemed to have more strength and resisted the
attack for what must have been hours. Finally the other drew away
baffled.

At this the mental incubus surrounding Perry's faculties broke. Dimly he
became aware of a grinding noise nearby and a constant lurching of his
body. At length his vision cleared sufficiently to enable him to
discover the cause of the peculiar sensations.

He was in a railroad coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

He took a rapid glance around and noted a drummer sitting in the seat
across the aisle, staring curiously at him. With an effort Perry assumed
an inscrutable expression and determined to stare the other out of
countenance. Reluctantly the man glanced away, and after a moment, under
Perry's stony gaze, he suddenly arose and chose a new seat in front of
the car. Perry took to the solace of a cigarette and stared out at the
flying telegraph poles. From time to time he noted familiar landmarks.
The train had evidently left Keegan far behind and was already nearly
into the home town.

For the balance of the ride the reporter experienced pure nightmare. The
peculiar sensations of dizziness, accompanied by frightful periods of
insensibility, kept recurring, now, however, not lasting more than ten
or fifteen minutes at a time. At such times as he was conscious he found
opportunity to wonder in an abstracted sort of way how he had ever
managed to get on the train and pay his fare, which must have been a
cash one, without arousing the conductor's suspicions. Discovery of a
rebate in his pocket proved that he must have done so, however. The
business of leaving the train and getting to the office has always been
an unknown chapter in Perry's life.

He came out of one of his mental fogs to find himself seated in the
private editorial sanctum of the Journal. Evidently he had just arrived.
Bland, a thick-set man with the jaw of a bulldog, was eyeing him
intently.

"Well! Any report to make?" The question was crisp.

The reporter passed a hand across his perspiring forehead. "Yes, I guess
so. I--er--that is--you see--"

"Where's Handlon? What happened to you? You act as if you were drunk."
Bland was not in an amiable mood.

"Search me," Perry managed to respond. "If Skip isn't here old man Kell
must have done for him. I came back alone."

"You wha-a-t?" the irate editor fairly roared, half rising from his
chair. "Tell me exactly what happened and get ready to go back there on
the next train. Or--no, on second thoughts you'd better go to bed. You
look all used up. Handlon may be dead or dying at this minute. That Kell
could do anything." He pressed the button on his desk.

"Johnny," he said to the office boy, "get O'Hara in here on the double
quick and tell him to bring along his hat and coat."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned again to Perry, who was gazing nervously at the door. "Now
tell me everything that happened and make it fast," he ordered.

The reporter complied, omitting nothing except the little matter of his
mental lapses at the house of Professor Kell and later on the train. The
incident of the drugged cigars seemed to interest the Old Man hugely,
and Perry did not forget to play up Handlon's exploits in getting the
picture of the Professor. All through the recital he was in a sweat for
fear that he might have a recurrence of one of his brain spells and that
Bland would become cognizant of it. When would the Chief finish and let
him escape from the office? Desperately he fought to prevent the numbing
sensation from overcoming him. All that kept him from finally fleeing
the place in panic was the entrance of Jimmie O'Hara.

Slight, wiry and efficient looking, this individual was a specimen of
the perfect Journal reporter. This is saying a good deal, for the news
crew and editorial force of the paper were a carefully selected body of
men indeed. Bland never hired a man unless experience had endowed him
with some unusual qualification. Most of them could write up a story
with realistic exactitude, being able in most cases to supply details
gleaned from actual experience in one walk of life or another.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of this redoubtable crew probably the queerest was Jimmie O'Hara. Jimmie
had just finished a sentence in the "pen" for safe-cracking at the time
he landed the job with the Journal. Theoretically all men should have
shunned him on account of his jailbird taint. Not so Bland. The Chief
was independent in his ideas on the eternal fitness of things and
allowed none of the ordinary conventions of humanity to influence his
decisions. So Jimmie became one of the staff and worked hard to justify
Bland in hiring him. His former profession gave him valuable sidelights
upon crime stories of all kinds, and he was almost invariably picked as
the man to write these up for the columns.

"Jimmie," said the Chief, "we have need of an experienced strong-arm man
and all around second story worker. You are the only man on the force
who fills the bill for this job. Perry here has just returned from
Keegan, where I sent him to interview Professor Kell. Skip Handlon went
with him, but failed to return. We want to know what happened to Skip.
That is your job. _Get Handlon!_ If he is dead let me know by long
distance phone and I'll have a couple of headquarters men down there in
a hurry. Get a good fast car and don't waste any time. That's all."

O'Hara stopped long enough to get the location of Professor Kell's place
fixed in his mind, then abruptly departed. Bland gazed after him
musingly.

"The Professor will have some job to put anything over on that bird," he
said grimly. "Personally, I'm sorry for the old soul."

       *       *       *       *       *

After leaving the Journal office Jimmie proceeded directly to a certain
stable where he kept his private car. It was a long, low speedster with
a powerful engine, and capable of eating up distance. It was the work of
a minute to touch the starter and back out of the yard.

For the next hour he held the wheel grimly while the car roared over the
seventy-odd miles to Keegan. Would he be in time? At last a sign post
told him that he was within five miles of the railroad crossing at
Keegan. Now the headlights were picking out the black outlines of the
freight shed, and the next moment he had swept over the tracks. The
luminous dial on his wrist watch notified him that he had been on the
road but little over an hour, but his spirits somehow refused to revive
with the knowledge.

About a mile beyond the station he drove the car into a dark wood road
and parked it, turning off all lights. The rest of the way to the
Professor's mansion he did on foot. Rather than approach from the front
of the grounds he nimbly climbed a stone wall and, crossing a field or
two, entered the stretch of woods which extended just behind the
mansion. His pocket flashlight here came into use, and once or twice he
gave a reassuring pat to a rear pocket where bulged a heavy Colt
automatic.

       *       *       *       *       *

What was that? He had approached very close to the rear of the house
now. No lights were visible as yet, but unless he was greatly mistaken
he had heard a muffled scream. He stopped in his tracks and listened
intently. Again it came, this time with a blood-curdling cadence ending
in what he would have sworn was a choking sob.

The little job of getting the old-fashioned rear window open was a mere
