
"Yes, sir; I live at his house."

"That is well."

They had turned down Bleecker Street, when it occurred to Phil to say:

"I don't understand how Mr. Carter should be in this neighborhood."

"That is something I can't explain, as I know nothing about his
affairs," said the stranger pleasantly. "Perhaps he may have property on
the street."

"I don't think so. I attend to much of his business, and he would have
sent me if there had been anything of that kind to attend to."

"I dare say you are right," said his companion.

"Of course I know nothing about it. I only formed a conjecture."

"Has a physician been sent for?" asked Phil.

"Do you know of any we can call in?"

"My wife agreed to send for one on Sixth Avenue," said the stranger. "I
didn't wait for him to come, but set out for the store."

Nothing could be more ready or plausible than the answers of his new
acquaintance, and Phil was by no means of a suspicious temperament. Had
he lived longer in the city it might have occurred to him that there
was something rather unusual in the circumstances, but he knew that Mr.
Carter had spoken of leaving the house at the breakfast-table, indeed
had left it before he himself had set out for the store. For the time
being the thought of the sum of money which he carried with him had
escaped his memory, but it was destined very soon to be recalled to his
mind.

They had nearly reached Sixth Avenue, when his guide stopped in front of
a shabby brick house.

"This is where I live," he said. "We will go in."

He produced a key, opened the door, and Phil accompanied him up a shabby
staircase to the third floor. He opened the door of a rear room, and
made a sign to Phil to enter.



CHAPTER XXXII.

PHIL IS ROBBED.

When he was fairly in the room Phil looked about him expecting to
see Mr. Carter, but the room appeared unoccupied. He turned to his
companion, a look of surprise on his face, but he was destined to be
still more surprised, and that not in a pleasant way. His guide had
locked the door from the inside and put the key in his pocket.

"What does that mean?" asked Phil, with sudden apprehension.

"What do you refer to?" asked his guide with an unpleasant smile.

"Why do you lock the door?"

"I thought it might be safest," was the significant answer.

"I don't believe Mr. Carter is in the house at all," said Phil quickly.

"I don't believe he is either, youngster."

"Why did you tell me he was here?" demanded Phil, with rising
indignation.

"I thought you wouldn't come if I didn't," replied his companion
nonchalantly.

"Answer me one thing, is Mr. Carter sick at all?"


"Not that I know of."

"Then I am trapped!"

"Precisely. You may as well know the truth now."

Phil had already conjectured the reason why he had been enticed to this
poor dwelling. The two hundred dollars which he had in his pocket made
him feel very uncomfortable. I think I may say truly that if the money
had been his own he would have been less disturbed. But he thought, with
a sinking heart, that if the money should be taken from him, he would
himself fall under suspicion, and he could not bear to have Mr. Carter
think that he had repaid his kindness with such black ingratitude. He
might be mistaken. The man before him might not know he had such a sum
of money in his possession, and of course he was not going to give him
the information.

"I am glad Mr. Carter is all right," said Phil. "Now tell me why you
have taken such pains to get me here?"

"Why, as to that," said his companion, "there were at least two hundred
good reasons."

Phil turned pale, for he understood now that in some way his secret was
known.

"What do you mean?" he asked, not wholly able to conceal his perturbed
feelings.

"You know well enough, boy," said the other significantly. "You've got
two hundred dollars in your pocket. I want it."

"Are you a thief, then?" said Phil, with perhaps imprudent boldness.

"Just take care what you say. I won't be insulted by such a
whipper-snapper as you. You'd better not call names. Hand over that
money!"

"How do you know I have any money?" Phil asked, trying to gain a little
time for deliberation.

"No matter. Hand it over, I say!"

"Don't take it!" said Phil, agitated. "It isn't mine!"

"Then you needn't mind giving it up."

"It belongs to Mr. Carter."

"He has plenty more."

"But he will think I took it. He will think I am dishonest."

"That is nothing to me."

"Let me go," pleaded Phil, "and I will never breathe a word about your
wanting to rob me. You know you might get into trouble for it."

"That's all bosh! The money, I say!" said the man sternly.

"I won't give it to you!" said Phil boldly.

"You won't, hey? Then I shall have to take it. If I hurt you, you will
have yourself to blame."

So saying the man seized Phil, and then a struggle ensued, the boy
defending himself as well as he could. He made a stouter resistance than
the thief anticipated, and the latter became irritated with the amount
of trouble he had to take it. I should be glad to report that Phil
made a successful defense, but this was hardly to be expected. He was a
strong boy, but he had to cope with a strong man, and though right was
on his side, virtue in his case had to succumb to triumphant vice.

Phil was thrown down, and when prostrate, with the man's knee on his
breast, the latter succeeded in stripping him of the money he had so
bravely defended.

"There, you young rascal!" he said, as he rose to his feet; "you see how
much good you have done. You might as well have given up the money in
the first place."

"It was my duty to keep it from you, if I could," said Phil, panting
with his exertions.

"Well, if that's any satisfaction to you, you're welcome to it."

He went to the door and unlocked it.

"May I go now?" asked Phil.

"Not much. Stay where you are!"

A moment later and Phil found himself alone and a prisoner.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

A TERRIBLE SITUATION.

Phil tried the door, but now it was locked on the outside, and he found
that he was securely trapped. He went to the window, but here, too,
there was no chance of escape. Even if he had been able to get safely
out, he would have landed in a back-yard from which there was no egress
except through the house, which was occupied by his enemies.

"What shall I do?" Phil asked himself, despairingly. "Mr. Carter will
be anxious about me, and perhaps he may think I have gone off with the
money!"

This to Phil was the worst of his troubles. He prized a good reputation
and the possession of an honorable name, and to be thought a thief would
distress him exceedingly.

"What a fool I was to walk into such a trap!" he said to himself. "I
might have known Mr. Carter would not be in such a neighborhood."

Phil was too severe upon himself. I suspect that most of my boy readers,
even those who account themselves sharp, might have been deceived as
easily. The fact is, rogues are usually plausible, and they are so
trained in deception that it is no reflection upon their victims that
they allow themselves to be taken in.

Hours passed, and still Phil found himself a prisoner. Each moment he
became more anxious and troubled.

"How long will they keep me?" he asked himself. "They can't keep me here
forever."

About six o'clock the door was opened slightly, and a plate of bread and
butter was thrust in, together with a glass of cold water. Who brought
it up Phil did not know, for the person did not show himself or herself.

Phil ate and drank what was provided, not that he was particularly
hungry, but he felt that he must keep up his strength.

"They don't mean to starve me, at any rate," he reflected. "That is some
consolation. While there is life, there is hope."

A little over an hour passed. It became dark in Phil's prison, but he
had no means of lighting the gas. There was a small bed in the room, and
he made up his mind that he must sleep there.

All at once there was a confused noise and disturbance. He could
not make out what it meant, till above all other sounds he heard the
terrible cry of "Fire!"

"Fire! Where is it?" thought Phil.

It was not long before he made a terrible discovery. It was the very
house in which he was confined! There was a trampling of feet and a
chorus of screams. The smoke penetrated into the room.

"Heavens! Am I to be burned alive!" thought our poor hero.

He jumped up and down on the floor, pounded frantically on the door, and
at last the door was broken open by a stalwart fireman, and Phil made
his way out, half-suffocated.

Once in the street, he made his way as fast as possible homeward.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

PHIL'S FRIENDS AND HIS ENEMIES.

Meanwhile, Phil's long absence had excited anxiety and alarm.

"What can have become of Philip?" said Mr. Carter when supper time came
and he did not arrive.

"I can't think," answered Mrs. Forbush. "He is generally very prompt."

"That is what makes me feel anxious. I am afraid something must have
happened to him."

"Did you send him anywhere, Uncle Oliver?"

"Yes; he called, as usual, to get my check from Mr. Pitkin."

"And he ought to have been here earlier?"

"Certainly. He wouldn't have to wait for that."

"Philip is very careful. I can't think that he has met with an
accident."

"Even the most prudent and careful get into trouble sometimes."

They were finally obliged to sit down to supper alone. None of the three
enjoyed it. Not only Mr. Carter and Mrs. Forbush, but Julia was anxious
and troubled.

"I didn't know I cared so much for the boy," said Uncle Oliver. "He has
endeared himself to me. I care nothing for the loss of the money if he
will only return safe."

It was about a quarter of eight when the door-bell rang, and the servant
ushered in Mr. and Mrs. Pitkin and Alonzo.

After the usual greetings were interchanged, Mrs. Pitkin said, looking
about her:

"Where is Philip?"

"We are very much concerned about him," said Mr. Carter, his face
showing his trouble. "He has not been home since morning. Did he call at
your store, Pitkin?"

"Hasn't he been home since?" asked Pitkin, in a tone unpleasantly
significant.

"No. At what time did he leave the store?"

"Hours since. I--I am not sure but I may be able to throw some light on
his failure to return."

"Do so, if you can!" said Uncle Oliver.

"In place of giving him a check, I gave the boy two hundred dollars in
bills."

"Well?"

"Don't you see? The temptation has proved too strong for him. I think,
Uncle Oliver, you won't see him back in a hurry."

"Do you mean to say the boy would steal?" demanded the old gentleman
indignantly.

"I think it more than likely that he has appropriated the money."

"I am sure he has not," said Mrs. Forbush.

"And so am I," chimed in Julia.

Mr. Pitkin shrugged his shoulders.

"So you think," he answered; "but I don't agree with you."

"Nor I!" said Mrs. Pitkin, nodding her head vigorously. "I never had any
confidence in the boy. I don't mind telling you now that I have warned
Alonzo not to get too intimate with him. You remember it, Lonny?"

"Yes'm," responded Lonny.

"Then you think the boy capable of appropriating the money?" asked Mr.
Carter quietly.

"Yes, I do."

"Well, I don't!" said Uncle Oliver emphatically.

"You are very easily deceived," said Mrs. Pitkin.

"Don't be too sure of that," returned Mr. Carter, with a significant
glance, that made his niece feel uncomfortable.

"I suspect you will have to admit it," said Mr. Pitkin. "If, contrary to
my anticipation, the boy returns, and brings the money with him, I will
own myself mistaken."

Just then the front door was heard to open; there was a sound of steps
in the hall, and Phil came hurriedly into the room.

Mr. and Mrs. Pitkin exchanged looks of surprise and dismay; but Mrs.
Forbush, her daughter and Uncle Oliver looked delighted.



CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PITKINS RETIRE IN DISGUST.

"Where have you been, Philip?" asked Mr. Carter, breaking the silence.
"We were getting anxious about you."

"I have bad news for you, sir," returned Phil, saying what stood first
in his mind. "I have lost the two hundred dollars Mr. Pitkin paid me
this morning."

"So you lost it?" observed Mr. Pitkin with a sneer, emphasizing the word
"lost" to show his incredulity.

"Yes, sir, I lost it," answered Phil, looking him fearlessly in the eye;
"or, rather, it was stolen from me."

"Oh! now it is stolen, is it?" repeated Pitkin.

"Really, Uncle Oliver, this is getting interesting."

"I believe I am the proper person to question Philip," said Mr. Carter
coldly. "It was my money, I take it."

"Yes, it was yours. As I made the payment, I cannot, of course, be
responsible for its not reaching you. You will pardon my saying that it
would have been wiser to employ a different messenger."

"Why?" demanded Uncle Oliver, looking displeased.

"Why, really, Uncle Oliver," said Mr. Pitkin, "I should think the result
might convince you of that."

"We had better let Philip tell his story," said Mr. Carter quietly. "How
did it happen, Philip?"

Thereupon Philip told the story already familiar to the reader.

"Upon my word, quite a romantic story!" commented Mr. Pitkin, unable to
repress a sneer. "So you were tracked by a rascal, lured into a den
of thieves, robbed of your money, or, rather, Mr. Carter's, and only
released by the house catching fire?"

"That is exactly what happened to me, sir," said Philip, coloring with
indignation, for he saw that Mr. Pitkin was doing his best to discredit
him.

"It quite does credit to your imagination. By the way, boy, have you
been in the habit of reading dime novels?"

"I never read one in my life, sir."

"Then I think you would succeed in writing them. For a boy of sixteen,
you certainly have a vivid imagination."

"I quite agree with my husband," said Mrs. Pitkin. "The boy's story is
ridiculously improbable. I can't understand how he has the face to stand
there and expect Uncle Oliver to swallow such rubbish."

"I don't expect you to believe it, either of you," said Philip manfully,
"for you have never treated me fairly."

"I think you will find, also, that my uncle is too sensible a man to
credit it, also," retorted Mrs Pitkin.

"Speak for yourself, Lavinia," said Mr. Carter, who had waited
intentionally to let his relatives express themselves. "I believe every
word of Philip's story."

"You do?" ejaculated Mrs. Pitkin, rolling her eyes and nodding her head,
in the vain endeavor to express her feelings. "Really, Uncle Oliver, for
a man of your age and good sense----"

"Thank you for that admission, Lavinia," said Mr. Carter mockingly. "Go
on."

"I was about to say that you seem infatuated with this boy, of whom we
know nothing, except from his own account. To my mind his story is a
most ridiculous invention."

"Mr. Pitkin, did any one enter your store just after Philip left it to
inquire after him?"

"No, sir," answered Pitkin triumphantly. "That's a lie, at any rate."

"You will remember that Philip did not make the assertion himself. This
was the statement of the thief who robbed him."

"Yes, of course," sneered Pitkin. "He told his story very shrewdly."
