worst, it would be a few hours before he felt any symptoms.

As he sized up his position and that of the asteroid, he let out a yell of
triumph. His gamble would succeed! He had estimated that going into the
direct gravity pull of the sun at the proper moment, and lighting off
their last tubes, would put them into a landing position. The asteroid was
swerving rapidly, moving into a new orbit that would intersect the course
he and Santos were on. He had planned on the asteroid's change of orbit.
In a minute at most they would be back on the rock.

His propulsion tube flared out and he released it. It would travel along
with him, but his hands would be free. He watched closely as the asteroid
drew nearer and estimated they would land with plenty of room to spare.

Then he saw something else. The blast had started the asteroid turning!

He reacted instantly. Turning up his communicator he yelled, "Koa! The
rock is spinning! Cut the prisoners loose, grab the equipment, and run for
it! You'll have to keep running to stay in the shadow. If sunlight hits
those fuel tanks or the tubes of rocket fuel, they'll explode!"

Koa replied tersely, "Got it. We're moving."

The Planeteers and their prisoners would have to move fast, running to
stay out of direct sunlight. A moment or two in the sun wouldn't hurt the
men, but the chemical fuels in the cutting tanks and rocket tubes would
explode in a matter of seconds.

At least the Connie cruiser couldn't harm them now, Rip thought grimly. He
looked for the cruiser and failed to find it for several seconds. It had
moved. He finally saw its exhausts some distance away.

He forgot his own predicament in a grin. The Connie cruiser had moved, but
not because its commander had wanted to. It had been right in the path of
the nuclear blast, although some distance from it. The Connie had been
literally shoved away.

Then Rip forgot the cruiser. His suit ventilator was whining under the
terrific heat and his whole body was bathed in perspiration. The sun was
getting them. It was only a short time until the ventilator overloaded and
burned out. They had to reach the asteroid before then. The trouble was,
there was nothing further he could do about it. He had only air bottles
left, and their blast was so weak that the effect wouldn't speed him up
much. Nevertheless, he called to Santos and directed him to use his
bottles. Then he did the same.

Santos spoke up. "Sir, we're going to make it."

In the same instant, Rip saw that they would land on the dark side. The
asteroid was turning over and over, and for a second he had the impression
he was looking at a turning globe of the earth, the kind used in
elementary school back home. But this gray planet was scarcely bigger than
the giant globe at the entrance of the Space Council building on Terra.

The gray metal world suddenly leaped into sharp focus and seemed to rush
toward him. It was an optical illusion. The ability of the eyes to
perceive depth sharply--the faculty known as depth perception--didn't appear
to operate normally until the eyes were within a certain distance of an
object.

He knew he was going to hit hard. The way to keep from being hurt was to
turn the vertical energy of his arrival into motion in another direction.
As he swept down to the metal surface he started running, his legs pumping
wildly in space. He hit with a bone-jarring thud, lost his footing and
fell sideways, both hands cradling his helmet. He got to his feet
instantly and looked for Santos. A good thing his equipment was
shock-mounted, he thought. Otherwise the communicator would be knocked for
a line of galaxies.

"You all right, sir?" Santos called anxiously.

"Yes. Are you?"

"I'm fine. I think the others are over there." He pointed.

"We'll find them," Rip said. His hip hurt like fury from smashing against
the unyielding metal, and the worst part was that he couldn't rub it. The
blow had been strong enough to hurt through the heavy fabric and air
pressure, but his hand wasn't strong enough to compress the suit. Just the
same, he tried.

And while he was trying, he found himself in direct sunlight!

He had forgotten to run. Standing still on the asteroid meant turning with
it, from darkness into sunlight and back again. He yelled at Santos and
legged it out of there, moving in long, gliding steps. He regained the
shadow and kept going.

The first order of business was to stop the rock from turning. Otherwise
they couldn't live on it.

Rip knew that they had only one means of stopping the spin. That was to
use the tubes of rocket fuel left over from correcting the course. They
had three tubes left, but he didn't know if that was enough to do the job.

Moving rapidly, he and Santos caught up to Koa and the Planeteers.

The Connie prisoners were pretty well bunched up, gliding along like a
herd of fantastic sheep. Their shepherds were Pederson, Nunez, and Dowst.
The three Planeteers had a pistol in each hand. The spares were probably
those taken from prisoners.

The Planeteers were loaded down with equipment. A few Connie prisoners
carried equipment, too.

Trudeau had the rocket launcher and the remaining rockets. Kemp had his
torch and two tanks of oxygen. Bradshaw had tied his safety line to the
squat containers of chemical fuel for the torch and was towing them behind
like strange balloons. The only trouble with that system, Rip thought, was
that Bradshaw could stop, but the containers would have a tendency to keep
going. Unless the English Planeteer were skillful, his burdens would drag
him right off his feet.

Dominico had a tube of rocket fuel under each arm. The Italian was small
and the tubes were bulky. Each was about ten feet long and two feet in
diameter. With any gravity or air resistance at all, the Italian couldn't
have carried even one.

Rip smiled as Dominico glided along. He looked as though the tubes were
floating him over the asteroid, instead of the other way around.

Santos took the radiation detection instruments and the case with the
astrogation equipment from Koa. Rip greeted his men briefly, then took his
computing board and began figuring. He knew the men were glad he and
Santos had made it. But they kept their greetings short. A spinning
asteroid was no place for long and sentimental speeches.

He remembered the dimensions of the asteroid and its mass. He computed its
inertia, then figured out what it would take to overcome the inertia of
the spin.

The mathematics would have been simple under normal conditions, but doing
them on the run, trying to watch his step at the same time, made things a
little complicated. He had to hold the board under his arm, run alongside
Santos while the new sergeant held the case open, select the book he
wanted, open it and try to read the tables by his belt light and then
transfer the data to the board.

His ventilator had quieted down once he got into the darkness, but now it
started whining slightly again because he was sweating profusely. Finally
he figured out the thrust needed to stop the spin. Now all he had to do
was compute how much fuel it would take.

He had figures on the amount of thrust given by the kind of rocket fuel in
the tubes. He also knew how much fuel each tube contained. But the figures
were not in his head. They were on reference sheets.

He collected the data on the fly, slowing down now and then to read
something, until a yell from Santos or Koa warned that the sun line was
creeping close. When he had all data noted on the board, he started his
mathematics. He was right in the middle of a laborious equation when he
stumbled over a thorium crystal. He went headlong, shooting like a rocket
three feet above the ground. His board flew away at a tangent. His stylus
sped out of his glove like a miniature projectile, and the slide rule
clanged against his bubble.

It happened so fast neither Koa nor Santos had time to grab him. The
action had given him extra speed and he saw with horror that he was going
to crash into Trudeau. He yelled, "Frenchy! Watch out!" Then put both
hands before him to protect his helmet. His hands caught the French
Planeteer between the shoulders with a bone-jarring thud.





CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - THE ARCHER AND THE EAGLE


Trudeau held tight to the launcher, but the rocket racks opened and
spilled attack rockets into space. They flew in a dozen different
directions. Trudeau gave vent to his feelings in colorful French.

Koa and Santos laughed so hard they had trouble collecting the scattered
equipment. Rip, slowed by his crash with Trudeau, got his feet under him
again.

The asteroid had turned into the sun before they collected everything but
Rip's stylus and five attack rockets. The space-pencil was the only thing
that could write on the computing board. It had to be found.

"Next time around," Rip called to the others, and led the way full speed
ahead until they regained the safety of shadow.

Rip suspected the stylus was somewhere above the rock and probably
wouldn't return to the surface for some minutes. While he was wondering
what to do, there was a chorus of yells. A rocket sped between the
Planeteers and shot off into space.

"Our own rockets are after us," Trudeau gasped. There hadn't been time to
collect them all after Rip's unwilling attack on the Frenchman scattered
them. Now the sun was setting them off. Another flashed past, fortunately
over their heads. The sun's heat was causing them to fire unevenly. Rip
hoped they would all go off soon and get it over with.

"Three more to go," Koa called. "Watch out!"

Only two went, and they were far enough away to offer no danger.

Santos had been fishing around in the instrument case. He triumphantly
produced another stylus. "It was under the sextant," he explained. "I
thought there was another one around somewhere."

"If we get through this I'll propose you for ten more stripes," Rip vowed.
"We'll make you the highest ranking sergeant that ever made a private's
life miserable."

Working slowly but more safely, Rip figured that slightly more than two
and a half tubes would do the trick.

Now to fire them. That meant finding a thorium crystal properly placed and
big enough. There were plenty of crystals, so that was no problem. The
next step was for Kemp to cut holes with his torch, so that the thrust of
the rocket fuel would be counter to the direction in which the asteroid
was spinning.

Rip explained to all hands what had to be done. The burden would fall on
Kemp, who would need a helper. Rip took that job himself. He took one
oxygen tank from Kemp. Koa took the other, leaving the torchman with only
his torch.

Then Rip took a container of chemical fuel from Bradshaw. Working while
running, he lashed the two containers together with his safety line. Then
he improvised a rope sling so they could hang on his back. He wanted his
hands free.

Kemp, meanwhile, assembled his torch and put the proper cutting nozzle in
place. When he was ready, he moved to Rip's side and connected the hoses
of the torch to the tanks the lieutenant carried. Kemp had the torch
mechanism strapped to his own back. It was essentially a high pressure
pump that drew oxygen and fuel from the tanks and forced them through the
nozzle under terrific pressure.

When he had finished, he pressed the trigger that started the cutting
torch going. The fuel ignited about a half inch in front of the nozzle.
The nozzle had two holes in it, one for oxygen and the other for fuel. The
holes were placed and angled to keep the flame always a half inch away,
otherwise the nozzle itself would melt.

"How do we work this?" Kemp asked.

"We'll get ahead of the others," Rip explained. "Keep up speed until we're
running at the forward sun line. Then, when the crystal we want comes
around into the shadow, we can stop running and work until it spins into
the sunshine again."

"Got it," Kemp agreed.

Rip estimated the axis on which the asteroid was spinning and selected a
crystal in the right position. He had to be careful, otherwise their
counter-blast might do nothing more than start the gray planet wobbling.

He and Kemp ran ahead of the others. The Planeteers and their prisoners
were running at a speed that kept them right in the middle of the dark
area.

It was like running on a treadmill. The Planeteers were making good speed,
but were actually staying in the same place relative to the sun's
position, keeping the turning asteroid between them and the sun.

Rip and Kemp ran forward until they were right at the sun line. Then they
slowed down, holding position and waiting for the crystal they had chosen
to reach them. As it came across the sun line into darkness they stopped
running and rode the crystal through the shadow until it reached the sun
again. Then the two Planeteers ran back across the dark zone to meet the
crystal as it came around again. There was only a few minutes' working
time each revolution.

Kemp worked fast, and the first hole deepened. Rip helped as best he could
by pushing away the chunks of thorium that Kemp cut free, but it was
essentially a one-man job.

As Kemp neared the bottom of the first hole, Rip reviewed his plan and
realized he had overlooked something. These weren't nuclear bombs; they
were simple tubes of chemical fuel. The tubes wouldn't destroy the hole
Kemp was cutting.

He reached a quick decision and called Koa to join them. Koa appeared as
Kemp pulled his torch from the hole and started running again to avoid the
sun. Rip and Koa ran right along with him, crossing the dark zone to meet
the crystal as it came around again.

"There's no reason to drill three holes," Rip explained as they ran.
"We'll use one hole for all three charges. They don't have to be fired all
at once."

"How do we fire them?" Koa asked.

"Electrically. Who has the exploders and the hand dynamo?"

"Dowst has the exploders. One of the Connies is carrying the dynamo."

Speaking of the Connies ... Rip hadn't seen the Consops cruiser recently.
He looked up, searching for its exhaust, and finally found it, a faint
line some distance away.

The Connie commander was stalemated for the time being. He couldn't land
his cruiser on a spinning asteroid, and he had no more boats. Rip thought
he probably was just waiting around for any opportunity that might present
itself.

The Federation cruisers should be arriving. He studied his chronometer.
No, the nearest one, the _Sagittarius_ from Mercury, wasn't due for
another ten minutes or so. He turned up his helmet communicator and
ordered all hands to watch for the exhaust of a nuclear drive cruiser,
then turned it down again and gave Koa instructions.

"Have Trudeau turn his load over to a Connie and collect the exploders and
the dynamo. We'll need wire, too. Who has that?"

"Another Connie."

"Get a reel. Cut off a few hundred feet and connect the dynamo to one end
and an exploder to the other."

The crystal came around again and Kemp got to work. Rip stood by, again
reviewing all steps. They couldn't afford to make a mistake. He had no
margin of error.

Kemp finished the hole a few seconds before the crystal turned into the
sunlight again. Rip told him to keep the torch going. There might be some
last minute cutting to do. Then the lieutenant hurried off at an angle to
where Dominico was plodding along with the fuel tubes.

Koa had turned the tube he carried over to a Connie. Rip got it, and told
Dominico to follow him. Then he angled back across the asteroid to where
Kemp was holding position.

The asteroid turned twice before Koa arrived. He had a coil of wire slung
over his arm and he carried the dynamo in one hand and an exploder in the
other, the two connected by the wire.

Rip took the exploder. "Uncoil the wire," he directed. "Go to its full
length at right angles to the hole. We have to time this exactly right.
When the crystal comes around again, I'll shove the tube into the hole,
then scurry for cover. When I'm clear I'll yell and you pump the dynamo.
Dominico and Kemp stay with Koa. Make sure no one is in the way of the
blast."

Koa unreeled the wire, moving away from Rip. The lieutenant pushed the
exploder into one end of the fuel tube and crimped it tightly with his
gloved hand.

Koa and the others were as far away as they could get now, the wire
stretching between them and Rip. Kemp had made sure no one was running
near the line of blast.

Rip watched for the crystal. It would be coming around any second now. He
held the tube with the exploder projecting behind him, ready for the hole
to appear.

Koa's voice echoed in his helmet. "All set, Lieutenant."

"So am I," Rip answered. "Stand by."
