they could not climb out because the walls were higher than their heads
and the cover was on. The Queen was first angry and then annoyed and
then discouraged; but the officers were only afraid. Every one of the
poor fellows heartily wished he was back in Oogaboo caring for his
orchard, and some were so unhappy that they began to reproach Ann for
causing them all this trouble and danger.

Finally the Queen sat down on the bottom of the pit and leaned her back
against the wall. By good luck her sharp elbow touched a secret spring
in the wall and a big flat rock swung inward. Ann fell over backward,
but the next instant she jumped up and cried to the others:

"A passage! A passage! Follow me, my brave men, and we may yet escape."

Then she began to crawl through the passage, which was as dark and dank
as the pit, and the officers followed her in single file. They crawled,
and they crawled, and they kept on crawling, for the passage was not
big enough to allow them to stand upright. It turned this way and
twisted that, sometimes like a corkscrew and sometimes zigzag, but
seldom ran for long in a straight line.

"It will never end--never!" moaned the officers, who were rubbing all
the skin off their knees on the rough rocks.

"It must end," retorted Ann courageously, "or it never would have been
made. We don't know where it will lead us to, but any place is better
than that loathsome pit."

So she crawled on, and the officers crawled on, and while they were
crawling through this awful underground passage Polychrome and Shaggy
and Files and the Rose Princess, who were standing outside the entrance
to Ruggedo's domains, were wondering what had become of them.




Chapter Seventeen

A Tragic Transformation


"Don't let us worry," said Shaggy to his companions, "for it may take
the Queen some time to conquer the Metal Monarch, as Tik-Tok has to do
everything in his slow, mechanical way."

"Do you suppose they are likely to fail?" asked the Rose Princess.

"I do, indeed," replied Shaggy. "This Nome King is really a powerful
fellow and has a legion of nomes to assist him, whereas our bold Queen
commands a Clockwork Man and a band of faint-hearted officers."

"She ought to have let Quox do the conquering," said Polychrome,
dancing lightly upon a point of rock and fluttering her beautiful
draperies. "But perhaps the dragon was wise to let her go first, for
when she fails to conquer Ruggedo she may become more modest in her
ambitions."

"Where is the dragon now?" inquired Ozga.

"Up there on the rocks," replied Files. "Look, my dear; you may see him
from here. He said he would take a little nap while we were mixing up
with Ruggedo, and he added that after we had gotten into trouble he
would wake up and conquer the Nome King in a jiffy, as his master the
Jinjin has ordered him to do."

"Quox means well," said Shaggy, "but I do not think we shall need his
services; for just as soon as I am satisfied that Queen Ann and her
army have failed to conquer Ruggedo, I shall enter the caverns and show
the King my Love Magnet. That he cannot resist; therefore the conquest
will be made with ease."

This speech of Shaggy Man's was overheard by the Long-Eared Hearer, who
was at that moment standing by Ruggedo's side. For when the King and
Guph had recovered from Hank's kick and had picked themselves up, their
first act was to turn Tik-Tok on his back and put a heavy diamond on
top of him, so that he could not get up again. Then they carefully put
his gun in a corner of the cavern and the King sent Guph to fetch the
Long-Eared Hearer.

The Hearer was still angry at Ruggedo for breaking his ear, but he
acknowledged the Nome King to be his master and was ready to obey his
commands. Therefore he repeated Shaggy's speech to the King, who at
once realized that his Kingdom was in grave danger. For Ruggedo knew of
the Love Magnet and its powers and was horrified at the thought that
Shaggy might show him the magic talisman and turn all the hatred in his
heart into love. Ruggedo was proud of his hatred and abhorred love of
any sort.


"Really," said he, "I'd rather he conquered and lose my wealth and my
Kingdom than gaze at that awful Love Magnet. What can I do to prevent
the Shaggy Man from taking it out of his pocket?"

Kaliko returned to the cavern in time to overhear this question, and
being a loyal nome and eager to serve his King, he answered by saying:

"If we can manage to bind the Shaggy Man's arms, tight to his body, he
could not get the Love Magnet out of his pocket."

"True!" cried the King in delight at this easy solution of the problem.
"Get at once a dozen nomes, with ropes, and place them in the passage
where they can seize and bind Shaggy as soon as he enters."

This Kaliko did, and meanwhile the watchers outside the entrance were
growing more and more uneasy about their friends.

"I don't worry so much about the Oogaboo people," said Polychrome, who
had grown sober with waiting, and perhaps a little nervous, "for they
could not be killed, even though Ruggedo might cause them much
suffering and perhaps destroy them utterly. But we should not have
allowed Betsy and Hank to go alone into the caverns. The little girl is
mortal and possesses no magic powers whatever, so if Ruggedo captures
her she will be wholly at his mercy."

"That is indeed true," replied Shaggy. "I wouldn't like to have
anything happen to dear little Betsy, so I believe I'll go in right
away and put an end to all this worry."

"We may as well go with you," asserted Files, "for by means of the Love
Magnet, you can soon bring the Nome King to reason."

So it was decided to wait no longer. Shaggy walked through the entrance
first, and after him came the others. They had no thought of danger to
themselves, and Shaggy, who was going along with his hands thrust into
his pockets, was much surprised when a rope shot out from the darkness
and twined around his body, pinning down his arms so securely that he
could not even withdraw his hands from the pockets. Then appeared
several grinning nomes, who speedily tied knots in the ropes and then
led the prisoner along the passage to the cavern. No attention was paid
to the others, but Files and the Princess followed on after Shaggy,
determined not to desert their friend and hoping that an opportunity
might arise to rescue him.

As for Polychrome, as soon as she saw that trouble had overtaken Shaggy
she turned and ran lightly back through the passage and out of the
entrance. Then she easily leaped from rock to rock until she paused
beside the great dragon, who lay fast asleep.

"Wake up, Quox!" she cried. "It is time for you to act."

But Quox did not wake up. He lay as one in a trance, absolutely
motionless, with his enormous eyes tight closed. The eyelids had big
silver scales on them, like all the rest of his body.

Polychrome might have thought Quox was dead had she not known that
dragons do not die easily or had she not observed his huge body
swelling as he breathed. She picked up a piece of rock and pounded
against his eyelids with it, saying:

"Wake up, Quox--wake up!" But he would not waken.

"Dear me, how unfortunate!" sighed the lovely Rainbow's Daughter. "I
wonder what is the best and surest way to waken a dragon. All our
friends may be captured and destroyed while this great beast lies
asleep."

She walked around Quox two or three times, trying to discover some
tender place on his body where a thump or a punch might be felt; but he
lay extended along the rocks with his chin flat upon the ground and his
legs drawn underneath his body, and all that one could see was his
thick sky-blue skin--thicker than that of a rhinoceros--and his silver
scales.

Then, despairing at last of wakening the beast, and worried over the
fate of her friends, Polychrome again ran down to the entrance and
hurried along the passage into the Nome King's cavern.

Here she found Ruggedo lolling in his throne and smoking a long pipe.
Beside him stood General Guph and Kaliko, and ranged before the King
were the Rose Princess, Files and the Shaggy Man. Tik-Tok still lay
upon the floor, weighted down by the big diamond.

Ruggedo was now in a more contented frame of mind. One by one he had
met the invaders and easily captured them. The dreaded Love Magnet was
indeed in Shaggy's pocket, only a few feet away from the King, but
Shaggy was powerless to show it and unless Ruggedo's eyes beheld the
talisman it could not affect him. As for Betsy Bobbin and her mule, he
believed Kaliko had placed them in the Slimy Cave, while Ann and her
officers he thought safely imprisoned in the pit. Ruggedo had no fear
of Files or Ozga, but to be on the safe side he had ordered golden
handcuffs placed upon their wrists. These did not cause them any great
annoyance but prevented them from making an attack, had they been
inclined to do so.

The Nome King, thinking himself wholly master of the situation, was
laughing and jeering at his prisoners when Polychrome, exquisitely
beautiful and dancing like a ray of light, entered the cavern.

"Oho!" cried the King; "a Rainbow under ground, eh?" and then he stared
hard at Polychrome, and still harder, and then he sat up and pulled the
wrinkles out of his robe and arranged his whiskers. "On my word," said
he, "you are a very captivating creature; moreover, I perceive you are
a fairy."

"I am Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter," she said proudly.

"Well," replied Ruggedo, "I like you. The others I hate. I hate
everybody--but you! Wouldn't you like to live always in this beautiful
cavern, Polychrome? See! the jewels that stud the walls have every tint
and color of your Rainbow--and they are not so elusive. I'll have fresh
dewdrops gathered for your feasting every day and you shall be Queen of
all my nomes and pull Kaliko's nose whenever you like."

"No, thank you," laughed Polychrome. "My home is in the sky, and I'm
only on a visit to this solid, sordid earth. But tell me, Ruggedo, why
my friends have been wound with cords and bound with chains?"

"They threatened me," answered Ruggedo. "The fools did not know how
powerful I am."

"Then, since they are now helpless, why not release them and send them
back to the earth's surface?"

"Because I hate 'em and mean to make 'em suffer for their invasion. But
I'll make a bargain with you, sweet Polly. Remain here and live with me
and I'll set all these people free. You shall be my daughter or my wife
or my aunt or grandmother--whichever you like--only stay here to
brighten my gloomy kingdom and make me happy!"

Polychrome looked at him wonderingly. Then she turned to Shaggy and
asked:

"Are you sure he hasn't seen the Love Magnet?"

"I'm positive," answered Shaggy. "But you seem to be something of a
Love Magnet yourself, Polychrome."

She laughed again and said to Ruggedo: "Not even to rescue my friends
would I live in your kingdom. Nor could I endure for long the society
of such a wicked monster as you."

"You forget," retorted the King, scowling darkly, "that you also are in
my power."

"Not so, Ruggedo. The Rainbow's Daughter is beyond the reach of your
spite or malice."

"Seize her!" suddenly shouted the King, and General Guph sprang forward
to obey. Polychrome stood quite still, yet when Guph attempted to
clutch her his hands met in air, and now the Rainbow's Daughter was in
another part of the room, as smiling and composed as before.

Several times Guph endeavored to capture her and Ruggedo even came down
from his throne to assist his General; but never could they lay hands
upon the lovely sky fairy, who flitted here and there with the
swiftness of light and constantly defied them with her merry laughter
as she evaded their efforts.

So after a time they abandoned the chase and Ruggedo returned to his
throne and wiped the perspiration from his face with a finely-woven
handkerchief of cloth-of-gold.

"Well," said Polychrome, "what do you intend to do now?"

"I'm going to have some fun, to repay me for all my bother," replied
the Nome King. Then he said to Kaliko: "Summon the executioners."

Kaliko at once withdrew and presently returned with a score of nomes,
all of whom were nearly as evil looking as their hated master. They
bore great golden pincers, and prods of silver, and clamps and chains
and various wicked-looking instruments, all made of precious metals and
set with diamonds and rubies.

"Now, Pang," said Ruggedo, addressing the leader of the executioners,
"fetch the Army of Oogaboo and their Queen from the pit and torture
them here in my presence--as well as in the presence of their friends.
It will be great sport."

"I hear Your Majesty, and I obey Your Majesty," answered Pang, and went
with his nomes into the passage. In a few minutes he returned and bowed
to Ruggedo.

"They're all gone," said he.

"Gone!" exclaimed the Nome King. "Gone where?"

"They left no address, Your Majesty; but they are not in the pit."

"Picks and puddles!" roared the King; "who took the cover off?"

"No one," said Pang. "The cover was there, but the prisoners were not
under it."

"In that case," snarled the King, trying to control his disappointment,
"go to the Slimy Cave and fetch hither the girl and the donkey. And
while we are torturing them Kaliko must take a hundred nomes and search
for the escaped prisoners--the Queen of Oogaboo and her officers. If he
does not find them, I will torture Kaliko."

Kaliko went away looking sad and disturbed, for he knew the King was
cruel and unjust enough to carry out this threat. Pang and the
executioners also went away, in another direction, but when they came
back Betsy Bobbin was not with them, nor was Hank.

"There is no one in the Slimy Cave, Your Majesty," reported Pang.

"Jumping jellycakes!" screamed the King. "Another escape? Are you sure
you found the right cave?"

"There is but one Slimy Cave, and there is no one in it," returned Pang
positively.

Ruggedo was beginning to be alarmed as well as angry. However, these
disappointments but made him the more vindictive and he cast an evil
look at the other prisoners and said:

"Never mind the girl and the donkey. Here are four, at least, who
cannot escape my vengeance. Let me see; I believe I'll change my mind
about Tik-Tok. Have the gold crucible heated to a white, seething heat,
and then we'll dump the copper man into it and melt him up."

"But, Your Majesty," protested Kaliko, who had returned to the room
after sending a hundred nomes to search for the Oogaboo people, "you
must remember that Tik-Tok is a very curious and interesting machine.
It would be a shame to deprive the world of such a clever contrivance."

"Say another word, and you'll go into the furnace with him!" roared the
King. "I'm getting tired of you, Kaliko, and the first thing you know
I'll turn you into a potato and make Saratoga-chips of you! The next to
consider," he added more mildly, "is the Shaggy Man. As he owns the
Love Magnet, I think I'll transform him into a dove, and then we can
practice shooting at him with Tik-Tok's gun. Now, this is a very
interesting ceremony and I beg you all to watch me closely and see that
I've nothing up my sleeve."

He came out of his throne to stand before the Shaggy Man, and then he
waved his hands, palms downward, in seven semicircles over his victim's
head, saying in a low but clear tone of voice the magic wugwa:

  "Adi, edi, idi, odi, udi, oo-i-oo!
  Idu, ido, idi, ide, ida, woo!"
