"'_Mingo!--oh, Mingo!_' en den hit got nigher--'_Mingo!--oh, Mingo!_'

"I ain't 'spon' ter dat, but I lay dar, I did, en I say ter myse'f--

"'Bless gracious! de man on t'er side done come, but how in de name er
goodness is he know Mingo?'

"I lay dar, en I study en I lissen, en I lissen en I study; en den I
doze off like, en fus' news I know yer come de call--

"'_Mingo!--oh, Mingo!_'

"Hit soun' nigher, yit hit seem like it come fum a mighty fur ways, en
den wiles I wundin' en studyin', yer she come mo' plainer dan befo'--

"'OH, MINGO!'

"I snatch de blanket offn my head, en sot up en lissen, I did, en den I
make answer--

"'Who dat callin' Mingo way out yer?'

"I lissen en I lissen, but nobody ain't callin'. I year de water
sneakin' 'long under de bank, en I year de win' squeezin' en shufflin'
'long thoo de trees, en I year de squinch-owl shiver'n' like he cole,
but I ain't year no callin'. Dis make me feel sorter jubous like, but I
lay down en wrop up my head.

"I ain't bin dar long 'fo' bimeby yer come de call, en it soun' right
at me. Hit rise en it fall, en de wud wuz--

"'_Mingo!--oh, Mingo! Whar my little baby? My little baby, Mingo! Whar
my little, baby?_'

"En den, boss, hit seem like I year sump'n like a 'oman cryin' in de
dark like 'er heart gwineter break. You kin laff ef you mineter, but I
ain't dast ter take dat blanket offn my head, kaze I know my young
mistiss done come back, en mo'n dat, I know sho 'uz stannin" dar right
over me.

"Tooby sho I wuz skeer'd, but I wa'n't so skeer'd dat I dunner w'at she
mean, en I des broke inter de bigges' kinder boo-hoo, en I say, sez I--

"'Make yo' peace, Miss Deely! make yo' peace, honey! kaze I gwine right
back ter dat baby ef de Lord spar' me. I gwine back, Miss Deely! I
gwine back!'

"Bless yo' soul, boss, right den en dar I know'd w'at bin a-pester'n'
un me, kaze des time I make up my min' fer ter come back ter dat baby,
hit look like I see my way mo' cle'r dan w'at it bin befo'. Arter dat I
lay dar, I did, en I lissen en I lissen, but I ain't year no mo'
callin' en no mo' cryin'; en bimeby I tuck de blanket fum off'n my
head, en lo en beholes, de stars done fade out, en day done come, en
dey wa'n't no fuss nowhars. De squinch-owl done hush, en de win' done
gone, en it look like de water done stop sneakin' en crawlin' und' de
bank.

"I riz up, I did, en shuck de stift'nes out'n my bones, en I look 'way
'cross de river ter de top er de hill whar de road lead. I look en I
say, sez I--

"'Maybe you leads ter freedom, but, bless God! I gwine back.'

"Des 'bout dat time I see de fe'ymun come down ter de flat en onloose
de chain, en make ez he wuz comin' 'cross arter me. Wid dat I raise up
my hat en tip 'im a bow, en dat's de las' I seed un 'im.

"I come back, I did," continued Mingo, reflectively, "en yer I is, en
yer I bin; en I ain't come none too soon, en I ain't stay none too
close, n'er, kaze I dunuer w'at mout er happin. Miss F'raishy been
mighty good, too, sho. She ain't useter niggers like some w'ite folks,
en she can't git 'long wid um, but she puts up wid me mighty well. I
tuck holt er de little piece er groun' w'at she had, en by de he'p er
de Lord we bin gittin on better dan lots er folks. It bin nip en tuck,
but ole tuck come out ahead, en it done got so now dat Miss P'raishy
kin put by some er de cotton money fer ter give de little gal a chance
w'en she git bigger. 'Twon't b'ar tellin' how smart dat chile is. She
got Miss Deely peanner, en, little ez she is, she kin pick mos' all de
chunes w'at her mammy useter pick. She sets at de peanner by de hour,
en whar she larnt it I be bless ef _I_ kin tell you--dat I can't!"

The little girl had grown tired of the services in the church, and ran
out just as the old man had put my horse to the buggy. Mingo knew a
shorter road to Rockville than that by which I had come, and taking the
child by the hand, he walked on ahead to show me the way. In a little
while we came to the brow of a hill, and here I bade the old man and
his charge good-bye, and the two stood watching me as I drove away.
Presently a cloud of dust rose between us, and I saw them no more, but
I brought away a very pretty picture in my mind--Mingo with his hat
raised in farewell, the sunshine falling gently upon his grey hairs,
and the little girl clinging to his hand and daintily throwing kisses
after me.



AT TEAGUE POTEET'S.

A SKETCH OF THE HOG MOUNTAIN RANGE


EMMIGRATION is a much more serious matter than revolution. Virtually,
it is obliteration. Thus, Gerard Petit, landing upon the coast of South
Carolina in the days of French confusion--a period covering too many
dates for a romancer to be at all choice in the matter--gave his wife
and children over to the oblivion of a fatal fever. Turning his face
westward, he pushed his way to the mountains. He had begun his journey
fired with the despair of an exile, and he ended it with something of
the energy and enterprise of a pioneer. In the foot-hills of the
mountains he came to the small stream of English colonists that was
then trickling slowly southward through the wonderful valleys that
stretch from Pennsylvania to Georgia, between the foot-hills of the
Blue Ridge and the great Cumberland Range. Here, perhaps for the first
time, the _je, vous, nous_ of France met in conflict the "ah yi," the
"we uns" and the "you uns" of the English-Pennsylvania-Georgians. The
conflict was brief. There was but one Gerard Petit, and, although he
might multiply the _je, vous, nous_ by the thousands and hundreds of
thousands, as he undoubtedly did, yet, in the very nature of things,
the perpetual volley of "you uns" and "we uns" must carry the day. They
belonged to the time, and the climate suited them. By degrees they
fitted themselves to Gerard Petit; they carried him from the mountains
of South Carolina to the mountains of North Georgia, and there they
helped him to build a mill and found a family. But their hospitality
did not end there. With the new mill and the new family, they gave him
a new name. Gerard Petit, presumably with his hand upon his heart, as
became his race, made one last low bow to genealogy. In his place stood
Jerd Poteet, "you uns" to the left of him, "we uns" to the right of
him. He made such protest as he might. He brought his patriotism to
bear upon the emergency, and named his eldest son Huguenin Petit. How
long this contest between hospitality on the one hand and family pride
and patriotism on the other was kept up it is unnecessary to inquire.
It is enough to say that the Huguenin of one generation, left Hugue
Poteet as his son and heir; Hugue left Hague, and this Hague, or a
succeeding one, by some mysterious development of fate, left Teague
Poteet.

Meanwhile the restless stream of English-Pennsylvania-Georgians, with
its "you uns" and its "we uns," trickled over into Alabama, where some
of the Petits who were carried with it became Pettys and Pettises. The
Georgia settlements, however, had been reinforced by Virginians, South
Carolinians, and Georgians. The gold excitement brought some; while
others, set adrift by the exigencies of the plantation system, found it
easier and cheaper to get to North Georgia than to reach Louisiana or
Mississippi. Thus, in 1859, Teague Poteet, a young man of thirty or
thereabouts, was tilling, in a half-serious, half-jocular way, a small
farm on Hog Mountain, in full view of Gullettsville. That is to say,
Poteet could see the whole of Gullettsville, but Gullettsville could
not, by any means, see the whole, nor even the half, of Poteet's
fifty-acre farm. Gullettsville could see what appeared to be a grey notch
on the side of the mountain, from which a thin stream of blue smoke flowed
upward and melted into the blue of the sky, and this was about all that
could be seen. Gullettsville had the advantage in this, that it was the
county-seat. A country-road, straggling in from the woods, straggled
around a barn-like structure called the court-house, and then straggled
off to some other remote and lonely settlement.

Upon rare occasions Teague made his appearance on this straggling
street, and bought his dram and paid his thrip for it; but, in a
general way, if Gullettsville wanted to see him, it had to search
elsewhere than on the straggling street. By knocking the sheriff of the
county over the head with a chair, and putting a bullet through a
saloon-keeper who bullied everybody, Poteet won the reputation of being
a man of marked shrewdness and common sense, and Gullettsville was
proud of him, in a measure. But he never liked Gullettsville. He wore a
wool hat, a homespun shirt, jeans pantaloons, and cotton suspenders,
and he never could bring himself into thorough harmony with the young
men who wore ready-made clothes, starched shirts, and beaver hats; nor
was his ideal of feminine beauty reached by the village belles, with
their roach-combs, their red and yellow ribbons, and their enormous
flounces. In the mountains, he was to the manner born; in the village,
he was keenly alive to the presence and pressure of the exclusiveness
that is the basis of all society, good, bad, or indifferent; and it
stirred his venom. His revolt was less pronounced and less important
than that of his ancestors; but it was a revolt. Gerard Petit left
France, and Teague Poteet remained away from Gullettsville. Otherwise
there was scarcely a trace of his lineage about him, and it is a
question whether he inherited this trait from France or from the
Euphrates--from Gerard or from Adam.

But he did not become a hermit by any means. The young men of
Gullettsville made Sunday excursions to his farm, and he was pleased to
treat them with great deference. Moreover, he began to go upon little
journeys of his own across Sugar Valley. He made no mystery of his
intentions; but one day there was considerable astonishment when he
rode into Gullettsville on horseback, with Puss Pringle behind him, and
informed the proper authorities of his desire to make her Mrs. Puss
Poteet. Miss Pringle was not a handsome woman, but she was a fair
representative of that portion of the race that has poisoned whole
generations by improving the frying-pan and perpetuating "fatty bread."
The impression she made upon those who saw her for the first time was
one of lank flatness--to convey a vivid idea rather clumsily. But she
was neither lank nor flat. The total absence of all attempts at
artificial ornamentation gave the future Mrs. Poteet an appearance of
forlorn shiftlessness that was not even slightly justified by the
facts. She was a woman past the heyday of youth, but of considerable
energy, and possessed of keen powers of observation. Whatever was
feminine about her was of that plaintive variety which may be depended
upon to tell the story of whole generations of narrow, toilsome, and
unprofitable lives.

There was one incident connected with Miss Pringle's antenuptial ride
that rather intensified the contempt which the Mountain entertained for
the Valley. As she jogged down the street, clinging confidently, if not
comfortably, to Teague Poteet's suspenders, two young ladies of
Gullettsville chanced to be passing along. They walked slowly, their
arms twined about each other's waists. They wore white muslin dresses,
and straw hats with wide and jaunty brims, and the loose ends of gay
ribbons fluttered about them. These young ladies, fresh from school,
and no doubt full of vainglory, greeted the bridal procession with a
little explosion of giggles, and when Puss Pringle pushed back her
gingham sun-bonnet and innocently gazed upon them, they turned up their
noses, sniffed the air scornfully, and made such demonstrations as no
feminine mind, however ignorant in other directions, could fail to
interpret.

Miss Pringle had not learned the art of tossing her head and sniffing
the air, but she half closed her eyes and gave the young ladies a look
that meant something more than scorn. She said nothing to Teague, for
she was in hopes he had not observed the tantrums of the school-girls.

As for Teague, he saw the whole affair, and was out to the quick. In
addition to the latent pride of his class, he inherited the
sensitiveness of his ancestors, but, turning his eyes neither to the
right nor to the left, he jogged along to the wedding. He carried his
wife home, and thereafter avoided Gullettsville. When he was compelled
to buy coffee and sugar, or other necessary luxuries, he rode forty
miles across the mountain to Villa Bay.

He had been married a year or more when, one afternoon, he was
compelled to ride down to Gullettsville under whip and spur for a
doctor. There was a good deal of confused activity in the town. Old men
and young boys were stirring around with blue cockades in their hats,
and the women wore blue rosettes on their bosoms. Three negroes in
uniform--a contribution from the nearest railroad town--were parading
up and down the straggling street with fife and drums, and a number of
men were planting a flag-pole in front of the court-house.

No conscientious historian can afford to ignore a coincidence, and it
so happened that upon the very day that league Poteet's wife presented
him with the puzzle of a daughter, Fate presented his countrymen with
the problem of war. That night, sitting in the door of his house and
smoking his pipe, Teague witnessed other developments of the
coincidence. In the next room the baby-girl squalled most persistently;
down in the valley the premonitions of war made themselves heard
through the narrow throat of a small cannon which, until then, had been
used only to celebrate the Fourth of July.

The noise of a horse's hoofs roused Teague's hounds, and some one
called out from the road--

"Hello, Poteet!"

"Ah-yi!"

"You hearn the racket?"

"My gal-baby keeps up sich a hollerin' I can't hear my own years."

"_Oh!_"

"You better b'lieve! Nine hours ole, an' mighty peart. What's them
Restercrats in the valley cuttin' up the'r scollops fer?"

"Whoopin' up se_say_sion. Sou' Ca'liny done plum gone out, an' Georgy
a-gwine."

Teague Poteet blew a long, thin cloud of home-made tobacco-smoke
heavenward, leaned back heavily in his chair, and replied--

"Them air Restercrats kin go wher' they dang please; I'm a-gwine to
stay right slambang in the United States."

There was a little pause, as if the man on horseback was considering
the matter. Then the response came--

"Here's at you!"

"Can't you 'light?" asked Poteet.

"Not now," said the other; "I'll git on furder."

The man on horseback rode on across the mountain to his home. Another
mountaineer, seeing the rockets and hearing the sound of the cannon,
came down to Poteet's for information. He leaned over the brush-fence.

"What's up, Teague?"

"Gal-baby; reg'lar surbinder."
"_Shoo!_ won't my ole 'oman holler! What's up down yan?"

"Them dad-blasted Restercrats a secedin' out'n the United States."

"They say theyer airter savin' of the'r niggers," said the man at the
fence.

"Well, I hain't got none, and I hain't a wantin' none; an' it hain't
been ten minnits sence I ups an' says to Dave Hightower, s' I, 'The
United States is big enough for me.'"

"Now you er makin' the bark fly," said the man at the fence.

During the night other men came down the mountain as far as Poteet's,
and always with the same result.

The night broadened into day, and other days and nights followed. In
the valley the people had their problem of war, and on the mountain
Teague Poteet had the puzzle of his daughter. One was full of doubt and
terror, and death, and the other full of the pleasures of peace. As the
tide of war surged nearer and nearer, and the demand for recruits
became clamorous, the people of the valley bethought them of the gaunt
but sturdy men who lived on the mountain. A conscript officer,
representing the necessities of a new government, made a journey
thither--a little excursion full of authority and consequence. As he
failed to return, another officer, similarly equipped and commissioned,
rode forth and disappeared, and then another and another; and it was
not until a little search expedition had been fitted out that the
Confederates discovered that the fastnesses of Hog Mountain concealed a
strong and dangerous organisation of Union men. There was a good deal
of indignation in the valley when this state of affairs became known,
and there was some talk of organising a force for the purpose of
driving the mountaineers away from their homes. But somehow the Valley
never made up its mind to attack the Mountain, and, upon such
comfortable terms as these, the Mountain was very glad to let the
Valley alone.

After a while the Valley had larger troubles to contend with.
Gullettsville became in some measure a strategic point, and the left
wing of one army and the right wing of the other manoeuvred for
possession. The left wing finally gave way, and the right wing marched
in and camped round about, introducing to the distracted inhabitants
General Tecumseh Sherman and some of his lieutenants. The right wing
had learned that a number of Union men were concealed on the mountain,
and one or two little excursion parties were made up for the purpose of
forming their acquaintance. These excursions were successful to this
extent, that some of the members thereof returned to the friendly
shelter of the right wing with bullet-holes in them, justly feeling
that they had been outraged. The truth is, the Poteets, and the
Pringles, and the Hightowers of Hog Mountain had their own notions of
what constituted Union men. They desired to stay in the United States
on their own terms. If nobody pestered them, they pestered nobody.

Meanwhile league Poteet's baby had grown to be a thumping girl, and
hardly a day passed that she did not accompany her father in his
excursions. When the contending armies came in sight, Teague and his
comrades spent a good deal of their time in watching them. Each force
passed around an elbow of the mountain, covering a distance of nearly
sixty miles, and thus for days and weeks this portentous panorama was
spread out before these silent watchers. Surely never before did a
little girl have two armies for her playthings. The child saw the
movements of the soldiers, the glitter of the array, and the waving of
the banners; she heard the dull thunder of the cannon, and the sharp
rattle of the musketry. When the sun went down, and the camp-fire shone
out, it seemed that ten thousand stars had fallen at her feet, and
sometimes sweet strains of music stole upward on the wings of the
night, and slipped heavenward through the sighing pines.

The grey columns swung right and left, and slowly fell back; the blue
columns swayed right and left, and slowly pressed forward--sometimes
beneath clouds of sulphurous smoke, sometimes beneath heavy mists of
rain, sometimes in the bright sunshine. They swung and swayed slowly
out of sight, and Hog Mountain and Gullettsville were left at peace.

The child grew and thrived. In the midst of a gaunt and sallow
generation she shone radiantly beautiful. In some mysterious way she
inherited the beauty, and grace, and refinement of a Frenchwoman.
Merely as a phenomenon, she ought to have reminded league of his name
and lineage; but Teague had other matters to think of. "Sis ain't no
dirt-eater," he used to say, and to this extent only would he commit
himself, his surroundings having developed in him that curious excess
of caution and reserve which characterises his class.

As for Puss Poteet, she sat and rocked herself and rubbed snuff, and
regarded her daughter as one of the profound mysteries. She was in a
state of perpetual bewilderment and surprise, equalled only by her
apparent indifference. She allowed herself to be hustled around by Sis
without serious protest, and submitted, as Teague did, to the new order
of things as quietly as possible.

Meanwhile the people in the valley were engaged in adjusting themselves
to the changed condition of affairs. The war was over, but it had left
some deep scars here and there, and those who had engaged in it gave
their attention to healing these--a troublesome and interminable task,
be it said, which by no means kept pace with the impatience of the
victors, whipped into fury by the subtle but ignoble art of the
politician. There was no lack of despair in the valley, but out of it
all prosperity grew, and the promise of a most remarkable future.
Behind the confusion of politics, of one sort and another, the spirit
of Progress rose and shook her ambitious wings.

Something of all this must have made itself felt on the mountain, for
one day Teague Poteet pushed his wide-brimmed wool hat from over his
eyes, with an air of astonishment. Puss had just touched upon a very
important matter.

"I reckon in reason," she said, "we oughter pack Sis off to school
some'rs. She'll thes nat'ally spile here."

"Hain't you larnt her how to read an' write an' cipher?" asked Teague.

"I started in," said Mrs. Poteet, "but, Lord! I hain't more'n opened a
book tell she know'd mor'n I dast to know ef I wuz gwine to die fer it.
Hit'll take somebody lots smarter'n' stronger'n me."

Teague laughed, and then relapsed into seriousness. After a while he
called Sis. The girl came running in, her dark eyes flashing, her black
hair bewitchingly tangled, and her cheeks flushing with a colour
hitherto unknown to the mountain.

"What now, pap?"

"I wuz thes a-thinkin' ef maybe you oughtn't to bresh up an' start to
school down in Gullettsville."

"O pap!" the girl exclaimed, clapping her hands with delight. She was
about to spring upon Teague and give him a severe hugging, when
suddenly her arms dropped to her side, the flush died out of her face,
and she flopped herself down upon a chair. Teague paid no attention to
this.

"Yes, siree," he continued, as if pursuing a well-developed line of
argument; "when a gal gits ez big ez you is, she hain't got no business
to be a-gwine a-whoopin' an' a-hollerin' an' a-rantin' an' a-rompin'
acrost the face er the yeth. The time's done come when they oughter be
tuck up an' made a lady out'n; an' the nighest way is to sen' 'em to
school. That's whar you a-gwine--down to Gullettsville to school."

"I shan't, an' I won't--I won't, I won't, I _won't!_" exclaimed Sis,
clenching her hands and stamping her feet. "I'll die first."

Teague had never seen her so excited,

"Why, what's the matter, Sis?" he asked with unfeigned concern.

Sis gave him a withering look.

"Pap, do you reckon I'm fool enough to traipse down to Gullettsville
an' mix with them people, wearin' cloze like these? Do you reckon I'm
fool enough to make myself the laughin'-stock for them folks?"

Teague Poteet was not a learned man, but he was shrewd enough to see
that the Mountain had a new problem to solve. He took down his rifle,
whistled up his dogs, and tramped skyward. As he passed out through his
horse-lot, a cap and worm of a whisky-still lying in the corner of the
fence attracted his attention. He paused, and turned the apparatus over
with his foot. It was old and somewhat battered.

"I'll thes about take you," said Teague, with a chuckle, "an' set up a
calico-factory. I'll heat you up an' make you spin silk an' split it
into ribbens."

It was a case of civilisation or no civilisation, and there is nothing
more notorious in history--nothing more mysterious--than the fact that
civilisation is not over-nice in the choice of her handmaidens. One day
it is war, another it is slavery. Every step in the advancement of the
human race has a paradox of some kind as a basis. In the case of Sis
Poteet, it was whisky.

Teague got his still together and planted it in a nice cool place,
where it could be reached only by a narrow footpath. He had set up a
still immediately after the war, but it had been promptly broken up by
the revenue officers. Upon this occasion, therefore, he made elaborate
preparations to guard against surprise and detection, and these
preparations bore considerable fruit in the way of illicit whisky; the
ultimate result of which was that Sis went to school in Gullettsville,
and became the belle of the town.

The breath of the mountain was heavily charged with whisky, and the
Government got a whiff of it. Word went to Washington, and there was
much writing and consulting by mail, and some telegraphing. The
officials--marshal, deputy-marshals, and collector--were mostly men
from a distance, brought hither on the tide of war, who had no personal
interest in judging the situation. Naturally enough, the power with
which they were invested was neither discreetly nor sympathetically
exercised. They represented the Government, which, they were taught to
believe by the small men above them, was still at war with every
condition and belief in Georgia.

Down in the valley they domineered with impunity, and one fine morning
a posse, armed with carbines, rode up the mountain, laughing, talking,
and rattling their gear as gaily as a detachment of cuirassiers
parading under the protection of friendly guns. The mountain was
inhospitable, for when they rode down again, a few hours afterward,
three saddles were empty, and the survivors had a terrible story to
tell of an attack from an unseen foe.

By the time the story of this fight with the illicit distillers reached
Washington, the details were considerably enlarged. The commissioner
was informed by the marshal that a detail of deputy-marshals had
attempted to seize a still, and were driven back by an overpowering
force. The correspondents at the Capital still further enlarged the
details, and the affair finally went into history as "A New Phase of
the Rebellion." This was the natural outgrowth of the confusion of that
period; for how should the careless deputy-marshals, thinking only of
the sectionalism that lit up the smouldering ruins of war, know that
the Moonshiners were Union men and Republicans?

While the Government was endeavouring to invent some plan for the
capture of the Moonshiners, Sis Poteet was growing lovelier every day.
She was a great favourite with the teachers of the academy and with
everybody. As a general thing, she avoided the public square when
riding to and from the school, but it was hats off with all the men
when she did go clattering down the street, and some of the romantic
dry-goods clerks sent their sighs after her. Sighs are frequently very
effective with school-girls, but those that followed Sis Poteet fell
short and were wasted on the air; and she continued to ride from the
mountain to the valley and from the valley to the mountain in profound
ignorance of the daily sensation she created among the young men of
Gullettsville, to whom her fine figure, her graceful ways, and her
thrillingly beautiful face were the various manifestations of a
wonderful revelation.

Naturally enough, the Government took no account of Sis Poteet. The
commissioner at Washington conferred with the marshal for Georgia by
mail, and begged him to exert himself to the utmost to break up the
business of illicit distilling in the Hog Mountain Range. In view of an
important election about to be held in some doubtful State in the North
or West, the worthy commissioner at Washington even suggested the
propriety of another armed raid, to be made up of deputy-marshals and a
detachment of men from the Atlanta garrison. But the marshal for
Georgia did not fall in with this suggestion. He was of the opinion
that if a raid was to be made at all it should not be made blindly, and
he fortified his opinion with such an array of facts and arguments that
the Bureau finally left the whole matter to his discretion.

Early one morning, in the summer of 1879, a stranger on horseback rode
up the straggling red road that formed the principal business
thoroughfare of Gullettsville, and made his way toward the
