The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sermons on Various Important Subjects, by
Andrew Lee, et al


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Sermons on Various Important Subjects

Author: Andrew Lee

Release Date: February 13, 2005  [eBook #15031]
Most recently updated: February 27, 2005

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERMONS ON VARIOUS IMPORTANT
SUBJECTS***


E-text prepared by Fredric B. Lozo 



SERMONS ON VARIOUS IMPORTANT SUBJECTS: WRITTEN PARTLY ON SUNDRY OF THE
MORE DIFFICULT PASSAGES IN THE SACRED VOLUME.

By

Rev. ANDREW LEE, A.M.







INTRODUCTION

This text has been transcribed from the original by Fredric Lozo,
Mathis, Texas, January 2005.

The original text was typeset using the convention of the American
Colonial Period with a second "s" symbol resembling the letter "f"
which makes reading somewhat difficult for the modern reader. The text
was thus transcribed using the modern single "s" symbol convention.

The original text was photographed and read with an OCR program and
then transcribed word by word. An attempt was made to proofread the
final text for transcription errors and wherever an mistake
has not been corrected, the transcriber sincerely apologizes to the
reader. As for the rest, the transcriber has endeavored to faithfully
maintain as much of the historical record as the ASCII TEXT format
permits, including the original spelling and grammar. Page numbering
was omitted in keeping with e-book format conventions. The reader is
encouraged to use the search feature of the text reader to locate
chapters listed on the contents page.

The work was published by the son of Isaiah Thomas, who is known both
as the father of American printing, and as a Minuteman at Lexington
and Concord in the War of Independence.

Some of the thoughts expressed in these sermons are a refreshing
return to an earlier time before American religious denominations
became fixed in their particular "systematic theology."

Reverend Lee's language and logic give us a glimpse of the purity of
mind and soul that followed in the wake of desperate revolutionary
conflict and the tumultuous years following independence when the
greatest minds of the time formulated the American Constitution and
The Bill of Rights. These sermons seem to address the universal issues
with which men of all times and places have also struggled, in times
of peace as well as war. These issues are articulated here with a
clarity that is perhaps only achieved in those times of great testing,
tears, and tenuous victory that began in 1776 and that would remain
tenuous until after the War of 1812.

Lee lived in a time of great intellectual pursuit and Lee's views of
life and the Lord's Providence seem particularly blessed with
illumination through the Holy Spirit.

Fredric Lozo, January, 2005






SERMONS ON VARIOUS IMPORTANT SUBJECTS: WRITTEN PARTLY ON SUNDRY OF THE
MORE DIFFICULT PASSAGES IN THE SACRED VOLUME.

By

Rev. ANDREW LEE, A.M.
Pastor of the North Church in Lisbon, Connecticut.

Printed at Worcester: By Isaiah Thomas, Jun. Sold by him, and by the
AUTHOR, in Lisbon, Connecticut-Sold also by said Thomas & Whipple, at
their Bookstore in Newburyport.

October----1803






"I KNOW BUT ONE BOOK, THAT CAN JUSTIFY OUR IMPLICIT ACQUIESCENCE IN
IT; AND ON THAT BOOK, A NOBLE DISDAIN OF UNDUE DEFERANCE TO PRIOR
OPINION--CASTS NEW AND INESTIMABLE LIGHT."--Young.




PREFACE

That thick darkness overspread the church after the irruptions of the
northern barbarians, and the desolations which they occasioned in the
Roman empire, is known and acknowledged. Those conquerors professed
the religion of the conquered; but corrupted and spoiled it. Like the
new settlers in the kingdom of Ephraim, they feared the Lord and
served their own gods. In those corruptions antichristian error and
domination originated. The tyranny of opinion became terrible, and
long held human minds enslaved. Few had sentiments of their own. The
orders of the vatican were received as the mandates of heaven. But at
last some discerning and intrepid mortals arose who saw the absurdity
and impiety of the reigning superstition, and dared to disclose them
to a wondering world! Among those bold reformers, LUTHER, CALVIN, and
a few contemporary worthies, hold a distinguished rank. Greatly is the
church indebted to them for the light which they diffused, and the
reformation which they effected. But still the light was imperfect.
Dark shades remained. This particularly appeared in the dogmatism and
bigotry of these same reformers, who often prohibited further
inquiries, or emendations! They had differed from Rome, but no body
must differ from them! As though the infallibility which they denied
to another, had been transferred to themselves!

Too many others, and in more enlightened times, have discovered a
strand measure of the same spirit.....a spirit which hath damped
inquiry and prevented improvement.

Hence, probably, the silence of some expositors on difficult
scriptures, and the sameness observable in some others. For the
complaint of the poet is not without reason,

"That commentators each dark passage shun, and hold their farthing
candle to the fun."

And the sameness which we see in several writers is probably dictated
by fear of singularity, and of incurring the charge of heresy. Minds
are different. When a dozen expositors interpret a difficult text
alike, they must, for some reason, have borrowed from one another.

The writer of the following pages claims no superiority to others,
either in genius or learning; but he claims a right to judge for
himself in matters of faith, and sense of scripture, and presumes to
exercise it--calling no man master. He hath found the original
scriptures, compared with the different translations, to be the best
exposition. To these he early had recourse, and in this way formed an
opinion of the meaning of sundry difficult passages in the volume of
truth. But comparing them afterwards with several expositions,
perceived their meaning to have been mistaken, either by those
writers, or by himself. As they did not convince him that his
constructions were erroneous, he now offers them to the public--Not as
certainly devoid of error--He knows himself to be fallible--but as the
result of some attention; and as that which he conceives their most
probable meaning.

On the prayer of Moses to be blotted out of God's book--the wish of
Paul to be accused from Christ, and the prevalence of infidelity
before the coming of the Son of Man, he published a summary of his
views, some years ago. By the advice of several respected literary
friends, they are now corrected, enlarged and inserted. On the last of
these he wrote A.D. 1785. Subsequent events tend to confirm him in the
sentiments then entertained. Expositors generally consider the prayer
of Moses and the wish of St. Paul to stand related as expressions of
the same temper, and argue from the one to the other. The author
conceives them perfectly foreign to each other, and totally mistaken
by every expositor he hath consulted; as also several of the other
scriptures on which he hath written.

A hint dropped, some years ago, in conversation, by a respected
father,* gave an opening to the writer, relative to one+ of the
following subjects, and occasioned his writing upon it. For the rest,
he is conscious of having borrowed from no writer, except a few
quotations, which are credited in their places. He doth not flatter
himself that his co constructions of scripture will be universally
received. Nor hath he a desire to dictate to others, or a wish that
his own views only should see the light. The press is open to those
who are otherwise minded. The author will read with pleasure, the
different constructions of the candid and ingenuous. But should
strictures of another description appear, they will be viewed with
indifference, and treated with neglect.

* Rev. Dr. Cogswell, of Windham + On 2 Samuel xii. 13.




CONTENTS

SERMON I.

   The Wisdom of God in the Means used to Propagate the Gospel.
   1 Cor. i. 27, 28.--"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the
   world to confound the wise," &c.

SERMON II.

   The Subject Continued.

SERMON III.

   The Declensions of Christianity an argument of its truth.
   Luke xviii. 8.--"When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on
   the earth?"

SERMON IV.

   The Subject Continued.

SERMON V.

   Abram's Horror of Great Darkness.
   Gen. xv. 12.--"And when the sun was going down a deep sleep fell
   upon Abram," &c.

SERMON VI.

   Divine Impartiality Considered.
   Rom. ii. 11.--"For there is no respect of persons with God."

SERMON VII.

   Moses' Prayer to be Blotted out of God's Book.
   Exod. xxxii. 31,32.--"And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said,
   'Oh! This people have sinned,'" &c.

SERMON VIII.

   The Same Subject Continued.

SERMON IX.

   St. Paul's wish to be Accused from Christ.
   Rom. ix. 3.--"For I could with that myself were accursed from
   Christ," &c.

SERMON X.

   David's Sin in the Matter of Uriah.
   2 Sam. xii. 13.--"And David said unto Nathan, 'I have sinned against
   the Lord,'" &c.

SERMON XI.

   The General Character of Christians.
   Gal. v. 24.--"And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh
   with its affections," &c.

SERMON XII.

   The Aggravated Guilt of him who delivered Christ to Pilate.
   John xix. 10, 11.--"Then saith Pilate unto him, 'Speakest thou not
   unto me?'" &c.

SERMON XIII.

   The Trial of Peter's Love to Christ.
   John xxi. 15, 16, 17.--"So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon
   Peter, 'Simon,'" &c.

SERMON XIV.

   Gifts no Certain Evidence of Grace.
   Luke x. 20.--"In this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto
   you, but," &c.

SERMON XV.

   Human Characters Determined only by Divine Decision
   1 Cor. iv. 3, 4.--"But with me it is a very small thing that I
   should be judged of you," &c.

SERMON XVI.

   Characters will be Disclosed and Justice Awarded.
   1 Cor. iv. 5.--"Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
   who both will bring," &c.

SERMON XVII.

   God Willing that all Men should be Saved.
   1 Tim. ii. 4.--"Who will have all men to be saved."

SERMON XVIII.

   Balak's Inquiries relative to the Service of God, and Balaam's
   answer briefly considered.
   Micah vi. 6,7,8.--"Wherewith shall I come before the Lord And bow
   myself before the high God?" &c.

SERMON XIX.

   Confessing Christ an Indispensible Duty.
   2 Tim ii. 12.--"If We deny him, he will deny us."

SERMON XX.

   The Fear which terminates in the Second Death.
   Rev. xxi.8.--"The fearful--shall have their part in the lake, which
   burneth with fire," &c.

SERMON XXI.

   The End of Family Institutions, with Observations on The Importance
   of Education.
   Mal ii. 15.--"And did he not make one? Yet had he the residue of the
   Spirit," &c.

SERMON XXII.

   Parental Duties Considered and Urged--from the same text.

SERMON XXIII.

   The Blessing of God on Filial Piety.
   Jer. xxxv. 19.--"Therefore thus saith the Lord--'Jonadab, the Son of
   Rechab shall not want a man,'" &c.

SERMON XXIV.

   The Character and Supports of Widows Indeed.
   2 Tim. v. 5.--"Now she that is a widow indeed and desolate, trusteth
   in God," &c.

SERMON XXV.

   The Good Man Useful in Life and Happy in Death.
   Psalm xxxvii. 37.--"Mark the perfect man and behold the upright; for
   the end of that man is peace."

SERMON XXVI.

   Departed Saints Fellow Servants with those on Earth.
   Rev. xxii. 9.--"I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the
   prophets--."

SERMON XXVII.

   The Subject Continued.

SERMON XXVIII.

   The Dangers of Deviating from Divine Institutions.
   Col. ii. 8--"Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and
   vain deceit," &c.
   
