crashing and jangling noise, which was repeated till the length of
wooden palisade was broken into splinters.  But the chain and picket-peg
were as firmly attached as ever, and were dragged steadily across the
remaining portion of the playground right for the hedge, which now stood
before the boys, displaying not only the demolished reparations, but a
good-sized gap as well.

It seemed as if their steed meant to pass straight through, and he did
so.  The great iron peg got across a couple of tough old stumps of the
hawthorn bushes and drew him up short, but only for a few moments; the
huge beast putting forth its strength and dragging them out by the
roots, after which it turned off to the left, to go on straight through
the still sleeping town, making its way in the calmest manner for the
show-field at the back of the principal hotel.  Here it stopped at last
close to the loosened earth from which it had originally wrenched the
picket; and then, raising its trunk, blew such a blast that it produced
a chaotic burst of sounds from the quadrangle of cages and dens, each
creature after its kind joining in the chorus, and rousing and bringing
every keeper and labourer attached to the menagerie upon the scene, the
last to arrive, eager and smiling, but before anything was done, being
the proprietor himself, who came up cheering and waving hat and
handkerchief in the air.

"Think of that now!" he cried.  "I say, young gentlemen, it all points
to it, you see, and you needn't tell me; the old Rajah saw what was
right.  He only went to fetch you, and you've come to stay."



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

"HALT!  RIGHT FACE!"

The yellow silk handkerchief was brought a great deal into use by Mr
Ramball to dab his head; and once Glyn nudged his schoolfellow's elbow
and suggested that the proprietor was going to cry with disappointment
from being told that he was labouring under a very grave mistake.

Soon after the two boys slipped away so as to make for the school and
excuse themselves for being out of bounds and going out unseen so early
in the morning.

They "slipped away" at Ramball's request.  "Just walk up and down with
me a few times," he said, "till we get on the other side of the
caravans.  No, not yet," he said.  "I have sent one of the men for a big
basket of carrots.  They are nice and sweet, and his highness likes
them.  Once get him busy on them and he won't notice you going."

A big two-handled basket made its appearance a few minutes later, piled
up with the orange-red vegetables, and carried by a couple of Ramball's
men.

"Just give him two or three yourselves, gentlemen," said the proprietor,
"and start him on them.  Then get behind him and walk right away
straight from his tail.  You may do anything of that sort, as I dare say
you know, without his seeing.  Elephants are very stupid beasts about
what goes on behind their backs."

The two boys did as requested, and as soon as the elephant was busy they
strolled off with its owner, who was very eager to shake hands with them
again and beg of them to come to his place.

"Here, I have had enough of this," cried Glyn as soon as they were out
of the great field, "and I never thought of it before.  What time is
it?"

"I don't know," said Singh.  "I have left my watch on the
dressing-table."

Just then the striking of the church clock fell upon their ears, and
Singh began to count aloud, while Glyn expressed his belief that it must
be seven.

"Why, all the chaps will be out when we get back," he said.

"Eight!" said Singh loudly.

"Nonsense!  You have muddled it," cried Glyn.

"Nine!" cried Singh.

"Rubbish!"

"It is.  Look at the shops all open, and the people about."

"Well; but the time couldn't have gone like that," cried Glyn.  "Here,
what are we going to say?  If you are right--why, breakfast's over ever
so long ago, and the fellows are all going in to class.  But you can't
be right."

"Well, there's the clock," said Singh contemptuously.  "Look for
yourself."

The hands and Roman numerals of the great church clock had only lately
been re-gilded, and they seemed to twinkle and blink and point
derisively in the bright morning sunshine.

"Oh, I say," cried Glyn, "who could have thought it!  Bother old Ramball
and his beasts!  Feeding his elephant!  I wish somebody would feed me!
Why, we shall get no breakfast."

"Oh yes, we shall," cried Singh confidently.  "Why, you forget we are in
the infirmary still, and Mrs Hamton won't let us go without our
breakfast.  But come along; let's trot back round by the shortest way."

They started the military double directly, and were about half-way back
to the school when, as they turned a corner to get into the main road, a
sharp military voice shouted:

"Halt!  Right face!"

"Father!" cried Glyn.

"Morning," cried the Colonel, as he shook hands warmly with both.  "You
two invalids having your constitutional?  Well, you ought to be taken
off the sick-list now.  I have just been having my walk before
breakfast.  I came past the Doctor's, but could not see anything of
either of you."

"Going in to breakfast, father?" said Glyn.

"Yes, my boy.  You had yours at eight o'clock, I suppose.  What time
were you up?  Seven o'clock, I suppose."

"No, father," said Glyn, laughing.  "It must have been about four."

"Four o'clock!  What made you get up so soon as that?" cried the
Colonel, as he looked from one to the other.

"We were called, father, and obliged to get up."  And between them the
boys narrated their early morning adventure.

"Tut, tut, tut, tut!" ejaculated the Colonel.  "Then you have had no
breakfast at all?"

Singh shook his head.

"Come along with me, then," cried the Colonel.  "I'll soon put that
right."

"Can't, father.  We haven't got leave.  We shall be punished for
breaking out of school."

"Nonsense!" cried his father.  "You didn't break out of school.  You
were carried off.  Here, I'll put that right with the Doctor; but there
must be no more of this.  You lads don't want elephants till you go back
to Dour, and that won't be for years to come."

Very shortly afterwards the boys were once more seated at the Colonel's
table, to partake of a leisurely breakfast, before he, as he termed it,
marched them back like a couple of deserters to the Doctor's
establishment.

Wrench looked at them at first wonderingly, and then shook his head as
he announced that the boys were all in their classes, and that the
Doctor was going round the grounds with the gardener to see what damage
was done by the second visit of the elephant; when the Colonel proposed
that they should follow and give the boys' version of their adventure.

They came upon him they sought almost directly after, for he had
inspected the damaged hedge, and was gazing very ruefully at the
broken-down palisade and the torn and trampled flower-beds.

He was busy pointing out the mischief to his companion, for Morris was
with him, looking very sympathetic, as he borrowed the Doctor's
walking-cane and carried his mathematical studies into daily life and
utility by bending down and taking the dimensions of the elephant's
great circular foot-prints.

The Doctor frowned as he turned and saw who were approaching; but
explanations followed as he rather ponderously led the way into his
study, where everything connected with the discipline of his school was
always discussed.

"Oh, of course, Colonel Severn," he said, as his visitor took leave.  "I
hold your ward and son perfectly blameless, and have nothing to say
about their absence from my establishment this morning.--But I hope,
young gentlemen, that this is the last of these adventures; and I am
glad, Colonel, that you met them and made them your guests."

"Unintentionally, my dear sir--unintentionally," said the Colonel
stiffly.  "I did mean to ask your permission for them to dine with me
once more; but after this morning's meeting I shall not do so.  We
mustn't interfere with the discipline of the school boys," he said.
"To-morrow morning I return to town, and probably I shall not see you
again for a couple of months.  Good-morning, Doctor; good-morning.--You
will see me to the door, boys?"

The Doctor smiled and bowed, and the two lads walked past Wrench and
then down with the Colonel to the Doctor's gate, where he stood for a
few minutes talking.

"That fellow civil and attentive?" he said, giving his Malacca cane a
wave in the direction of Wrench.

"Yes, father; very nice and obliging."

"Give him that," said the Colonel, slipping a crown-piece into his son's
hand; "and, let's see; you get your month's allowance regularly.  Not
overrunning the constable, I hope--not getting into debt?"

The boys shook their heads, and after a few words more the Colonel
marched off, erect and soldierly, while the boys rather slowly and
unwillingly returned to their room to give a finishing touch or two to
their rather hasty morning toilet.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE PROFESSOR MAKES A REQUEST.

Morris, being off duty, as he termed it, walked down the road to clear
his head a little of mathematical calculations, as well as to devise an
examination paper intended for the improvement of his pupils; not that
he looked upon it in that light, for as soon as he had mentally got it
into shape, ready for committing to paper, he laughed to himself and
rubbed his white hands over and over again in his intense satisfaction.

"That will puzzle their brains," he said maliciously.  "That will give
some of them a headache;" and as he spoke, on his way back, he suddenly
awakened to the fact that he was just coming to the damaged hedge, where
a couple of men were for the second time, by Ramball's orders,
restaking, half-cutting through, and bending down for interlacing
purposes sturdy old growths of hawthorn.

The next moment he was conscious of the fact that Professor Barclay, who
looked particularly neat, refined, and clean, was coming up to him with
a most friendly smile and with extended hand.

The Professor was clean-shaven, wore his hair cut very short, and from
his hat to his boots he was spotless; but somehow or other there was a
suggestion that the profession of Sanskrit did not result in the
possession of wealth, for the Professor's hat was not so new as it had
been once, one of his well-polished boots had a smile in its upper
leather just where the little toe pressed outwards, there was a
suggestion about his very stiff shirt-collar of the growth of saw-like
teeth that might be very unpleasant if they came in contact with his
ears, while his tightly buttoned-up frock-coat, which looked very nice
in front, had grown extremely shiny in two places at the back where the
wearer's blade-bones were prominent.

Morris took the extended hand and shook it, but not half so
affectionately as the Professor shook his, while agreeing very simply
that the day was remarkably fine; and then, oddly enough, Morris, though
the Professor gave him no reason for his thoughts in words, began
thinking of a quiet little place in the town where modest dinners were
provided, one of which Morris did not require in the least, inasmuch as
a repast would be provided for him gratuitously in the Doctor's
establishment.  Item, he began thinking, too, of half-crowns.  But his
thoughts were turned in another direction by the Professor.

"So this is the spot," he said, "where the elephant broke through?"

"Yes," said Morris eagerly; "great mischievous beast!  It will be a good
thing when it's out of the town."

"Exactly," said the Professor, "unless the proprietor had some one to
manage it who understood its ways.  Is it true, as I have heard, that
the young Prince and his friend and fellow-pupil controlled the huge
beast by giving it orders in Hindustani?"

"Oh yes," said Morris, smiling now, as he ridded himself of thoughts of
cheap dinners and half-crowns.

"Well, I am not surprised," continued the Professor; "but it was a pity
I was not there."

"Pity you were not there?" said Morris, making a suggestion with his
hand preparatory to saying "good-bye--can't stop," and then telling
something very much like a fib; for it was in his mind to say, "So glad
to have met you."

"Yes," said the Professor nonchalantly, "you see, I know Hindustani
thoroughly; and though I suppose my pronunciation would be faulty in the
ears of a native, I could very well make myself understood."

"Ah, yes," said Morris hastily; "so I should suppose; but--er--you will
excuse me?"  And he glanced at his watch.  "I am afraid I must be back
at the college.  It is close upon dinner-time."

The Professor sighed and inadvertently sniffed as poor boys sniff who
are passing cookshops.

"In a moment, my dear friend.  I will not detain you; but I will walk
with you as far as the college.  It will be in my way.  You see, just
when one wants them most, important letters--important pecuniary
letters--have such a bad habit of being delayed."

Morris coughed.

"Now, nothing could have happened better for me than that I should have
met you, a brother-student; though we follow divergent lines, you for
the attainment of mathematical precision, I for the diffusion of Eastern
lore, you of all men seem to have extended towards me a kindly
interest."

"Oh, well, that was perfectly natural," said Morris feebly, as,
inadvertently he thrust his right hand into his pocket, started,
coloured, and withdrew it quickly.

"Now," continued the Professor, "I want you to give me your advice about
seeing the Doctor again."

Morris shook his head.

"Ah, I see what you are thinking; but that was for a permanent post.
Now, don't you think he might accept my services, say, for a
non-resident and three days a week?"

"No," said Morris, "I am sure he wouldn't.  Your coming made Rampson
dreadfully jealous, and he told me afterwards that the Doctor assured
him that he should make no change."

"Well, say one day a week."

Morris shook his head again and looked down the road, as if hoping that
some one would come and rescue him from his position.

"Don't speak in haste," said the Professor, taking him with finger and
thumb by the plaited guard of silk, as if he had intentions upon the
watch--not to know the time.

"I am obliged to speak in haste," replied Morris.  "You see, it is so
near--"

"Exactly--dinner-time.  But for Sanskrit, a lesson a week--"

"The Doctor declared he should not introduce Sanskrit in the curriculum
of study."

"Dear, dear!  And with that young Eastern Prince in the establishment,
and his companion the son of that magnificent old Colonel with the
wondrous moustache!"  And as he spoke the Professor passed his hand over
his closely shaven upper lip.  "Well, well, the Doctor knows his own
business best; but I must confess that I am disappointed, my dear
friend."

"I am very, very sorry," said Morris, drawing back a little; and as the
guard tightened, and the watch began to rise out of his pocket, he gave
way again and the watch sank down.

So did its owner's spirits, for the Professor continued:

"Don't you think I might go back with you to the college and call upon
the Doctor once more?"

"No, that I don't," said Morris hastily; "for almost directly he will be
going into the dining-hall."

"Well, what would that matter?  Country hospitality and--you understand.
But there, if you think the time adverse, I certainly would not
presume.  But, by the way, would you believe it, that letter has not
come this morning?"

"Yes," said Morris faintly.  "You said so just now."

"And it puts me to the greatest inconvenience.  I am almost ashamed to
ask you."

"Would that you were quite!" thought Morris.

"But would you mind--say a couple of half-crowns--a mere trifle, and the
moment the letter comes--really, I think it must be stuck in the
post-office somewhere from wrong direction.  Is there another
Plymborough in England?"

"Oh no; this is the only one."

