
"Good heavens!" thought Jack, the real state of the case flashing upon
him, "is it possible that I am locked in?"

To determine this he employed all his strength, but the door still
resisted. He could no longer doubt.

He rushed to the windows. There were two in number, and looked out upon
a court in the rear of the house. No part of the street was visible from
them; therefore there was no hope of drawing the attention of passers-by
to his situation.

Confounded by this discovery, Jack sank into his chair in no very
enviable state of mind.

"Well," thought he, "this is a pretty situation for me to be in! I
wonder what father would say if he knew that I was locked up like a
prisoner. And then to think I let that treacherous woman, Mrs. Hardwick,
lead me so quietly into a snare. Aunt Rachel was about right when she
said I wasn't fit to come alone. I hope she'll never find out this
adventure of mine; I never should hear the last of it."

Jack's mortification was extreme. His self-love was severely wounded by
the thought that a woman had got the better of him, and he resolved,
if he ever got out, that he would make Mrs. Hardwick suffer, he didn't
quite know how, for the manner in which she had treated him.

Time passed. Every hour seemed to poor Jack to contain at least double
the number of minutes which are usually reckoned to that division of
time. Moreover, not having eaten for several hours, he was getting
hungry.

A horrible suspicion flashed across his mind. "The wretches can't
mean to starve me, can they?" he asked himself, while, despite his
constitutional courage, he could not help shuddering at the idea.

He was unexpectedly answered by the sliding of a little door in the
wall, and the appearance of the old man whose interview with Peg has
been referred to.

"Are you getting hungry, my dear sir?" he inquired, with a disagreeable
smile upon his features.

"Why am I confined here?" demanded Jack, in a tone of irritation.

"Why are you confined?" repeated his interlocutor. "Really, one would
think you did not find your quarters comfortable."

"I am so far from finding them comfortable that I insist upon leaving
them immediately," returned Jack.

"Then all you have got to do is to walk through that door.

"It is locked; I can't open it."

"Can't open it!" repeated the old man, with another disagreeable leer;
"perhaps, then, it will be well for you to wait till you are strong
enough."

Irritated by this reply, Jack threw himself spitefully against the door,
but to no purpose.

The old man laughed in a cracked, wheezing way.

"Good fellow!" said he, encouragingly, "try it again! Won't you try it
again? Better luck next time."

Jack throw himself sullenly into a chair.

"Where is the woman that brought me here?" he asked.

"Peg? Oh, she couldn't stay. She had important business to transact, my
young friend, and so she has gone; but don't feel anxious. She commended
you to our particular attention, and you will be just as well treated as
if she were here."

This assurance was not very well calculated to comfort Jack.

"How long are you going to keep me cooped up here?" he asked,
desperately, wishing to learn the worst at once.

"Really, my young friend, I couldn't say. We are very hospitable, very.
We always like to have our friends with us as long as possible."

Jack groaned internally at the prospect before him.

"One question more," he said, "will you tell me if my sister Ida is in
this house?"

"Your sister Ida!" repeated the old man, surprised in his turn.

"Yes," said Jack; believing, his astonishment feigned. "You needn't
pretend that you don't know anything about her. I know that she is in
your hands."

"Then if you know so much," said the other, shrugging his shoulders,
"there is no need of asking."

Jack was about to press the question, but the old man, anticipating
him, pointed to a plate of food which he pushed in upon a shelf, just in
front of the sliding door, and said: "Here's some supper for you. When
you get ready to go to bed you can lie down on the sofa. Sorry we didn't
know of your coming, or we would have got our best bed-chamber ready for
you. Good-night, and pleasant dreams!"

Smiling disagreeably he slid to the door, bolted it, and disappeared,
leaving Jack more depressed, if possible, than before.



CHAPTER XX. JACK IN CONFINEMENT.



THE anxiety of Mr. Abel Crump's family, when Jack failed to return
at night, can be imagined. They feared that he had fallen among
unscrupulous persons, of whom there is no lack in every large city, and
that some ill had come to him. The baker instituted immediate inquiries,
but was unsuccessful in obtaining any trace of his nephew. He resolved
to delay as long as possible communicating the sad intelligence to his
brother Timothy, who he knew would be quite (sic) overwhelwed by this
double blow.

In the mean time, let us see how Jack enjoyed himself. We will look in
upon him after he has been confined four days. To a youth as active
as himself, nothing could be more wearisome. It did not add to his
cheerfulness to reflect that Ida was in the power of the one who had
brought upon him his imprisonment, while he was absolutely unable to
help her. He did not lack for food. This was brought him three times a
day. His meals, in fact, were all he had to look forward to, to break
the monotony of his confinement. The books upon the table were not of a
kind likely to interest him, though he had tried to find entertainment
in them.

Four days he had lived, or rather vegetated in this way. His spirit
chafed against the confinement.

"I believe," thought he, "I would sooner die than be imprisoned for a
long term. Yet," and here he sighed, "who knows what may be the length
of my present confinement? They will be sure to find some excuse for
retaining me."

While he was indulging in these uncomfortable reflections, suddenly the
little door in the wall, previously referred to, slid open, and revealed
the old man who had first supplied him with food. To explain the
motive of his present visit, it will be remembered that he was under
a misapprehension in regard to the cause of Jack's confinement. He
naturally supposed that our hero was acquainted with the unlawful
practises of the gang of coiners with which he was connected.

The old man, whose name was Foley, had been favorably impressed by the
bold bearing of Jack, and the idea had occurred to him that he might
be able to win him as an accomplice. He judged, that if once induced to
join them, he would prove eminently useful. Another motive which led
him to favor this project was, that it would be very embarrassing to
be compelled to keep Jack in perpetual custody, as well as involve a
considerable expense.

Jack was somewhat surprised at the old man's visit.

"How long are you going to keep me cooped up here?" he inquired,
impatiently.

"Don't you find your quarters comfortable?" asked Foley.

"As comfortable as any prison, I suppose."

"My young friend, don't talk of imprisonment. You make me shudder. You
must banish all thoughts of such a disagreeable subject."

"I wish I could," groaned poor Jack.

"Consider yourself as my guest, whom I delight to entertain."

"But, I don't like the entertainment."

"The more the pity."

"How long is this going to last? Even a prisoner knows the term of his
imprisonment."

"My young friend," said Foley, "I do not desire to control your
inclinations. I am ready to let you go whenever you say the word."

"You are?" returned Jack, incredulously. "Then suppose I ask you to let
me go immediately."

"Certainly, I will; but upon one condition."

"What is it?"

"It so happens, my young friend, that you are acquainted with a secret
which might prove troublesome to me."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Jack, mystified.

"Yes; you see I have found it out. Such things do not escape me."

"I don't know what you mean," returned Jack, perplexed.

"No doubt, no doubt,", said Foley, cunningly. "Of course, if I should
tell you that I was in the coining business, it would be altogether new
to you."

"On my honor," said Jack, "this is the first I knew of it. I never saw
or heard of you before I came into this house."

"Could Peg be mistaken?" thought Foley. "But no, no; he is only trying
to deceive me. I am too old a bird to be caught with such chaff."

"Of course, I won't dispute your word, my young friend," he said,
softly; "but there is one thing certain; if you didn't know it before
you know it now."

"And you are afraid that I shall denounce you to the police."

"Well, there is a possibility of that. That class of people have a
little prejudice against us, though we are only doing what everybody
wants to do, _making money_."

The old man chuckled and rubbed his hands at this joke, which he
evidently considered a remarkably good one.

Jack reflected a moment.

"Will you let me go if I will promise to keep your secret?" he asked.

"How could I be sure you would do it?"

"I would pledge my word."

"Your word!" Foley snapped his fingers in derision. "That is not
sufficient."

"What will be?"

"You must become one of us."

"One of you!"

Jack started in surprise at a proposition so unexpected.

"Yes. You must make yourself liable to the same penalties, so that it
will be for your own interest to keep silent. Otherwise we cannot trust
you."

"And suppose I decline these terms," said Jack.

"Then I shall be under the painful necessity of retaining you as my
guest."

Foley smiled disagreeably.

Jack walked the room in perturbation. He felt that imprisonment would be
better than liberty, on such terms. At the same time he did not refuse
unequivocally, as possibly stricter watch than ever might be kept over
him.

He thought it best to temporize.

"Well, what do you say?" asked the old man.

"I should like to take time to reflect upon your proposal," said Jack.
"It is of so important a character that I do not like to decide at
once."

"How long do you require?"

"Two days," returned Jack. "If I should come to a decision sooner, I
will let you know."

"Agreed. Meanwhile can I do anything to promote your comfort? I want you
to enjoy yourself as well as you can under the circumstances."

"If you have any interesting books, I wish you would send them up. It is
rather dull staying here with nothing to do."

"You shall have something to do as soon as you please, my young friend.
As to books, we are not very bountifully supplied with that article. We
ain't any of us college graduates, but I will see what I can do for you
in that way. I'll be back directly."

Foley disappeared, but soon after returned, laden with one or two old
magazines, and a worn copy of the "Adventures of Baron Trenck."

It may be that the reader has never encountered a copy of this singular
book. Baron Trenck was several times imprisoned for political offences,
and this book contains an account of the manner in which he succeeded,
in some cases after years of labor, in breaking from his dungeon. His
feats in this way are truly wonderful, and, if not true, at least they
have so very much similitude that they find no difficulty in winning the
reader's credence.

Such was the book which Foley placed in Jack's hands. He must have been
in ignorance of the character of the book, since it was evident to what
thoughts it would lead the mind of the prisoner.

Jack read the book with intense interest. It was just such a one as he
would have read with avidity under any circumstances. It gratified his
taste for adventure, and he entered heart and soul into the Baron's
plans, and felt a corresponding gratification when he succeeded. When he
completed the perusal of the fascinating volume, he thought, "Why cannot
I imitate Baron Trenck? He was far worse off than I am. If he could
succeed in overcoming so many obstacles, it is a pity if I cannot find
some means of escape."

He looked about the room in the hope that some plan might be suggested.



CHAPTER XXI. THE PRISONER ESCAPES.



TO give an idea of the difficulties of Jack's situation, let it be
repeated that there was but one door to the room, and this was bolted
on the outside. The room was in the second story. The only two windows
looked out upon a court. These windows were securely fastened. Still a
way might have been devised to break through them, if this would at all
have improved his condition. Of this, however, there seemed but little
chance. Even if he had succeeded in getting safely into the court, there
