"Them Injuns have guns, but they are not generally ez good ez ours," he
said. "They don't carry ez fur. Now jest watch me change the set uv that
savage's figger. I wouldn't do it, but he's just a-pinin' fur our blood
an' the hair on top uv our heads."

Up went the long Kentucky rifle, and the moonlight fell clearly along its
polished barrel. Then came the flash, the spurt of smoke, the report
echoing among the hills about the lake, and the chief fell forward with
his face in the water. A yell of rage arose from the others, and again
bullets pattered on the surface of the lake, but all fell short. Jim Hart
calmly reloaded his rifle.

"That'll teach 'em to be a little more keerful who they're a-follerin',"
he said. "Now, Paul, let's paddle."

They sent the boat swiftly toward the north end of the lake, and Paul now
and then caught glimpses of the Miamis trying to keep parallel with it,
although out of range; but presently, as they passed the island, and could
swing out into the middle of the lake, the last of them sank permanently
from sight. But the two kept on in the canoe. The moonlight faded a
little, and soon the hills on the shore could be seen only as a black
blur.

"This is jest too easy, Paul," said Jim Hart, "With them runnin' aroun'
that big outer circle, they couldn't keep up with us even ef they could
see us. Let's rest a while."

Both put their paddles inside the canoe and drew long breaths. Each had a
feeling of perfect safety, for the time at least, and they let the boat
drift northward under the gentle wind from the south that rippled the
surface of the lake.

"Water and darkness," said Paul. "They are our friends."

"The best we could have," said Jim Hart. "Are you rested now, Paul?"

"I'm fresh again."

They resumed the paddles, and, curving about, came down on the western
side of the lake until they were opposite the island. Then they paddled
straight for their home, and the word "home," in this case, had its full
meaning for Paul. It gave him a thrill of delight when the prow of the
canoe struck upon the margin of the little island, and the gloom of the
great trees was friendly and protecting.

"We must hide the canoe good," said Jim Hart.

They concealed it in a thick clump of bushes, and then Hart carefully
readjusted the bushes so that no one would notice that they had ever been
disturbed, and they took their way to the hut in the glen. They did not
light a fire, but they sat for a little while on the stones, talking.

"You're sure they won't come over to the Island?" said Paul.

"They'll never do it," replied Jim Hart confidently. "Besides, they ain't
got the least suspicion that we've come here. Likely, they think we've
landed at the north end uv the lake, an' they'll be prowlin' aroun' thar
three or four days lookin' fur us. Jest think, Paul, uv all the work
they'll hev fur nothin'. I feel like laughin'. I think I _will_ laugh."

He kept his word and laughed low; but he laughed long, and with the most
intense pleasure.

"Jest to think, Paul," he continued, "how we're guarded by dead Injuns
theirselves!"

Presently the two went into the hut, and slept soundly until the next
morning. They did not light a fire then, but ate cold food, and went down
among the trees to watch the lake. They saw nothing. The water rippled and
glowed in alternate gold and silver under the brilliant sunshine, and the
hills about it showed distinctly; but there was no sign of a human being
except themselves.

"Lookin' fur us among the hills," said Jim Hart. "You an' me will jest
keep close, Paul, an' we won't light no fire."

The whole day passed without incident, and the following night also, but
about noon the next day, as they watched from the shelter of the trees,
they saw a black dot on the lake, far to the south.

"A canoe!" said Jim Hart.

"A canoe? How did they get it?" said Paul--he took it for granted that its
occupants were Miamis.

"Guess they brought it across country from some river, and thar they are,"
replied Jim Hart. "They've shore put a boat on our lake."

His tone showed traces of anxiety, and Paul, too, felt alarm. The Miamis,
after all, might defy their own superstition and land on the island.
Presently another canoe appeared behind the first, and then a third and a
fourth, until there was a little fleet, which the two watched with silent
apprehension. Had Henry Ware been mistaken? Did the Miamis really believe
it was a haunted island?

On came the canoes in a straight black file, enough to contain more than a
score of warriors, and the man and the boy nervously fingered their
rifles. If the Indians landed on the island, the result was sure. The two
might make a good fight and slay some of their foes, but in any event
they would certainly be taken or killed. Their lives depended upon the
effect of a superstition.

The line of canoes lay like a great black arrow across the water. They
were so close together that to the watchers they seemed to blend and
become continuous, and this arrow was headed straight toward the island.
Paul's heart went down with a thump, but a moment later a light leaped
into his eyes.

"The line is turning!" he exclaimed. "Look, Jim, look! They are afraid of
the island!"

"Yes," said Jim Hart, "I see! The ghosts are real, an' it's pow'ful lucky
fur us that they are. The Miamis dassent land!"

It was true. The black arrow suddenly shifted to the right, and the line
of canoes drew into the open water, midway between the island and the
eastern mainland.

"Lay close, Paul, lay close!" said Jim Hart. "We mustn't let 'em catch a
glimpse uv us, an' they're always pow'ful keen-eyed."

Both the man and the boy lay flat on their stomachs on the ground, and
peered from the shelter of the bushes. No human eye out on the lake could
have seen them there. The canoes were now abreast of the island, but were
going more slowly, and both could see that the occupants were looking
curiously at their little wooded domain. But they kept at a healthy
distance.

"I think they're lookin' here because the place is haunted, and not
because we are on it," said Jim Hart.

It seemed that he spoke the truth, as the Miamis presently swung nearer to
the mainland and began to examine the shores long and critically.

"I guess they've been huntin' us all through the woods, an' think now we
may be hid somewhar at the edge uv the lake," said Jim Hart.

It seemed so. The two lay there for hours, watching the little fleet of
canoes as it circled the lake, keeping near the outer rim, and searching
among all the hills and hollows that bordered the shores. Once, when it
was on the western side, the fleet turned its head again toward the
island, and again apprehension arose in the hearts of the boy and the man,
but it was only for a fleeting moment. The line of canoes was quickly
turned away, and bore on down the open water. Paul and Jim Hart were
protected by Manitou.

The circumnavigation of the lake by the Miamis lasted throughout the
remainder of the day, and when the twilight came, the canoes were lost in
its shade toward the southern end of the sheet of water.

"We're safe," said Jim Hart, "but we've still got to keep close. They may
hang about here fur days."

"What about Henry and Ross and Sol?" asked Paul anxiously. "On their way
back they may run right into that wasp's nest."

"'Tain't likely," replied Jim Hart. "Our boys know what they're a-doin'.
But I wish them Miamis would go away so's I could light a fire an' cook
some fresh meat."




CHAPTER XII

THE BELT BEARERS


Paul and Jim Hart waited several days, never once venturing from the
protecting shadows of the woods, and they found the burden very great. The
little island was like a cage, and Jim Hart groaned, moreover, because he
could not exercise his skill in the art of cooking.

"These cold victuals," he said, "besides bein' unpleasant to the inside,
are a disgrace to me. I jest got to cook somethin'."

Finally, he built up a bed of coals on a very dark night, when it was
impossible for anyone to see either their sheltered glow or the smoke they
sent out, and he broiled juicy steaks from the body of a deer that they
had hung up in a tree.

"Isn't it fine, Paul?" he said, as they ate hungrily.

"Fine's no name for it," replied Paul. "It's great, splendid, grand,
magnificent, surpassing, unapproachable! Are those the terms, Jim?"

"I don't know jest what all uv 'em mean," replied Jim Hart, "but they
shorely sound right to me."

They saw the Indian canoes on the lake once more, but the Miamis seemed to
be fishing, and did not come anywhere near the island. Paul appreciated
then how great had been their continual need of caution.

A day or two later there was a magnificent thunder storm, despite the
lateness of the season. The heavenly artillery roared grandly, and lakes,
hills, and forest swam at times in a glare that dazzled Jim Hart. After
that it rained hard, and they clung to the shelter of their hut, which was
fortunately water-tight now. The rain ceased by and by, but the clouds
remained in the sky, and night came very thick and dark. Jim Hart
suggested that it would be a good time to do a little fishing, and Paul
was ready and willing.

They paddled out silently a short distance from the island, where the
water was not too shallow, and let down the lines.

They waited some time and received no bites; but as this was nothing
unusual, owing to the crudity of their fishing tackle, they persisted
patiently. The night deepened and darkened, and they could not see the
surface of the lake fifty yards away. The water, moved by a light wind,
bubbled faintly against the sides of the canoe. Neither spoke, but sat in
silence, waiting hopefully for a pull on the lines.

Presently Paul heard a faint, wailing sound, coming from the mainland, but
at first he paid little attention to it. Then he noticed that Jim Hart had
raised his head and was listening intently. Naturally Paul then listened,
too, with the same eager attention, and the faint wailing sound,
singularly weird and strange in the night, came a second, and presently a
third time. But after that it was not repeated. Long Jim Hart looked at
the boy.

"You know what that is?" he said.

"The cry of the whip-poor-will."

"The cry of the whip-poor-will, given three times! The signal! The boys
are thar, an' we must go fur 'em."

"Of course," said Paul. "Do we need to return to the island for anything?"

"No; we have our rifles an' ammunition with us. We got to start right now,
an' Paul, don't you splash any water with your paddle."

Paul understood as well as Jim Hart the need of extreme caution, as the
Miamis might be abroad, and he made every stroke steady and sure. Jim Hart
emitted the lonesome cry of the whip-poor-will once in return--signal for
signal--and then they cut their way in silence through the dark.

They laid their course, according to agreement, for the drinking place at
the mouth of the brook, and Paul's heart beat with relief and gladness.
His comrades had come back, safe and sound. It did not occur to him that
any one of them might have fallen in the venture. Half way to the mainland
Jim Hart stopped the canoe, and listened a moment.

"I thought I heard somethin' down the lake that sounded like a splash," he
said.

But he did not hear it again, and they resumed their progress. Paul now
saw the loom of the land, a darker outline in the darkness, and his heart,
already beating fast, began to beat faster. Suppose there should be some
trick in the signal! Suppose they should find the Miamis, and not their
comrades, waiting for them! He sought hard to pierce the darkness and see
what might be there on the land before him.

The outline of the shore rose more distinctly out of the darkness, and the
prow of the boat struck softly on the margin. Then Paul saw a figure rise
from the bushes, and after it another, and then a third, and then no more.
He could not see their faces, but it was the right number, and a vast
relief surged up. The three figures came down confidently to the canoe,
and then the welcome voice of Henry Ware said in a low tone:

"You are here, Paul! You and Jim are on time to the minute!"

"An' mighty glad I am, too," said Shif'less Sol, in the same tone. "I wuz
never so tired before in all my life. I think I must have trotted a
thousan' miles, an' now I'm willin' to let Jim Hart paddle me the rest o'
the way in a canoe."

Tom Ross said nothing, merely showing his white teeth in a smile.

"The Miamis are about," said Paul. "They have been around the lake, and on
it, for days, looking for something."

"We know it," said Henry. "In fact, we've seen some of them not so long
since, though none of them saw us. There are big doings afoot, Paul, and
we must have our part in them."

"Should we go back to the island, then?"

"For the present, yes. We need a base, and the island is safest and best."

The five got cautiously into the canoe, disposing their weight carefully,
and Shif'less Sol, who had taken the paddle from Paul, raised it for the
first sweep. But it did not come down into the water. Instead, he stopped
it in its fall, and he and all the others listened. The same splash that
Jim Hart thought he had heard came now to their ears, and it was repeated.
Paul knew that it was made by paddles sweeping through water, and it was
coming nearer.

"Push back into the bushes," whispered Henry.

They gently shoved the canoe far among the bushes in the shallow water,
and waited. They were completely hidden, but even if seen they could
spring instantly to the land. They waited, and the splashing steadily grew
louder. Paul felt the pressure of Henry's hand on his arm, and he looked
with all his eyes. The Miami navy was abroad that night! A canoe, a long
one with seven or eight warriors in it, was abreast of them, and behind it
came five others. They were not twenty yards away, and Paul, in fancy at
least, saw the savage eyes and the painted faces. What had brought them
out on the lake, what suspicion or precaution, Paul never knew, but there
they were. All were brave hearts in the hidden canoe, but they held their
breath while that silent file passed by. Then, when the last had gone and
was lost in the darkness, they pushed out a little and listened, with all
the keenness of forest-bred ears. Hearing no splash, they paddled in a
straight course for the haunted island.

"I think they've gone toward the north end of the lake, and as they are
