on the march, and killed without having an opportunity of
explanation. Their friends, however, would have the power of at
once explaining, to all comers, the valuable benefits which they
could bestow.

During the time that they had been staying in the village, they had
further improved their bows by taking them to pieces, fitting the
parts more accurately together, and gluing them with glue, prepared
by boiling down sinews of animals in a gourd. Then, rebinding them
with fine sinews, they found that they were, in all respects, equal
to their English weapons. They had now no fear as to their power of
maintaining themselves with food on the way, and felt that, even
when their new friends should leave them, they would have a fair
chance of defending themselves against attack, as their bows would
carry more than thrice as far as those of the natives.

The following morning the start was made. The chief and twenty
picked warriors accompanied them, together with six young Indians,
two of whom carried lighted brands. The others dragged light
sleighs, upon which were piled skins and long poles, for making
tents at night, for the temperature was exceedingly cold after
sundown. The whole village turned out to see the party off, and
shouts of farewell, and good wishes, rang in the air.

For the first three days no adventures were met with. The party had
no difficulty in killing game sufficient for their needs, and at
night they halted at streams or pools. Ned observed, however, that
at the last halting place the chief, who had hitherto taken no
precaution at night, gave some orders to his followers; four of
whom, when the rest laid down to rest, glided off in different
directions into the darkness.

Ned pointed to them inquiringly, and the chief intimated that they
were now entering the hunting grounds of another tribe. The
following day the band kept closely together. A vigilant lookout on
the plains was kept up, and no straggling was allowed. They had
sufficient meat left over, from their spoils of the day before, to
last for the day; and no hunting was necessary.

The next evening, just as they had retired to rest, one of the
scouts came in and reported that he heard sounds around, which
betokened the presence of man. The calls of animals were heard on
the plain; and a herd of deer, which had evidently been disturbed,
had darted past at full speed.

The chief now ordered great quantities of dried wood to be thrown
into the fire, and a vast blaze soon shot up high, illuminating a
circle of a hundred yards in diameter. Advancing to the edge of
this circle, the chief held out his arms, to show that he was
unarmed; and then shouted, at the top of his voice, to the effect
that he invited all within hearing to come forward, in peace. The
strange appearance that they saw was a boon, given to the Indian
people by two great white beings, who were in his camp; and that,
by its aid, there would be no more cold.

Three times he shouted out these words, and then retired to the
fire and sat down. Presently from the circle of darkness a number
of figures appeared, approaching timidly and with an awe-struck
air, until within a short distance of the fire.

Then the chief again rose, and bade them welcome. There were some
fifty or sixty of them, but Ned and his friend had no fear of any
treachery, for they were evidently under the spell of a sense of
amazement greater than that which had been excited among those they
first met; and this because they first saw this wonder by night.

When the newcomers had taken their seats, the chief explained to
them the qualities of their new discovery. That it made them warm
and comfortable their own feelings told them; and on the morrow,
when they had meat, he would show them how great were its effects.
Then he told them of the dancing water, and how it softened and
made delicious the vegetables placed in it. At his command one of
his followers took two brands, carried them to a distance, and soon
lighted another fire.

During the narrative, the faces of the Indians lighted up with joy;
and they cast glances of reverence and gratitude towards the young
white men. These, finding that amity was now established, retired
to sleep to the little skin tents which had been raised for them;
while the Indians remained sitting round the fire, engrossed with
its wonders.

The young men slept late next morning, knowing that no move could
be made that day. When they came out of the tents, they found that
the natives had lost no time. Before daybreak hunting parties had
gone out, and a store of game was piled near the fire; or rather
fires, for a dozen were now burning, and the strangers were being
initiated in the art of cooking by their hosts.

Two days were spent here; and then, after much talk, the tribe at
which they had now arrived arranged to escort and pass the boys on
to their neighbors, while the first party returned to their
village. Ned and Tom were consulted before this matter was settled,
and approved of it. It was better that they should be passed on,
from tribe to tribe, than that they should be escorted all the way
by a guard who would be as strange as themselves to the country,
and who would naturally be longing to return to their homes and
families.

For some weeks the life led by the travelers resembled that which
has been described. Sometimes they waited for a few days at
villages, where great festivities were held in their honor The news
of their coming, in many cases, preceded them; and they and their
convoy were often met at the stream, or other mark which formed the
acknowledged boundary between the hunting grounds, by large bodies
eager to receive and welcome them.

They had, by this time, made considerable progress in the language,
knew all the names of common objects, and could make themselves
understood in simple matters. The language of savage people is
always simple. Their range of ideas is narrow; their vocabulary
very limited, and consequently easily mastered.

Ned knew that, at any time, they might come across people in a
state of active warfare with each other; and that his life might
depend upon the ability to make himself understood. Consequently he
lost no opportunity of picking up the language. On the march Tom
and he, instead of walking and talking together, each went with a
group of natives; and kept up a conversation, eked out with signs,
with them; and consequently they made very considerable progress
with the language.




Chapter 13: Through the Cordilleras.



After three months of steady travel, the country, which had become
more and more hilly as they advanced toward the west, assumed a
different character. The hills became mountains, and it was clear
that they were arriving at a great range running north and south.
They had for some time left the broad plains behind them, and game
was very scarce. The Indians had of late been more and more
disinclined to go far to the west, and the tribe with whom they
were now traveling told them that they could go no farther. They
signified that beyond the mountains dwelt tribes with whom they
were unacquainted, but who were fierce and warlike. One of the
party, who had once crossed, said that the people there had fires
like those which the white men had taught them to make.

"You see, Tom," Ned said, "they must have been in contact with the
Spaniards, or at least with tribes who have learned something from
the Spaniards. In that case our supernatural power will be at an
end, and our color will be against us, as they will regard us as
Spaniards, and so as enemies. At any rate, we must push on and take
our chance."

From the Indian they learned that the track lay up a valley before
them, that after a day's walking they would have to begin the
ascent. Another day's journey would take them to a neck between two
peaks, and the passage of this would occupy at least a day. The
native described the cold as great here, even in summer, and that
in winter it was terrible. Once across the neck, the descent on the
other side began.

"There can be no snow in the pass now, Tom; it is late in December,
and the hottest time of the year; and although we must be a very
great height above the sea, for we have been rising ever since we
left the coast, we are not so very far south, and I cannot believe
the snow can now lie in the pass. Let us take a good stock of dried
meat, a skin for water--we can fill it at the head of the
valley--and make our way forward. I do not think the sea can lie
very far on the other side of this range of mountains, but at any
rate, we must wait no longer. Captain Drake may have passed
already, but we may still be in time."

The next morning they bade adieu to their companions, with whom
they had been traveling for a fortnight. These, glad again to turn
their faces homeward, set off at once; and the lads, shouldering
their packs, started up the valley. The scenery was grand in the
extreme, and Ned and Tom greatly enjoyed it. Sometimes the sides
approached in perpendicular precipices, leaving barely room for the
little stream to find its way between their feet; at others it was
half a mile wide. When the rocks were not precipitous the sides
were clothed with a luxuriant foliage, among which the birds
maintained a concert of call and song. So sheltered were they that,
high as it was above the sea, the heat was very oppressive; and
when they reached the head of the valley, late in the afternoon,
they were glad indeed of a bathe in a pool of the stream.

Choosing a spot of ground near the stream, the lads soon made a
fire, put their pieces of venison down to roast, and prepared for a
quiet evening.

"It seems strange to be alone again, Tom, after so many months with
those Indians; who were ever on the watch for every movement and
word, as if they were inspired. It is six months, now, since we
left the western coast; and one almost seems to forget that one is
English. We have picked up something of half a dozen Indian
dialects; we can use their weapons almost as well as they can
themselves; and as to our skins, they are as brown as that of the
darkest of them. The difficulty will be to persuade the people on
the other side that we are whites."

"How far do you think the sea lies on the other side of this range
of giant mountains?" Tom asked.

"I have no idea," Ned replied, "and I do not suppose that anyone
else has. The Spaniards keep all matters connected with this coast
a mystery; but I believe that the sea cannot be many days' march
beyond the mountains."

For an hour or two they chatted quietly, their thoughts naturally
turning again to England, and the scenes of their boyhood.

"Will it be necessary to watch, think you?" Tom asked.

"I think it would be safer, Tom. One never knows. I believe that we
are now beyond the range of the natives of the Pampas. They
evidently have a fear of approaching the hills; but that only shows
that the natives from the other side come down over here. I believe
that they were, when the Spaniards landed, peaceable people; quiet
and gentle. So at least they are described. But those who take to
the mountains must be either escaped slaves, or fugitives from the
cruelty of the Spaniards; and even the gentlest man, when driven to
desperation, becomes savage and cruel. To these men our white skins
would be like a red rag to a bull. They can never have heard of any
white people, save the Spaniards; and we need expect little mercy
if we fall into their hands. I think we had better watch, turn
about. I will take the first watch, for I am not at all sleepy, and
my thoughts seem busy tonight, with home."

Tom was soon fast asleep, and Ned sat quietly watching the embers
of the fire, occasionally throwing on fresh sticks, until he deemed
that nearly half the night was gone. Then he aroused his companion
and lay down himself, and was soon fast asleep.

The gray light was just beginning to break when he was aroused by a
sudden yell, accompanied by a cry from Tom. He leaped to his feet,
just in time to see a crowd of natives rush upon himself and his
comrade, discharging as they did so numbers of small arrows,
several of which pierced him as he rose to his feet. Before they
could grasp their bows, or any other weapons, the natives were upon
them. Blows were showered down with heavy clubs and, although the
lads made a desperate resistance, they were beaten to the ground in
a short time. The natives at once twisted strong thongs round their
limbs; and then, dragging them from the fire, sat down themselves
and proceeded to roast the remains of the boys' deer meat.

"This is a bad business indeed, Tom," Ned said. "These men
doubtless take us for Spaniards. They certainly must belong to the
other side of the mountains, for their appearance and language are
altogether different to those of the people we have been staying
with. These men are much smaller, slighter, and fairer. Runaways
though no doubt they are, they seem to have more care about their
persons, and to be more civilized in their appearance and weapons,
than the savages of the plains."

"What do you think they will do with us, Ned?"

"I have no doubt in the world, Tom, that their intention is either
to put us to death with some horrible torture, or to roast us. The
Spaniards have taught them these things, if they did not know them
before; and in point of atrocities, nothing can possibly exceed
those which the Spaniards have inflicted upon them and their
fathers."

Whatever were the intentions of the Indians, it was soon evident
that there would be some delay in carrying them out. After they had
finished their meal, they rose from the fire. Some amused
themselves by making arrows from the straight reeds that grew by
the stream. Others wandered listlessly about. Some threw themselves
upon the ground and slept; while others, coming up to the boys,
poured torrents of invective upon them, among which they could
distinguish in Spanish the words "dog" and "Spaniard," varying
their abuse by violent kicks. As, however, these were given by the
naked feet, they did not seriously inconvenience the boys.

"What can they be waiting for?" Tom said. "Why don't they do
something if they are going to do it."

"I expect," Ned answered, "that they are waiting for some chief, or
for the arrival of some other band, and that we are to be kept for
a grand exhibition."

So it proved. Three days passed, and upon the fourth another band,
smaller in numbers, joined them. Upon the evening of that day the
lads saw that their fate was about to be brought to a crisis. The
fire was made up with huge bundles of wood; the natives took their
seats around it, with gravity and order; and the boys were led
forward by four natives, armed with spears. Then began what was a
regular trial. The boys, although they could not understand a word
of the language, could yet follow the speeches of the excited
orators. One after another arose and told the tale of the treatment
that he had experienced. One showed the weals which covered his
back. Another held up his arm, from which the hand had been lopped.
A third pointed to the places where his ears once had been. Another
showed the scar of a hot iron on his arms and legs. Some went
through a pantomime, which told its tale of an attack upon some
solitary hut, the slaughter of the old and infirm, and the dragging
away of the men and women into slavery. Others spoke of long
periods of labor, in a bent position, in a mine, under the cruel
whip of the taskmaster. All had their tale of barbarity and cruelty
to recite and, as each speaker contributed his quota, the anger and
excitement of the rest rose.

"Poor devils!" Ned said; "no wonder that they are savage against
us. See what they have suffered at the hands of the white men. If
we had gone through as much, you may be sure that we should spare
none. Our only chance is to make them understand that we are not
Spanish; and that, I fear, is beyond all hope."

This speedily proved to be the case. Two or three of the natives
who spoke a few words of Spanish came to them, calling them Spanish
dogs.

Ned shook his head and said, "Not Spanish."

For all reply the natives pointed to the uncovered portions of
their body, pulled back the skins which covered their arms and,
pointing to the white flesh, laughed incredulously.

"White men are Spaniards, and Spaniards are white men," Tom
groaned, "and that we shall have to die, for the cruelty which the
Spaniards have perpetrated, is clear enough.

"Well, Ned, we have had more good fortune than we could have
expected. We might have been killed on the day when we landed, and
we have spent six jolly months in wandering together, as hunters,
on the plain. If we must die, let us behave like Englishmen and
Christians. It may be that our lives have not been as good as they
should have been; but so far as we know, we have both done our
duty; and it may be that, as we die for the faults of others, it
may come to be considered as a balance against our own faults."

"We must hope so, Tom. I think we have both done, I won't say our
best, but as well as could be expected in so rough a life. We have
followed the exhortations of the good chaplain, and have never
joined in the riotous ways of the sailors in general. We must trust
that the good God will forgive us our sins, and strengthen us to go
through this last trial."

While they had been speaking the natives had made an end of their
deliberation. Tom was now conducted, by two natives with spears, to
a tree; and was securely fastened. Ned, under the guard of the
other two, was left by the fire. The tree was situated at a
distance of some twenty yards from it, and the natives mostly took
their place near the fire. Some scattered among the bushes, and
presently reappeared bearing bundles of dry wood. These were laid
in order round the tree, at such a distance that the flames would
not touch the prisoner, but the heat would gradually roast him to
death.

As Ned observed the preparations for the execution of his friend,
the sweat stood in great drops on his forehead; and he would have
given anything to be able to rush to his assistance, and to die
with him. Had his hands been free he would, without hesitation,
have snatched up a bow and sent an arrow into Tom's heart, to
release him from the lingering death which awaited him; and he
would then have stabbed himself with a spear. But while his hands
were sufficiently free to move a little, the fastenings were too
tight to admit of his carrying out any plan of that sort.

Suddenly an idea struck him, and he began nervously to tug at his
fastenings. The natives, when they seized them, had bound them
without examining their clothes. It was improbable that men in savage
attire could have about them any articles worth appropriating. The
knives, indeed, which hung from their belts had been cut off; but
these were the only articles which had been touched.

Just as a man approached the fire and, seizing a brand, stooped
forward to light the pyre, Ned succeeded in freeing his hands
sufficiently to seize the object which he sought. This was his
powder flask, which was wrapped in the folds of the cloth round his
waist. With little difficulty he succeeded in freeing it and,
moving a step closer to the fire, he cast it into the midst of it,
at the very moment the man with the lighted brand was approaching
Tom. Then he stepped back as far as he could from the fire. The
natives on guard over him, not understanding the movement, and
thinking he meditated flight, closed around him.

An instant later there was a tremendous explosion. The red hot
embers were flaming in all directions, and both Ned and the savages
who stood by him were, with many others, struck to the ground. As
soon as he was able, Ned struggled up again.

Not a native was in sight. A terrific yell had broken from them at
the explosion, which sounded to them like one of the cannons of
their Spanish oppressors; and, smarting with the wounds
simultaneously made by the hot brands, each, without a moment's
thought, had taken to his heels. Tom gave a shout of exultation, as
Ned rose. The latter at once stooped and, with difficulty, picked
up one of the still blazing brands, and hurried towards the tree.

"If these fellows will remain away for a couple of minutes, Tom,
you shall be free," he said, "and I don't think they will get over
their scare as quickly as that."

So saying, he applied the end of the burning brand to the dry
withes with which Tom was bound to the tree. These at once took
fire and flared up, and the bands fell to the ground.

"Now, Tom, do me the same service."

This was quickly rendered, and the lads stood free.

"Now, let us get our weapons."

A short search revealed to them their bows, laid carefully aside,
while the ground was scattered with the arms which the natives, in
