But now there's a cry that the prepostor of the room is coming; so the
tossing stops, and all scatter to their different rooms; and Tom is
left to turn in, with the first day's experience of a public school to
meditate upon.



CHAPTER VII--SETTLING TO THE COLLAR.

     "Says Giles, ''Tis mortal hard to go,
     But if so be's I must
     I means to follow arter he
     As goes hisself the fust.'"--Ballad.

Everybody, I suppose, knows the dreamy, delicious state in which one
lies, half asleep, half awake, while consciousness begins to return
after a sound night's rest in a new place which we are glad to be in,
following upon a day of unwonted excitement and exertion. There are
few pleasanter pieces of life. The worst of it is that they last such
a short time; for nurse them as you will, by lying perfectly passive
in mind and body, you can't make more than five minutes or so of them.
After which time the stupid, obtrusive, wakeful entity which we call
"I", as impatient as he is stiff-necked, spite of our teeth will force
himself back again, and take possession of us down to our very toes.

It was in this state that Master Tom lay at half-past seven on the
morning following the day of his arrival, and from his clean little
white bed watched the movements of Bogle (the generic name by which the
successive shoeblacks of the School-house were known), as he marched
round from bed to bed, collecting the dirty shoes and boots, and
depositing clean ones in their places.

There he lay, half doubtful as to where exactly in the universe he was,
but conscious that he had made a step in life which he had been anxious
to make. It was only just light as he looked lazily out of the wide
windows, and saw the tops of the great elms, and the rooks circling
about and cawing remonstrances to the lazy ones of their commonwealth
before starting in a body for the neighbouring ploughed fields. The
noise of the room-door closing behind Bogle, as he made his exit with
the shoebasket under his arm, roused him thoroughly, and he sat up in
bed and looked round the room. What in the world could be the matter
with his shoulders and loins? He felt as if he had been severely beaten
all down his back--the natural results of his performance at his first
match. He drew up his knees and rested his chin on them, and went over
all the events of yesterday, rejoicing in his new life, what he had seen
of it, and all that was to come.

Presently one or two of the other boys roused themselves, and began to
sit up and talk to one another in low tones. Then East, after a roll
or two, came to an anchor also, and nodding to Tom, began examining his
ankle.

"What a pull," said he, "that it's lie-in-bed, for I shall be as lame as
a tree, I think."

It was Sunday morning, and Sunday lectures had not yet been established;
so that nothing but breakfast intervened between bed and eleven o'clock
chapel--a gap by no means easy to fill up: in fact, though received with
the correct amount of grumbling, the first lecture instituted by
the Doctor shortly afterwards was a great boon to the School. It was
lie-in-bed, and no one was in a hurry to get up, especially in rooms
where the sixth-form boy was a good-tempered fellow, as was the case in
Tom's room, and allowed the small boys to talk and laugh and do pretty
much what they pleased, so long as they didn't disturb him. His bed was
a bigger one than the rest, standing in the corner by the fireplace,
with a washing-stand and large basin by the side, where he lay in state
with his white curtains tucked in so as to form a retiring place--an
awful subject of contemplation to Tom, who slept nearly opposite, and
watched the great man rouse himself and take a book from under his
pillow, and begin reading, leaning his head on his hand, and turning his
back to the room. Soon, however, a noise of striving urchins arose, and
muttered encouragements from the neighbouring boys of "Go it, Tadpole!"
"Now, young Green!" "Haul away his blanket!" "Slipper him on the hands!"
Young Green and little Hall, commonly called Tadpole, from his great
black head and thin legs, slept side by side far away by the door, and
were for ever playing one another tricks, which usually ended, as on
this morning, in open and violent collision; and now, unmindful of all
order and authority, there they were, each hauling away at the other's
bedclothes with one hand, and with the other, armed with a slipper,
belabouring whatever portion of the body of his adversary came within
reach.

"Hold that noise up in the corner," called out the prepostor, sitting
up and looking round his curtains; and the Tadpole and young Green sank
down into their disordered beds; and then, looking at his watch, added,
"Hullo! past eight. Whose turn for hot water?"

(Where the prepostor was particular in his ablutions, the fags in his
room had to descend in turn to the kitchen, and beg or steal hot water
for him; and often the custom extended farther, and two boys went down
every morning to get a supply for the whole room.)

"East's and Tadpole's," answered the senior fag, who kept the rota.

"I can't go," said East; "I'm dead lame."

"Well, be quick some of you, that's all," said the great man, as he
turned out of bed, and putting on his slippers, went out into the great
passage, which runs the whole length of the bedrooms, to get his Sunday
habiliments out of his portmanteau.

"Let me go for you," said Tom to East; "I should like it."

"Well, thank 'ee, that's a good fellow. Just pull on your trousers, and
take your jug and mine. Tadpole will show you the way."

And so Tom and the Tadpole, in nightshirts and trousers, started off
downstairs, and through "Thos's hole," as the little buttery, where
candles and beer and bread and cheese were served out at night, was
called, across the School-house court, down a long passage, and into the
kitchen; where, after some parley with the stalwart, handsome cook, who
declared that she had filled a dozen jugs already, they got their hot
water, and returned with all speed and great caution. As it was, they
narrowly escaped capture by some privateers from the fifth-form rooms,
who were on the lookout for the hot-water convoys, and pursued them up
to the very door of their room, making them spill half their load in the
passage.

"Better than going down again though," as Tadpole remarked, "as we
should have had to do if those beggars had caught us."

By the time that the calling-over bell rang, Tom and his new
comrades were all down, dressed in their best clothes, and he had the
satisfaction of answering "here" to his name for the first time, the
prepostor of the week having put it in at the bottom of his list. And
then came breakfast and a saunter about the close and town with East,
whose lameness only became severe when any fagging had to be done. And
so they whiled away the time until morning chapel.

It was a fine November morning, and the close soon became alive with
boys of all ages, who sauntered about on the grass, or walked round the
gravel walk, in parties of two or three. East, still doing the cicerone,
pointed out all the remarkable characters to Tom as they passed: Osbert,
who could throw a cricket-ball from the little-side ground over
the rook-trees to the Doctor's wall; Gray, who had got the Balliol
scholarship, and, what East evidently thought of much more importance,
a half-holiday for the School by his success; Thorne, who had run ten
miles in two minutes over the hour; Black, who had held his own against
the cock of the town in the last row with the louts; and many more
heroes, who then and there walked about and were worshipped, all trace
of whom has long since vanished from the scene of their fame. And the
fourth-form boy who reads their names rudely cut on the old hall tables,
or painted upon the big-side cupboard (if hall tables and big-side
cupboards still exist), wonders what manner of boys they were. It will
be the same with you who wonder, my sons, whatever your prowess may be
in cricket, or scholarship, or football. Two or three years, more or
less, and then the steadily advancing, blessed wave will pass over your
names as it has passed over ours. Nevertheless, play your games and do
your work manfully--see only that that be done--and let the remembrance
of it take care of itself.

The chapel-bell began to ring at a quarter to eleven, and Tom got in
early and took his place in the lowest row, and watched all the other
boys come in and take their places, filling row after row; and tried
to construe the Greek text which was inscribed over the door with the
slightest possible success, and wondered which of the masters, who
walked down the chapel and took their seats in the exalted boxes at the
end, would be his lord. And then came the closing of the doors, and the
Doctor in his robes, and the service, which, however, didn't impress him
much, for his feeling of wonder and curiosity was too strong. And the
boy on one side of him was scratching his name on the oak panelling
in front, and he couldn't help watching to see what the name was, and
whether it was well scratched; and the boy on the other side went to
sleep, and kept falling against him; and on the whole, though many boys
even in that part of the school were serious and attentive, the general
atmosphere was by no means devotional; and when he got out into the
close again, he didn't feel at all comfortable, or as if he had been to
church.

But at afternoon chapel it was quite another thing. He had spent the
time after dinner in writing home to his mother, and so was in a better
frame of mind; and his first curiosity was over, and he could attend
more to the service. As the hymn after the prayers was being sung, and
the chapel was getting a little dark, he was beginning to feel that he
had been really worshipping. And then came that great event in his, as
in every Rugby boy's life of that day--the first sermon from the Doctor.

More worthy pens than mine have described that scene--the oak pulpit
standing out by itself above the School seats; the tall, gallant form,
the kindling eye, the voice, now soft as the low notes of a flute, now
clear and stirring as the call of the light-infantry bugle, of him who
stood there Sunday after Sunday, witnessing and pleading for his Lord,
the King of righteousness and love and glory, with whose Spirit he was
filled, and in whose power he spoke; the long lines of young faces,
rising tier above tier down the whole length of the chapel, from the
little boy's who had just left his mother to the young man's who was
going out next week into the great world, rejoicing in his strength.
It was a great and solemn sight, and never more so than at this time of
year, when the only lights in the chapel were in the pulpit and at the
seats of the prepostors of the week, and the soft twilight stole over
the rest of the chapel, deepening into darkness in the high gallery
behind the organ.

But what was it, after all, which seized and held these three hundred
boys, dragging them out of themselves, willing or unwilling, for twenty
minutes, on Sunday afternoons? True, there always were boys scattered up
and down the School, who in heart and head were worthy to hear and able
to carry away the deepest and wisest words there spoken. But these were
a minority always, generally a very small one, often so small a one as
to be countable on the fingers of your hand. What was it that moved
and held us, the rest of the three hundred reckless, childish boys, who
feared the Doctor with all our hearts, and very little besides in heaven
or earth; who thought more of our sets in the School than of the Church
of Christ, and put the traditions of Rugby and the public opinion of
boys in our daily life above the laws of God? We couldn't enter into
half that we heard; we hadn't the knowledge of our own hearts or the
knowledge of one another, and little enough of the faith, hope, and love
needed to that end. But we listened, as all boys in their better moods
will listen (ay, and men too for the matter of that), to a man whom we
felt to be, with all his heart and soul and strength, striving against
whatever was mean and unmanly and unrighteous in our little world. It
was not the cold, clear voice of one giving advice and warning from
serene heights to those who were struggling and sinning below, but the
warm, living voice of one who was fighting for us and by our sides, and
calling on us to help him and ourselves and one another. And so, wearily
and little by little, but surely and steadily on the whole, was brought
home to the young boy, for the first time, the meaning of his life--that
it was no fool's or sluggard's paradise into which he had wandered
by chance, but a battlefield ordained from of old, where there are no
spectators, but the youngest must take his side, and the stakes are life
and death. And he who roused this consciousness in them showed them at
the same time, by every word he spoke in the pulpit, and by his whole
daily life, how that battle was to be fought, and stood there before
them their fellow-soldier and the captain of their band--the true sort
of captain, too, for a boy's army--one who had no misgivings, and gave
no uncertain word of command, and, let who would yield or make truce,
would fight the fight out (so every boy felt) to the last gasp and the
last drop of blood. Other sides of his character might take hold of
and influence boys here and there; but it was this thoroughness and
undaunted courage which, more than anything else, won his way to the
hearts of the great mass of those on whom he left his mark, and made
them believe first in him and then in his Master.

It was this quality above all others which moved such boys as our
hero, who had nothing whatever remarkable about him except excess of
boyishness--by which I mean animal life in its fullest measure, good
nature and honest impulses, hatred of injustice and meanness, and
thoughtlessness enough to sink a three-decker. And so, during the next
two years, in which it was more than doubtful whether he would get good
or evil from the School, and before any steady purpose or principle grew
up in him, whatever his week's sins and shortcomings might have been, he
hardly ever left the chapel on Sunday evenings without a serious resolve
to stand by and follow the Doctor, and a feeling that it was only
cowardice (the incarnation of all other sins in such a boy's mind) which
hindered him from doing so with all his heart.

The next day Tom was duly placed in the third form, and began his
lessons in a corner of the big School. He found the work very easy, as
he had been well grounded, and knew his grammar by heart; and, as he had
no intimate companions to make him idle (East and his other School-house
friends being in the lower fourth, the form above him), soon gained
golden opinions from his master, who said he was placed too low, and
should be put out at the end of the half-year. So all went well with him
in School, and he wrote the most flourishing letters home to his mother,
full of his own success and the unspeakable delights of a public school.

In the house, too, all went well. The end of the half-year was drawing
near, which kept everybody in a good humour, and the house was ruled
well and strongly by Warner and Brooke. True, the general system was
rough and hard, and there was bullying in nooks and corners--bad signs
for the future; but it never got farther, or dared show itself openly,
stalking about the passages and hall and bedrooms, and making the life
of the small boys a continual fear.

Tom, as a new boy, was of right excused fagging for the first month, but
in his enthusiasm for his new life this privilege hardly pleased him;
and East and others of his young friends, discovering this, kindly
allowed him to indulge his fancy, and take their turns at night fagging
and cleaning studies. These were the principal duties of the fags in the
house. From supper until nine o'clock three fags taken in order stood in
the passages, and answered any prepostor who called "Fag," racing to the
door, the last comer having to do the work. This consisted generally of
going to the buttery for beer and bread and cheese (for the great men
did not sup with the rest, but had each his own allowance in his study
or the fifth-form room), cleaning candlesticks and putting in new
candles, toasting cheese, bottling beer, and carrying messages about the
house; and Tom, in the first blush of his hero-worship, felt it a high
privilege to receive orders from and be the bearer of the supper of old
Brooke. And besides this night-work, each prepostor had three or four
fags specially allotted to him, of whom he was supposed to be the guide,
philosopher, and friend, and who in return for these good offices had to
clean out his study every morning by turns, directly after first lesson
and before he returned from breakfast. And the pleasure of seeing the
great men's studies, and looking at their pictures, and peeping into
their books, made Tom a ready substitute for any boy who was too lazy to
do his own work. And so he soon gained the character of a good-natured,
willing fellow, who was ready to do a turn for any one.

In all the games, too, he joined with all his heart, and soon became
well versed in all the mysteries of football, by continual practice at
the School-house little-side, which played daily.

The only incident worth recording here, however, was his first run at
hare-and-hounds. On the last Tuesday but one of the half-year he was
passing through the hall after dinner, when he was hailed with shouts
from Tadpole and several other fags seated at one of the long tables,
the chorus of which was, "Come and help us tear up scent."

Tom approached the table in obedience to the mysterious summons, always
ready to help, and found the party engaged in tearing up old newspapers,
copy-books, and magazines, into small pieces, with which they were
filling four large canvas bags.

"It's the turn of our house to find scent for big-side hare-and-hounds,"
exclaimed Tadpole. "Tear away; there's no time to lose before
calling-over."

"I think it's a great shame," said another small boy, "to have such a
hard run for the last day."

"Which run is it?" said Tadpole.

"Oh, the Barby run, I hear," answered the other; "nine miles at least,
and hard ground; no chance of getting in at the finish, unless you're a
first-rate scud."

"Well, I'm going to have a try," said Tadpole; "it's the last run of the
half, and if a fellow gets in at the end big-side stands ale and bread
and cheese and a bowl of punch; and the Cock's such a famous place for
ale."

"I should like to try too," said Tom.

"Well, then, leave your waistcoat behind, and listen at the door, after
calling-over, and you'll hear where the meet is."

After calling-over, sure enough there were two boys at the door, calling
out, "Big-side hare-and-hounds meet at White Hall;" and Tom, having
girded himself with leather strap, and left all superfluous clothing
behind, set off for White Hall, an old gable-ended house some quarter
of a mile from the town, with East, whom he had persuaded to join,
notwithstanding his prophecy that they could never get in, as it was the
hardest run of the year.

At the meet they found some forty or fifty boys, and Tom felt sure, from
having seen many of them run at football, that he and East were more
likely to get in than they.

After a few minutes' waiting, two well-known runners, chosen for the
hares, buckled on the four bags filled with scent, compared their
watches with those of young Brooke and Thorne, and started off at a
long, slinging trot across the fields in the direction of Barby.

Then the hounds clustered round Thorne, who explained shortly, "They're
to have six minutes' law. We run into the Cock, and every one who comes
in within a quarter of an hour of the hares'll be counted, if he has
been round Barby church." Then came a minute's pause or so, and then the
watches are pocketed, and the pack is led through the gateway into the
field which the hares had first crossed. Here they break into a trot,
scattering over the field to find the first traces of the scent which
the hares throw out as they go along. The old hounds make straight for
the likely points, and in a minute a cry of "Forward" comes from one
of them, and the whole pack, quickening their pace, make for the spot,
while the boy who hit the scent first, and the two or three nearest to
him, are over the first fence, and making play along the hedgerow in the
long grass-field beyond. The rest of the pack rush at the gap already
made, and scramble through, jostling one another. "Forward" again,
