"Yes; he told us of it before we came down. We are going to look for
her now," answered Lawry.

What Lawry had said excited the suspicion of his mother, as she
thought of the malicious words of her older son on the preceding
evening. She was excited and indignant; she feared he had executed
the wicked purpose which she was confident he had cherished. She went
into the house, and upstairs to the room where Ben still lay in bed.

"Benjamin, what have you done?" demanded she.

"I haven't done anything. I'm a nobody here!" replied the inebriated
young man, with surly emphasis.

"What did you mean last night when you said that you should run that
steamer, or nobody should?" asked Mrs. Wilford.

"I meant just what I said. You and Lawry both said I shouldn't run
her--and she has gone to the bottom again; she'll stay there this
time."

"Oh, Benjamin!" said his mother, bursting into tears. "How could you
be so wicked?"

"Did you think I'd stay round here, and be a nobody?" growled the
wretched young man.

"Did you sink that steamer?"

"What if I did?"

"Oh, Benjamin!"

"You needn't cry about it. Next time, you'd better not try to make a
nobody out of me."

"Don't you think I've had trouble enough, without trying to make
more for me?" sobbed the distressed mother.

"If you had told Lawry to give me the charge of the steamer, he
would have done it," whined Ben.

"I shouldn't tell him any such thing!" replied Mrs. Wilford
indignantly. "A pretty captain of a steamboat you would make! You are
so tipsy now you can't hold your head up!"

"I'm as sober as you are."

Mrs. Wilford knew that it was useless to talk to a person in his
condition, and she left him to sleep off the effect of his cups if he
could, after the evil deed he had done. Full of sympathy for Lawry,
under his great affliction, she left the house, and hastened down to
the landing, to learn, if possible, the condition of the
_Woodville_. Lawry and Ethan were in the wherry, returning to
the shore, when she reached the landing.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted both of the boys, in unison, as Mrs.
Wilford came in sight.

"What now?" asked the anxious mother.

"She's safe, mother! She has not sunk," replied Lawry.

"Where is she? I don't see her anywhere," added Mrs. Wilford,
scanning the lake in every direction.

"Over on the other side," replied Lawry.

"What's the reason she didn't sink?" continued his mother.

"The casks kept her up, of course. We want something for breakfast
and for dinner, mother, for she is so far off we can't come home till
we have pumped her out, and I won't leave her again till I am sure
she's all right."

"What shall I do about the ferry, mother?" asked Lawry. "Will Ben
run the boat to-day?"

"Don't trouble yourself about the ferry, Lawry. If Benjamin won't
take care of it, I will."

"I don't want you to do it, mother."

"I think your brother will run the boat; at any rate, you needn't
give it a thought."

Mrs. Wilford was quite as happy as the boys to find that the steamer
was not at the bottom of the lake again; and she returned to the
cottage with a light heart, when she had seen the wherry leave the
shore.

From the deepest depths of despondency, if not despair, the young
engineers had been raised to the highest pinnacle of hope and joy
when the _Woodville_ was discovered on the other side of the
lake. She had drifted in behind a point of land, and could not be
seen from the ferry. They had gone out to the place where she had
been anchored, near the Goblins; and while they were gazing down into
the deep water in search of her, Ethan happened to raise his eyes and
saw her on the other side of the lake. What a thrill went through his
heart as he recognized her! And what a thrill he communicated to
Lawry when he pointed her out to him!

"Why, the casks are all gone!" exclaimed Ethan.

"All gone!" replied Lawry.

"She must be aground," added Ethan; "but she sets out of water a
great deal farther than when we left her."

"We shall soon find out what the matter is," continued Lawry. "She
is safe, and on the top of the water; that's enough for me at the
present time."

"What does this mean?" he exclaimed.

"I don't know. The water couldn't have run out of her without some
help," replied Ethan.

"I don't understand it," added Lawry. "The casks are all gone, and
the steamer has been pumped out. Somebody must have done this work."

"That's true," said Ethan. "Somebody has certainly been here."

"There's no doubt of that; but I can't see, for the life of me, what
they wanted to set her adrift for."

"Nor I; they were good friends to pump her out for us, whoever they
were. In my opinion, Mr. Sherwood knows something about this job."

"But slipping the cables looks just as though they intended to have
her smashed up on the shore," added Lawry. "The anchors are not here,
and, of course, they are on the bottom of the lake. I don't see
through this business."

"Nor I, either; but one thing we can see through; the steamer is
safe, with the water all pumped out of her. We may as well go to
work, and get her over to the ferry."

This was good counsel, and without losing any more time in attempts
to fathom what was dark and strange, they commenced the labors of the
day.




CHAPTER XIII

GETTING UP STEAM


A survey of the position of the _Woodville_ showed that she was
slightly aground at the stern; but Ethan was confident that a few
turns of the wheels would bring her off. The boys then tried the
pumps; but after less than a hundred strokes they refused to yield
any more water. They then carefully examined every part of the
interior below the decks.

"She's all right," said Lawry. "What shall we do now?"

"Get up steam," replied Ethan. "I have a couple of hours' work to do
on the engine; but we will start the furnaces at once."

"Can't I make the fire?" asked Lawry.

"Yes, if you know how."

"You can show me. I don't know much about steam-boilers and engines."

"We will get our dry wood out of the wherry, and I will help you
start the fire. While I am at work on the engine, you will have to
overhaul your steering-gear, and see that it is all right. The chains
and pulleys will need to be oiled."

Lawry got into the wherry, and threw the dry wood on deck. Ethan had
not expected to kindle the fires till night, when he hoped the water
would be below the furnaces. It was a grateful surprise to be able at
once to go to work on the engine. He was enthusiastic in his fondness
for machinery, and that of the _Woodville_ was his particular pet.

After he had tried the valves on the boiler, and assured himself
that it contained the proper supply of water, the fires were started
in the furnaces. There was plenty of wood and coal on board, though
the former was so wet that it would not burn without some assistance,
which was furnished by the dry fuel brought off in the wherry. In a
little while the furnaces were roaring with the blaze from the wood,
and the coal was shoveled in. Ethan, having dried a quantity of the
wet packing, commenced rubbing down and oiling the machinery. He was
in his element now, and never was a young man in a higher state of
keen enjoyment.

While he was thus engaged, Lawry overhauled the steering apparatus,
rubbed down the wheel, oiled the pulleys, and satisfied himself that
everything was in working order. The situation and the work were in
the highest degree exhilarating. It was not labor to clean and adjust
the gear; it was a pleasure such as he had never realized from the
most exciting sports. He could hardly repress the rapture he felt
when he saw the black smoke from the pine wood pouring out of the
smokestack.

"This is my steamer," said he to himself. "I am the owner of her."

The thought made him laugh with joy. He stood up at the wheel, and
though he could not turn it, because the rudder was fast in the sand,
he knew exactly how he should feel when he stood in this position
with the _Woodville_ gliding swiftly over the bright waters of
the lake.

The steering-gear was in perfect order, so far as he could judge
without using it, and Ethan was still busy at the engine. Lawry could
not deny himself the pleasure of a survey of the steamer, for the
purpose of admiring her comforts and conveniences. He walked up and
down the main-deck, entered the saloon and the cabin, visited the
forehold, and opened the doors of the various apartments forward of
the paddle-boxes. It is true, everything was in a state of "confusion
worse confounded." Carpets were soaked with water, curtains were
drabbled and stained, sofas and chairs upset in the cabin and saloon;
while in the kitchen and storerooms, shelves and lockers had been
emptied, and their contents strewed in wild disorder about the
apartments.

But Lawry knew how order could be brought out of chaos, and the
derangement of furniture and utensils did not disturb him. It would
be a delightful occupation to restore harmony to these shelves and
lockers, to bring order and neatness out of the confusion which
reigned in every part of the steamer. When he had completed his
survey, he went to the engine-room, and offered his services to Ethan
for duty in his department. As the engineer had nothing for him to
do, he returned to the kitchen, and busied himself in putting things
to rights there, foreseeing that this apartment would soon be needed.
He made a fire in the galley, in order to dry the room more speedily,
and then occupied his time in picking up the tins and the kettles,
and putting them in their places.

While he was examining the lockers and shelves, he found part of a
leg of bacon, and some potatoes, which had been left from the stores
used by the crew on the passage from New York up to the lake. There
were coffee and tea in the canisters, sugar in the buckets, butter
and salt in the boxes; though all these articles had been more or
less soaked in the water, depending upon the tightness of the vessels
that held them. There was a good fire in the stove, and a bright
thought entered Lawry's excited brain; he and his companion would
breakfast on fried ham and potatoes, flanked with hot coffee!

Lawry was a cook of no mean accomplishments, and he immediately went
to work in carrying out his brilliant idea. Somehow, it is a singular
fact that boys have a special delight in "getting up something to
eat" in the woods, on the water, and generally in all out-of-the-way
places. A dinner at Parker's or Delmonico's is not to be compared
with baked potatoes and roasted ears of corn in the woods, or with
fried fish and potatoes in a boat or on an island. The young pilot
was no exception to the common rule, and in a state of rapture known
only to the amateur cook of tender years, he put on the teakettle,
pared and sliced the potatoes, and put a quantity of the brown mud
from the canister into the coffeepot.

Things were hissing and sizzling on the stove in the most
satisfactory manner, and Lawry presided over the frying-pan with a
grace and dignity which would have been edifying in a professional
cook. While the ham was cooking, he wiped the dishes with a cloth he
had dried at the fire, and set the table on the broad bench at the
end of the kitchen. The meat and the potatoes were "done to a turn,"
but the coffee had a suspicious look, owing to the absence of the
fish-skin, or other ingredient, for settling it. The contents of the
basket brought from home were tastily disposed in dishes on the
table, and breakfast was ready. We will venture to say that, in spite
of the disadvantages under which this meal was prepared, many
steamboat men have sat down to a less satisfactory banquet.

Lawry, chuckling with delight at what he had done, rang the hand-bell
he found in the kitchen, at the door. If Ethan had smelled the
savory viands in the course of preparation for him, he had made no
sign; but he was probably too busy to heed anything but the darling
engine he was so affectionately caressing with handfuls of packing
and spurts of oil.

"What's that bell for, Lawry?" shouted he.

"Breakfast's ready," replied Lawry.

"I wouldn't stop to eat now--would you?"

"Things will be cold if you don't."

"Cold?" laughed Ethan.

"Yes--cold. What's the use of having a kitchen if you don't use it?"

"You're a good one!" shouted Ethan. "Why didn't you tell me what you
were about?"

"I didn't want to spoil your appetite."

"You are a first-rate fellow, Lawry. Your breakfast looks tip-top,
and I shall do full justice to it; but I must go and look at the
boiler and the fires before I eat."

They sat down to breakfast when Ethan had returned and washed the
smut from his face and hands. Lawry poured out the coffee, and helped
his companion to ham and potatoes. The engineer ate with good relish.

"Your ham and potatoes are first-rate, Lawry; but I've seen better
coffee than this," said he.

"I had nothing to settle it, and there is no milk on board."

"We had some fish-skin, and there is plenty of condensed milk on
board," replied Ethan.

The coffee was subjected to a new process, and the condensed milk
prepared for use. By the time the substantials of the feast had been
discussed, some pretty good coffee was ready for them. The boys ate
their breakfast with a zest they had never known before.

"Ethan!" exclaimed Lawry.

"What, Lawry?"

"Hold me down!" shouted the proprietor of the _Woodville_.

"What's the matter?"

"Hold me down! I shall go up if you don't. I can't hold in any
longer. I'm so tickled, I feel as though I should fly away."

"Don't do it," laughed Ethan. "But I must go and look after the
engine, or we may both go up, in a way that won't suit us;" and Ethan
hurried down into the fire-room.

After taking a turn up and down the deck, Lawry curbed down his
superfluous enthusiasm, and returned to the kitchen, where he
extinguished the fire in the galley, and put away the dishes and
kettles which had been used in getting breakfast. By this time Ethan
had finished his work on the engine, and the steam gage indicated a
sufficient pressure to work the machinery.

"All ready, Lawry!" shouted he.

"Is everything all right?"

"Yes, as good as new. Now, if you will go into the wheel-house, we
will see what she will do."

"Hurrah!" shouted Lawry.

He pulled the bell for starting her, and with a thrill of delight he
heard the wheels splashing in the water; and the great splurges began
to roll up on the shore.

"Does she move?" asked Ethan, through the speaking-tube which
communicated with the engine-room.

"No, she sticks fast," replied Lawry. "Give her a little more of it."

