But greeting by gesture and hand-clapping still live, and are discovered
in the first lessons given by a mother to her babe.

    "Clap hands, papa comes,"

and

    "Pat a cake, pat a cake, my little man,
    Yes, I will, mother, as fast as I can"

have a universal significance in Child Land. Unfortunately this survival
of hand-clapping, a vestige of a habit belonging to primitive people,
does not begin and end in our modern nursery.

"When I was a child I spake as a child, but when I became a man I put
away childish things," is a resolve daily forgotten.

In the theatre, when our sentiment is awakened by the craft of the stage
player, we show approbation by a round of hand-clapping not one whit
less savage than the habit of the Uvinza grandee or the good-morning
among the Walunga tribe.

    "O wad some Power the giftie gie us
    To see oursels as others see us!"

This demonstration of feeling may have more _corps d'esprit_ than the
feeble "hear, hear" of the educated or self-restrained man, but
sign-language, especially among the Anglo-Saxon race, is on the wane.
Its exodus is slowly going on, lingering anon in the ritual of
religions, yet in social life ever being expelled.

"It is rude to point," says the nursemaid to her little charge.

"Is it rude to shake hands, nurse?" once exclaimed a child cynic. The
nurse was nonplussed. The middle-class mother answers the child's
question--

"Yes, dear--with anyone in a lower position."

"That's a case," said an Irishman on hearing it, "of twopence-halfpenny
looking down on twopence," or by another comparison, it is a case of one
English grandee clapping his hands over another grandee's head. Still,
though educational influences and nine-tenths of the coterie of society
wage war against sign-language, ill-mannered men and badly-behaved
children must always be with us.

"'Tis rude to laugh" is another precept of the hypercritical mother.
Why? Goodness only knows!--for none but a pompous blockhead or a solemn
prig will pretend that he never relaxes. But let ancient Plato, brimful
as he was of philosophy, answer the question "When not to laugh?"

Indulging one day in idle waggery, Plato, on seeing a staid disciple
approach, suddenly exclaimed to his fellows, "Let's be wise now, for I
see a fool coming," and under hypocrisy's mask all merriment ceased.

Agesilaus in mere sport romped with his children, and delighted them by
riding on a stick round the nursery, possibly singing, after the manner
of many a modern rollicking nursery-loving father--

    "Ride a cock-horse to Banbury Cross."

With men, however, kingly proclamations, laws, empires pass away and are
forgotten, time obliterates their memories, but in Child Land all the
inhabitants, from the tiniest crower to the ten-year-old boy, show an
eager appreciation in the conservation of the pleasing lore contained in
the lullabies, the jingles, the tales, the riddles, the proverbs, and
the games of the nursery classics.

And what terrible critics these babies are! What a perverse preference
they have for the soft jingle of nonsensical melody; blank verse with
its five accents and want of rhythm does not soothe: they must have
the--

    "Lalla, lalla, lalla,
    Aut dormi, aut lacta"

of their prototype of Roman days.

How they revel and delight in the mother's measured song of--

    "Dance, little baby, dance up high,
    Never mind, baby, mother is nigh;
    Crow and caper, caper and crow,
    There, little baby, there you go.
    Up to the ceiling, down to the ground,
    Backwards and forwards, round and round;
    So dance, little baby, and mother will sing,
    With a high cockolorum and tingle, ting ting."

Or--

    "With a merry, gay coral, and tingle, ting ting."[A]


FOOTNOTES:

[A] First printed in a selection of nursery rhymes by Taylor, 1828. A
modern well-known baby dance.




CHAPTER III.

    "The moon is up; by Heaven, a lovely eve!
    Long streams of light o'er dancing waves expand."


The Norwegian explorer, Dr. Nansen, in his address to the Royal
Geographical Society on February 9th, 1897, stated:--

"The long Arctic day was beautiful in itself, though one soon got tired
of it. But when that day vanished and the long Polar night began, then
began the kingdom of beauty, then they had the moon sailing through the
peculiar silence of night and day. The light of the moon shining when
all was marble had a most singular effect."[B]

Writers on Comparative Religions for the most part assert that moon
worship amongst the almost utterly savage tribes in Africa and America,
the hunting, nomad races of to-day, is a noteworthy feature. "It is not
the sun that first attracted the attention of the savage."[C] "In order
of birth the worship of the night sky, inclusive of that of the moon,
precedes that of the day sky and the sun. It was observed long ago that
wherever sun worship existed moon worship was to be found, being a
residuum of an earlier state of religion."[D]

What the early primal melody of thousands of years ago may have been one
can hardly suggest, but that the subject-matter of the song was mythical
there can be very little doubt, and, like folk-lore tales, built upon
and around nature worship; for as the capacity for creating language
does not exhaust all its force at once, but still continues to form new
modes of speech whenever an alteration of circumstances demands them, so
it is with myths. The moon during a long Polar night reigning in a
kingdom of crystalline beauty, when all around is silence and grandeur,
would suggest to the dweller on the fringe of the ice fields--his deity.
The sun, in like manner shedding forth its genial warmth, the
agriculturist would learn to welcome, and to ascribe to its power the
increase of his crop, and just as the limitation of reason holds the
untutored man in bondage, so the myth, the outcome of his ignorance,
becomes his god.

Even though social advancement has made rapid strides among
comparatively modern peoples and nations, not only traces of
mythological, but entire religious observances, reclothed in Christian
costumes, are still kept up. Praying to an apple tree to yield an
abundant crop was the habit of the Bohemian peasant, until Christian
teaching influenced him for the better; yet such a hold had the
tradition of his ancestors over him that the custom still survives, and
yearly on Good Friday before sunrise he enters his garden, and there on
his knees says--

    "I pray, O green tree, that God may make thee good."

The old form ran thus--

    "I pray thee, O green tree, that thou yield abundantly."

In some districts the lash of the Bohemian peasant's whip is well
applied to the bark of the tree, reminding one of the terse verse--

    "A woman, a spaniel, and walnut tree,
    The more you beat them the better they be."

There is also something akin, in this Bohemian's former sentiment, to
the wish our nursery children make while eating apples. Coming to the
cores they take out the pippins and throw them over the left shoulder,
exclaiming--

    "Pippin, pippin, fly away;
    Bring me an apple another day."

Surely a tree hidden within its fruit.

In the German fairy tale of Ashputtel, also known as the golden
slipper--a similar legend is extant amongst the Welsh people--and from
which our modern tale of Cinderella and her glass slipper came, a tree
figured as the mysterious power. After suffering many disappointments
Ashputtel, so the legend relates, goes to a hazel tree and complains
that she has no clothes in which to go to the great feast of the king.

    "Shake, shake, hazel tree,
    Gold and silver over me,"

she exclaims, and her friends the birds weave garments for her while the
tree makes her resplendent with jewels of gold and silver.

"Children's sport, popular sayings, absurd customs, may be practically
unimportant, but they are not philosophically insignificant, bearing as
they do on primitive culture."[E] Trans-Alpine Europe was a greater
mystery to the nations on the littoral of the Mediterranean at the time
of Christ's appearance in Syria than any spot in Central Africa is to us
to-day.

Across the Northern mountain chains were regions unaffected by Greek or
Roman culture, and the only light shed on the memorials of Northern
Europe's early youth comes from the contributory and dimly illuminative
rays of folk-lore.


THE BABY'S RATTLE

at this juncture is worth according a passing notice, though degenerated
into the bauble it now is.

Among the Siberian, Brazilian, and Redskin tribes it was held as a
sacred and mysterious weapon. This sceptre of power of the modern
nursery--the token primitive man used, and on which the Congo negro
takes his oath--has lost its significance.

The Red Indian of North America had his Rattle man, who, as physician,
used it as a universal prescription in the cure of all disease,
believing, no doubt, that its jargon would allay pain, in like manner as
it attracts and soothes a cross child; and this modern type of primitive
man, the Red Indian, although fast dying out, has no obscured visions of
the records of childhood; they have remained since his _anno mundi_ ran
back to zero. To him the great sources of religious and moral suasion
which gave birth to mediaeval and modern Europe, and so largely
contributed to the polity of Asia and the upraising of Africa, have been
a dead letter, which spell his extinction. He lived up to his racial
traditions, and is fast dying with them. His language, his arts, his
religious rites are of an unfamiliar past.

Leaving the Red Indian moon worshipper with his death rattle awhile and
harking back to Europe, Norway stands out as the richest country in
legendary lore, for old-time superstitions have lingered among the
simple and credulous people, living pent up on the horrid crags, where
torrents leap from cliff to valley. Their tales of goblins and spirits,
tales of trolls, gnomes, and a legendary host of other uncanny
creatures, point to the former nature and ancestral worship of a people
cut off from the advancing civilisation of their time. Luckily for the
archaeologist, superstitious beliefs and folk-lore tales have preserved
the graves of the Stone Age inhabitants of the country from desecration.
As in Norway so in the Isle of Man, and in the western districts of
Ireland.

In Man until the fifties many of the inhabitants believed in the Spirit
of the Mountains; indeed, even in County Donegal and the West Riding of
Yorkshire, up to the last twenty years, fairy superstition was rife.
Boyd Dawkins gives in his chapter, "Superstition of the Stone Age: Early
Man in Britain," an account of an Isle of Man farmer who, having allowed
investigation to be made in the interests of science on portions of his
lands, becoming so awed at the thought of having sanctioned the
disturbing of the dead, that he actually offered up a heifer as a burnt
sacrifice to avert the wrath of the Manes. After lunar and solar
worships this ancestral worship of the Isle of Man farmer ranks next in
point of age, a survival of which is seen in the respect paid by country
people to the fairies, the goblins, and the elves. Equally so has the
spirit of former beliefs been handed down to us in the song of the
nurse, and in the practices of rural people.

A modernised lullaby of a Polish mother bears traces in the last stanza
of a quasi-native worship--

    "Shine, stars, God's sentinels on high,
      Proclaimers of His power and might,
    May all things evil from us fly;
      O stars, good-night, good-night!"

Other instances of nature worshippers are amusing as well as being
instructive. The Ojebway Indians believe in the mortality of the sun,
for when an eclipse takes place the whole tribe, in the hope of
rekindling the obscured light, keep up a continual discharge of
fire-tipped arrows from their bows until they perceive again his majesty
of light. Amongst the New Caledonians the wizard, if the season continue
to be wet and cloudy, ascends the highest accessible peak on a
mountain-range and fires a peculiar sacrifice, invoking his ancestors,
and exclaiming--

    "Sun, this I do that you may be burning hot,
    And eat up all the black clouds of the sky,"

reminding one of the puerile cry of the weather-bound nursery child--

    "Rain, rain, go away,
    Come again another day."

Wind-making among primitive people was universally adopted; even at a
late period the cultured Greeks and Romans believed in a mythical wind
god.

It was the custom of the wind clan of the Omahas to flap their overalls
to start a breeze, while a sorcerer of New Britain desirous of appeasing
the wind god throws burnt lime into the air, and towards the point of
the compass he wishes to make a prosperous journey, chanting meanwhile a
song. Finnish wizards made a pretence of selling wind to land-bound
sailors. A Norwegian witch once boasted of sinking a vessel by opening a
wind-bag she possessed. Homer speaks of Ulysses receiving the winds as a
present from AEolus, the King of Winds, in a leather bag.

In the highlands of Ethiopia no storm-driven wind ever sweeps down
without being stabbed at by a native to wound the evil spirit riding on
the blast. In some parts of Austria a heavy gale is propitiated by the
act and speech of a peasant who, as the demon wings his flight in the
raging storm, opens the window and casts a handful of meal or chaff to
the enraged sprite as a peace offering, at the same time shouting--

    "There, that's for you; stop, stop!"

A pretty romance is known in Bulgarian folk-lore. The wife of a peasant
who had been mysteriously enticed away by the fairies was appealed to by
her husband's mother to return.

    "Who is to feed the babe, and rock its cradle?"

sang the grandmother, and the wind wafted back the reply--

    "If it cry for food, I will feed it with copious dews;
    If it wish to sleep, I will rock its cradle with a gentle breeze."

How devoid of all sentiment our Englished version of the same tale
reads.

    "Hush-a-bye, baby, on a tree top,
    When the wind blows the cradle will rock,
    When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,
    Down comes the baby and cradle and all."

No wonder this purposeless lullaby is satirised in the orthodox libretto
of Punch's Opera or the Dominion of Fancy, for Punch, having sung it,
throws the child out of the window.

The poetic instinct of the German mother is rich in expression, her
voice soothing and magnetic as she sways her babe to and fro to the
melody of--

      "Sleep, baby, sleep!
    Thy father tends the sheep,
    Thy mother shakes the branches small,
    Whence happy dreams in showers fall.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!

      "Sleep, baby, sleep!
    The sky is full of sheep,
    The stars the lambs of heaven are,
    For whom the shepherd moon doth care.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!"[F]

The lullaby of the Black Guitar, told by the Grimm brothers in their
German fairy tales, gives us the same thought.

    "Thou art sleeping, my son, and at ease,
    Lulled by the whisperings of the trees."

Another German nurse song of a playful yet commanding tone translates--

      "Baby, go to sleep!
    Mother has two little sheep,
    One is black and one is white;
    If you do not sleep to-night,
    First the black and then the white
    Shall give your little toe a bite."

A North Holland version has degenerated into the flabby Dutch of--

      "Sleep, baby, sleep!
    Outside there stands a sheep
    With four white feet,
    That drinks its milk so sweet.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!"

The old English cradle rhyme, evidently written to comfort fathers more
than babies, is given by way of contrast, and, as is usual with our own
countrymen, the versification is thoroughly British, slurred over and
slovenly--

      "Hush thee, my babby,
      Lie still with thy daddy,
    Thy mammy has gone to the mill
      To grind thee some wheat
      To make thee some meat,
    Oh, my dear babby, do lie still!"

The Danish lullaby of

    "Sweetly sleep, my little child,
      Lie quiet and still.
    The bird nests in the wood,
    The flower rests in the meadow grass;
    Sweetly sleep, my little child."

This last recalls the esteem our Teuton ancestors had for their scalds,
or polishers of language, when poetry and music were linked together by
the voice and harp of minstrelsy, and when the divine right to fill the
office of bard meant the divine faculty to invent a few heroic stanzas
to meet a dramatic occasion.

One more well-known British lullaby--

    "Bye, baby bunting,
    Daddy's gone a-hunting
    To get a little _hare skin_
    To wrap the baby bunting in."

The more modern version gives "_rabbit skin_."


FOOTNOTES:

[B] _Times'_ report, February 10th, 1897.

[C] F. SPIEGEL.

[D] WELCKER, _Griechische Goetterlehre_, i. 551.

[E] TYLOR.

[F] Wagner introduced the music to which it is sung in his _Siegfried_
idyll.




CHAPTER IV.

    "One very dark night, when the goblins' light
      Was as long and as white as a feather,
        A fairy spirit bade me stray
      Amongst the gorse and heather.
        The pixies' glee enamoured me,
    They were as merry as merry could be.

    "They held in each hand a gold rope of sand,
      To every blue-bell that grew in the dell
        They tied a strand,
      Then the fairies and pixies and goblins and elves
        Danced to the music of the bells
    By themselves, merry, merry little selves."


To the kingdom of elf-land few English nursery poems have any reference.
Our continental neighbours have preserved a few, but the major number
are found in versions of the folk-lore tales belonging to the people
dwelling in the hilly districts of remote parts of Europe. Norway,
Switzerland, Italy, and even Poland present weird romances, and our own
country folk in the "merrie north country," and in the lowlands of
"bonnie Scotland," add to the collection. The age to which most of them
may be traced is uncertain; at all events, they bear evidences of
belonging to a period when nature worship was universal, and the
veneration of the mysterious in life common to our ancestors. The Second
Stone Age men, it is said, cremated their dead who were worthy of
reverence, and worshipped their shades, and the nursery tales of pixies
and goblins and elves are but the mythical remains of their once
prevailing religion--universal the world over. The inception of this
ancestral worship probably took place during that period known as the
Neolithic Age, when the moon, stars, and sun no longer remained the
mysterious in life to be feared and worshipped. In the dreary process of
evolution a gradual development took place, and nature worship and
ancestral veneration evolved into the more comprehensive systems of
Buddha, Confucius, and the later polytheism of Greece, Ancient Tuscany,
and Rome, leaving high and dry, stranded, as it were, in Northern
Europe, Ireland, and North Britain, an undisturbed residuum of
ante-chronological man's superstitions. Evidences of primitive man's
religion are seen in the customs and practices of our rural folk to-day.

In vast forest districts, or in hilly regions far away from the refining
influences of social contact, the old-time superstitions lingered,
changing little in the theme, and inspiring the succeeding generations,
as they unfolded in the long roll-call of life, with the same fears of
the mystery of death and of a future life. One of the customs of recent
practice is fitly described as follows:--

In Yorkshire and in north-west Irish homesteads, and even far away in
the East amongst the Armenian peasantry, a custom was, until late years,
