she showed not a vestige of it.

This was a memorable session, but it was the shortest one of all the
list. When Joan had taken her seat a resume of her "crimes" was read to
her. Then Cauchon made a solemn speech. It in he said that in the course
of her several trials Joan had refused to answer some of the questions
and had answered others with lies, but that now he was going to have the
truth out of her, and the whole of it.

Her manner was full of confidence this time; he was sure he had found a
way at last to break this child's stubborn spirit and make her beg
and cry. He would score a victory this time and stop the mouths of the
jokers of Rouen. You see, he was only just a man after all, and couldn't
stand ridicule any better than other people. He talked high, and his
splotchy face lighted itself up with all the shifting tints and signs
of evil pleasure and promised triumph--purple, yellow, red, green--they
were all there, with sometimes the dull and spongy blue of a drowned
man, the uncanniest of them all. And finally he burst out in a great
passion and said:

"There is the rack, and there are its ministers! You will reveal all now
or be put to the torture.

"Speak."

Then she made that great answer which will live forever; made it without
fuss or bravado, and yet how fine and noble was the sound of it:

"I will tell you nothing more than I have told you; no, not even if you
tear the limbs from my body. And even if in my pain I did say something
otherwise, I would always say afterward that it was the torture that
spoke and not I."

There was no crushing that spirit. You should have seen Cauchon.
Defeated again, and he had not dreamed of such a thing. I heard it said
the next day, around the town, that he had a full confession all written
out, in his pocket and all ready for Joan to sign. I do not know that
that was true, but it probably was, for her mark signed at the bottom of
a confession would be the kind of evidence (for effect with the public)
which Cauchon and his people were particularly value, you know.

No, there was no crushing that spirit, and no beclouding that clear
mind. Consider the depth, the wisdom of that answer, coming from an
ignorant girl. Why, there were not six men in the world who had ever
reflected that words forced out of a person by horrible tortures
were not necessarily words of verity and truth, yet this unlettered
peasant-girl put her finger upon that flaw with an unerring instinct.
I had always supposed that torture brought out the truth--everybody
supposed it; and when Joan came out with those simple common-sense words
they seemed to flood the place with light. It was like a lightning-flash
at midnight which suddenly reveals a fair valley sprinkled over with
silver streams and gleaming villages and farmsteads where was only an
impenetrable world of darkness before. Manchon stole a sidewise look at
me, and his face was full of surprise; and there was the like to be seen
in other faces there. Consider--they were old, and deeply cultured, yet
here was a village maid able to teach them something which they had not
known before. I heard one of them mutter:

"Verily it is a wonderful creature. She has laid her hand upon an
accepted truth that is as old as the world, and it has crumbled to dust
and rubbish under her touch. Now whence got she that marvelous insight?"

The judges laid their heads together and began to talk now. It was
plain, from chance words which one caught now and then, that Cauchon and
Loyseleur were insisting upon the application of the torture, and that
most of the others were urgently objecting.

Finally Cauchon broke out with a good deal of asperity in his voice and
ordered Joan back to her dungeon. That was a happy surprise for me. I
was not expecting that the Bishop would yield.

When Manchon came home that night he said he had found out why the
torture was not applied.

There were two reasons. One was, a fear that Joan might die under the
torture, which would not suit the English at all; the other was,
that the torture would effect nothing if Joan was going to take back
everything she said under its pains; and as to putting her mark to a
confession, it was believed that not even the rack would ever make her
do that.

So all Rouen laughed again, and kept it up for three days, saying:

"The sow has littered six times, and made six messes of it."

And the palace walls got a new decoration--a mitered hog carrying a
discarded rack home on its shoulder, and Loyseleur weeping in its wake.
Many rewards were offered for the capture of these painters, but nobody
applied. Even the English guard feigned blindness and would not see the
artists at work.

The Bishop's anger was very high now. He could not reconcile himself to
the idea of giving up the torture. It was the pleasantest idea he had
invented yet, and he would not cast it by. So he called in some of his
satellites on the twelfth, and urged the torture again. But it was a
failure.

With some, Joan's speech had wrought an effect; others feared she might
die under torture; others did not believe that any amount of suffering
could make her put her mark to a lying confession. There were fourteen
men present, including the Bishop. Eleven of them voted dead against the
torture, and stood their ground in spite of Cauchon's abuse. Two voted
with the Bishop and insisted upon the torture. These two were Loyseleur
and the orator--the man whom Joan had bidden to "read his book"--Thomas
de Courcelles, the renowned pleader and master of eloquence.

Age has taught me charity of speech; but it fails me when I think of
those three names--Cauchon, Courcelles, Loyseleur.

(1) Hog, pig.

(2) Cochonner, to litter, to farrow; also, "to make a mess of"!

(3) The lower half of it remains to-day just as it was then; the upper
half is of a later date. -- TRANSLATOR.




17 Supreme in Direst Peril

ANOTHER ten days' wait. The great theologians of that treasury of all
valuable knowledge and all wisdom, the University of Paris, were still
weighing and considering and discussing the Twelve Lies.

I had had but little to do these ten days, so I spent them mainly in
walks about the town with Noel. But there was no pleasure in them, our
spirits being so burdened with cares, and the outlook for Joan
growing steadily darker and darker all the time. And then we naturally
contrasted our circumstances with hers: this freedom and sunshine, with
her darkness and chains; our comradeship, with her lonely estate; our
alleviations of one sort and another, with her destitution in all.
She was used to liberty, but now she had none; she was an out-of-door
creature by nature and habit, but now she was shut up day and night in
a steel cage like an animal; she was used to the light, but now she was
always in a gloom where all objects about her were dim and spectral; she
was used to the thousand various sounds which are the cheer and music
of a busy life, but now she heard only the monotonous footfall of the
sentry pacing his watch; she had been fond of talking with her mates,
but now there was no one to talk to; she had had an easy laugh, but it
was gone dumb now; she had been born for comradeship, and blithe and
busy work, and all manner of joyous activities, but here were only
dreariness, and leaden hours, and weary inaction, and brooding
stillness, and thoughts that travel by day and night and night and day
round and round in the same circle, and wear the brain and break the
heart with weariness. It was death in life; yes, death in life, that is
what it must have been. And there was another hard thing about it all. A
young girl in trouble needs the soothing solace and support and
sympathy of persons of her own sex, and the delicate offices and gentle
ministries which only these can furnish; yet in all these months of
gloomy captivity in her dungeon Joan never saw the face of a girl or a
woman. Think how her heart would have leaped to see such a face.

Consider. If you would realize how great Joan of Arc was, remember that
it was out of such a place and such circumstances that she came week
after week and month after month and confronted the master intellects
of France single-handed, and baffled their cunningest schemes, defeated
their ablest plans, detected and avoided their secretest traps and
pitfalls, broke their lines, repelled their assaults, and camped on the
field after every engagement; steadfast always, true to her faith and
her ideals; defying torture, defying the stake, and answering threats
of eternal death and the pains of hell with a simple "Let come what may,
here I take my stand and will abide."

Yes, if you would realize how great was the soul, how profound the
wisdom, and how luminous the intellect of Joan of Arc, you must study
her there, where she fought out that long fight all alone--and not
merely against the subtlest brains and deepest learning of France, but
against the ignoble deceits, the meanest treacheries, and the hardest
hearts to be found in any land, pagan or Christian.

She was great in battle--we all know that; great in foresight; great
in loyalty and patriotism; great in persuading discontented chiefs and
reconciling conflicting interests and passions; great in the ability to
discover merit and genius wherever it lay hidden; great in picturesque
and eloquent speech; supremely great in the gift of firing the hearts
of hopeless men and noble enthusiasms, the gift of turning hares into
heroes, slaves and skulkers into battalions that march to death with
songs on their lips. But all these are exalting activities; they keep
hand and heart and brain keyed up to their work; there is the joy of
achievement, the inspiration of stir and movement, the applause which
hails success; the soul is overflowing with life and energy, the
faculties are at white heat; weariness, despondency, inertia--these do
not exist.

Yes, Joan of Arc was great always, great everywhere, but she was
greatest in the Rouen trials.

There she rose above the limitations and infirmities of our human
nature, and accomplished under blighting and unnerving and hopeless
conditions all that her splendid equipment of moral and intellectual
forces could have accomplished if they had been supplemented by the
mighty helps of hope and cheer and light, the presence of friendly
faces, and a fair and equal fight, with the great world looking on and
wondering.




18 Condemned Yet Unafraid

TOWARD THE END of the ten-day interval the University of Paris rendered
its decision concerning the Twelve Articles. By this finding, Joan
was guilty upon all the counts: she must renounce her errors and make
satisfaction, or be abandoned to the secular arm for punishment.

The University's mind was probably already made up before the Articles
were laid before it; yet it took it from the fifth to the eighteenth to
produce its verdict. I think the delay may have been caused by temporary
difficulties concerning two points:

1. As to who the fiends were who were represented in Joan's Voices; 2.
As to whether her saints spoke French only.

You understand, the University decided emphatically that it was fiends
who spoke in those Voices; it would need to prove that, and it did. It
found out who those fiends were, and named them in the verdict: Belial,
Satan, and Behemoth. This has always seemed a doubtful thing to me,
and not entitled to much credit. I think so for this reason: if the
University had actually known it was those three, it would for very
consistency's sake have told how it knew it, and not stopped with the
mere assertion, since it had made Joan explain how she knew they were
not fiends. Does not that seem reasonable? To my mind the University's
position was weak, and I will tell you why. It had claimed that Joan's
angels were devils in disguise, and we all know that devils do disguise
themselves as angels; up to that point the University's position was
strong; but you see yourself that it eats its own argument when it turns
around and pretends that it can tell who such apparitions are, while
denying the like ability to a person with as good a head on her
shoulders as the best one the University could produce.

The doctors of the University had to see those creatures in order to
know; and if Joan was deceived, it is argument that they in their turn
could also be deceived, for their insight and judgment were surely not
clearer than hers.

As to the other point which I have thought may have proved a difficulty
and cost the University delay, I will touch but a moment upon that, and
pass on. The University decided that it was blasphemy for Joan to say
that her saints spoke French and not English, and were on the French
side in political sympathies. I think that the thing which troubled the
doctors of theology was this: they had decided that the three Voices
were Satan and two other devils; but they had also decided that these
Voices were not on the French side--thereby tacitly asserting that they
were on the English side; and if on the English side, then they must be
angels and not devils. Otherwise, the situation was embarrassing. You
see, the University being the wisest and deepest and most erudite body
in the world, it would like to be logical if it could, for the sake
of its reputation; therefore it would study and study, days and days,
trying to find some good common-sense reason for proving the Voices to
be devils in Article No. 1 and proving them to be angels in Article No.
10. However, they had to give it up. They found no way out; and so, to
this day, the University's verdict remains just so--devils in No. 1,
angels in No. 10; and no way to reconcile the discrepancy.

The envoys brought the verdict to Rouen, and with it a letter for
Cauchon which was full of fervid praise. The University complimented
him on his zeal in hunting down this woman "whose venom had infected the
faithful of the whole West," and as recompense it as good as promised
him "a crown of imperishable glory in heaven." Only that!--a crown in
heaven; a promissory note and no indorser; always something away off
yonder; not a word about the Archbishopric of Rouen, which was the thing
Cauchon was destroying his soul for. A crown in heaven; it must have
sounded like a sarcasm to him, after all his hard work. What should he
do in heaven? he did not know anybody there.

On the nineteenth of May a court of fifty judges sat in the
archiepiscopal palace to discuss Joan's fate. A few wanted her delivered
over to the secular arm at once for punishment, but the rest insisted
that she be once more "charitably admonished" first.

So the same court met in the castle on the twenty-third, and Joan was
brought to the bar. Pierre Maurice, a canon of Rouen, made a speech
to Joan in which he admonished her to save her life and her soul by
renouncing her errors and surrendering to the Church. He finished with
a stern threat: if she remained obstinate the damnation of her soul was
certain, the destruction of her body probable. But Joan was immovable.
She said:

"If I were under sentence, and saw the fire before me, and the
executioner ready to light it--more, if I were in the fire itself, I
would say none but the things which I have said in these trials; and I
would abide by them till I died."

A deep silence followed now, which endured some moments. It lay upon me
like a weight. I knew it for an omen. Then Cauchon, grave and solemn,
turned to Pierre Maurice:

"Have you anything further to say?"

The priest bowed low, and said:

"Nothing, my lord."

"Prisoner at the bar, have you anything further to say?"

"Nothing."

"Then the debate is closed. To-morrow, sentence will be pronounced.
Remove the prisoner."

She seemed to go from the place erect and noble. But I do not know; my
sight was dim with tears.

To-morrow--twenty-fourth of May! Exactly a year since I saw her go
speeding across the plain at the head of her troops, her silver helmet
shining, her silvery cape fluttering in the wind, her white plumes
flowing, her sword held aloft; saw her charge the Burgundian camp three
times, and carry it; saw her wheel to the right and spur for the duke's
reserves; saw her fling herself against it in the last assault she was
ever to make. And now that fatal day was come again--and see what it was
bringing!




19 Our Last Hopes of Rescue Fail

JOAN HAD been adjudged guilty of heresy, sorcery, and all the other
terrible crimes set forth in the Twelve Articles, and her life was in
Cauchon's hands at last. He could send her to the stake at once. His
work was finished now, you think? He was satisfied? Not at all. What
would his Archbishopric be worth if the people should get the idea into
their heads that this faction of interested priests, slaving under the
English lash, had wrongly condemned and burned Joan of Arc, Deliverer
of France? That would be to make of her a holy martyr. Then her spirit
would rise from her body's ashes, a thousandfold reinforced, and sweep
the English domination into the sea, and Cauchon along with it. No,
the victory was not complete yet. Joan's guilt must be established by
evidence which would satisfy the people. Where was that evidence to be
found? There was only one person in the world who could furnish it--Joan
of Arc herself. She must condemn herself, and in public--at least she
must seem to do it.

But how was this to be managed? Weeks had been spent already in trying
to get her to surrender--time wholly wasted; what was to persuade her
now? Torture had been threatened, the fire had been threatened; what was
left? Illness, deadly fatigue, and the sight of the fire, the presence
of the fire! That was left.

Now that was a shrewd thought. She was but a girl after all, and, under
illness and exhaustion, subject to a girl's weaknesses.

Yes, it was shrewdly thought. She had tacitly said herself that under
the bitter pains of the rack they would be able to extort a false
confession from her. It was a hint worth remembering, and it was
remembered.

She had furnished another hint at the same time: that as soon as the
pains were gone, she would retract the confession. That hint was also
remembered.

She had herself taught them what to do, you see. First, they must wear
out her strength, then frighten her with the fire. Second, while the
fright was on her, she must be made to sign a paper.

But she would demand a reading of the paper. They could not venture
to refuse this, with the public there to hear. Suppose that during the
reading her courage should return?--she would refuse to sign then. Very
well, even that difficulty could be got over. They could read a short
paper of no importance, then slip a long and deadly one into its place
and trick her into signing that.

Yet there was still one other difficulty. If they made her seem to
abjure, that would free her from the death-penalty. They could keep her
in a prison of the Church, but they could not kill her.

That would not answer; for only her death would content the English.
Alive she was a terror, in a prison or out of it. She had escaped from
two prisons already.

But even that difficulty could be managed. Cauchon would make promises
to her; in return she would promise to leave off the male dress. He
would violate his promises, and that would so situate her that she would
not be able to keep hers. Her lapse would condemn her to the stake, and
the stake would be ready.

These were the several moves; there was nothing to do but to make them,
each in its order, and the game was won. One might almost name the day
that the betrayed girl, the most innocent creature in France and the
noblest, would go to her pitiful death.

The world knows now that Cauchon's plan was as I have sketched it to
you, but the world did not know it at that time. There are sufficient
indications that Warwick and all the other English chiefs except the
highest one--the Cardinal of Winchester--were not let into the secret,
also, that only Loyseleur and Beaupere, on the French side, knew the
scheme. Sometimes I have doubted if even Loyseleur and Beaupere knew the
whole of it at first. However, if any did, it was these two.

It is usual to let the condemned pass their last night of life in peace,
but this grace was denied to poor Joan, if one may credit the rumors of
the time. Loyseleur was smuggled into her presence, and in the character
of priest, friend, and secret partisan of France and hater of England,
he spent some hours in beseeching her to do "the only right an righteous
thing"--submit to the Church, as a good Christian should; and that then
she would straightway get out of the clutches of the dreaded English and
be transferred to the Church's prison, where she would be honorably used
and have women about her for jailers. He knew where to touch her. He
knew how odious to her was the presence of her rough and profane English
guards; he knew that her Voices had vaguely promised something which she
interpreted to be escape, rescue, release of some sort, and the chance
to burst upon France once more and victoriously complete the great work
which she had been commissioned of Heaven to do. Also there was that
other thing: if her failing body could be further weakened by loss of
rest and sleep now, her tired mind would be dazed and drowsy on the
morrow, and in ill condition to stand out against persuasions, threats,
and the sight of the stake, and also be purblind to traps and snares
which it would be swift to detect when in its normal estate.

I do not need to tell you that there was no rest for me that night. Nor
for Noel. We went to the main gate of the city before nightfall, with a
hope in our minds, based upon that vague prophecy of Joan's Voices which
seemed to promise a rescue by force at the last moment. The immense news
