
"--seven--eight--nine--ten!"

On reaching "ten" he was fully awake and knew that she had applied the
emergency procedure they had been drilled in using, giving him a pep
shot. When Ross sat up on the narrow bunk there was a light in the cabin
and no sign of day outside the porthole. Torgul, Vistur, the two other
cruiser captains, all there ... and Jazia.

Ross swung his feet to the deck. A pep-shot headache was already
beginning, but would wear off soon. There was, however, a concentration
of tension in the cabin, and something must have driven Karara to use
the drug.

"What is it?"

Karara fitted the medical kit into the compact carrying case.

"Tino-rau has returned. There _is_ a sub in the bay. It emits energy
waves on a shoreward beam."

"Then they are still there." Ross accepted the dolphin's report without
question. Neither of the scouts would make a mistake in those matters.
Energy waves beamed shoreward--power for some type of unit the Baldies
were using? Suppose the Rovers could find a way of cutting off the
power.

"The Sea Maid has told us that this ship sits on the bottom of the
harbor. If we could board it--" began Torgul.

"Yes!" Vistur brought his fist down against the end of the bunk on which
the Terran still sat, jarring the dull, drug-borne pain in Ross's head.
"Take it--then turn it against its crew!"

There was an eagerness in all Rover faces. For that was a game the
Hawaikan seafarers understood: Take an enemy ship and turn its armament
against its companions in a fleet. But that plan would not work out.
Ross had a healthy respect for the technical knowledge of the galactic
invaders. Of course he, Karara, even Loketh might be able to reach the
sub. Whether they could then board her was an entirely different matter.

Now the Polynesian girl shook her head. "The broadcast there--Tino-rau
rates it as lethal. There are dead fish floating in the bay. He had
warning at the reef entrance. Without a shield, there will be no way of
getting in."

"Might as well wish for a depth bomb," Ross began and then stopped.

"You have thought of something?"

"A shield--" Ross repeated her words. It was so wild this thought of
his, and one which might have no chance of working. He knew almost
nothing about the resources of the invaders. Could that broadcast which
protected the sub and perhaps activated the weapons of the invaders
ashore be destroyed? A wall of fish--sea life herded in there as a
shield ... wild, yes, even so wild it might work. Ross outlined the
idea, speaking more to Karara than to the Rovers.

"I do not know," she said doubtfully. "That would need many fish, too
many to herd and drive----"

"Not fish," Torgul cut in, "salkars!"

"Salkars?"

"You have seen the bow carving on this ship. That is a salkar. Such are
larger than a hundred fish! Salkars driven in ... they might even wreck
this undersea ship with their weight and anger."

"And you can find these salkars near-by?" Ross began to take fire. That
dragon which had hunted him--the bulk of the thing was well above any
other sea life he had seen here. And to its ferocity he could give
testimony.

"At the spawning reefs. We do not hunt at this season which is the time
of the taking of mates. Now, too, they are easily angered so they will
even attack a cruiser. To slay them at present is a loss, for their
skins are not good. But they would be ripe for battle were they to be
disturbed."

"And how would you get them from the spawning reefs to Kyn Add?"

"That is not too difficult; the reef lies here." Torgul drew lines with
the point of his sword on the table top. "And here is Kyn Add. Salkars
have a great hunger at this time. Show them bait and they will follow;
especially will they follow swimming bait."

There were a great many holes in the plan which had only a halfway
chance of working. But the Rovers seized upon it with enthusiasm, and so
it was set up.

Perhaps some two hours later Ross swam toward the land mass of Kyn Add.
Gleams of light pricked on the shore well to his left. Those must mark
the Rover settlement. And again the Terran wondered why the invaders had
remained there. Unless they knew that there had been three cruisers out
on a raid and for some reason they were determined to make a complete
mop-up.

Karara moved a little to his right, Taua between them, the dolphin's
super senses their guide and warning. The swiftest of the cruisers had
departed, Loketh on board to communicate with Tino-rau in the water.
Since the male dolphin was the best equipped to provide a fox for salkar
hounds, he was the bait for this weird fishing expedition.

"No farther!" Ross's sonic pricked a warning against his body. Through
that he took a jolt which sent him back, away from the bay entrance.

"On the reef." Karara's tapped code drew him on a new course. Moments
later they were both out of the water, though the wash of waves over
their flippered feet was constant. The rocks among which they crouched
were a rough harborage from which they could see the shore as a dark
blot. But they were well away from the break in the reef through which,
if their outlandish plan succeeded, the salkars would come.

"A one-in-a-million chance!" Ross commented as he put up his mask.

"Was not the whole Time Agent project founded on just such chances?"
Karara asked the right question. This was Ross's kind of venture. Yes,
one-in-a-million chances had been pulled off by the Time Agents. Why, it
had been close to those odds against their ever finding what they had
first sought along the back trails of time--the wrecked spaceships.

Just suppose this could be a rehearsal for another attack? If the
salkars could be made to crack the guard of the Baldies, could they also
be used against the Foanna gate? Maybe.... But take one fight at a time.

"They come!" Karara's fingers gripped Ross's shoulder. Her hand was
hard, bar rigid. He could see nothing, hear nothing. That warning must
have come from the dolphins. But so far their plan was working; the
monsters of the Hawaikan sea were on their way.




12

Baldies


"Ohhhh!" Karara clutched at Ross, her breath coming in little gasps,
giving vent to her fear and horror. They had not known what might come
from this plan; certainly neither had foreseen the present chaos in the
lagoon.

Perhaps the broadcast energy of the enemy whipped the already
vicious-tempered salkars into this insane fury. But now the moonlit
water was beaten into foam as the creatures fought there, attacking each
other with a ferocity neither Terran had witnessed before.

Lights gleamed along the shore where the alien invaders must have been
drawn by the clamor of the fighting marine reptiles. Somewhere in the
heights above the beach of the lagoon a picked band of Rovers should now
be making their way from the opposite side of Kyn Add under strict
orders not to go into attack unless signaled. Whether the independent
sea warriors would hold to that command was a question which had worried
Ross from the first.

Tino-rau and Taua in the waters to the seaward of the reef, the two
Terrans on that barrier itself, and between them and the shore the wild
melee of maddened salkars. Ross started. The sonic warning which had
been pulsing steadily against his skin cut off sharply. The broadcast in
the bay had been silenced! This was the time to move, but no swimmer
could last in the lagoon itself.

"Along the reef," Karara said.

That would be the long way round, Ross knew, but the only one possible.
He studied the cluster of lights ashore. Two or three figures moved
there. Seemingly the attention of the aliens was well centered upon the
battle still in progress in the lagoon.

"Stay here!" he ordered the girl. Adjusting his mask, Ross dropped into
the water, cutting away from the reef and then turning to swim parallel
with it. Tino-rau matched him as he went, guiding Ross to a second break
in the reef, toward the shore some distance from where the conflict of
the salkars still made a hideous din in the night.

The Terran waded in the shallows, stripping off his flippers and
snapping them to his belt, letting his mask swing free on his chest. He
angled toward the beach where the aliens had been. At least he was
better armed for this than he had been when he had fronted the Rovers
with only a diver's knife. From the Time Agent supplies he had taken the
single hand weapon he had long ago found in the armory of the derelict
spaceship. This could only be used sparingly, since they did not know
how it could be recharged, and the secret of its beam still remained
secret as far as Terran technicians were concerned.

Ross worked his way to a curtain of underbrush from which he had a free
view of the beach and the aliens. Three of them he counted, and they
were Baldies, all right--taller and thinner than his own species, their
bald heads gray-white, the upper dome of their skulls overshadowing the
features on their pointed chinned faces. They all wore the skintight
blue-purple-green suits of the space voyagers--suits which Ross knew of
old were insulated and protective for their wearers, as well as a medium
for keeping in touch with one another. Just as he, wearing one, had once
been trailed over miles of wilderness.

To him, all three of the invaders looked enough alike to have been
stamped out from one pattern. And their movements suggested that they
worked or went into action with drilled precision. They all faced
seaward, holding tubes aimed at the salkar-infested lagoon. There was no
sound of any explosion, but green spears of light struck at the scaled
bodies plunging in the water. And where those beams struck, flesh
seared. Methodically the trio raked the basin. But, Ross noted, those
beams which had been steady at his first sighting, were now interrupted
by flickers. One of the Baldies upended his tube, rapped its butt
against a rock as if trying to correct a jamming. When the alien went
into action once again his weapon flashed and failed. Within a matter of
moments the other two were also finished. The lighted rods pushed into
the sand, giving a glow to the scene, darkened as a fire might sink to
embers. Power fading?

An ungainly shape floundered out of the churned water, lumbered over the
shale of the beach, its supple neck outstretched, its horned nose down
for a gore-threatening charge. Ross had not realized that the salkars
could operate out of what he thought was their natural element, but this
wild-eyed dragon was plainly bent on reaching its tormentors.

For a moment or two the Baldies continued to front the creature, almost,
Ross thought, as if they could not believe that their weapons had failed
them. Then they broke and ran back to the fairing which they had taken
with such contemptuous ease. The salkar plowed along in their wake, but
its movements grew more labored the farther it advanced, until at last
it lay with only its head upraised, darting it back and forth, its
fanged jaws well agape, voicing a coughing howl.

Its plaint was answered from the water as a second of its kind wallowed
ashore. A terrible wound had torn skin and flesh just behind its neck;
yet still it came on, hissing and bubbling a battle challenge. It did
not attack its fellow; instead it dragged its bulk past the first comer,
on its way after the Baldies.

The salkars continued to come ashore, two more, a third, a fourth,
mangled and torn--pulling themselves as far as they could up the beach.
To lie, facing inland, their necks weaving, their horned heads bobbing,
their cries a frightful din. What had drawn them out of their
preoccupation of battle among themselves into this attempt to reach the
aliens, Ross could not determine. Unless the intelligence of the beasts
was such that they had been able to connect the searing beams which the
Baldies had turned on them so tellingly with the men on the beach, and
had responded by striving to reach a common enemy.

But no desire could give them the necessary energy to pull far ashore.
Almost helplessly beached, they continued to dig into the yielding sand
with their flippers in a vain effort to pursue the aliens.

Ross skirted the clamoring barrier of salkars and headed for the
fairing. A neck snapped about; a head was lowered in his direction. He
smelled the rank stench of reptile combined with burned flesh. The
nearest of the brutes must have scented the Terran in turn, as it was
now trying vainly to edge around to cut across Ross's path. But it was
completely outclassed on land, and the man dodged it easily.

Three Baldies had fled this way. Yet Jazia had reported five had come
out of the sea to take Kyn Add. Two were missing. Where? Had they
remained in the fairing? Were they now in the sub? And that sub--what
had happened to it? The broadcast had been cut off; he had seen the
failure of the weapons and the shore lights. Might the sub have suffered
from salkar attack? Though Ross could hardly believe that the beasts
could wreck it.

The Terran was traveling blindly, keeping well under cover of such brush
as he could, knowing only that he must head inland. Under his feet the
ground was rising, and he recalled the nature of this territory as
Torgul and Jazia had pictured it for him. This had to be part of the
ridge wall of the valley in which lay the buildings of the fairing. In
these heights was the Shrine of Phutka where Jazia had hidden out. To
the west now lay the Rover village, so he had to work his way left,
downhill, in order to reach the hole where the Baldies had gone to
ground. Ross made that progress with the stealth of a trained scout.

Hawaika's moon, triple in size to Terra's companion, was up, and the
landscape was sharply clear, with shadows well defined. The glow, weird
to Terran eyes, added to the effect of being abroad in a nightmare, and
the bellowing of the grounded salkars continued a devils' chorus.

When the Rovers had put up the buildings of their fairing, they had
cleared a series of small fields radiating outward from those
structures. All of these were now covered with crops almost ready to
harvest. The grain, if that Terran term could be applied to this
Hawaikan product, was housed in long pods which dipped from
shoulder-high bushes. And the pods were well equipped with horny
projections which tore. A single try at making his way into one of those
fields convinced Ross of the folly of such an advance. He sat back to
nurse his scratched hands and survey the landscape.

To go down a very tempting lane would be making himself a clear target
for anyone in those buildings ahead. He had seen the flamers of the
Baldies fail on the beach, but that did not mean the aliens were now
weaponless.

His best chance, Ross decided, was to circle north, come back down along
the bed of a stream. And he was at the edge of that watercourse when a
faint sound brought him to a frozen halt, weapon ready.

"Rosss--"

"Loketh!"

"And Torgul and Vistur."

This was the party from the opposite side of the island, gone expertly
to earth. In the moonlight Ross could detect no sign of their presence,
yet their voices sounded almost beside him.

"They are in there, in the great hall." That was Torgul. "But no longer
are there any lights."

"Now--" An urgent exclamation drew their attention.

Light below. But not the glow of the rods Ross had seen on the beach.
This was the warm yellow-red of honest fire, bursting up, the flames
growing higher as if being fed with frantic haste.

Three figures were moving down there. Ross began to believe that there
were only this trio ashore. He could sight no weapons in their hands,
which did not necessarily mean they were unarmed. But the stream ran
close behind the rear wall of one of the buildings, and Ross thought its
bed could provide cover for a man who knew what he was doing. He pointed
out as much to Torgul.

"And if their magic works and you are drawn out to be killed?" The Rover
captain came directly to the point.

"That is a chance to be taken. But remember ... the magic of the Foanna
at the sea gate did not work against me. Perhaps this won't either.
Once, earlier, I won against it."

"Have you then another hand to give to the fire as your defense?" That
was Vistur. "But no man has the right to order another's battle
challenge."

"Just so," returned Ross sharply. "And this is a thing I have long been
trained to do."

He slid down into the stream bed. Approaching from this angle, the
structures of the fairing were between him and the fire. So screened he
reached a log wall, got to his feet, and edged along it. Then he
witnessed a wild scene. The fire raged in great, sky-touching tongues.
And already the roof of one of the Rover buildings smoldered. Why the
aliens had built up such a conflagration, Ross could not guess. A signal
designed to reach some distance?

He did not doubt there was some urgent purpose. For the three were
dragging in fuel with almost frenzied haste, bringing out of the Rover
buildings bales of cloth to be ripped apart and whirled into the
devouring flames, furniture, everything movable which would burn.

There was one satisfaction. The Baldies were so intent upon this
destruction that they kept no watch save that now and then one of them
would run to the head of the path leading to the lagoon and listen as if
he expected a salkar to come pounding up the slope.

"They're ... they're rattled!" Ross could hardly believe it. The Baldies
who had always occupied his mind and memory as practically invincible
supermen were acting like badly frightened primitives! And when the
enemy was so off balance you pushed--you pushed hard.

Ross thumbed the button on the grip of the strange weapon. He sighted
