CHAPTER XIV--SIMPLE REMEDIES

BITES
BLEEDING
BURNS
EARS
EYES
FEET
HEADACHE
SUNSTROKE
STOMACH ACHE
TOOTHACHE

In a small camp a physician is unnecessary, though one should be within
call. The camp leader should have a knowledge of the ordinary ailments of
growing boys and simple remedies for relief. No camp of fifty or more boys
should be without a physician or some upper class medical student of high
moral character. Don't run risks. When in doubt, call in a physician. The
treatment of local disorders described is largely from nature's medicine
chest, and simple in application.

Bites and Stings

Put on salt and water, or make a paste of soda and water, or rub the wound
with aromatic ammonia, camphor, or tar soap. Common salt is excellent.

Bleeding Nose

Do not blow the nose. Hold a wet handkerchief at the back of the neck and
wash the face in hot water, or place a wad of paper under the upper lip,
or crowd some fine gauze or cotton into the nostrils and make a plug.

To Check Bleeding

Raise the injured part as high as you can above the heart, press very
firmly with sterile pad under thumb or fingers on or into the wound. Blood
from a vein will be dark red or purplish and will flow in a steady stream.
Press upon the vein below the wound. Put on a clean pad and bind it upon
the wound firmly enough to stop bleeding. Blood from an artery will be
bright red and will probably spurt in jets. Press very hard above the
wound. Tie a strong bandage (handkerchief, belt, suspenders, rope, strip
of clothing) around the wounded member, and between the wound and the
heart. Under it and directly over the artery place a smooth pebble, piece
of stick, or other hard lump. Then thrust a stout stick under the bandage
and twist until the wound stops bleeding. A tourniquet should not remain
over twenty-four hours.

Blisters

Wash blistered feet in hot water and then in alcohol or in cold water with
a little baking powder or soda added. Wipe them dry and then rub them with
a tallow candle or some fat.

Bruises

Apply compresses of hot or cold water to keep down swelling and
discoloration. Also apply witch hazel.

Burns

Use vaseline, baking soda, bread, the white of an egg, flour and water,
butter, grease, or fat; or mix flour and soda with fat, or soap with sugar
and make into a paste, or put a teaspoonful of baking powder into a pint
of warm water and pour it on a piece of gauze and put this on the burn or
scald, covering it with cotton and a bandage. Never let a burn be exposed
to the air, but cover it at once if the pain is intense.

Chills

Mix a good dash of pepper with a little ginger in sweetened hot water and
drink it. Get into bed at once. Cover with blankets and put hot water
bottle at feet.

Choking

Force yourself to swallow pieces of dry bread or drink some water. Let
some one slap the back.

Colds

Pour boiling water over two heads of elder blossoms, brew for twenty
minutes, and drink a small cup hot on going to bed. Or drink hot lemonade
or hot ginger tea. In any case, keep warm and out of a draft.

Constipation

Use cathartic pills, or castor oil.  Eat plenty of prunes or fruit. Drink
plenty of water.

Cuts

Always clean thoroughly all open wounds to prevent infection, and
accelerate healing. Carbolic, left on a wound for any time at all may
result in carbolic poisoning or in gangrene. Use pure alcohol (not wood or
denatured, as both are poisonous), or a teaspoonful of sulphur-naphthol to
a basin of water, or 1:1000 corrosive sublimate solution (wad with
flexible collodion). Do not use vaseline  or any other substance on a
freshly abrased surface. After a scab has formed, vaseline may be applied
to keep this scab soft. Never close a wound with court plaster[1]. The
only legitimate uses for sticking or adhesive plaster are to hold
dressings in place where bandaging is difficult, or in case of a cut to
keep edges closed without sewing the skin.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: Cloth coated with adhesive substance to cover
cuts or scratches on the skin.]

Earache

Take the heart of an onion, heat it in an oven, and put it in the ear when
hot, but not so hot as to burn the ear. This not only relieves the
earache, but helps to send the sufferer to sleep. Hold hot water bag to
ear.

Inflamed Eye

Wring a towel in water hot as the hands will bear; lay on the eyes and
change frequently. Bathe with saturated solution of boric acid crystals.

Great relief is felt by opening the eyes in tepid or very warm boracic
solution. Even if it is strong enough to smart, no harm will result.

If inflammation is caused by a foreign substance, rub the other eye, in
order to make both eyes water. If the speck can be seen, it can generally
be taken out by twisting a small piece of gauze or cloth around a
toothpick and drawing it over the speck, or by twisting up a piece of
paper like a lamp lighter and, after wetting the tip of it, wiping it
against the speck. If it is under the upper lid, pull the lid away from
the eyeball, and push the under lid up underneath the upper one. In this
way the eyelashes of the lower lid will generally clean the inside of the
upper one. An eye-tweezers for removing a piece of grit from the eye is
made by folding a piece of paper in two. With a sharp knife cut it to a
point at an angle of 30 degrees and slightly moisten the point in clean
water.

Feet

It is a good thing to dry-soap your feet and the inside of your socks
before putting them on for a hike or tramp. This is an old army trick. If
your feet perspire freely, powder them with boric acid powder, starch, and
oxide of zinc in equal parts. Wash the feet every day, best on turning in
at night.

To prevent the nail growing into the toe, take a bit of broken glass and
scrape down the top of the nail until it is quite thin, and in time the
corners begin to grow out, and no longer hurt the toe. Toenails should be
cut square and not encouraged to grow in by side trimming. A good plan is
to make a "V" shape notch on the middle of the top of each toenail, which
will close up naturally, and, in so doing, draw the sides up and inward.

Headache

Headache comes from indigestion or from the sun. A boy will overeat and
then play under the hot sun--result, headache. Have the boy lie down and
sleep, if possible, using cloths dipped in cold water to drive the blood
away from the head. A remedy recommended by the great John Wesley is to
lay very thin slices of lemon rind on either temple.

Hiccough

Take a deep breath and hold it as long as possible, or make yourself
sneeze.

Ivy Poisoning

Mix some baking powder with water, or rub on wood ashes. Wash with
alcohol. Be careful not to spread by scratching.

Rusty Nail

Better call a physician. Puncture with nails and such things, especially
if rusty, should be squeezed and washed with sulphur-naphthol or hot water
poured into the hole. If too small, this may be slightly enlarged.
Cauterize with carbolic acid, then with pure alcohol. Keep the wound open
for a few days. Run no risk with a rusty nail wound. Attend to it
immediately.

Sprains

Bathe a sprain in as hot water as you can bear, to which has been added a
small quantity of vinegar and salt. Slight sprains (as of finger) may be
painted with iodine.

Sunstroke

The first symptom is a headache followed by a heavy feeling in the pit of
the stomach, dimmed eyesight, difficulty in breathing, and a fever. If
insensibility follows, lay the person on his back in a cool, shady place,
with his head slightly raised. Loosen his clothing, keep his head cold
with wet cloths, and pour cold water on his face and chest, until the
temperature of his body is lowered and the face becomes pale.

Sunburn

Get used to sun gradually. Use powdered boric acid or ointment. Cocoa
butter is also a good preventive.

Sore Throat

Gargle the throat with warm water and some salt added, and then bind a
woolen sock around it. Keep the sock on until the soreness is gone. Put
teaspoonful of chlorate of potash in a cup of water and gargle. Diluted
alkalol [sic] is also good for a gargle, or tincture of iron diluted. Fat
bacon or pork may be tied around the neck with a dry sock. Swab the
throat.

Stomachache

Caused by undigested food in the intestines. Put the boy on a diet, also
give him plenty of warm water to drink, or a cup of hot ginger tea.

Toothache

Heat will always help to soothe the sufferer. A seeded raisin, toasted
before the fire, makes a useful poultice for an aching tooth, pressed into
the hollow. A bag of hot salt, pressed on the face, relieves pain.

[Illustration: Drill in First Aid]



CHAPTER XV--FIRST AID TO THE INJURED

First aid should teach every boy how to render temporary assistance by
improvised means for the relief of the injured one, and the methods by
which he can be removed to a place of safety. With this in view, the
information given in this chapter incorporates what every camper should
know. Before going to camp, boys should be taught the use of the
Triangular Bandage. This bandage is used by the United States Government,
and is well suited for an emergency bandage. It can be easily made from a
handkerchief or a piece of linen. The American Red Cross First Aid Outfit
contains a triangular bandage, with methods of application printed
thereon. The gauze or roller bandage is more difficult to handle. This,
however, is the bandage to control bleeding, etc. Any reliable book on
First Aid gives information as to its manipulation.

Dislocation

A dislocation of the finger or toe can generally be reduced by pulling
strongly and at the same time pressing where the dislocation is. If the
hip, shoulder, or elbow is dislocated, do not meddle with the joint, but
make the boy as comfortable as possible by surrounding the joint with
flannel cloths wrung out in hot water; support with soft pads, and send
for a doctor at once. If the spine is dislocated, lay the boy on his back.
Never put him on his side or face, it may be fatal. If he is cold, apply
hot blankets to his body, hot water bottle or hot salt bag to the seat of
pain.

[Illustration: Triangular Bandage; Method of Folding Triangular Bandage
for Use; Bandage should always be secured by means of a reef knot.]

Broken Bones

Do not try to reduce the fracture if a physician can be secured, for
unskilled handling will do more harm than good. The thing to do is to make
the boy comfortable by placing him in a comfortable position with the
injured part resting on a pad, keeping him perfectly quiet. If there is an
open wound, cover it with cheesecloth or gauze which has been dipped in
boiling water, to which baking soda has been added. Then wrap absorbent
cotton around it. If the boy has a fever, put wet cloths on his head,
swinging them in the air to cool for changing.

THE FOLLOWING PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ARE GIVEN IN "CAMP KITS AND CAMP
LIFE," BY CHARLES STEDMAN HANKS.

Nose

If the nose is broken, plug with gauze to stop bleeding.

Jaw

If the jaw is broken, push the bone gently into place, and if there is an
open wound, cover it  with gauze or cotton, made antiseptically, and then
put a bandage around the jaw.

Collar Bone

If the collar bone is broken, it will be known by the pain in the shoulder
and the shoulder dropping. Holding the elbow up will relieve the weight
from the collar bone. Lay the boy on his back. Put a cotton wad in his
armpit and bandage the arm to the side of the body and put the arm in a
sling.

Shoulder Blade

If the shoulder blade is broken, put the forearm across the chest with the
fingers on the shoulder and then bandage the arm to the body.

Rib

If a rib is broken it will pain the patient when he takes a long breath.
Put him on his back, resting a little on the uninjured side, so that he
will breathe easily. If it is necessary to move him, bandage strips of
adhesive plaster around the body, beginning at the lowest rib and working
upward, having each strip lap over the one below it. If you have no
adhesive plaster, use a wide strip of cotton cloth. After you have put his
coat on, pin it as tightly as you can in the back.

Leg Above Knee

If the leg is broken above the knee, lay shoulders slightly back, with the
head and shoulders slightly raised. Draw the leg out straight, and, after
padding it with cotton or towels, cut a small sapling long enough to reach
from the foot to the armpit, and fasten it at the ankle, knee, and waist.
If it is necessary to move the boy, bind both legs firmly together.

Leg Below Knee

If the leg is broken below the knee, lay the boy on his back and put a
pillow or a bag stuffed with grass lengthwise under it. Then put a board
or a hewed sapling on the under side of the pillow to stiffen it, and
bandage the pillow and the board or sapling firmly to the leg. If the boy
has to be moved, bind both legs together.

Knee Pan

If the knee pan is broken, put the boy on his back and straighten out the
leg on a padded splint which reaches from the heel to the hip, putting
some cotton or a folded towel under the knee and the heel. Then bandage
the splint on at the ankle, at the upper part of the leg, and above and
below the knee pan.

Foot

If the foot is broken, make a splint of two pieces of wood held together
at right angles, and, after padding the foot with cotton, bind the splint
to the side of the foot and the leg.

[Illustration: Large arm sling as a support for the forearm.]

[Illustration: Large arm sling as a support for the elbow.]


Upper Arm

If the upper arm is broken, make three splints, one long enough to reach
from the shoulder to the elbow to go on the outside of the arm, one to go
on the inner side of the arm, and one on the back of the arm. Pad the arm
from the armpit to the elbow with cotton, towels, or newspapers wrapped in
cloth, and, after bandaging on the splints, put the forearm in a sling and
bind the arm to the body.

Forearm

If the forearm is broken, make a cotton pad long enough to reach from the
fingers well up to the forearm, and rest the palm of the hand on it. Put a
similar pad on the back of the hand, and, after bandaging in a splint, put
the arm in a sling.

Hand

If the hand is broken, put a cotton pad on the palm and over it a thin
splint long enough to reach from the tips of the fingers to the forearm.
After binding the splint in place, put the arm in a sling with the hand
higher than the elbow.

Finger

If a finger is broken, make a splint of cardboard or a thin piece of wood
long enough to reach from the tip of the finger to the wrist. Cover the
finger with gauze or cotton, and, after binding on the splint, support the
hand in a sling.

Fainting

Fainting comes from too little blood in the head. Lay the boy on his back
with feet higher than his head. Loosen tight clothing and let him have
plenty of fresh air. Sprinkle his face with cold water and rub his arms
with it. For an attack of dizziness, bend the head down firmly between the
knees. If his face is flushed, raise the head.

Stunned

Lay the boy on his back with head somewhat raised. Apply heat, such as
bottles of hot water, hot plates or stones wrapped in towels to the
extremities and over the stomach, but keep the head cool with wet cloths.
Do not give any stimulant; it would drive blood to the brain.

Stretcher

A stretcher may be improvised in one of the following ways: (a) A shutter,
door, or gate covered well with straw, hay, clothing, or burlap bagging.

(b) A piece of carpet, blanket, sacking, tarlatan, spread out, and two
stout poles rolled up in the sides. Put clothes for a pillow.

(c) A coat with the two sleeves turned inside out; pass two poles through
the sleeves, button the coat over them. (See illustration.) Patient sits
on coat and rests against the back of the first bearer.

(d) Two poles passed through a couple of bags, through holes at bottom
corners of each.

[Illustration: Coat Stretcher]

Carry a patient by walking out of step, and take short paces, about 18
inches apart. Usually carry the patient feet first, but in going up hill
the position is reversed, and the patient is carried head first.

[Illustration: Life Saving Patrol]

The following illustrations explain the process of carrying a patient
without a stretcher:

[Illustration: Three and four handed carry.]

PREVENTION FROM DROWNING

Learn to Swim

Every summer records its hundreds of drowning accidents, many of which
might have been prevented if methods of rescue had been generally taught.
No boy should be permitted to enter a boat, particularly a canoe, until he
has learned to swim. The movement to teach swimming to every boy and young
man in North America who does not know how to swim is both commendable and
practical. The text-book used largely is "At Home in the Water," by George
H. Corsan, issued by the publishers of this book.

Button Awards

Summer camps provide a special opportunity for giving such instruction. To
each individual who is actually taught to swim in camp a silver-oxidized
button is given by the Association's International Committee, 124 East
28th St., New York, provided the test is made under the supervision of a
committee of three men. Those who teach others to swim receive a gold
oxidized leader's button. Write to the Physical Department at the above
address for information.

[Illustration: Award Button]

U. S. V. Life Saving Corps

An Auxiliary Division of the U. S. Volunteer Life Saving Corps should be
established to patrol the water during swimming periods. Any camper may
qualify for membership by taking the following examinations: the boy to
receive not less than 6 points in 10 point subjects, and not less than 3
points on 5 point subjects, with a total of 75 points. Those receiving
less than 75 points may become members of auxiliary crews.

[Illustration: Award Button]

