russet-clad pikemen, charging down on us. A moment, and we were crushed
back: another, and the chant rose again. We were grappling, hand to
hand, in the midst of their files.

But, good lack! What use is swordsmanship in a charge like this? The
first red coat that encounter'd me I had spitted through the lung,
and, carried on by the rush, he twirled me round like a windmill. In an
instant I was pass'd; the giant stepping before me and clearing a space
about him, using his pike as if 'twere a flail. With a wrench I tugg'd
my sword out and followed. I saw Sir Bevill, a little to the left,
beaten to his knee, and carried toward me. Stretching out a hand I
pull'd him on his feet again, catching, as I did so, a crack on the
skull that would have ended me, had not Billy Pottery put up his pike
and broke the force of it. Next, I remember gripping another red coat
by the beard and thrusting at him with shortened blade. Then the giant
ahead lifted his pike high, and we fought to rally round it; and with
that I seem'd caught off my feet and swept forward:--and we were on the
crest.

Taking breath, I saw the enemy melting off the summit like a man's
breath off a pane. And Sir Bevill caught my hand and pointed across
to where, on the north side, a white standard embroider'd with gold
griffins was mounting.

"'Tis dear Nick Slanning!" he cried; "God be prais'd--the day is ours
for certain!"




CHAPTER XVII.

I MEET WITH A HAPPY ADVENTURE BY BURNING OF A GREEN LIGHT.


The rest of this signal victory (in which 1,700 prisoners were taken,
besides the Major-General Chudleigh; and all the rebels' camp, cannon
and victuals) I leave historians to tell. For very soon after the rout
was assured (the plain below full of men screaming and running, and Col.
John Digby's dragoons after them, chasing, cutting, and killing), a wet
muzzle was thrust into my hand, and turning, I found Molly behind me,
with the groom to whom I had given her in the morning. The rogue had
counted on a crown for his readiness, and swore the mare was ready for
anything, he having mix'd half a pint of strong ale with her mash, not
half an hour before.

So I determin'd to see the end of it, and paying the fellow, climb'd
into the saddle. On the summit the Cornish captains were now met, and
cordially embracing. 'Tis very sad in these latter times to call back
their shouts and boyish laughter, so soon to be quench'd on Lansdowne
slopes, or by Bristol graff. Yet, O favor'd ones!--to chase Victory, to
grasp her flutt'ring skirt, and so, with warm, panting cheeks, kissing
her, to fall, escaping evil days!

How could they laugh? For me, the late passionate struggle left me
shaken with sobs; and for the starting tears I saw neither moors around,
nor sun, nor twinkling sea. Brushing them away, I was aware of Billy
Pottery striding at my stirrup, and munching at a biscuit he had found
in the rebels' camp. Said he, "In season, Jack, is in reason. There
be times to sing an' to dance, to marry and to give in marriage; an'
likewise times to become as wax: but now, lookin' about an' seein'
no haughty slaughterin' cannon but has a Cornishman seated 'pon the
touch-hole of the same, says I in my thoughtsome way, 'Forbear!'"

Presently he pulls up before a rebel trooper, that was writhing on the
slope with a shatter'd thigh, yet raised himself on his fists to gaze on
us with wide, painful eyes.

"Good sirs," gasp'd out the rebel, "can you tell me--where be Nat
Shipward?"

"Now how should I know?" I answer'd.

"'A had nutty-brown curls, an' wore a red jacket--Oh, as straight a
young man as ever pitched hay! 'a sarved in General Chudleigh's troop--a
very singular straight young man."

"Death has taken a many such," said I, and thought on the man I had run
through in our last charge.

The fellow groaned. "'A was my son," he said: and though Billy pull'd
out a biscuit (his pockets bulged with them) and laid it beside him, he
turn'd from it, and sank back on the turf again.

We left him, and now, the descent being gentler, broke into a run, in
hopes to catch up with Col. John Digby's dragoons, that already were far
across the next vale. The slope around us was piled with dead and dying,
whereof four out of every five were rebels; and cruelly they cursed us
as we passed them by. Night was coming on apace; and here already we
were in deep shadow, but could see the yellow sun on the hills beyond.
We crossed a stream at the foot, and were climbing again. Behind us the
cheering yet continued, though fainter: and fainter grew the cries and
shouting in front. Soon we turn'd into a lane over a steep hedge, under
the which two or three stout rebels were cowering. As we came tumbling
almost atop of them, they ran yelling: and we let them go in peace.

The lane gradually led us to westward, out of the main line of the rout,
and past a hamlet where every door was shut and all silent. And at last
a slice of the sea fronted us, between two steeply shelving hills. On
the crest of the road, before it plunged down toward the coast, was
a wagon lying against the hedge, with the horses gone: and beside it,
stretch'd across the road, an old woman. Stopping, we found her dead,
with a sword-thrust through the left breast; and inside the wagon a
young man lying, with his jaw bound up,--dead also. And how this sad
spectacle happened here, so far from the battlefield, was more than we
could guess.

I was moving away, when Billy, that was kneeling in the road, chanced
to cast his eyes up toward the sea, and dropping the dead woman's hand
scrambled on his feet and stood looking, with a puzzled face.

Following his gaze, I saw a small sloop moving under shorten'd canvas,
about two miles from the land. She made a pleasant sight, with the last
rays of sunlight flaming on her sails: but for Billy's perturbation I
could not account, so turn'd an enquiring glance to him.

"Suthin' i' the wind out yonder," was his answer: "What's a sloop doing
on that ratch so close in by the point? Be dang'd! but there she goes
again;"--as the little vessel swung off a point or two further from the
breeze, that was breathing softly up Channel. "Time to sup, lad, for the
both of us," he broke off shortly.

Indeed, I was faint with hunger by this time, yet had no stomach to
eat thus close to the dead. So turning into a gate on our left hand, we
cross'd two or three fields, and sat down to sup off Billy's biscuits,
the mare standing quietly beside us, and cropping the short grass.

The field where we now found ourselves ran out along the top of a small
promontory, and ended, without fence of any sort, at the cliff's edge.
As I sat looking southward, I could only observe the sloop by turning my
head: but Billy, who squatted over against me, hardly took his eyes off
her, and between this and his meal was too busy to speak a word. For
me, I had enough to do thinking over the late fight: and being near worn
out, had half a mind to spend the night there on the hard turf: for,
though the sun was now down and the landscape grey, yet the air was
exceeding warm: and albeit, as I have said, there breath'd a light
breeze now and then, 'twas hardly cool enough to dry the sweat off me.
So I stretch'd myself out, and found it very pleasant to lie still;
nor, when Billy stood up and sauntered off toward the far end of the
headland, did I stir more than to turn my head and lazily watch him.

He was gone half an hour at the least, and the sky by this time was so
dark, that I had lost sight of him, when, rising on my elbow to look
around, I noted a curious red glow at a point where the turf broke off,
not three hundred yards behind me, and a thin smoke curling up in it, as
it seem'd, from the very face of the cliff below. In a minute or so the
smoke ceased almost; but the shine against the sky continued steady,
tho' not very strong. "Billy has lit a fire," I guessed, and was
preparing to go and look, when I spied a black form crawling toward me,
and presently saw 'twas Billy himself.

Coming close, he halted, put a finger to his lip and beckoned: then
began to lead the way back as he had come.

Thought I, "these are queer doings:" but left Molly to browse, and crept
after him on hands and knees. He turn'd his head once to make sure I was
following, and then scrambled on quicker, but softly, toward the point
where the red glow was shining.

Once more he pull'd up--as I judg'd, about twelve paces' distance from
the edge--and after considering for a second, began to move again; only
now he worked a little to the right. And soon I saw the intention of
this: for just here the cliff's lip was cleft by a fissure--very like
that in Scawfell which we were used to call the _Lord's Rake_, only
narrower--that ran back into the field and shelved out gently at the
top, so that a man might easily scramble some way down it, tho' how far
I could not then tell. And 'twas from this fissure that the glow came.

Along the right lip of this Billy led me, skirting it by a couple of
yards, and wriggling on his belly like a blind worm. Crawling closer now
(for 'twas hard to see him against the black turf), I stopp'd beside him
and strove to quiet the violence of my breathing. Then, after a minute's
pause, together we pulled ourselves to the edge, and peer'd over.

The descent of the gully was broken, some eight feet below us, by a
small ledge, sloping outward about six feet (as I guess), and screen'd
by branches of the wild tamarisk. At the back, in an angle of the
solid rock, was now set a pan pierced with holes, and full of burning
charcoal: and over this a man in the rebels' uniform was stooping.

He had a small paper parcel in his left hand, and was blowing at the
charcoal with all his might. Holding my breath, I heard him clearly,
but could see nothing of his face, for his back was toward us, all sable
against the glow. The charcoal fumes as they rose chok'd me so, that
I was very near a fit of coughing, when Billy laid one hand on my
shoulder, and with the other pointed out to seaward.

Looking that way, I saw a small light shining on the sea, pretty close
in. 'Twas a lantern hung out from the sloop, as I concluded on the
instant: and now I began to have an inkling of what was toward.

But looking down again at the man with the charcoal pan I saw a black
head of hair lifted, and then a pair of red puff'd cheeks, and a pimpled
nose with a scar across the bridge of it--all shining in the glare of
the pan.

"Powers of Heaven!" I gasped; "'tis that bloody villain Luke Settle!"

And springing to my feet, I took a jump over the edge and came sprawling
on top of him. The scoundrel was stooping with his nose close to the
pan, and had not time to turn before I lit with a thud on his shoulders,
flattening him on the ledge and nearly sending his face on top of the
live coal. 'Twas so sudden that, before he could so much as think, my
fingers were about his windpipe, and the both of us struggling flat on
the brink of the precipice. For he had a bull's strength, and heaved and
kicked, so that I fully looked, next moment, to be flying over the edge
into the sea: nor could I loose my grip to get out a pistol, but only
held on and worked my fingers in, and thought how he had strangled the
mastiff that night on the bowling-green, and vowed to serve him the same
if only strength held out.

But now, just as he had almost twisted his neck free, I heard a stone or
two break away above us, and down came Billy Pottery flying atop of us,
and pinned us to the ledge.

'Twas short work now. Within a minute, Captain Luke Settle was turned
on his back, his eyes fairly starting with Billy's clutch on his throat,
his mouth wide open and gasping; till I slipp'd the nozzle of my pistol
between his teeth; and with that he had no more chance, but gave in, and
like a lamb submitted to have his arms truss'd behind him with Billy's
leathern belt, and his legs with his own.

"Now," said I, standing over him, and putting the pistol against his
temple, "you and I, Master Turncoat Settle, have some accounts that
'twould be well to square. So first tell me, what do you here, and where
is Mistress Delia Killigrew?"

I think that till this moment the bully had no idea his assailants were
more than a chance couple of Cornish troopers. But now seeing the glow
of the burning charcoal on my face, he ripped out a horrid blasphemous
curse, and straightway fell to speaking calmly.

"Good sirs, the game is yours, with care. S'lid! but you hold a pretty
hand--if only you know how to play it."

"'Tis you shall help me, Captain: but let us be clear about the stakes.
For you, 'tis life or death: for me, 'tis to regain Mistress Delia,
failing which I shoot you here through the head, and topple you into the
sea. You are the Knave of trumps, sir, and I play that card: as matters
now stand, only the Queen can save you."

"Right: but where be King and Ace?"

"The King is the Cornish army, yonder: the Ace is my pistol here, which
I hold."

"And that's a very pretty comprehension of the game, sir: I play the
Queen."

"Where is she?"

For answer, he pointed seaward, where the sloop's lantern lay like a
floating star on the black waters.

"What!" cried I. "Mistress Delia in that sloop! And who is with her,
pray?"

"Why, Black Dick, to begin with--and Reuben Gedges--and Jeremy Toy."

"All the Knaves left in the pack--God help her!" I muttered, as I look'd
out toward the light, and my heart beat heavily. "God help her!" I said
again, and turning, spied a grin on the Captain's face.

"Under Providence," answered he, "your unworthy servant may suffice. But
what is my reward to be?"

"Your neck," said I, "if I can save it when you are led before the
Cornish captains."

"That's fair enough: so listen. These few months the lady has been shut
in Bristol keep, whither, by the advice of our employer, we conveyed her
back safe and sound. This same employer--"

"A dirty rogue, whom you may as well call by his name--Hannibal
Tingcomb."

"Right, young sir: a very dirty rogue, and a niggardly:--I hate a mean
rascal. Well, fearing her second escape from that prison, and being hand
in glove with the Parliament men, he gets her on board a sloop bound for
the Virginias, just at the time when he knows the Earl of Stamford is to
march and crush the Cornishmen. For escort she has the three comrades of
mine that I named: and the captain of the sloop (a fellow that asks no
questions) has orders to cruise along the coast hereabouts till he gets
news of the battle."

"Which you were just now about to give him," cried I, suddenly
enlighten'd.

"Right again. 'Twas a pretty scheme: for--d'ye see?--if all went
well with the Earl of Stamford, the King's law would be wiped out in
Cornwall, and Master Tingcomb (with his claims and meritorious services)
might snap his thumb thereat. So, in that case, Mistress Delia was to be
brought ashore here and taken to him, to serve as he fancied. But if the
day should go against us--as it has--she was to sail to the Virginias
with the sloop, and there be sold as a slave. Or worse might happen; but
I swear that is the worst was ever told me."

"God knows 'tis vile enough," said I, scarce able to refrain from
blowing his brains out. "So you were to follow the Earl's army, and work
the signals. Which are they?" For a quick resolve had come into my head,
and I was casting about to put it into execution.

"A green light if we won: if not, a red light, to warn the sloop away."

I picked up the packet that had dropp'd from his hand when first I
sprang upon him. It was burst abroad, and a brown powder trickling from
it about the ledge.

"This was the red light--to be sprinkled on the burning charcoal, I
suppose?"

The fellow nodded. At the same moment, Billy (who as yet had not spoke
a word, and of course, understood nothing) thrust into my hand another
packet that he had found stuck in a corner against the rock.

"Now tell me--in case the rebels won, where was the landing to be made?"

"In the cove below here--where the road leads down."

"Aye, the road where the wagon stood."

Captain Luke Settle blink'd his eyes at this: but nodded after a moment.

"And how many would escort her?"

He caught my drift and laughed softly---

"Be damn'd, sir, but I begin to love you, for you play the game very
proper and soundly. Reuben, Jeremy, and Black Dick alone are in the
plot; so why should more escort her? For the skipper and crew have their
own business to look after."

"Then, Master Settle, tho' it be a sore trial to you, those three Knaves
you must give me, or I play my Ace," and I pressed the ring of my pistol
sharply against his ear as a reminder.

"With all my heart, young sir, you shall have them," says he briskly.

"And this is 'honor among thieves,'" thought I: "You would sell your
comrade as you sold your King:" but only said, "If you cry out, or speak
one word to warn them--"

Before I could get my sentence out, Billy Pottery broke in with a voice
like a trumpet--

"As folks go, Jack, I be a humorous man. But sittin' here, an' ponderin'
this way an' that, I says, in my deaf an' afflicted style, 'Why not
shoot the ugly rogue, if mirth, indeed, be your object?' For to wait
till an uglier comes to this untravel'd spot is superfluity."

How to explain matters to Billy was more than I could tell: but in a
moment he himself supplied the means. For the rocks here were of some
kind of slate, very hard, but scaly: and finding two pieces, a large and
a small, he handed them to me, bawling that I was to write therewith. So
giving him my pistol, I made shift to scribble a few words. Seeing his
eyes twinkle as he read, I stood up.

The charcoal by this time was a glowing mass of red: and threw so clear
a light on us that I feared the crew on board the sloop might see
our forms and suspect their misadventure. But the lantern still hung
steadily: so signing to Billy to drag our prisoner behind a tamarisk
bush, I open'd the second packet, and poured some of the powder into my
hand.

It was composed of tiny crystals, yellow and flaky: and holding it,
for a moment I was possessed with a horrid fear that this might be the
signal to warn the sloop away. I flung a look at the Captain: who read
my thoughts on the instant.

"Never fear, young sir: am no such hero as to sell my life for that
tag-rag. Only make haste, for your deaf friend has a cursed ugly way of
fumbling his pistol."

So taking heart, I tore the packet wide, and shook out the powder on the
coals.

Instantly there came a dense choking vapor, and a vivid green flare that
turned the rocks, the sky, and our faces to a ghastly brilliance. For
two minutes, at least, this unnatural light lasted. As soon as it died
away and the fumes clear'd, I look'd seaward.

The lantern on the sloop was moving in answer to the signal. Three times
it was lifted and lower'd: and then in the stillness I heard voices
calling, and soon after the regular splash of oars.

There was no time to be lost. Pulling the Captain to his feet, we
scrambled up the gully, and out at the top, and across the fields as
fast as our legs would take us. Molly came to my call and trotted beside
me--the Captain following some paces behind, and Billy last, to keep a
safe watch on his movements.

At the gate, however, where we turned into the road, I tethered the
mare, lest the sound of her hoofs should betray us: and down toward
the sea we pelted, till almost at the foot of the hill I pull'd up and
listen'd, the others following my example.

We could hear the sound of oars plain above the wash of waves on the
beach. I look'd about me. On either side the road was now bank'd by tall
hills, with clusters of bracken and furze bushes lying darkly on
their slopes. Behind one of these clusters I station'd Billy with the
Captain's long sword, and a pistol that I by signs forbade him to fire
unless in extremity. Then, retiring some forty paces up the road, I hid
the Captain and myself on the other side.

Hardly were we thus disposed, before I heard the sound of a boat
grounding on the beach below, and the murmur of voices; and then the
noise of feet trampling the shingle. Upon which I ordered my prisoner to
give a hail, which he did readily.

"Ahoy, Dick! Ahoy, Reuben Gedges!"

In a moment or two came the answer--

"Ahoy, there, Captain--here we be!"

"Fetch along the cargo!" shouted Captain Settle, on my prompting.

"Where be you?"

"Up the road, here--waiting!"

"One minute, then--wait one minute, Captain!"

I heard the boat push'd off, some _Good-nights_ call'd, and then (with
tender anguish) the voice of my Delia lifted in entreaty. As I guess'd,
she was beseeching the sailors to take her back to the sloop, nor leave
her to these villains. There follow'd an oath or two growl'd out, a
short scrimmage, and at last, above the splash of the retreating boat,
came the tramp of heavy feet on the road below.

So fired was I at the sound of Delia's voice, that 'twas with much ado
I kept quiet behind the bush. Yet I had wit enough left to look to the
priming of my pistol, and also to bid the Captain shout again. As he
did so, a light shone out down the road, and round the corner came a man
bearing a lantern.

"Can't be quicker, Captain," he called: "the jade struggles so that Dick
and Jeremy ha' their hands full."

Sure enough, after him there came in view two stooping forms that bore
my dear maid between them--one by the feet, the other by the shoulders.
I ground my teeth to see it, for she writhed sorely. On they came,
