
"It is because I suspected as much that I put my question to you,"
said Morhange blandly.

"I will not keep you longer in suspense," said M. Le Mesge. "The word,
Antinea, is composed as follows: _ti_ is nothing but a Tifinar
addition to an essentially Greek name. _Ti_ is the Berber feminine
article. We have several examples of this combination. Take _Tipasa_,
the North African town. The name means the whole, from _ti_ and from
[Greek: nap]. So, _tinea_ signifies the new, from _ti_ and from
[Greek: ea]."

"And the prefix, _an_?" queried Morhang.

"Is it possible, sir, that I have put myself to the trouble of talking
to you for a solid hour about the Critias with such trifling effect?
It is certain that the prefix _an_, alone, has no meaning. You will
understand that it has one, when I tell you that we have here a very
curious case of apocope. You must not read _an_; you must read _atlan_.
_Atl_ has been lost, by apocope; _an_ has survived. To sum up, Antinea
is composed in the following manner: [Greek: ti-nea--atl'An]. And its
meaning, _the new Atlantis_, is dazzlingly apparent from this
demonstration."

I looked at Morhange. His astonishment was without bounds. The Berber
prefix _ti_ had literally stunned him.

"Have you had occasion, sir, to verify this very ingenious etymology?"
he was finally able to gasp out.

"You have only to glance over these few books," said M. Le Mesge
disdainfully.

He opened successively five, ten, twenty cupboards. An enormous
library was spread out to our view.

"Everything, everything--it is all here," murmured Morhange, with an
astonishing inflection of terror and admiration.

"Everything that is worth consulting, at any rate," said M. Le Mesge.
"All the great books, whose loss the so-called learned world deplores
to-day."

"And how has it happened?"

"Sir, you distress me. I thought you familiar with certain events. You
are forgetting, then, the passage where Pliny the Elder speaks of the
library of Carthage and the treasures which were accumulated there? In
146, when that city fell under the blows of the knave, Scipio, the
incredible collection of illiterates who bore the name of the Roman
Senate had only the profoundest contempt for these riches. They
presented them to the native kings. This is how Mantabal received this
priceless heritage; it was transmitted to his son and grandson,
Hiempsal, Juba I, Juba II, the husband of the admirable Cleopatra
Selene, the daughter of the great Cleopatra and Mark Antony. Cleopatra
Selene had a daughter who married an Atlantide king. This is how
Antinea, the daughter of Neptune, counts among her ancestors the
immortal queen of Egypt. That is how, by following the laws of
inheritance, the remains of the library of Carthage, enriched by the
remnants of the library of Alexandria, are actually before your eyes.

"Science fled from man. While he was building those monstrous Babels
of pseudo-science in Berlin, London, Paris, Science was taking refuge
in this desert corner of Ahaggar. They may well forge their hypotheses
back there, based on the loss of the mysterious works of antiquity:
these works are not lost. They are here. They are here: the Hebrew,
the Chaldean, the Assyrian books. Here, the great Egyptian traditions
which inspired Solon, Herodotus and Plato. Here, the Greek
mythologists, the magicians of Roman Africa, the Indian mystics, all
the treasures, in a word, for the lack of which contemporary
dissertations are poor laughable things. Believe me, he is well
avenged, the little universitarian whom they took for a madman, whom
they defied. I have lived, I live, I shall live in a perpetual burst
of laughter at their false and garbled erudition. And when I shall be
dead, Error,--thanks to the jealous precaution of Neptune taken to
isolate his well-beloved Clito from the rest of the world,--Error, I
say, will continue to reign as sovereign mistress over their pitiful
compositions."

"Sir," said Morhange in grave voice, "you have just affirmed the
influence of Egypt on the civilizations of the people here. For
reasons which some day, perhaps, I shall have occasion to explain to
you, I would like to have proof of that relationship."

"We need not wait for that, sir," said M. Le Mesge. Then, in my turn,
I advanced.

"Two words, if you please, sir," I said brutally. "I will not hide
from you that these historical discussions seem to me absolutely out
of place. It is not my fault if you have had trouble with the
University, and if you are not to-day at the College of France or
elsewhere. For the moment, just one thing concerns me: to know just
what this lady, Antinea, wants with us. My comrade would like to know
her relation with ancient Egypt: very well. For my part, I desire
above everything to know her relations with the government of Algeria
and the Arabian Bureau."

M. Le Mesge gave a strident laugh.

"I am going to give you an answer that will satisfy you both," he
replied.

And he added:

"Follow me. It is time that you should learn."




X

THE RED MARBLE HALL


We passed through an interminable series of stairs and corridors
following M. Le Mesge.

"You lose all sense of direction in this labyrinth," I muttered to
Morhange.

"Worse still, you will lose your head," answered my companion _sotto
voce_. "This old fool is certainly very learned; but God knows what he
is driving at. However, he has promised that we are soon to know."

M. Le Mesge had stopped before a heavy dark door, all incrusted with
strange symbols. Turning the lock with difficulty, he opened it.

"Enter, gentlemen, I beg you," he said.

A gust of cold air struck us full in the face. The room we were
entering was chill as a vault.

At first, the darkness allowed me to form no idea of its proportions.
The lighting, purposely subdued, consisted of twelve enormous copper
lamps, placed column-like upon the ground and burning with brilliant
red flames. As we entered, the wind from the corridor made the flames
flicker, momentarily casting about us our own enlarged and misshapen
shadows. Then the gust died down, and the flames, no longer flurried,
again licked up the darkness with their motionless red tongues.

These twelve giant lamps (each one about ten feet high) were arranged
in a kind of crown, the diameter of which must have been about fifty
feet. In the center of this circle was a dark mass, all streaked with
trembling red reflections. When I drew nearer, I saw it was a bubbling
fountain. It was the freshness of this water which had maintained the
temperature of which I have spoken.

Huge seats were cut in the central rock from which gushed the
murmuring, shadowy fountain. They were heaped with silky cushions.
Twelve incense burners, within the circle of red lamps, formed a
second crown, half as large in diameter. Their smoke mounted toward
the vault, invisible in the darkness, but their perfume, combined with
the coolness and sound of the water, banished from the soul all other
desire than to remain there forever.

M. Le Mesge made us sit down in the center of the hall, on the
Cyclopean seats. He seated himself between us.

"In a few minutes," he said, "your eyes will grow accustomed to the
obscurity."

I noticed that he spoke in a hushed voice, as if he were in church.

Little by little, our eyes did indeed grow used to the red light. Only
the lower part of the great hall was illuminated. The whole vault was
drowned in shadow and its height was impossible to estimate. Vaguely,
I could perceive overhead a great smooth gold chandelier, flecked,
like everything else, with sombre red reflections. But there was no
means of judging the length of the chain by which it hung from the
dark ceiling.

The marble of the pavement was of so high a polish, that the great
torches were reflected even there.

This room, I repeat, was round a perfect circle of which the fountain
at our backs was the center.

We sat facing the curving walls. Before long, we began to be able to
see them. They were of peculiar construction, divided into a series
of niches, broken, ahead of us, by the door which had just opened to
give us passage, behind us, by a second door, a still darker hole
which I divined in the darkness when I turned around. From one door to
the other, I counted sixty niches, making, in all, one hundred and
twenty. Each was about ten feet high. Each contained a kind of case,
larger above than below, closed only at the lower end. In all these
cases, except two just opposite me, I thought I could discern a
brilliant shape, a human shape certainly, something like a statue of
very pale bronze. In the arc of the circle before me, I counted
clearly thirty of these strange statues.

What were these statues? I wanted to see. I rose.

M. Le Mesge put his hand on my arm.

"In good time," he murmured in the same low voice, "all in good time."

The Professor was watching the door by which we had entered the hall,
and from behind which we could hear the sound of footsteps becoming
more and more distinct.

It opened quietly to admit three Tuareg slaves. Two of them were
carrying a long package on their shoulders; the third seemed to be
their chief.

At a sign from him, they placed the package on the ground and drew out
from one of the niches the case which it contained.

"You may approach, gentlemen," said M. Le Mesge.

He motioned the three Tuareg to withdraw several paces.

"You asked me, not long since, for some proof of the Egyptian
influence on this country," said M. Le Mesge. "What do you say to that
case, to begin with?"

As he spoke, he pointed to the case that the servants had deposited
upon the ground after they took it from its niche.

Morhange uttered a thick cry.

We had before us one of those cases designed for the preservation of
mummies. The same shiny wood, the same bright decorations, the only
difference being that here Tifinar writing replaced the hieroglyphics.
The form, narrow at the base, broader above, ought to have been enough
to enlighten us.

I have already said that the lower half of this large case was
closed, giving the whole structure the appearance of a rectangular
wooden shoe.

M. Le Mesge knelt and fastened on the lower part of the case, a square
of white cardboard, a large label, that he had picked up from his
desk, a few minutes before, on leaving the library.

"You may read," he said simply, but still in the same low tone.

I knelt also, for the light of the great candelabra was scarcely
sufficient to read the label where, none the less, I recognized the
Professor's handwriting.

It bore these few words, in a large round hand:

"Number 53. Major Sir Archibald Russell. Born at Richmond, July 5,
1860. Died at Ahaggar, December 3, 1896."

I leapt to my feet.

"Major Russell!" I exclaimed.

"Not so loud, not so loud," said M. Le Mesge. "No one speaks out loud
here."

"The Major Russell," I repeated, obeying his injunction as if in spite
of myself, "who left Khartoum last year, to explore Sokoto?"

"The same," replied the Professor.

"And ... where is Major Russell?"

"He is there," replied M. Le Mesge.

The Professor made a gesture. The Tuareg approached.

A poignant silence reigned in the mysterious hall, broken only by the
fresh splashing of the fountain.

The three Negroes were occupied in undoing the package that they had
put down near the painted case. Weighed down with wordless horror,
Morhange and I stood watching.

Soon, a rigid form, a human form, appeared. A red gleam played over
it. We had before us, stretched out upon the ground, a statue of pale
bronze, wrapped in a kind of white veil, a statue like those all
around us, upright in their niches. It seemed to fix us with an
impenetrable gaze.

"Sir Archibald Russell," murmured M. Le Mesge slowly.

Morhange approached, speechless, but strong enough to lift up the
white veil. For a long, long time he gazed at the sad bronze statue.

"A mummy, a mummy?" he said finally. "You deceive yourself, sir, this
is no mummy."

"Accurately speaking, no," replied M. Le Mesge. "This is not a mummy.
None the less, you have before you the mortal remains of Sir Archibald
Russell. I must point out to you, here, my dear sir, that the
processes of embalming used by Antinea differ from the processes
employed in ancient Egypt. Here, there is no natron, nor bands, nor
spices. The industry of Ahaggar, in a single effort, has achieved a
result obtained by European science only after long experiments.
Imagine my surprise, when I arrived here and found that they were
employing a method I supposed known only to the civilized world."

M. Le Mesge struck a light tap with his finger on the forehead of Sir
Archibald Russell. It rang like metal.

"It is bronze," I said. "That is not a human forehead: it is bronze."

M. Le Mesge shrugged his shoulders.

"It is a human forehead," he affirmed curtly, "and not bronze. Bronze
is darker, sir. This is the great unknown metal of which Plato speaks
in the Critias, and which is something between gold and silver: it is
the special metal of the mountains of the Atlantides. It is
