are brought into play again, and the whole nation with its possessions
is 'devoted'. The word explains the dreadful usage. There are two kinds
of devotion to God: that of willing, and that of unwilling, men; the
one brings life, the other, death. The massacre of the foul nations of
Canaan was thereby made a direct divine judgment, and removed wholly
from the region of ferocious warfare. No doubt, the whole plane of
morals in the earlier revelation is lower than that of the New
Testament. If Jesus has not taught a higher law than was given to 'them
of old time,' one large part of His gift to men disappears. The
wholesale destruction of 'babe and suckling' with the guilty makes us
shudder; and we are meant to feel the difference between the atmosphere
of that time and ours. But we are not meant to question the reality of
the divine command, nor His right to give it. He slays, and makes
alive. His judgments strike the innocent with the guilty. In many a
case, and often, the sin is one generation's, and the bitter fruit
another's. The destruction of Canaanites and Amalekites does not change
its nature because God used men to do it; and the question is not
whether the Israelites were fiercely barbarous in their warfare, but
whether God has the right of life and death. We grant all the
dreadfulness, and joyfully admit the distance between such acts and
Jesus Christ; but we recognise them as not incongruous with the whole
revealed character of the God who is justice as well as love, as
parallel in substance, though different in instrument, with many of His
dealings with men,--as the execution of righteous sentence on rank
corruption, and as sweetening the world by its removal. Most of the
difficulty and repugnance has been caused by forgetting that Israel was
but the sword, while the hand was God's.

II. Note the disobedience. Partial obedience is complete disobedience.
Saul and his men obeyed as far as suited them; that is to say, they did
not obey God at all, but their own inclinations, both in sparing the
good and in destroying the worthless. What was not worth carrying off
they destroyed,--not because of the command, but to save trouble. This
one fault seems but a small thing to entail the loss of a kingdom. But
is it so? It was obviously not an isolated act on Saul's part, but
indicated his growing impatience of the divine control, exercised on
him through Samuel. He was in a difficult position. He owed his kingdom
to the prophet; and the very condition on which he held it was that of
submission to Samuel's authority. No wonder that his elevation
quickened the growth of his masterfulness and gloomy, impetuous
self-will,--traits in his character which showed themselves very early
in his reign! No wonder either that such a king, held in
leading-strings by a prophet, should chafe! The more insignificant the
act in itself, the more significant it may be as a flag of revolt.
Disobedience which will not do a little thing is great disobedience.
Nor was this the first time that Saul had 'kicked,' like another Saul,
'against the pricks,' Gilgal had seen a previous instance of his
impetuous self-assertion, masked by apparent deference; and the
inference is fair that the interval between the two pieces of rebellion
had been of a piece with them. Trivial acts, especially when repeated,
show deep-seated evil. There may be only a coil of the snake visible,
but that betrays the presence of the slimy folds, though they are
covered from sight among the leaves. The tiny shoot of a plant, peeping
above the ground, does not augur that the roots are short; they may run
for yards. Nor can any act be called small, of which the motive is
disregard of God's plain command: 'He that is unjust in the least is
unjust also in much.' Saul had never much religion. He had never heard
of Samuel till that day when he came to consult him about the asses. It
was a wonder to his acquaintances to find him 'among the prophets'; and
all his acts of worship have about them a smack of self, and an
exclusive regard to the mere externals of sacrifice, which imply a
shallow notion of religion and a spirit unsubdued by its deeper
influences.

Such a man habitually acts in disregard of God's will; and that is
great sin, though it be manifested in small acts. It is to be
remembered, too, that the excepting of the best of the spoil from the
general destruction, changed the whole character of the transaction,
and brought it down from the level of a solemn act of divine justice,
of which Saul and his army were the executors by divine mandate, to
that of a mere cattle-lifting foray, in which they were but thieves for
their own gain. The mingling of personal advantage with any sort of
service of God, ruins the whole, and turns it into mere selfishness.
Samuel, in verse 19, puts the two sides of this 'evil in the sight of
the Lord' as being disobedience and swooping down on the booty, like
some bird of prey,

III. Note Saul's excuses. Throughout the whole interview he plays a
sorry part, and is evidently cowed by the hated authority and
personality of the old man; while Samuel, on his side, is curt, stern,
and takes the upper hand, as becomes God's messenger. The relative
positions of the two men are the normal ones of their offices, and
explain both Saul's revolt and the chronic impatience of kings at the
interference of prophets. Here we have Saul coming to meet Samuel with
affected heartiness and welcome, and with the bold lie, 'I have
performed the commandment of the Lord.' That is more than true
obedience is quick to say. If Saul had done it, he would have been
slower to boast of it. 'Those vessels yield the most sound that have
the least liquor.' He 'doth protest too much'; and the protestation
comes from an uneasy conscience. Or did he, like a great many other men
who have no deep sense of the sanctity of every jot and tittle of a
divine law, please himself with the notion that it was enough to keep
it approximately, in the 'spirit' of the precept, without slavish
obedience to the 'letter'? In a later part of the interview (v. 20) he
insists that he has obeyed, and tries to prove it by dwelling on the
points in which he did so, and gliding lightly over the others.

'Samuel had reason to believe the sheep and oxen above Saul'; and there
is a tone of almost contempt for the shuffling liar in his quiet
question: 'What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears,
and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?' There was no answering that;
so Saul shifts his ground without a blush or a moment's hesitation.
'The people spared.' It is a new character for him to appear in,--that
of a weak ruler who cannot keep his unruly men in order! Had he tried
to restrain them? If he had, and had failed, he was not fit to be a
king. If he had not, he was a coward to shift the blame on to them. How
ready men are to vilify themselves in some other direction, in order to
escape the consciousness of sin, which God is seeking to force home on
them! No doubt the people were very willing to have a finger in the
affair; but so was he. And if the cattle was their share, Agag, who
could be held to ransom, was his; and the arrangement suited all round.
As to the purpose of sacrificing at Gilgal, perhaps that was true; but
if it were, no doubt the same process of selection, which had destroyed
the worthless and kept the best, would have been repeated; and the net
result would have been a sacrifice of the least valuable, and 'the
survival of the fittest' in many a pasture and stall.

But note Saul's attitude towards Jehovah, betrayed by him in that one
word: 'the Lord _thy_ God,' No wonder that he had been content with a
partial and perfunctory obedience, if he had no closer sense of
connection with God than that! There is almost a sneer in it, too, as
if he had said, 'What needs all this fuss about saving the cattle? You
should be pleased; for this Jehovah, with whom you profess to have
special communication, will be honoured with sacrifice, and you will
share in the feast.' If the words do not mean abjuring Jehovah, they go
very near it, and, at all events, betray the shallowness of Saul's
religion. Samuel, in his answer, reminds him of his early modesty and
self-distrust, and of the source of his elevation. He then sweeps away
the flimsy cobwebs of excuses, by the curt repetition of the plain,
dreadful terms of Saul's commission, and then flashes out the piercing
question, like a sword, 'Wherefore then didst thou not?' The reminder
of past benefits, and the reiteration of the plain injunctions which
have been broken, are the way to cut through the poor palliations which
men wrap around their sins.

It speaks of a very obstinate and gloomy determination that, in answer,
Saul should reiterate his protestation of having done as he was bid. He
doggedly says over again all that he had said before, unmoved by the
prophet's solemn words. He is steeling his heart against reproof; and
there is only one end to that. Sin unacknowledged, after God has
disclosed it, is doubly sin. The heart that answers the touch of God's
rebukes by sullenly closing more tightly on its evil, is preparing
itself for the blow of the hammer which will crush it. 'He that being
often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.' Let us beware of meeting God's prophet with
shuffling lies about our obedience, and of opposing to the words which
are loving though they pierce, the armour of impenetrable
self-righteousness and conceit.

IV. Note the punishment. To the vain talk about honouring God by
sacrifice, Samuel opposes the great principle which was the special
message committed to every prophet in Israel, and which was repeated
all through its history, side by side with the divinely appointed
sacrificial system. In the intensity of his spiritual emotion, Samuel
speaks in lyric strains, in the measured parallelism which was the
Hebrew dress of poetry, and gives forth in words 'which will live for
ever' the great truth that God delights in obedience more than in
sacrifice. Whilst, on the one hand, he lifts the surrender of the will,
and the consequent submission of the life, high above all mere ritual,
on the other hand, by the same process, he sinks the rebellion of the
will and the stubbornness of the nature, unsubdued either by kindness
or threats, as Saul was showing his to be, to the level of actual
idolatry.

             'Rebellion is divination,
              And stubbornness is idols and teraphim.'

Then comes the stern sentence of rejection. Why was Saul thus
irrevocably set aside? Was it not a harsh punishment for such a crime?
As we have already remarked, Saul's act is not to be judged as an
isolated deed, but as the outcome of a deep tendency in him, which
meant revolt from God. It was not because of the single act, but
because of that which it showed him to be, that he was set aside. The
sentence is pronounced, not because 'thou didst spare Amalek,' but
because 'thou didst reject the word of the Lord.' Further, it is to be
remembered that the punishment was but the carrying out of his act. His
own hand had cut the bond between him and God, and had disqualified
himself for the office which he filled. Saul had said, 'I will reign by
myself.' God said, 'Be it so! By thyself thou shalt reign.' For the
consequence of his deposition was not outward change in his royalty.
David indeed was anointed but in secret, so Samuel consented to honour
Saul before the people. All the external difference was that Samuel
never saw him again, and he was relieved from the incubus of the
prophet's 'interference'; that is to say, he ceased to be God's king,
and became a phantom, ruling only by his own will and power, as he had
wished to do. How profound may be the difference while all externals
remain unchanged! When we set up ourselves as our own lords, and shake
off God's rule, we cast away His sanction and help in all the deeds of
our self-will, however unaltered their outward appearance may remain.
But God left him to 'walk in his own ways, and be filled with the fruit
of his own devices,' by no irrevocable abandonment, however the decree
of rejection from the kingship was irrevocable. The gates of repentance
stood open for him; and the very sentence that came stern and laconic
from Samuel's lips, rightly accepted, might have drawn him in true
penitence to a forgiving God. His subsequent confession was rejected
because it expressed no real contrition; and the worship which he
proceeded to offer, without the sanction of the prophet's presence, was
as unreal as his protestation of obedience, and showed how little he
had learned the lesson of the great words, 'To obey is better than
sacrifice.'




THE SHEPHERD-KING

'And the Lord said unto Samuel, How long wilt them mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel! fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Beth-lehemite: for I
have provided Me a king among his sons. 2. And Samuel said, How can I
go? If Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the Lord said, Take an heifer
with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the Lord. 3. And call
Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show thee what thou shalt do: and
thou shalt anoint unto Me him whom I name unto thee. 4. And Samuel did
that which the Lord spake, and came to Beth-lehem. And the elders of
the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably? 5.
And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctify
yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse
and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice. 6. And it came to pass,
when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the
Lord's anointed is before him. 7. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look
not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have
refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on
the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. 8. Then
Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said,
Neither hath the Lord chosen this. 9. Then Jesse made Shammah to pass
by. And he said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this. 10. Again, Jesse
made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto
Jesse, The Lord hath not chosen these. 11. And Samuel said unto Jesse,
Are here all thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the
youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto
Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come
hither. 12. And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and
withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the Lord
said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he. 13. Then Samuel took the horn
of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit
of the Lord came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up,
and went to Ramah.'--1 SAMUEL xvi 1-13.


The chief purpose in these verses is to bring out that the choice of
David was purely God's. The most consummate art could have taken no
better way of heightening the effect of his first appearance than that
adopted in this perfectly unartificial story, which leads us up a long
avenue to where the shepherd-boy stands. First, we have Samuel, with
his regrets and objections; then Jesse with his seven stalwart sons;
and at last, when expectation has been heightened by delay and by the
minute previous details, the future king is disclosed,--a stripling
with his ruddy locks glistening with the anointing oil, and his lovely
eyes. We shall best catch the spirit by simply following the letter of
the story.

I. We have Samuel and his errand to Bethlehem. After that sad day at
Gilgal, he and Saul met no more, though their homes were but a few
miles apart, and it must have been difficult to avoid each other.
Samuel yearned over the man whom he had learned to love, and it must
have been pain to him to see the shattering of the vessel which he had
formed. However natural his mourning, and however indicative of his
sweet nature, it was wrong, because it showed that he had not yet
reconciled himself to God's purpose, though his conduct obeyed. The
mourning which submits while it weeps, and which interferes with no
duty, is never rebuked by God. He never says,' How long dost thou
mourn?' unless sorrow has deepened into accusation of His providence,
or tears have blinded us to the duty that ensues. But the true cure for
overmuch sorrow is work, and, for vain regrets after vanished good, the
welcome to the new good which God ever sends to fill the empty place.
His resources are not exhausted because one man has failed. 'There are
as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it.' Saul has been
rejected, but a king shall be found; and Samuel is to dry his tears and
anoint him. He evidently had no thought of a successor to Saul till
this command came; and when it comes, how little it tells him! He gets
light enough for the next step, but no more. That is always God's way.
Duty opens by degrees, and the way to see farther ahead is to go as far
as we see.

Samuel's sorrow and the incomplete command show plainly that he was but
an instrument. At every step the view is confuted which makes him a
far-seeing statesman who inaugurated and carried through a peaceful
revolution. The history, which is our only source, tells another story,
and makes God the actor, and the prophet only a tool in His hands. If
we cut the supernatural out of the story, the fragments do not hang
together, and no reason is forthcoming why they should be any more true
than are the rejected pieces. Samuel does not show to advantage in
either of the two things mentioned about him here. In neither was he
true to his early vow, 'Speak, for Thy servant heareth.' But there was
much reason for his fear, if once God was left out of the account; for
Saul's ever-wakeful suspicion had become a disease, and it was not
wonderful that he should be on the watch for any act which looked like
putting the sentence of deposition into effect. If ever a man lived
with a sword hanging by a hair over him, it was this unhappy king, who
knew that he was dethroned, and did not know when or by whom the divine
rejection would be made visible to all men. But Samuel had faced worse
dangers without a murmur; and no doubt his alarm now, which makes him
venture all but flatly to refuse to obey, indicates that, to some
extent, he had lost his hold of God by his indulgence in his sorrow. If
he had been true to his high calling, he would have 'filled his horn,'
and gone on God's errand, careless of a hundred Sauls or a hundred
deaths. But it is easy for us, who have never perilled anything for
obedience, to sit in judgment on him. 'Wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself.' God judges him mercifully, and provides a
shelter for his weakness, which he should not have needed. To hide his
true errand behind the cloak of the sacrifice was second-best, and only
permitted in consideration of his fear which had a touch of sin in it.
He was not, at the moment, up to treading the heroic plain path; and
God opened an easier one for him. It is sometimes allowable to use an
avowed purpose to conceal the real one, but it is a permission which
should be very sparingly used.

II. We have Samuel at Bethlehem, with Jesse and his sons. An old man is
suddenly seen coming up the hill to the gate of the little city on
foot, driving or leading a heifer, and carrying a horn in his hand. In
such humble fashion did the prophet travel; but reverential awe met
him, and his long years of noble service surrounded him as with a halo.
Apparently, Bethlehem had not been included in his usual circuits, and
the village elders were somewhat scared by his sudden appearance. Their
question may give a glimpse into the severity which Samuel sometimes
had to show, and is a strange testimony to the reality of his power:
'Comest thou peaceably?' One old man was no very formidable assailant
of a village, even if he did not come with friendly intent; but, if he
is recognised as God's messenger, his words are sharper than any
two-edged sword, and his unarmed hand bears weapons mighty to 'pull
down strongholds.' Why should the elders have thought that he came
'with a rod'? Because they knew that they and their fellow-villagers
deserved it. If men were not dimly conscious of sin, they would not be
afraid of God's messenger or of God.

The narrative does not tell whether or not the sacrifice preceded the
review of Jesse's sons. Probably it did, and the interval between it
and the feast was occupied in the interview. It is evident that Samuel
kept the reason of his wish to see Jesse's sons to himself; for
disclosure would have brought about the danger which he was so anxious
to avoid. It appears, too, from verse 13, that only the family of Jesse
were present. So we have to fancy the wondering little cluster of burly
husbandmen with their father surrounding the prophet, and: one by one,
bracing themselves to meet his searching gaze. Again the choice is
emphatically represented as God's, by the mention of Samuel's hasty
conclusion, from the look of the eldest, that he was the man. Had not
Samuel had enough of kings of towering stature? Strange that he should
have been in such a hurry to fix on a second edition of Saul! The most
obedient waiters on God sometimes outrun His intimations, and they
always go wrong when they do. Samuel has to learn two lessons, as he is
bidden to repress the too quick thought: one, that he is not choosing,
but only registering God's choice; and one, that the qualifications for
God's king are inward, not bodily. In these old days, the world's
monarchs had to be men of thews and sinews, for power rested on mere
brute force: but God's chosen had to rule, not by the strength of his
own arm, but by leaning on God's. The genius of the kingdom determined
the principle of selection of its king. Samuel does not again attempt
to forecast the choice; but he lets the other six pass, and, hearing no
inward voice from God, tells Jesse, as it would seem, that the Lord has
not chosen them for whatsoever mysterious purpose was in His mind.

III. We have 'the Lord's chosen.' Samuel was staggered by the apparent
failure of his errand. God had told him that he had provided a king
from this family, and now they had passed in review before him, and
none was chosen. Again he is made to feel his own impotence, and his
question, 'Are here all thy children?' has a touch of bewilderment in
it. God seldom shows us His choice at first; and both in thought and
practice we get at the precious and the true by a process of exclusion,
having often to reject 'seven' before we find in some all-but-forgotten
'eighth' that which we seek. David's insignificance in Jesse's eyes was
such that his father would never have remembered his existence but for
the question, and his answer is a kind of assurance to the prophet that
he need not take the trouble to see the boy, for he will never do for
whatever he may have in view. His youth and occupation put him out of
the question. We know, from the other parts of his story, that his
brothers had no love for him; nor does his father seem to have had
much. Probably the lad had the usual lot of genius,--to grow up among
uncongenial, commonplace people, understanding him little, and liking
him less. It is a hard school; but where it does not sour, it makes
strong men. His solitary shepherd life taught him many precious
lessons, and, at any rate, gave him the priceless gift of solitude,
which is the nurse of poetry, heroism, and religion. The glorious
night-piece in Psalm viii., and its companion day-piece in Psalm xix.,
may bear the impress of the shepherd life; which is idealised and
sanctified for ever in the immortal sweetness of Psalm xxiii. There
were many worse schools for the future king than a solitary shepherd's
life on the bare hills round Bethlehem.

The delay of the feast and the pause of idle waiting heighten the
expectation with which we look for David's coming. When he does come,
what a bright young figure is lovingly painted for us! He is 'ruddy,
and withal fair of eyes, and goodly to look upon,'--of fair complexion,
with golden hair (rare among these swarthy Orientals), and with
lustrous poet's eyes. What a contrast to Saul's grim face and
figure,--like a sunbeam streaming athwart a thunder-cloud seamed with
its own lightning! Silently the divine voice spoke, and silently, as it
would seem, Samuel poured the oil on the boy's bowed curls. No word of
the purpose escaped his lips, and the awestruck youth was left to
wonder for what high destiny he was chosen. One can fancy the looks of
his brothers as they bitterly watched the anointing with hearts full of
envy, contempt, and rage. I Samuel xvii. 28 shows what they felt to
David.

What was the use of this enigmatical anointing for an undisclosed
purpose? It is Samuel's last act, and his last appearance, except for
the mention of David's flight to him from the court of Saul, and that
weird scene of Saul prophesying and lying naked before Samuel and David
for a day and a night. It was therefore the solemn final act of the
prophet,--transferring the monarchy; but it was for David the beginning
of his training for the throne, in two ways, 'The Spirit of the Lord
came upon David from that day forward.' There was an actual
communication of divine gifts fitting him for his unknown office, and
he was conscious of a new spirit stirring in him. Beside this, the
consciousness of a call to unknown tasks would mature him fast, and
bring graver thoughts, humbler sense of weakness, and clinging trust in
God who had laid the burden on him; and the necessity for repressing
his dreams of the future, in order to do his obscure present duties,
would add patience and self-control to his youthful ardour. What a
whirl of thoughts he carried back to his flock, and how welcome would
the solitude be!

The great lesson here is the one so continually reiterated in
Scripture, from Isaac downwards, that God 'chooses the weak things of
the world to confound the things that are mighty,' and thereby
magnifies both the sovereign freedom of His choice and the power of His
Spirit, which takes the stripling from the sheepcotes and qualifies him
to be the antagonist of the grim Saul, and the king of Israel. There
are subsidiary lessons, especially for young and ardent souls confined
for the present to lowly tasks, and feeling some call to something
higher in a dim future. Patience, the faithful doing of to-day's
trivial tasks, the habit of self-repression, the quiet trust in God who
opens the way in due time,--these, and such like, were the signs that
David was called to a throne, and that God's Spirit was preparing him
for it. They are the virtues which will best prepare us for whatever
the future may have in store for us, and will be in themselves abundant
reward, whether they draw after them a high position, which is a heavy
burden, or, more happily, leave us in our sheltered obscurity.




THE VICTORY OF UNARMED FAITH

'And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy
servant will go and fight with this Philistine. 33. And Saul said to
David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with
him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth. 34.
And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and
there came a lion and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock; 35. And
I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth:
and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him,
and slew him. 36. Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied
the armies of the living God. 37. David said moreover, The Lord that
delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the
bear, He will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul
said unto David, Go, and the Lord be with thee. 38. And Saul armed
David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head;
also he armed him with a coat of mail. 39. And David girded his sword
upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for he had not proved it. And
David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not proved
them. And David put them off him. 40. And he took his staff in his
hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them
in a shepherd's bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in
his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine. 41. And the Philistine
came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went
before him. 42. And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance. 43. And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that
thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his
gods. 44. And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.
45. Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword,
and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast
defied. 46. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I
will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel. 47. And all this assembly shall know
that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the
Lord's, and He will give you into our hands. 48. And it came to pass,
when the Philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet David, that
David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine. 49. And
David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang it,
and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his
forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth. 50. So David
prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote
the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of
David. 51. Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took
his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was
dead, they fled.'--1 SAMUEL xvii. 32-51.


The scene of David's victory has been identified in the present Wady
Es-Sunt, which still possesses one of the terebinth-trees which gave it
its name of 'Elah.' At that point it is about a quarter of a mile wide,
and runs nearly east and west. In the centre is 'a deep trench or
gulley, the sides and bed of which are strewn with rounded and
water-worn pebbles.' This is the 'valley,' or rather 'ravine' of verse
3 of this chapter, which is described by a different word from that for
'vale' in verse 2--the one meaning a much broader opening than the
other--and from it came the 'five smooth stones.' Notice the minute
topographical accuracy, which indicates history, not legend. The
pebble-bed may supply a missile to hit the modern 'giant' of sceptical
criticism, who boasts much after Goliath's fashion.

The two armies lay looking at each other across the valley, with
occasional skirmishes; and for forty days (probably a round number)
Goliath paraded on his own, the south, side of the gulley, shouting out
his taunts and challenge with a voice like a bull. Many a similar scene
in classical and mediaeval warfare confirms the truth of the picture,
so unlike modern battles. The story is, for all time, the example of
the victory of unarmed faith over the world's utmost might. It is in
little the history of the Church and the type of all battles for God.
It is a pattern for the young especially. The youthful athlete leaps
into the arena, and overcomes, not because of his own strength, but
because he trusts in God.

I. Note the glowing youthful enthusiasm which dares the conflict. When
the Spirit of the Lord left Saul, his courage seems to have gone too,
and he is cowed, like the rest, by Goliath. His interview with David
shows him as timid and unlike his former self, when he dashed at Nahash
and any odds. Now he is hardly to be roused, even by David's contagious
boldness, and is full of objections and precautions. The temper of the
two, as they front each other in Saul's tent, shows that the one has
lost, and the other received, the Spirit which strengthens. David has
become the encourager, and his cheery words bring some hopefulness to
the gloomy, faint-hearted king. The Septuagint has a variant reading in
verse 32, which brings this out and suits the context, 'Let not my
lord's heart fail.' But, whether this be adopted or no, David appears
as quite unaffected by the terror which had unmanned the army, and as
bringing a buoyant disregard of the enemy, like a reviving breeze. It
was not merely youthful daring, nor foolish under-estimation of the
danger, which prompted his stimulating words. The ring of true faith is
in them, and they show us how we may surround ourselves with an
atmosphere which will keep prevailing faint-heartedness off us, and
make us, like Gideon's fleece, impervious to the chill mists of
faithless fear which saturate all around. He who trusts in God should
be as a pillar of fire, burning bright in the darkness of terror, and
making a rallying point for weaker hearts. When panic has seized
others, the Christian soul has the more reason for courage. David
conquered the temptation to share in the general cowardice, before he
conquered Goliath, and perhaps the former fight was the worse of the
two.

While David is the embodiment of the courage of faith, Saul embodies
worldly wisdom and calculating prudence. A touch of tenderness blends
with his attempt to dissuade the lad from the unequal conflict. He
speaks of probabilities, and, like all such calculation, his results
are quite right, only that he has not taken all the forces into
account, and the omission vitiates the conclusion. It is quite true
that David is but a youth, and Goliath a giant and a veteran; but is
that all that is to be said? If it be, then the lad cannot fight the
Philistine bully; but if Saul has made the small omission of leaving
out God, that makes a difference. The same mistake is constantly made
still, and so the victories of faith are a constant surprise to the
world and to a worldly Church. David's eager story of his fights with
wild beasts is meant both to answer Saul's objection on his own ground,
by showing him that, youth as the speaker was, he had proved his power,
and still more to supply the lacking element in the calculation. So he
tells, first, how 'I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew
him,' and then at the end brings in the true ground of his confidence:
'The Lord that delivered me ... He will deliver.' As Thomas Fuller
says, 'He made an experimental syllogism, and from most practical
premises (major a lion, minor a bear), inferred the direct conclusion
that God would give him victory over Goliath. Faith has the right thus
to argue from the past to the future, because it draws from God whose
resources and patience are equally inexhaustible. An echo of the words
comes from Paul's 'Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth
deliver: in whom we trust that He will yet deliver.' There is infinite
pathos in Saul's parting blessing. 'The Lord be with thee!' is spoken
as if from the consciousness that the Lord had left _him_, and that
_his_ day for going into battle with the assurance of His help was gone
for ever. If that softened mood had lasted, how different his future
might have been! If we modestly and boldly show the power of faith in
our lives, we may kindle yearnings in some gloomy hearts, that would
lead them to peace, if followed out.

II. The equipment of faith. Saul meant to honour as well as to secure
David by dressing him in his own royal attire, and by encumbering him
by the help of sword and helmet. And David was willing to be so fitted
out, for it is no part of the courage of faith to disdain any outward
helps. But he soon found that he could not move freely in the
unaccustomed armour, and flung it off, like a wise man. His motive was
partly common sense, which told him not to choose weapons that his
antagonist could handle better than he; and partly reliance on God,
which told him that he was safer with no armour but his shepherd's
dress and with only his sling in his hand. So there he stands, drawn
for us with wonderful vividness, in one hand his staff, in the other
his sling, both familiar and often used, and by his side the simple
wallet which had held his frugal meal, and now received the smooth
pebbles that he picked up as he passed the gulley to the Philistine
side of the valley.

How graphically the contrast is drawn between him and Goliath, as the
latter conies forth swelling with his own magnificence, and preceded by
his shield-bearer! He was 'brass' all over; note the kind of amused
emphasis with which the word is repeated in the half-satirical and
marvellously lifelike portrait of him in verses 5-8; 'brass' here,
'brass' there, 'brass' everywhere; and, not content with one shield
dangling at his back, he has a man to carry another in front of him as
he struts. David seems to have crossed the ravine, and to have come
close up to Goliath before he was observed; and then, with almost a
snort of contempt, the giant resents the insult of sending such a foe
to fight _him_ with such weapons. Perhaps he was nearer the truth than
he thought, when he asked if he was a dog; and any stick will do, as
the proverb says, to beat that animal, especially if God guards the
hand that holds it.

The five smooth stones have become the symbol of the insignificant
means, in the world's estimate, which God uses in faithful hands to
slay the giants of evil. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
they are mighty. Faith unarmed is armed with more than triple steel,
and a sling in its hand is more fatal than a sword. Sometimes in
kindness and sometimes in malice, the world tempts us to fight evil
with its own weapons, and to put on its unfamiliar armour. The Church
as a whole, and individual Christians, have often been hampered, and
all but smothered, in Saul's harness. The more simply we keep ourselves
to the simple methods which the word of God enjoins, and to the simple
weapons which ought to be the easiest for a Christian, the more likely
shall we be to conquer. Goliath is not to be encountered with sword and
armour which is, after all, but a shabby copy of the tons of brass
which he wears, but he does not know what to make of the sling, and
does not see the stone till it crashes his skull in.

III. Note faith's anticipation of victory. The dialogue before the
battle has many parallels in classical times and among savage peoples.
Goliath's bluster is full of contempt of David and truculent
self-confidence. Its coarseness is characteristic,--he will make his
boyish antagonist food for vultures and jackals. It is exactly what a
bully would say. David's answer throbs with buoyant confidence, and
stands as a stimulating example of the temper in which God's soldiers
should go out to every fight, no matter against what odds. It fully
recognises the formidable armoury of the enemy,--sword for close
quarters, spear to thrust with, and javelin to fling from a distance,
every weapon that ingenuity could fashion and trained skill could
wield. Goliath was a walking arsenal, and little David took count of
his weapons as they clanked and flashed. It is no part of faith's
triumph to ignore the number and sharpness of the enemy's arms. But
faith sees them all, and keeps unterrified and unashamed of the poor
leathern sling and smooth stones. The unarmed hand which grasps God's
hand should never tremble; and he who can say 'I come ... in the name
of the Lord of hosts,' has no need to be afraid of an army of Goliaths,
though each bristled with swords and spears like a porcupine.

The great name on which David's faith rested, 'the Lord of hosts,'
appears to have sprung into use in this epoch, and to have been one
precious fruit of its frequent wars. Conflict is blessed if it teaches
the knowledge of the unseen Commander who marshals not only men, but
all the forces of the universe and the armies of heaven, for the
defence of His servants and the victory of His own cause. The fulness
of the divine name is learned by degrees, as our needs impress the
various aspects of His character; and the revelation contained in this
appellation is the gift of that fierce and stormy time, a possession
for ever. He who defies the armies of Israel has to reckon with the
Lord of these armies, whose name proclaims at once His eternal,
self-originated, and self-sustained being, His covenant, His presence
with His earthly host, and the infinite ranks of obedient creatures who
are His soldiers and their allies. That is 'the Name' in the strength
of which we may 'set up our banners' and be sure of victory. Note how
David flings back Goliath's taunts in his teeth. He is sure that God
will conquer through him, and, though he has no sword, that he will
somehow hack the big head off; and that it is the host of the
Philistines on whom the vultures and jackals are to feed to-day.

His faith sees the victory before the battle is begun, and trusts, not
in his own weak power, but only 'in the name of the Lord.' Note, too,
the result which he expects--no glory for himself, though that came
unsought, when the shrill songs from the women of Israel met the
victors, but to all the world the proof that Israel had a God, and to
Israel ('this assembly') the renewed lesson of their true weapons and
of their Almighty Helper. Such utter suppression of self is inseparable
from trust in God, and without it no soldier of His has a right to
expect victory. To fight 'in the name of the Lord' requires hiding our
own name. If we are really going to war for Him, and in His strength,
we ought to expect to conquer. Believe that you will be beaten, and you
will be. Trust to Him to make you 'more than conquerors,' and the trust
will bring about its own fulfilment.

IV. Observe the contrast in verse 48 between the slow movements of the
heavy-armed Philistine and the quick run of the shepherd, whose 'feet
were as hind's feet' (Psalm xviii. 33). Agility and confident alacrity
were both expressed. His feet were shod with 'the preparedness of
faith.' Observe, too, the impetuous brevity of the account in verse 49,
of the actual fall of Goliath. The short clauses, coupled by a series
of 'ands,' reproduce the swift succession of events, which ended the
fight before it had begun; and one can almost hear the whiz of the
stone as it crashes into the thick head, so strangely left unprotected
by all the profusion of brass that clattered about him. The vulnerable
heel of Achilles and the unarmed forehead of Goliath illustrate the
truth, ever forgotten and needing to be repeated, that, after all
precautions, some spot is bare, and that 'there is no armour against
fate.'

The picture of the huge 'man-mountain' fallen upon his face to the
earth, a huddled heap of useless mail, recalls the words of a psalm,
'When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up
my flesh, they stumbled and fell' (Psalm xxvii. 2). Is it fanciful to
hear in that triumphant chant an echo of Goliath's boast about giving
his flesh to the fowls and the beasts, and a vision of the braggart as
he tottered and lay prostrate? Observe, too, the contemptuous
reiteration of 'the Philistine,' which occurs six times in the four
verses (48-51). National feeling speaks in that. There is triumph in
the sarcastic repetition of the dreaded name in such a connection. This
was what one of the brood had got, and his fate was an omen of what
would befall the rest. The champion of Israel, the soldier of God,
standing over the dead Philistine, all whose brazen armour had been
useless and his brazen insolence abased, and sawing off his head with
his own sword, was a prophecy for the Israel of that day, and will be a
symbol till the end of time of the true equipment, the true temper, and
the certain victory, of all who, in the name of the Lord of hosts, go
forth in their weakness against the giants of ignorance, vice, and sin.
'This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.'




A SOUL'S TRAGEDY

'And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself
wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war; and he was accepted in
the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.
6. And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the
slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of
Israel, singing and dancing, to meet King Saul, with tabrets, with joy,
and with instruments of musick. 7. And the women answered one another
as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his
ten thousands. 8. And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased
him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to
me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the
kingdom? 9. And Saul eyed David from that day and forward. 10. And it
came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon
Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played
with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul's
hand. 11. And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David
even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.
12. And Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, and
was departed from Saul. 13. Therefore Saul removed him from him, and
made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in
before the people. 14. And David behaved himself wisely in all his
ways; and the Lord was with him. 15. Wherefore, when Saul saw that he
behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him. 16. But all Israel
and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.'--1
SAMUEL xviii. 5-16.


Verse 5 anticipates verses 13-16. It is the last verse of a section
which interrupts the even flow of the story, and which is absent from
the Septuagint. Verse 6 follows immediately on xvii. 54 in that
version. Taking that verse as our starting-point, we have three stages
in Saul's growing hatred and awe of the young champion, and of David's
growing influence and reputation. It is deeply tragic to watch the
gradual darkening of the once bright light, side by side with the
irresistible increase in brilliance of the new star. 'He must increase,
but I must decrease,' became Saul's bitter conviction; but instead of
meekly accepting the necessity, his gloomy spirit struggled against it,
like stormy waves against a breakwater, and, like them, was shivered
into foam in the vain effort.

I. The first stage was Saul's jealousy of David's fame as a warrior.
The returning victorious army was met, in Oriental fashion, by a
triumphal chorus of women, with their shrill songs, accompanied by the
dissonant noises which do duty for music to Eastern ears. The words of
their chant were startlingly and ominously plain-spoken, and became
more emphatic and insulting in Saul's ears, because they were sung by
two answering bands, one of which rang out, 'Saul hath slain his
thousands,' while the other overtopped them by pealing out still more
loudly and exultantly, 'And David his ten thousands.' To be brought
into comparison with this unknown stripling was bitter enough, but to
be used as a foil to set off his superiority was too much to be borne.
There are few men, holding high places in any walk of life, who could
have stood such a comparison without wincing. Suppose a great soldier
in our day, coming home from a successful campaign, and having his
prowess dimmed in every newspaper by the praises lavished on a young
lieutenant who had done some brave feat that caught the public
fancy--would he be likely to be in a very amiable mood towards either
the singers or the object of their triumphal songs? Do great authors
rejoice in the rising of young reputations that dim theirs? or do great
orators smile when some 'boy' takes the public ear more than they do?
Poor Saul had to drink the bitter cup, which all who love the sweet
draught of popular applause have sooner or later to taste; and we need
not think him a monster of badness because he found it bitter.

It will be more to the purpose that we take care lest we do the very
same thing in our little lives and humble spheres; for envy and
jealousy of those who threaten to out-shine, or in any way to out-do,
us is not confined to people in high places or with great reputations.
The roots of them are in us all, and the only way to keep them from
growing up rank is to think less of our reputation and more of our
duty, to count it a very small matter what men think of us, and the
all-important matter what God thinks.

Saul was moved, too, by the consciousness that he had been really
deposed by Jehovah, and was only a phantom king, and, as his angry
soliloquy shows, what troubled him most in the women's song was that it
pointed to David as likely to come in and rob him, not only of glory,
but of the kingdom. Ever since Samuel had pronounced his rejection, his
uneasy eyes had been furtively scanning men for his possible
supplanter, and no wonder that his gloomy suspicions focussed
themselves on the gallant youth, who conquered men's hearts and made
women's tongues eloquent in his praise. Stormy and dark as Saul's
nature had become, and grave as had been his failure to be worthy of
the monarchy, one cannot but feel the infinite pathos and pity of his
life.

II. The second stage was the attempt on David's life. Verses 10 and 11,
which record it, are not in the Septuagint, and the narrative does run
more smoothly without them. But if they are retained, they show how the
moody suspicion with which Saul 'eyed David' came to a swift, murderous
climax. He stands as a terrible example of how suspicion and jealousy,
working in a nature utterly without self-control, transport it into the
wildest excesses. In the strange phraseology of verse 9, 'an evil
spirit from God' laid hold of him, dominating his personality. The
writer of this book felt that God was the ultimate cause of all things,
and that all beings were under His control; and his devout recognition
of that fact led him to the apparent paradox of tracing an 'evil
spirit' to God. But we must not be so startled as to overlook the truth
that Saul had prepared the fit abode for that evil spirit by his own
indulgence in a whirl of sinful passions and acts, and that these were
punished by their 'natural' consequence. Any man who lets his own baser
nature have full fling invites the devil. Saul had what would now be
called a paroxysm of insanity. But perhaps the modern medical phrase is
not to be preferred to the old scriptural one. The former is innocent
of any explanation of the fact which it designates, and it may possibly
be that insanity is sometimes, even now, 'possession.' At all events,
since science gives no explanation of it, and a great dim region of
consciousness is now being recognised,--'subliminal,' to speak in the
new phraseology,--he is a bold man who ventures to deny that
possibility.

But be that as it may, what a striking picture is given of Saul, worn
with passion and swept away by ungovernable impulses, 'prophesying' or
'raving' with wild gestures and uttering wilder sounds; and of David,
young, calm, giving forth melodies on his harp and songs from his lips,
that sought to soothe the paroxysms of fury. Browning has drawn the
picture in immortal words, which all who can should read. It has been
suggested that Saul did not 'cast' his spear, but only brandished it in
his fierce threat to pin David to the wall. But the youthful harper
would scarcely have 'avoided out of his presence' for a mere threat and
the flourish of a lance; and a man, raging mad and madly hostile, would
not be likely to waste breath in mere threats. The attempt was more
probably a serious one, and the spear, flung by an arm made stronger
