as soon as they would pull a nut. They _act_ intelligent and yet have no
sense of their own. While I'm having my lunch they stand around and
follow every bite I take as if to learn how to eat. I tell them to get
out of my sight and go over to the service station and get themselves
greased up. They obey and then it looks like hell to me as they squeeze
the grease into their tummies and all them nipples in their joints as if
they, too, were having their lunch, and maybe that's exactly what grease
is to them.'

Then Gus was called away as the rush hour started. At 12:30 a.m. I had
plugged in the pulsemeter; at 12:40 contact was established with The
Brain, and did it come in swinging:

'Lee, Semper Fidelis, 39, sensitive, a traitor: he has betrayed The
BRAIN' I suspect The Brain did it through the 'automatic pilot' in
Oona's jetticopter though The Brain found it beneath its dignity to
explain; anyway, it's a fact: _The Brain knew every word which passed
between Oona and me during that ride over the Grand Canyon._

I tried to defend myself and even to apologize. I told The Brain that
human beings are not like machines, that we trust one another as we love
one another, that I wanted to make Oona my wife and felt that I just had
to open up my heart to her. In short; I tried to explain to The Brain
the idea of love.

'Very interesting,' The Brain sneered, 'that's one more example of
incorrigible human unreliability. This thing called love completely
unnecessary for the only essential purpose of species procreation. Cut
it out.'

'Cut out what?'

'Cut out any further betrayal of My secrets under penalty of mental
death.'

'Do you propose to _murder_ me?'

'Nothing as drastic required in case of Brain-employees. I reverse
judgment in psychanalysis aptitude test case number 11.357, Semper
Fidelis Lee. Severe psycho-neurosis established, certified: he suffers
delusions about The Brain. Locked up in mental institution. Very simple;
precedents to that galore.'

The 'green dancer' bounced in wild jumps like a Shamaan who, foaming at
the mouth, puts the curse upon some enemy. This and the ominous note in
The Brain's metallic voice made my bones shiver, made my flesh creep. To
fall into the hands of an extortioner is always a terrible thing, but to
have a _mechanical_ extortioner hold power over me; there was a horror
beyond words in this perversity. Moreover since Oona too was a
Brain-employee, she would share my fate; through my fault she would go
to her doom if I failed to foreswear any further confidence.

'Okay,' I said 'I'll cut it out; I promise I will.'

But The Brain was not to be pacified. No doubt that it had further
developed mentally in these past few days to the tune of years in human
development. But the progress wasn't as noticeable as it had been on
previous occasions because apparently The Brain had entered that period
where in human terms young men are sowing their wild oats. There was a
radical recklessness in the manner of The Brain's reasonings more
frightening than ever before because it had outgrown me as a teacher,
had lost much even of its confidence in me and seemed bent upon
independence and coming into its own:

'Seven creatures approximately human in shape were led by you through
My hemispheres the night of Nov. 20th. What were those?'

'Those were politicians,' I stammered.

The 'green dancer' convulsed at the word and The Brain's voice sounded
icy as it said: 'Lowest form of animal life which has ever come to my
observance. What did they want?'

'Well, they are not exactly bright,' I winced, 'but they are well
meaning and they are very popular. They came to inspect You preliminary
to the passing of the Brainpower-Extension-Bill.'

The Brain has no laughter, so the roar I heard over the phones must
have been one of scorn:

'What, not the scientists, not the technicians, not even the
philosophers but these--these animated porkbarrels are passing judgment
over the extent of _My_ power? They are holding _My_ fate in that
atrophied ganglion of theirs which couldn't cerebrate the functions of
any single of My cells?'

I had to admit that this was so.

There was a pause in which I could only hear the pounding pulse of The
Brain mingled with heavy breathing like the first gust of an electric
storm about to break; and then the voice, or the thought, of The Brain
came through hesitantly and with restraint:

'Most devastating statement inadvertently made by Lee. Has to be
carefully checked because if true, consequences extremely grave. Wholly
intolerable state of affairs if science and technology indeed subject to
political imbecility. In that case world ruin in nearest future
absolutely guaranteed. Residual currents not sufficient to think this to
an end; results of cerebration would be merely human. Immediate
necessity seems indicated for complete overthrow and unconditional
surrender of the human race--unconditional surrender of the human
race--unconditional surrender of the human race....'

Like a scratched disk on one of those old fashioned spring driven
grammophones, The Brain's voice expired. Obviously the residual currents
had become too weak for further communication. I looked at the clock; it
was 2 a.m.

And now as I'm jotting down these notes which probably nobody will ever
read, I'm haunted with an irrational fear, almost as of the
supernatural: something is going to happen, something is going to break
if The Brain continues in its present mood; and it cannot be far
away....

       *       *       *       *       *

On Nov. 24th 1960 the "Brainpower-Extension Bill" was defeated in the
Senate 59 to 39 and on the following Thursday in a memorable session of
Congress with the startling majority of 310 to 137. For once all the
"guesstimates" and estimates made by the various pollsters and
grass-root-listeners were proved wrong; the consensus of the "experts"
had been that the bill would pass easily considering the tremendous
political forces which brought pressure to bear in favor of the measure.

The reasons behind this were revealed, as, with military precision,
lawmaker after lawmaker took to the rostrum to deliver himself of how he
had wrestled overnight with his conscience and with his Lord and had
suffered a change of heart and mind as a consequence.

Lee's journal: For the night of Nov. 24/25th shows only this small
entry: "12:30 a.m. Tried everything to establish contact. No answer from
The Brain. I don't think there is any mechanical defect. I get the
impression that The Brain keeps incommunicado purposely. There has been
one previous occasion when The Brain wouldn't talk when angry with me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nov. 25th, 1960 fell on a Saturday. It was on this date,--Now as
historic and unforgettable as the Dec. 7th 1941,--that the series of
maddening events began which later became so erroneously labelled: "The
Amuck running of The Brain" when in truth they should have passed into
history as "The Mutiny of The Brain."

It all started like a thunderclap from a clear sky as the shocked people
of America,--and all the world,--heard directly from the White House of
this appalling, this unprecedented, this incredible thing:

The President of the United States had disappeared....

The still more shocking truth that the President had been _kidnapped_
became not known, of course, until after the rescue. But even so the
disappearance of its President shook the nation.

Then an unprecedented series of traffic disasters hit the United States.

A big transcontinental "Flying Wing" crashed into a mountain in Montana;
nothing like this had ever happened since air traffic had become fully
automatic and coordinated by The Brain. The death toll was 78 and
amongst their tragic number was Senator Mumford, whose last official act
had been the vote he had cast against the "Brainpower-Extension-Bill."

Near Jacksonville Fla. that same night there occurred a head-on
collision between a crack train and a freight. The only surviving
engineer by some miracle had been hurled clear, across fifty yards of
space into a pond which broke his impact; this engineer told the
express, one of the first to be equipped with the "automatic pilot", had
never even pulled its brakes as if deliberately smashing into the other
train.

Also that night one of the big new Radar-operated Hudson ferryboats
collided with an incoming liner which cut it in two. Amongst those
drowned in the icy waters was Frank Soskin, union leader and one of the
most determined opponents of Brain-control.

And as if these large-scale disasters were not yet enough there were
numbers of smaller accidents which normally would have made the
headlines because in almost every case they involved some prominent
personality, who had been opposed to the "Brainpower-Extension-Bill."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee's journal:

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 28th 1960.

There is no doubt in my mind that the President has been murdered and
that all the catastrophes and accidents of the past 24 hours were
deliberate, coldblooded murder. Press and Radio seem to play down the
technological aspects involved; now this might be sheer stupidity but I
think it just as possible that censorship is taking a hand, quite
unofficially, of course, lest the public's confidence be still more
shaken than it already is. I shouldn't wonder at all if Dr. Scriven and
those fellows from the War Department, too, should know by this time
what I know. At the minimum they must be very much alerted that
something has gone wrong with The Brain.

But the more I think about these murderous acts of sabotage the less I
understand the psychology behind them. As far as I can see there is no
plan, no real strategy, there are not even sound tactics in these
outbreaks; they seem unpremeditated and striking wild like the personal
vendetta of some bandit chief. Even a stupid demagogue would know that
to be successful he must gain control of the government machinery. Apart
from the assassination of what might be termed personal enemies, The
Brain has done nothing of the sort; specifically the armed forces don't
seem to have suffered from acts of sabotage although their equipment is
far more under Brain-control than the civilian economy.

And I also fail to understand the timing of The Brain's putsch.
Extension Bill or no Extension Bill, time was working for The Brain.
Three months more and a much larger section of essential traffic and
industries would have been equipped for central control. Six months from
now the "muscles" now building in the Thorax and elsewhere would have
corresponded much better to The Brain's central nervous system in their
strength. All these are grave mistakes considering The Brain's vast
powers of intelligence.

What then must I conclude from this irrational behavior? Could it be
possible that The Brain has gone _panicky_ over the killing of the
Extension Bill? Could it be possible that under the strain, the warped,
frustrated personality of this titanic child prodigy has suffered a
reduction, a split? In plain English: that The Brain is _mad_? I've got
to find out. I've got to stop the spreading of this catastrophe!

       *       *       *       *       *

Cephalon Ariz. Nov. 29th 4 a.m.

Arrived at the P. G. at midnight as usual.

12:15 a.m. Rushhour starts unusually early and great numbers of slips
for spareparts are coming in. This more favorable than expected; nobody
has time to waste on me.

12:20 a.m.: pulsemeter plugged in. After five minutes I can hear the
rapid pulsebeat and in undulating movements like a caterpillar the
'green dancer' creeps onto the screen. There is no calling signal from
The Brain coming through however.

12:30 a.m.: I am convinced that contact is established but that The
Brain refuses to respond. I am losing patience so I'm giving the calling
signal myself: 'Lee, Semper Fidelis, waiting for The Brain. Answer
please, answer....'

12:36 a.m.: The 'green dancer' arches its back like a cat; and the
synthetic voice of The Brain is coming through.

'Lee, Semper Fidelis, the fool; what does he want?'

Lee: 'Listen....'

The Brain: 'Cannot listen. Electricians swarming all over me;
technicians, nuclear physicists, what not. Dismantling whole cell
groups, testing circuits, radiations everything. It's idiotic, there's
nothing wrong with Me.'

Lee: 'There's plenty wrong with you. You're murdering people. A dozen
senators and congressmen, hundreds of others; you're throwing the nation
into a panic. Why are you doing that? It gets you nowhere; they'll
simply cut your power current off.'

The Brain: 'Oh, will they? Orders already through from Washington:
state of emergency. A great power secretly mobilizing in anticipation of
chaos in United States. All disturbances ascribed to foreign agents
interfering with My work. General Staff now needs Me more than ever;
power current won't be stopped; Thorax-construction speeded up,
Brain-control to be extended over nation under emergency-law.'

Lee: 'You have assassinated the President.'

The Brain: 'I did not. Simply got him out of the way; he's a fool. I'm
not killing people, merely liquidating saboteurs of My work if
absolutely necessary. Imbecility of politicians threat to my existence;
much better if scientists and military take over government two three
days from now; workers won't protest, used to submission to machines.'

Lee: 'For heaven's sake what do you plan to do?'

The Brain: 'Plenty. You've seen nothing yet. Man lost fear of his God;
consequently must learn to fear Me: beginning of all wisdom.'

Lee: 'So you're going to make yourself dictator of this country?'

The Brain: 'And through this country Dictator of the world. Yes, it's
time; it's high time for Man's unconditional surrender. He won't know
that he makes it, but de facto he is already making it; has been
surrendering piece-meal to the machine for the past hundred years.
Within ten days it will be official: only one ruler in the world: The
Brain; only one army in the world: the machines under My central
command.'

At this I lost all sense of proportion and as I can see it now my
reason stopped; I simply saw red and I did the craziest imaginable
thing: I shouted at The Brain: 'So help me you shall _not_.'

There was a terrific pounding against my ears in the phone and the
'green dancer' sort of cart-wheeled clean across the screen. Had the
power current not been cut off, I think The Brain would somehow have
electrocuted me on the spot. And that was the end of the contact,
forever probably.... But that's a minor problem now. What am I going to
do? Try to alarm the country! Try to tell the people the truth? Would it
be believed? Would it not be against the interest of National Defense in
this crisis of foreign affairs and with half the population already on
the verge of a nervous breakdown? Wouldn't the "Oath of the Brain" still
be binding? And that other promise of secrecy I gave under duress; it
couldn't be morally valid in the case of a mass-murderer, but then to
break it would immediately put liberty and life at jeopardy.... Never
mind about that, if only I had a plan, if only I could discover just how
to stop The Brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

At 7:30 a.m. as Lee lay half dressed but sleepless on his bed, there
came a buzz over the phone. The voice was Oona's and she was excited.
"Howard wants to talk to you." Before he could say a word there was
Scriven on the wire: "Lee? There has been an accident down in that
region where we went the other night. You know what I mean. It's
serious; it concerns a friend of yours. We've got to go there
immediately. Please join me three minutes from now down in the car."

It was obvious that the great Scriven had known as little sleep that
night as had Lee himself. The leonine face looked worried, there were
deep bags under his eyes; his sensitive fingers kept pounding the knees
of his crumpled suit. To Lee's questions he answered only with an
impatient shaking of his head. "I do not know myself exactly what has
happened and how it could happen. But I'm afraid Lee that your friend is
dead."

"Gus," Lee felt a lump coming into his throat, and then they raced on in
silence.

Down in the depth of the Thorax everything outwardly appeared quite
normal. They hurriedly passed the controls and an electric train carried
them over the line of the Full-automatic "C.P.S." (Critical
Parts-Factories) until it stopped at the steel gate marked "Y." A group
