"Not with my leave."

Miss Keeldar clasped her round the waist with both arms and held her
back. "Not one step shall you stir," she went on authoritatively. "At
this moment Moore would be both shocked and embarrassed if he saw either
you or me. Men never want women near them in time of real danger."

"I would not trouble--I would help him," was the reply.

"How?--by inspiring him with heroism? Pooh! these are not the days of
chivalry. It is not a tilt at a tournament we are going to behold, but a
struggle about money, and food, and life."

"It is natural that I should be at his side."

"As queen of his heart? His mill is his lady-love, Cary! Backed by his
factory and his frames, he has all the encouragement he wants or can
know. It is not for love or beauty, but for ledger and broadcloth, he is
going to break a spear. Don't be sentimental; Robert is not so."

"I _could_ help him; I _will_ seek him."

"Off then--I let you go--seek Moore. You'll not find him."

She loosened her hold. Caroline sped like levelled shaft from bent bow;
after her rang a jesting, gibing laugh. "Look well there is no mistake!"
was the warning given.

But there _was_ a mistake. Miss Helstone paused, hesitated, gazed. The
figure had suddenly retreated from the gate, and was running back
hastily to the mill.

"Make haste, Lina!" cried Shirley; "meet him before he enters."

Caroline slowly returned. "It is not Robert," she said. "It has neither
his height, form, nor bearing."

"I saw it was not Robert when I let you go. How could you imagine it? It
is a shabby little figure of a private soldier; they had posted him as
sentinel. He is safe in the mill now. I saw the door open and admit him.
My mind grows easier. Robert is prepared. Our warning would have been
superfluous; and now I am thankful we came too late to give it. It has
saved us the trouble of a scene. How fine to have entered the
counting-house _toute eperdue_, and to have found oneself in presence of
Messrs. Armitage and Ramsden smoking, Malone swaggering, your uncle
sneering, Mr. Sykes sipping a cordial, and Moore himself in his cold
man-of-business vein! I am glad we missed it all."

"I wonder if there are many in the mill, Shirley!"

"Plenty to defend it. The soldiers we have twice seen to-day were going
there, no doubt, and the group we noticed surrounding your cousin in the
fields will be with him."

"What are they doing now, Shirley? What is that noise?"

"Hatchets and crowbars against the yard gates. They are forcing them.
Are you afraid?"

"No; but my heart throbs fast. I have a difficulty in standing. I will
sit down. Do you feel unmoved?"

"Hardly that; but I am glad I came. We shall see what transpires with
our own eyes. We are here on the spot, and none know it. Instead of
amazing the curate, the clothier, and the corn-dealer with a romantic
rush on the stage, we stand alone with the friendly night, its mute
stars, and these whispering trees, whose report our friends will not
come to gather."

"Shirley, Shirley, the gates are down! That crash was like the felling
of great trees. Now they are pouring through. They will break down the
mill doors as they have broken the gate. What can Robert do against so
many? Would to God I were a little nearer him--could hear him
speak--could speak to him! With my will--my longing to serve him--I
could not be a useless burden in his way; I could be turned to some
account."

"They come on!" cried Shirley. "How steadily they march in! There is
discipline in their ranks. I will not say there is courage--hundreds
against tens are no proof of that quality--but" (she dropped her voice)
"there is suffering and desperation enough amongst them. These goads
will urge them forwards."

"Forwards against Robert; and they hate him. Shirley, is there much
danger they will win the day?"

"We shall see. Moore and Helstone are of 'earth's first blood'--no
bunglers--no cravens----"

A crash--smash--shiver--stopped their whispers. A simultaneously hurled
volley of stones had saluted the broad front of the mill, with all its
windows; and now every pane of every lattice lay in shattered and
pounded fragments. A yell followed this demonstration--a rioters'
yell--a north-of-England, a Yorkshire, a West-Riding, a
West-Riding-clothing-district-of-Yorkshire rioters' yell.

You never heard that sound, perhaps, reader? So much the better for your
ears--perhaps for your heart, since, if it rends the air in hate to
yourself, or to the men or principles you approve, the interests to
which you wish well, wrath wakens to the cry of hate; the lion shakes
his mane, and rises to the howl of the hyena; caste stands up, ireful
against caste; and the indignant, wronged spirit of the middle rank
bears down in zeal and scorn on the famished and furious mass of the
operative class. It is difficult to be tolerant, difficult to be just,
in such moments.

Caroline rose; Shirley put her arm round her: they stood together as
still as the straight stems of two trees. That yell was a long one, and
when it ceased the night was yet full of the swaying and murmuring of a
crowd.

"What next?" was the question of the listeners. Nothing came yet. The
mill remained mute as a mausoleum.

"He _cannot_ be alone!" whispered Caroline.

"I would stake all I have that he is as little alone as he is alarmed,"
responded Shirley.

Shots were discharged by the rioters. Had the defenders waited for this
signal? It seemed so. The hitherto inert and passive mill woke; fire
flashed from its empty window-frames; a volley of musketry pealed sharp
through the Hollow.

"Moore speaks at last!" said Shirley, "and he seems to have the gift of
tongues. That was not a single voice."

"He has been forbearing. No one can accuse him of rashness," alleged
Caroline. "Their discharge preceded his. They broke his gates and his
windows. They fired at his garrison before he repelled them."

What was going on now? It seemed difficult, in the darkness, to
distinguish; but something terrible, a still-renewing tumult, was
obvious--fierce attacks, desperate repulses. The mill-yard, the mill
itself, was full of battle movement. There was scarcely any cessation
now of the discharge of firearms; and there was struggling, rushing,
trampling, and shouting between. The aim of the assailants seemed to be
to enter the mill, that of the defenders to beat them off. They heard
the rebel leader cry, "To the back, lads!" They heard a voice retort,
"Come round; we will meet you."

"To the counting-house!" was the order again.

"Welcome! we shall have you there!" was the response. And accordingly
the fiercest blaze that had yet glowed, the loudest rattle that had yet
been heard, burst from the counting-house front when the mass of rioters
rushed up to it.

The voice that had spoken was Moore's own voice. They could tell by its
tones that his soul was now warm with the conflict; they could guess
that the fighting animal was roused in every one of those men there
struggling together, and was for the time quite paramount above the
rational human being.

Both the girls felt their faces glow and their pulses throb; both knew
they would do no good by rushing down into the _melee_. They desired
neither to deal nor to receive blows; but they could not have run
away--Caroline no more than Shirley; they could not have fainted; they
could not have taken their eyes from the dim, terrible scene--from the
mass of cloud, of smoke, the musket-lightning--for the world.

"How and when would it end?" was the demand throbbing in their throbbing
pulses. "Would a juncture arise in which they could be useful?" was what
they waited to see; for though Shirley put off their too-late arrival
with a jest, and was ever ready to satirize her own or any other
person's enthusiasm, she would have given a farm of her best land for a
chance of rendering good service.

The chance was not vouchsafed her; the looked-for juncture never came.
It was not likely. Moore had expected this attack for days, perhaps
weeks; he was prepared for it at every point. He had fortified and
garrisoned his mill, which in itself was a strong building. He was a
cool, brave man; he stood to the defence with unflinching firmness.
Those who were with him caught his spirit, and copied his demeanour. The
rioters had never been so met before. At other mills they had attacked
they had found no resistance; an organized, resolute defence was what
they never dreamed of encountering. When their leaders saw the steady
fire kept up from the mill, witnessed the composure and determination of
its owner, heard themselves coolly defied and invited on to death, and
beheld their men falling wounded round them, they felt that nothing was
to be done here. In haste they mustered their forces, drew them away
from the building. A roll was called over, in which the men answered to
figures instead of names. They dispersed wide over the fields, leaving
silence and ruin behind them. The attack, from its commencement to its
termination, had not occupied an hour.

Day was by this time approaching; the west was dim, the east beginning
to gleam. It would have seemed that the girls who had watched this
conflict would now wish to hasten to the victors, on whose side all
their interest had been enlisted; but they only very cautiously
approached the now battered mill, and when suddenly a number of soldiers
and gentlemen appeared at the great door opening into the yard, they
quickly stepped aside into a shed, the deposit of old iron and timber,
whence they could see without being seen.

It was no cheering spectacle. These premises were now a mere blot of
desolation on the fresh front of the summer dawn. All the copse up the
Hollow was shady and dewy, the hill at its head was green; but just
here, in the centre of the sweet glen, Discord, broken loose in the
night from control, had beaten the ground with his stamping hoofs, and
left it waste and pulverized. The mill yawned all ruinous with unglazed
frames; the yard was thickly bestrewn with stones and brickbats; and
close under the mill, with the glittering fragments of the shattered
windows, muskets and other weapons lay here and there. More than one
deep crimson stain was visible on the gravel, a human body lay quiet on
its face near the gates, and five or six wounded men writhed and moaned
in the bloody dust.

Miss Keeldar's countenance changed at this view. It was the after-taste
of the battle, death and pain replacing excitement and exertion. It was
the blackness the bright fire leaves when its blaze is sunk, its warmth
failed, and its glow faded.

"This is what I wished to prevent," she said, in a voice whose cadence
betrayed the altered impulse of her heart.

"But you could not prevent it; you did your best--it was in vain," said
Caroline comfortingly. "Don't grieve, Shirley."

"I am sorry for those poor fellows," was the answer, while the spark in
her glance dissolved to dew. "Are any within the mill hurt, I wonder? Is
that your uncle?"

"It is, and there is Mr. Malone; and, O Shirley, there is Robert!"

"Well" (resuming her former tone), "don't squeeze your fingers quite
into my hand. I see. There is nothing wonderful in that. We knew he, at
least, was here, whoever might be absent."

"He is coming here towards us, Shirley!"

"Towards the pump, that is to say, for the purpose of washing his hands
and his forehead, which has got a scratch, I perceive."

"He bleeds, Shirley. Don't hold me. I must go."

"Not a step."

"He is hurt, Shirley!"

"Fiddlestick!"

"But I _must_ go to him. I wish to go so much. I cannot bear to be
restrained."

"What for?"

"To speak to him, to ask how he is, and what I can do for him."

"To tease and annoy him; to make a spectacle of yourself and him before
those soldiers, Mr. Malone, your uncle, et cetera. Would he like it,
think you? Would you like to remember it a week hence?"

"Am I always to be curbed and kept down?" demanded Caroline, a little
passionately.

"For his sake, yes; and still more for your own. I tell you, if you
showed yourself now you would repent it an hour hence, and so would
Robert."

"You think he would not like it, Shirley?"

"Far less than he would like our stopping him to say good-night, which
you were so sore about."

"But that was all play; there was no danger."

"And this is serious work; he must be unmolested."

"I only wish to go to him because he is my cousin--you understand?"

"I quite understand. But now, watch him. He has bathed his forehead, and
the blood has ceased trickling. His hurt is really a mere graze; I can
see it from hence. He is going to look after the wounded men."

Accordingly Mr. Moore and Mr. Helstone went round the yard, examining
each prostrate form. They then gave directions to have the wounded taken
up and carried into the mill. This duty being performed, Joe Scott was
ordered to saddle his master's horse and Mr. Helstone's pony, and the
two gentlemen rode away full gallop, to seek surgical aid in different
directions.

Caroline was not yet pacified.

"Shirley, Shirley, I should have liked to speak one word to him before
he went," she murmured, while the tears gathered glittering in her eyes.

"Why do you cry, Lina?" asked Miss Keeldar a little sternly. "You ought
to be glad instead of sorry. Robert has escaped any serious harm; he is
victorious; he has been cool and brave in combat; he is now considerate
in triumph. Is this a time--are these causes for weeping?"

"You do not know what I have in my heart," pleaded the other--"what
pain, what distraction--nor whence it arises. I can understand that you
should exult in Robert's greatness and goodness; so do I, in one sense,
but in another I feel _so_ miserable. I am too far removed from him. I
used to be nearer. Let me alone, Shirley. Do let me cry a few minutes;
it relieves me."

Miss Keeldar, feeling her tremble in every limb, ceased to expostulate
with her. She went out of the shed, and left her to weep in peace. It
was the best plan. In a few minutes Caroline rejoined her, much calmer.
She said, with her natural, docile, gentle manner, "Come, Shirley, we
will go home now. I promise not to try to see Robert again till he asks
for me. I never will try to push myself on him. I thank you for
restraining me just now."

"I did it with a good intention," returned Miss Keeldar.

"Now, dear Lina," she continued, "let us turn our faces to the cool
morning breeze, and walk very quietly back to the rectory. We will steal
in as we stole out. None shall know where we have been or what we have
seen to-night; neither taunt nor misconstruction can consequently molest
us. To-morrow we will see Robert, and be of good cheer; but I will say
no more, lest I should begin to cry too. I seem hard towards you, but I
am not so."




CHAPTER XX.

TO-MORROW.


The two girls met no living soul on their way back to the rectory. They
let themselves in noiselessly; they stole upstairs unheard--the breaking
morning gave them what light they needed. Shirley sought her couch
immediately; and though the room was strange--for she had never slept at
the rectory before--and though the recent scene was one unparalleled for
excitement and terror by any it had hitherto been her lot to witness,
yet scarce was her head laid on the pillow ere a deep, refreshing sleep
closed her eyes and calmed her senses.

Perfect health was Shirley's enviable portion. Though warm-hearted and
sympathetic, she was not nervous; powerful emotions could rouse and sway
without exhausting her spirit. The tempest troubled and shook her while
it lasted, but it left her elasticity unbent, and her freshness quite
unblighted. As every day brought her stimulating emotion, so every night
yielded her recreating rest. Caroline now watched her sleeping, and read
the serenity of her mind in the beauty of her happy countenance.

For herself, being of a different temperament, she could not sleep. The
commonplace excitement of the tea-drinking and school-gathering would
alone have sufficed to make her restless all night; the effect of the
terrible drama which had just been enacted before her eyes was not
likely to quit her for days. It was vain even to try to retain a
recumbent posture; she sat up by Shirley's side, counting the slow
minutes, and watching the June sun mount the heavens.

Life wastes fast in such vigils as Caroline had of late but too often
kept--vigils during which the mind, having no pleasant food to nourish
it, no manna of hope, no hived-honey of joyous memories, tries to live
on the meagre diet of wishes, and failing to derive thence either
delight or support, and feeling itself ready to perish with craving
want, turns to philosophy, to resolution, to resignation; calls on all
these gods for aid, calls vainly--is unheard, unhelped, and languishes.

Caroline was a Christian; therefore in trouble she framed many a prayer
after the Christian creed, preferred it with deep earnestness, begged
for patience, strength, relief. This world, however, we all know, is the
scene of trial and probation; and, for any favourable result her
petitions had yet wrought, it seemed to her that they were unheard and
unaccepted. She believed, sometimes, that God had turned His face from
her. At moments she was a Calvinist, and, sinking into the gulf of
religious despair, she saw darkening over her the doom of reprobation.

Most people have had a period or periods in their lives when they have
felt thus forsaken--when, having long hoped against hope, and still seen
the day of fruition deferred, their hearts have truly sickened within
them. This is a terrible hour, but it is often that darkest point which
precedes the rise of day--that turn of the year when the icy January
wind carries over the waste at once the dirge of departing winter and
the prophecy of coming spring. The perishing birds, however, cannot thus
understand the blast before which they shiver; and as little can the
suffering soul recognize, in the climax of its affliction, the dawn of
its deliverance. Yet, let whoever grieves still cling fast to love and
faith in God. God will never deceive, never finally desert him. "Whom He
loveth, He chasteneth." These words are true, and should not be
forgotten.

The household was astir at last; the servants were up; the shutters were
opened below. Caroline, as she quitted the couch, which had been but a
thorny one to her, felt that revival of spirits which the return of day,
of action, gives to all but the wholly despairing or actually dying. She
dressed herself, as usual, carefully, trying so to arrange her hair and
attire that nothing of the forlornness she felt at heart should be
visible externally. She looked as fresh as Shirley when both were
dressed, only that Miss Keeldar's eyes were lively, and Miss Helstone's
languid.

"To-day I shall have much to say to Moore," were Shirley's first words;
and you could see in her face that life was full of interest,
expectation, and occupation for her. "He will have to undergo
cross-examination," she added. "I dare say he thinks he has outwitted me
cleverly. And this is the way men deal with women--still concealing
danger from them--thinking, I suppose, to spare them pain. They
imagined we little knew where they were to-night. We _know_ they little
conjectured where we were. Men, I believe, fancy women's minds something
like those of children. Now, that is a mistake."

This was said as she stood at the glass, training her naturally waved
hair into curls, by twining it round her fingers. She took up the theme
again five minutes after, as Caroline fastened her dress and clasped her
girdle.

"If men could see us as we really are, they would be a little amazed;
but the cleverest, the acutest men are often under an illusion about
women. They do not read them in a true light; they misapprehend them,
both for good and evil. Their good woman is a queer thing, half doll,
half angel; their bad woman almost always a fiend. Then to hear them
fall into ecstasies with each other's creations--worshipping the heroine
of such a poem, novel, drama--thinking it fine, divine! Fine and divine
it may be, but often quite artificial--false as the rose in my best
bonnet there. If I spoke all I think on this point, if I gave my real
opinion of some first-rate female characters in first-rate works, where
should I be? Dead under a cairn of avenging stones in half an hour."

"Shirley, you chatter so, I can't fasten you. Be still. And, after all,
authors' heroines are almost as good as authoresses' heroes."

"Not at all. Women read men more truly than men read women. I'll prove
that in a magazine paper some day when I've time; only it will never be
inserted. It will be 'declined with thanks,' and left for me at the
publisher's."

"To be sure. You could not write cleverly enough. You don't know enough.
You are not learned, Shirley."

"God knows I can't contradict you, Cary; I'm as ignorant as a stone.
There's one comfort, however: you are not much better."

They descended to breakfast.

"I wonder how Mrs. Pryor and Hortense Moore have passed the night," said
Caroline, as she made the coffee. "Selfish being that I am, I never
thought of either of them till just now. They will have heard all the
tumult, Fieldhead and the cottage are so near; and Hortense is timid in
such matters--so, no doubt, is Mrs. Pryor."

"Take my word for it, Lina, Moore will have contrived to get his sister
out of the way. She went home with Miss Mann. He will have quartered
her there for the night. As to Mrs. Pryor, I own I am uneasy about her;
but in another half-hour we will be with her."

By this time the news of what had happened at the Hollow was spread all
over the neighbourhood. Fanny, who had been to Fieldhead to fetch the
milk, returned in panting haste with tidings that there had been a
battle in the night at Mr. Moore's mill, and that some said twenty men
were killed. Eliza, during Fanny's absence, had been apprised by the
butcher's boy that the mill was burnt to the ground. Both women rushed
into the parlour to announce these terrible facts to the ladies,
terminating their clear and accurate narrative by the assertion that
they were sure master must have been in it all. He and Thomas, the
clerk, they were confident, must have gone last night to join Mr. Moore
and the soldiers. Mr. Malone, too, had not been heard of at his lodgings
since yesterday afternoon; and Joe Scott's wife and family were in the
greatest distress, wondering what had become of their head.

Scarcely was this information imparted when a knock at the kitchen door
announced the Fieldhead errand-boy, arrived in hot haste, bearing a
billet from Mrs. Pryor. It was hurriedly written, and urged Miss Keeldar
to return directly, as the neighbourhood and the house seemed likely to
be all in confusion, and orders would have to be given which the
mistress of the hall alone could regulate. In a postscript it was
entreated that Miss Helstone might not be left alone at the rectory. She
had better, it was suggested, accompany Miss Keeldar.

"There are not two opinions on that head," said Shirley, as she tied on
her own bonnet, and then ran to fetch Caroline's.

"But what will Fanny and Eliza do? And if my uncle returns?"

"Your uncle will not return yet; he has other fish to fry. He will be
galloping backwards and forwards from Briarfield to Stilbro' all day,
rousing the magistrates in the court-house and the officers at the
barracks; and Fanny and Eliza can have in Joe Scott's and the clerk's
wives to bear them company. Besides, of course, there is no real danger
to be apprehended now. Weeks will elapse before the rioters can again
rally, or plan any other attempt; and I am much mistaken if Moore and
Mr. Helstone will not take advantage of last night's outbreak to quell
them altogether. They will frighten the authorities of Stilbro' into
energetic measures. I only hope they will not be too severe--not pursue
the discomfited too relentlessly."

"Robert will not be cruel. We saw that last night," said Caroline.

"But he will be hard," retorted Shirley; "and so will your uncle."

As they hurried along the meadow and plantation path to Fieldhead, they
saw the distant highway already alive with an unwonted flow of
equestrians and pedestrians, tending in the direction of the usually
solitary Hollow. On reaching the hall, they found the backyard gates
open, and the court and kitchen seemed crowded with excited
milk-fetchers--men, women, and children--whom Mrs. Gill, the
housekeeper, appeared vainly persuading to take their milk-cans and
depart. (It _is_, or _was_, by-the-bye, the custom in the north of
England for the cottagers on a country squire's estate to receive their
supplies of milk and butter from the dairy of the manor house, on whose
pastures a herd of milch kine was usually fed for the convenience of the
neighbourhood. Miss Keeldar owned such a herd--all deep-dewlapped,
Craven cows, reared on the sweet herbage and clear waters of bonny
Airedale; and very proud she was of their sleek aspect and high
condition.) Seeing now the state of matters, and that it was desirable
to effect a clearance of the premises, Shirley stepped in amongst the
gossiping groups. She bade them good-morning with a certain frank,
tranquil ease--the natural characteristic of her manner when she
addressed numbers, especially if those numbers belonged to the
working-class; she was cooler amongst her equals, and rather proud to
those above her. She then asked them if they had all got their milk
measured out; and understanding that they had, she further observed that
she "wondered what they were waiting for, then."

"We're just talking a bit over this battle there has been at your mill,
mistress," replied a man.

"Talking a bit! Just like you!" said Shirley. "It is a queer thing all
the world is so fond of _talking_ over events. You _talk_ if anybody
dies suddenly; you _talk_ if a fire breaks out; you _talk_ if a
mill-owner fails; you _talk_ if he's murdered. What good does your
talking do?"

There is nothing the lower orders like better than a little downright
good-humoured rating. Flattery they scorn very much; honest abuse they
enjoy. They call it speaking plainly, and take a sincere delight in
being the objects thereof. The homely harshness of Miss Keeldar's
salutation won her the ear of the whole throng in a second.

"We're no war nor some 'at is aboon us, are we?" asked a man, smiling.

"Nor a whit better. You that should be models of industry are just as
gossip-loving as the idle. Fine, rich people that have nothing to do may
be partly excused for trifling their time away; you who have to earn
your bread with the sweat of your brow are quite inexcusable."

"That's queer, mistress. Suld we never have a holiday because we work
hard?"

"_Never_," was the prompt answer; "unless," added the "mistress," with a
smile that half belied the severity of her speech--"unless you knew how
to make a better use of it than to get together over rum and tea if you
are women, or over beer and pipes if you are men, and _talk_ scandal at
your neighbours' expense. Come, friends," she added, changing at once
from bluntness to courtesy, "oblige me by taking your cans and going
home. I expect several persons to call to-day, and it will be
inconvenient to have the avenues to the house crowded."

Yorkshire people are as yielding to persuasion as they are stubborn
against compulsion. The yard was clear in five minutes.

"Thank you, and good-bye to you, friends," said Shirley, as she closed
the gates on a quiet court.

Now, let me hear the most refined of cockneys presume to find fault with
Yorkshire manners. Taken as they ought to be, the majority of the lads
and lasses of the West Riding are gentlemen and ladies, every inch of
them. It is only against the weak affectation and futile pomposity of a
would-be aristocrat they turn mutinous.

Entering by the back way, the young ladies passed through the kitchen
(or _house_, as the inner kitchen is called) to the hall. Mrs. Pryor
came running down the oak staircase to meet them. She was all unnerved;
her naturally sanguine complexion was pale; her usually placid, though
timid, blue eye was wandering, unsettled, alarmed. She did not, however,
break out into any exclamations, or hurried narrative of what had
happened. Her predominant feeling had been in the course of the night,
and was now this morning, a sense of dissatisfaction with herself that
she could not feel firmer, cooler, more equal to the demands of the
occasion.

"You are aware," she began with a trembling voice, and yet the most
conscientious anxiety to avoid exaggeration in what she was about to
say, "that a body of rioters has attacked Mr. Moore's mill to-night. We
heard the firing and confusion very plainly here; we none of us slept.
It was a sad night. The house has been in great bustle all the morning
with people coming and going. The servants have applied to me for orders
and directions, which I really did not feel warranted in giving. Mr.
Moore has, I believe, sent up for refreshments for the soldiers and
others engaged in the defence, for some conveniences also for the
wounded. I could not undertake the responsibility of giving orders or
taking measures. I fear delay may have been injurious in some instances;
but this is not my house. You were absent, my dear Miss Keeldar. What
could I do?"

"Were no refreshments sent?" asked Shirley, while her countenance,
hitherto so clear, propitious, and quiet, even while she was rating the
milk-fetchers, suddenly turned dark and warm.

"I think not, my dear."

"And nothing for the wounded--no linen, no wine, no bedding?"

"I think not. I cannot tell what Mrs. Gill did; but it seemed impossible
to me, at the moment, to venture to dispose of your property by sending
supplies to soldiers. Provisions for a company of soldiers sounds
formidable. How many there are I did not ask; but I could not think of
allowing them to pillage the house, as it were. I intended to do what
was right, yet I did not see the case quite clearly, I own."

"It lies in a nutshell, notwithstanding. These soldiers have risked
their lives in defence of my property: I suppose they have a right to my
gratitude. The wounded are our fellow-creatures: I suppose we should aid
them.--Mrs. Gill!"

She turned, and called in a voice more clear than soft. It rang through
the thick oak of the hall and kitchen doors more effectually than a
bell's summons. Mrs. Gill, who was deep in bread-making, came with hands
and apron in culinary case, not having dared to stop to rub the dough
from the one or to shake the flour from the other. Her mistress had
never called a servant in that voice save once before, and that was when
she had seen from the window Tartar in full tug with two carriers' dogs,
each of them a match for him in size, if not in courage, and their
masters standing by, encouraging their animals, while hers was
unbefriended. Then indeed she had summoned John as if the Day of
Judgment were at hand. Nor had she waited for the said John's coming,
but had walked out into the lane bonnetless, and after informing the
carriers that she held them far less of men than the three brutes
whirling and worrying in the dust before them, had put her hands round
the thick neck of the largest of the curs, and given her whole strength
to the essay of choking it from Tartar's torn and bleeding eye, just
above and below which organ the vengeful fangs were inserted. Five or
six men were presently on the spot to help her, but she never thanked
one of them. "They might have come before if their will had been good,"
she said. She had not a word for anybody during the rest of the day, but
sat near the hall fire till evening watching and tending Tartar, who lay
all gory, stiff, and swelled on a mat at her feet. She wept furtively
over him sometimes, and murmured the softest words of pity and
endearment, in tones whose music the old, scarred, canine warrior
acknowledged by licking her hand or her sandal alternately with his own
red wounds. As to John, his lady turned a cold shoulder on him for a
week afterwards.

Mrs. Gill, remembering this little episode, came "all of a tremble," as
she said herself. In a firm, brief voice Miss Keeldar proceeded to put
questions and give orders. That at such a time Fieldhead should have
evinced the inhospitality of a miser's hovel stung her haughty spirit to
the quick; and the revolt of its pride was seen in the heaving of her
heart, stirred stormily under the lace and silk which veiled it.

"How long is it since that message came from the mill?"

"Not an hour yet, ma'am," answered the housekeeper soothingly.

"Not an hour! You might almost as well have said not a day. They will
have applied elsewhere by this time. Send a man instantly down to tell
them that everything this house contains is at Mr. Moore's, Mr.
Helstone's, and the soldiers' service. Do that first."

While the order was being executed, Shirley moved away from her friends,
and stood at the hall-window, silent, unapproachable. When Mrs. Gill
came back, she turned. The purple flush which painful excitement kindles
on a pale cheek glowed on hers; the spark which displeasure lights in a
dark eye fired her glance.

"Let the contents of the larder and the wine-cellar be brought up, put
into the hay-carts, and driven down to the Hollow. If there does not
happen to be much bread or much meat in the house, go to the butcher and
baker, and desire them to send what they have. But I will see for
myself."

She moved off.

"All will be right soon; she will get over it in an hour," whispered
Caroline to Mrs. Pryor. "Go upstairs, dear madam," she added
affectionately, "and try to be as calm and easy as you can. The truth
is, Shirley will blame herself more than you before the day is over."

By dint of a few more gentle assurances and persuasions, Miss Helstone
contrived to soothe the agitated lady. Having accompanied her to her
apartment, and promised to rejoin her there when things were settled,
Caroline left her to see, as she said, "if she could be useful." She
presently found that she could be very useful; for the retinue of
servants at Fieldhead was by no means numerous, and just now their
mistress found plenty of occupation for all the hands at her command,
and for her own also. The delicate good-nature and dexterous activity
which Caroline brought to the aid of the housekeeper and maids--all
somewhat scared by their lady's unwonted mood--did a world of good at
once; it helped the assistants and appeased the directress. A chance
glance and smile from Caroline moved Shirley to an answering smile
directly. The former was carrying a heavy basket up the cellar stairs.

"This is a shame!" cried Shirley, running to her. "It will strain your
arm."

She took it from her, and herself bore it out into the yard. The cloud
of temper was dispelled when she came back; the flash in her eye was
melted; the shade on her forehead vanished. She resumed her usual
cheerful and cordial manner to those about her, tempering her revived
spirits with a little of the softness of shame at her previous unjust
anger.

She was still superintending the lading of the cart, when a gentleman
entered the yard and approached her ere she was aware of his presence.

"I hope I see Miss Keeldar well this morning?" he said, examining with
rather significant scrutiny her still flushed face.

She gave him a look, and then again bent to her employment without
reply. A pleasant enough smile played on her lips, but she hid it. The
gentleman repeated his salutation, stooping, that it might reach her ear
with more facility.

"Well enough, if she be good enough," was the answer; "and so is Mr.
Moore too, I dare say. To speak truth, I am not anxious about him; some
slight mischance would be only his just due. His conduct has been--we
will say _strange_ just now, till we have time to characterize it by a
more exact epithet. Meantime, may I ask what brings him here?"

"Mr. Helstone and I have just received your message that everything at
Fieldhead was at our service. We judged, by the unlimited wording of the
gracious intimation, that you would be giving yourself too much trouble.
I perceive our conjecture was correct. We are not a regiment,
remember--only about half a dozen soldiers and as many civilians. Allow
me to retrench something from these too abundant supplies."

Miss Keeldar blushed, while she laughed at her own over-eager generosity
and most disproportionate calculations. Moore laughed too, very quietly
though; and as quietly he ordered basket after basket to be taken from
the cart, and remanded vessel after vessel to the cellar.

"The rector must hear of this," he said; "he will make a good story of
it. What an excellent army contractor Miss Keeldar would have been!"
Again he laughed, adding, "It is precisely as I conjectured."

"You ought to be thankful," said Shirley, "and not mock me. What could I
do? How could I gauge your appetites or number your band? For aught I
knew, there might have been fifty of you at least to victual. You told
me nothing; and then an application to provision soldiers naturally
suggests large ideas."

"It appears so," remarked Moore, levelling another of his keen, quiet
glances at the discomfited Shirley.--"Now," he continued, addressing the
carter, "I think you may take what remains to the Hollow. Your load will
be somewhat lighter than the one Miss Keeldar destined you to carry."

As the vehicle rumbled out of the yard, Shirley, rallying her spirits,
demanded what had become of the wounded.

"There was not a single man hurt on our side," was the answer.

"You were hurt yourself, on the temples," interposed a quick, low
voice--that of Caroline, who, having withdrawn within the shade of the
door, and behind the large person of Mrs. Gill, had till now escaped
Moore's notice. When she spoke, his eye searched the obscurity of her
retreat.

"Are you much hurt?" she inquired.

"As you might scratch your finger with a needle in sewing."

"Lift your hair and let us see."

He took his hat off, and did as he was bid, disclosing only a narrow
slip of court-plaster. Caroline indicated, by a slight movement of the
head, that she was satisfied, and disappeared within the clear obscure
of the interior.

"How did she know I was hurt?" asked Moore.

"By rumour, no doubt. But it is too good in her to trouble herself about
you. For my part, it was of your victims I was thinking when I inquired
after the wounded. What damage have your opponents sustained?"

"One of the rioters, or victims as you call them, was killed, and six
were hurt."

"What have you done with them?"

"What you will perfectly approve. Medical aid was procured immediately;
and as soon as we can get a couple of covered wagons and some clean
straw, they will be removed to Stilbro'."

"Straw! You must have beds and bedding. I will send my wagon directly,
properly furnished; and Mr. Yorke, I am sure, will send his."

"You guess correctly; he has volunteered already. And Mrs. Yorke--who,
like you, seems disposed to regard the rioters as martyrs, and me, and
especially Mr. Helstone, as murderers--is at this moment, I believe,
most assiduously engaged in fitting it up with feather-beds, pillows,
bolsters, blankets, etc. The _victims_ lack no attentions, I promise
you. Mr. Hall, your favourite parson, has been with them ever since six
o'clock, exhorting them, praying with them, and even waiting on them
like any nurse; and Caroline's good friend, Miss Ainley, that _very_
plain old maid, sent in a stock of lint and linen, something in the
proportion of another lady's allowance of beef and wine."

"That will do. Where is your sister?"

"Well cared for. I had her securely domiciled with Miss Mann. This very
morning the two set out for Wormwood Wells [a noted watering-place],
and will stay there some weeks."

"So Mr. Helstone domiciled me at the rectory! Mighty clever you
gentlemen think you are! I make you heartily welcome to the idea, and
hope its savour, as you chew the cud of reflection upon it, gives you
pleasure. Acute and astute, why are you not also omniscient? How is it
that events transpire, under your very noses, of which you have no
suspicion? It should be so, otherwise the exquisite gratification of
outmanoeuvring you would be unknown. Ah, friend, you may search my
countenance, but you cannot read it."

Moore, indeed, looked as if he could not.

"You think me a dangerous specimen of my sex. Don't you now?"

"A peculiar one, at least."

"But Caroline--is she peculiar?"

"In her way--yes."

"Her way! What is her way?"

"You know her as well as I do."

"And knowing her, I assert that she is neither eccentric nor difficult
of control. Is she?"

"That depends----"

"However, there is nothing masculine about _her_?"

"Why lay such emphasis on _her_? Do you consider her a contrast, in that
respect, to yourself?"

"You do, no doubt; but that does not signify. Caroline is neither
masculine, nor of what they call the spirited order of women."

"I have seen her flash out."

"So have I, but not with manly fire. It was a short, vivid, trembling
glow, that shot up, shone, vanished----"

"And left her scared at her own daring. You describe others besides
Caroline."

"The point I wish to establish is, that Miss Helstone, though gentle,
tractable, and candid enough, is still perfectly capable of defying even
Mr. Moore's penetration."

"What have you and she been doing?" asked Moore suddenly.

"Have you had any breakfast?"

"What is your mutual mystery?"

"If you are hungry, Mrs. Gill will give you something to eat here. Step
into the oak parlour, and ring the bell. You will be served as if at an
inn; or, if you like better, go back to the Hollow."

"The alternative is not open to me; I _must_ go back. Good-morning. The
first leisure I have I will see you again."




CHAPTER XXI.

MRS. PRYOR.


While Shirley was talking with Moore, Caroline rejoined Mrs. Pryor
upstairs. She found that lady deeply depressed. She would not say that
Miss Keeldar's hastiness had hurt her feelings, but it was evident an
