The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Devil in Iron, by Robert E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Devil in Iron

Author: Robert E. Howard

Release Date: February 26, 2013 [EBook #42209]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL IN IRON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THE DEVIL IN IRON

                    By Robert E. Howard

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was first published in Weird Tales
    August 1934. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




1


The fisherman loosened his knife in its scabbard. The gesture was
instinctive, for what he feared was nothing a knife could slay, not even
the saw-edged crescent blade of the Yuetshi that could disembowel a man
with an upward stroke. Neither man nor beast threatened him in the
solitude which brooded over the castellated isle of Xapur.

He had climbed the cliffs, passed through the jungle that bordered them,
and now stood surrounded by evidences of a vanished state. Broken
columns glimmered among the trees, the straggling lines of crumbling
walls meandered off into the shadows, and under his feet were broad
paves, cracked and bowed by roots growing beneath.

The fisherman was typical of his race, that strange people whose origin
is lost in the gray dawn of the past, and who have dwelt in their rude
fishing huts along the southern shore of the Sea of Vilayet since time
immemorial. He was broadly built, with long apish arms and a mighty
chest, but with lean loins and thin bandy legs. His face was broad, his
forehead low and retreating, his hair thick and tangled. A belt for a
knife and a rag for a loin-cloth were all he wore in the way of
clothing.

That he was where he was proved that he was less dully incurious than
most of his people. Men seldom visited Xapur. It was uninhabited, all
but forgotten, merely one among the myriad isles which dotted the great
inland sea. Men called it Xapur, the Fortified, because of its ruins,
remnants of some prehistoric kingdom, lost and forgotten before the
conquering Hyborians had ridden southward. None knew who reared those
stones, though dim legends lingered among the Yuetshi which half
intelligibly suggested a connection of immeasurable antiquity between
the fishers and the unknown island kingdom.

But it had been a thousand years since any Yuetshi had understood the
import of these tales; they repeated them now as a meaningless formula,
a gibberish framed by their lips by custom. No Yuetshi had come to Xapur
for a century. The adjacent coast of the mainland was uninhabited, a
reedy marsh given over to the grim beasts that haunted it. The fisher's
village lay some distance to the south, on the mainland. A storm had
blown his frail fishing craft far from his accustomed haunts, and
wrecked it in a night of flaring lightning and roaring waters on the
towering cliffs of the isle. Now in the dawn the sky shone blue and
clear, the rising sun made jewels of the dripping leaves. He had climbed
the cliffs to which he had clung through the night because, in the midst
of the storm, he had seen an appalling lance of lightning fork out of
the black heavens, and the concussion of its stroke, which had shaken
the whole island, had been accompanied by a cataclysmic crash that he
doubted could have resulted from a riven tree.

A dull curiosity had caused him to investigate; and now he had found
what he sought and an animal-like uneasiness possessed him, a sense of
lurking peril.

Among the trees reared a broken dome-like structure, built of gigantic
blocks of the peculiar iron-like green stone found only on the islands
of Vilayet. It seemed incredible that human hands could have shaped and
placed them, and certainly it was beyond human power to have overthrown
the structure they formed. But the thunderbolt had splintered the
ton-heavy blocks like so much glass, reduced others to green dust, and
ripped away the whole arch of the dome.

The fisherman climbed over the debris and peered in, and what he saw
brought a grunt from him. Within the ruined dome, surrounded by
stone-dust and bits of broken masonry, lay a man on the golden block. He
was clad in a sort of skirt and a shagreen girdle. His black hair, which
fell in a square mane to his massive shoulders, was confined about his
temples by a narrow gold band. On his bare, muscular breast lay a
curious dagger with a jeweled pommel, shagreen-bound hilt, and a broad
crescent blade. It was much like the knife the fisherman wore at his
hip, but it lacked the serrated edge, and was made with infinitely
greater skill.

The fisherman lusted for the weapon. The man, of course, was dead; had
been dead for many centuries. This dome was his tomb. The fisherman did
not wonder by what art the ancients had preserved the body in such a
vivid likeness of life, which kept the muscular limbs full and
unshrunken, the dark flesh vital. The dull brain of the Yuetshi had room
only for his desire for the knife with its delicate waving lines along
the dully gleaming blade.

Scrambling down into the dome, he lifted the weapon from the man's
breast. And as he did so, a strange and terrible thing came to pass. The
muscular dark hands knotted convulsively, the lids flared open,
revealing great dark magnetic eyes whose stare struck the startled
fisherman like a physical blow. He recoiled, dropping the jeweled dagger
in his perturbation. The man on the dais heaved up to a sitting
position, and the fisherman gaped at the full extent of his size, thus
revealed. His narrowed eyes held the Yuetshi and in those slitted orbs
he read neither friendliness nor gratitude; he saw only a fire as alien
and hostile as that which burns in the eyes of a tiger.

Suddenly the man rose and towered above him, menace in his every aspect.
There was no room in the fisherman's dull brain for fear, at least for
such fear as might grip a man who has just seen the fundamental laws of
nature defied. As the great hands fell to his shoulders, he drew his
saw-edged knife and struck upward with the same motion. The blade
splintered against the stranger's corded belly as against a steel
column, and then the fisherman's thick neck broke like a rotten twig in
the giant hands.




2


Jehungir Agha, lord of Khawarizm and keeper of the coastal border,
scanned once more the ornate parchment scroll with its peacock seal, and
laughed shortly and sardonically.

'Well?' bluntly demanded his counsellor Ghaznavi.

Jehungir shrugged his shoulders. He was a handsome man, with the
merciless pride of birth and accomplishment.

'The king grows short of patience,' said he. 'In his own hand he
complains bitterly of what he calls my failure to guard the frontier. By
Tarim, if I can not deal a blow to these robbers of the steppes,
Khawarizm may own a new lord.'

Ghaznavi tugged his gray-shot beard in meditation. Yezdigerd, king of
Turan, was the mightiest monarch in the world. In his palace in the
great port city of Aghrapur was heaped the plunder of empires. His
