
At this moment the old inventor opened his eyes.

"What happened?" he asked feebly. "Please give me some water. I am all
right."

They brought him a drink, and he managed to sip a little of it. Then he
attempted to sit up. But the effort was too much for him.

"What--what is the matter?" he asked. "I feel so strange. I am dizzy.
Has anything happened?"

"Somebody am a-playin' 'Ring around de Rosy' wid dis airship!" exclaimed
Washington, "My head am a-swimmin' so I can't stand."

"I must get to the conning tower!" muttered the old inventor. "I must
get there."

"Let me go, you can never make it," said Jack. "What is it you want to
see?"

"Look at the deflecting needle!" was the answer. "See how the needle
points and come back and tell me! It may be we are at the north pole!"

Jack started forward, crawling on his hands and knees. Indeed, this was
the only way he could advance. The professor watched him with anxious
eyes. The ship spun around even faster. Old Andy had awakened and was
gazing around with fear-stricken eyes.

Then, just as Jack reached the door of the conning tower, and started
inside, the _Monarch_ gave a violent motion. She seemed to stop for a
moment, and then, with a great lurch, turned completely over, throwing
the occupants to the ceiling. Then she plunged straight down to the
earth, through the centre of the whirlwind, like an arrow falling!




CHAPTER XX

AT THE NORTH POLE?


For an instant the utmost confusion reigned. The adventurers fell in a
heap on the ceiling that, for the time being, became the floor. Then, as
the ship righted herself, they fell back again to the floor. The cords
that bound Andy to his bunk broke, and he toppled with the rest.

"Repel the enemy!" yelled the old hunter, thinking in his delirium that
the ship was again attacked.

"We are lost!" cried the professor, as he felt the _Monarch_ plunging
down.

For a hundred feet or more the ship shot earthward bow first, so that
the adventurers all slid down to that end. It was well that everything,
including the gasolene tanks, had been lashed fast, or there would have
been a great jumble inside the craft.

Then, almost as suddenly as the ship had started to fall, it ceased, and
rode on an even keel, righting and floating easily in the air. The wind
no longer blew with the circular motion, the whirling having come to an
end. But the blinding snow continued.

Jack staggered from the conning tower, where he had gone to look at the
deflecting compass.

"What has happened?" he cried.

"No one knows," answered Professor Henderson. "We are in dire straits.
Did you look at the needle, Jack?"

"I did."

"What did it show?"

"The needle was straight up and down!"

"I knew it!" cried the old inventor. "I said we would reach the pole,
and we have!"

"It ain't goin' to do us a heab sight ob good," said Washington. "I'd
rather hab a good barber pole any day! No north poles fo' me!"

"Hush, Washington!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "This is no time to joke.
You are sure you made no mistake, Jack?"

"I am sure, sir."

"I thought we were at the pole when I saw that the gas engine had
stopped," went on the professor. "The attraction of the earth-magnets at
the pole exerted such a strong influence on the iron and steel that the
gas machine could not work. At last I have reached the goal of my
ambitions!"

The ship remained stationary for several minutes. Those aboard began to
have hopes. The snow storm was still as fierce as ever, but that was all
the manifestation of the elements.

"I want to take a look at the needle," said the professor. "I feel all
right now; I was only a little faint from my fall. How are you, Andy?"

"I feel much better," replied the hunter, whose delirium had somewhat
left him. "My arm is sore, that's all. But why have you all got your
furs on?"

"We had to turn off the stoves," explained Amos Henderson. "You had
better put your's on, too, Andy. You'll need them. We could only cover
you over when you were in the bunk."

The hunter soon began to realize that it was chilly in the ship, and he
donned his heavy garments. The professor started for the conning tower.
He gave one glance at the needle of the deflecting compass, and a look
of disappointment came over his face.

"It is not pointing down," he said to Jack, who had followed him.

"But I am sure it did when I noticed it," replied the boy.

"Then we have come past the pole," was Amos Henderson's opinion. "There
is only a small spot that is exactly north, and we have passed over it
during the storm. We must return. I want to descend exactly there and
make some experiments. Tell Washington to start the engines. We will
turn the ship around and go back!"

"We may run into the whirlwind again," objected Jack.

"That is so, I did not think of that. However, tell Washington to get
everything in readiness."

It was no small task to get the engine room into shape after the
upsetting it had been subjected to, but with the help of the boys and
the two men Washington succeeded. In about an hour the _Monarch_ was
ready to be sent up or down, forward or back. Since she had ceased
falling she had remain at a stationary height, about half a mile above
the earth.

Meanwhile Professor Henderson was trying to make up his mind what to do.
He wanted very much to get to the exact north pole, or the spot where
the imaginary pole was supposed to be. But he hesitated about taking the
airship back over the course, and run the chance of again encountering
the whirlwind.

"The more I think of it," he said to Jack and Mark, who had joined him,
"the more I think that the whirlwind is always there. It did not come
to us, we ran into it. It may be caused by the magnetic currents at the
pole eternally revolving. I am afraid to go back within their influence,
for it might mean death."

"I have a plan," said Jack modestly.

"Let us hear it," came from the professor. "I am at a loss what to do."

"Supposing we let the ship down now," Jack continued, "and walk back
until we come to the north pole, since it must be near here. We can take
along the deflecting needle to tell when we reach it, and the whirlwind
will not do much harm if we are on the ground and afoot."

"Good idea!" exclaimed the professor. "We'll do it. Washington, let the
gas out and we'll descend!"

In a few minutes a hissing told that the gas was being let out of the
silk bag. Soon the ship began to sink gently toward the earth, through
the clouds of snow.

"Let us go outside," suggested Jack. "The wind doesn't blow now, and the
snow will not hurt us. We will be warm enough in our furs."

Mark voted the suggestion a good one, and the two boys went out on the
deck. Washington was busy in the engine room, and the professor was in
the conning tower, so they did not go, but Tom and Bill said they would
like to get a little fresh air, even if the temperature was far below
zero, and they joined the lads.

The four stood and gazed in wonder at the strange scene. At first the
terrible cold cut them as if it was a keen knife. But they soon grew
used to it, and enjoyed what little of it reached them through the
opening in their fur caps. The snowflakes covered everything and the
airship looked more like a craft bedecked from stem to stern with cotton
batting than anything else. Jack and Mark walked around to the stern.
Suddenly Mark stumbled over something.

"What's this?" he cried.

Jack hurried to his side. As he did so the bundle gave a heave, and,
breaking through the snow blanket, there was displayed the calm features
of Dirola.

"Me sleep!" she announced with a smile.

And that was what she had been doing while the airship was being whirled
around by the strange force! She had braced herself in a corner, pulled
her furs about her face, and slumbered, even when the ship turned over.
So well braced was she that she did not tumble off.

"Well! She's a cool one!" exclaimed Mark.

"I guess you'd be too, if you slept out of doors with the temperature
about seventy below zero," remarked Jack. "But let's go in and tell the
professor Dirola is here. He may be worried about her."

The boys started for the cabin. They had not taken five steps before,
with a sudden lurch, the airship dived like a kite without its tail.
Then the craft turned completely over!

Jack and Mark with the two helpers and Dirola were thrown from the deck,
head first, toward the earth! Down and down they fell, uttering
despairing cries!




CHAPTER XXI

LOST IN THE SNOW


Once more the wind blew with hurricane force. On board the _Monarch_
Washington and Professor Henderson were tossed to the ceiling again.
Then the ship righted herself.

"De boys! De boys!" cried Washington, suddenly thinking of them. "Dey
hab falled off!"

"Great Scott! So they have!" exclaimed the inventor. "That is, unless
they grabbed something as we went over!"

"An de Sesquitomexico woman, too!" cried the colored man, meaning
Dirola.

"I guess she went with the others," said the professor. "We must take a
look as soon as it is safe."

Then came a strong gust of wind that hurled the ship forward. When it
had subsided Washington and the old inventor ventured outside. The boys
were nowhere to be seen.

"They are lost!" cried Andy, who had crawled to the bow of the ship
after the captain and Washington.

For a little while longer the airship sailed along easily, the wind no
more rushing with such force. Then, all at once the craft settled down
until, with a jerk, it came to rest on a big snow bank.

"We's landed!" exclaimed Washington. "We's hit de ole north pole at
last. Now I'll see what sort ob a stick it is!"

"We've landed sure enough," remarked the professor, "but I'm afraid we
are not at the north pole. However, in view of all that has happened, I
suppose we had better stop here for a while. Some of the machinery is
wrecked by the overturning of the ship, but I guess we can fix it. I
only wish I knew where the boys and the two men were."

"Don't forget Dirola," spoke up Andy. "We owe a good deal to her."

It stopped snowing about half an hour after the _Monarch_ had found
lodgement on the edge of a bank of ice. From the deck and windows of the
craft nothing could be seen but a big expanse of white. It was a cold,
lifeless world to which the ship had brought what remained of her crew
and owner.

The engine room of the _Monarch_ was once more a sorry sight, and
Washington and the inventor worked like a dozen men in restoring order.
They soon had things in ship-shape, but one of the motors would require
considerable repairing before it would run again. However, it was not
the most important one, and the craft could run without it, though only
at half speed.

Suddenly, there came from without a chorus of shouts.

"What's that?" cried the professor.

"Sounded like some one calling," ventured Andy.

"It am de boys and Tom and Bill come back to overjoy us," said
Washington.

The shouts grew louder. Andy glanced from a cabin window.

"The Esquimaux! The Esquimaux!" he exclaimed. "Here they are after us
again! They'll carry us back to the ice cave and eat us alive this
time!"

"These are not the same ones!" cried the professor. "We are hundreds of
miles from the ice cave."

"Then these are the ones the mysterious message was about," said Andy,
"and we had better be on our guard!"

"Perhaps these are Dirola's friends," ventured Amos Henderson. "If they
are I wish we had her here to intercede for us."

There came a rattling against the sides of the airship. It sounded like
a storm of hail.

"They are firing arrows at us!" yelled Andy. "That doesn't look very
friendly."

"Wait until I go out and speak to them," suggested the professor. "They
will respect my gray, hairs."

He went outside. The ship was surrounded by hundreds of little men, all
dressed in thick furs. At the sight of the ship's commander they gave a
loud yell.

"I wisht I'd neber done come to de north pole!" groaned Washington. He
grabbed up a rifle and followed Andy outside. At the sight of them the
Esquimaux set up louder yells, and shot another shower of arrows.
Fortunately none of the missiles struck the white men.

"Stop firing!" said the professor, raising his hand. "We mean you no
harm!"

His answer was a wilder burst of yells.

"Fire over their heads! Maybe that will teach them a little respect,"
spoke Andy.

He and Washington discharged their guns several times in rapid
succession. With frightened yells the men in furs fell flat on their
