was a very intelligent year, a jewel in the crown of civilization. Not
only was the Morell prize given to van Manderpootz, but I announced my
discrete field theory in that year, and the University unveiled Gogli's
statue of me as well." He sighed. "Yes, a very intelligent year! What do
you think?"

"It depends on how you look at it," I responded glumly. "I didn't enjoy
it so much, what with Joanna Caldwell and Denise d'Agrion, and your
infernal experiments. It's all in the point of view."

The professor snorted. "Infernal experiments, eh! Point of view! Of
course it's all in the point of view. Even Einstein's simple little
synthesis was enough to prove that. If the whole world could adopt an
intelligent and admirable point of view--that of van Manderpootz, for
instance--all troubles would be over. If it were possible--" He paused,
and an expression of amazed wonder spread over his ruddy face.

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"Matter? I am astonished! The astounding depths of genius awe me. I am
overwhelmed with admiration at the incalculable mysteries of a great
mind."

"I don't get the drift."

"Dixon," he said impressively, "you have been privileged to look upon an
example of the workings of a genius. More than that, you have planted
the seed from which perhaps shall grow the towering tree of thought.
Incredible as it seems, you, Dixon Wells, have given van Manderpootz an
idea! It is thus that genius seizes upon the small, the unimportant, the
negligible, and turns it to its own grand purposes. I stand awe-struck!"

"But what--?"

"Wait," said van Manderpootz, still in rapt admiration of the majesty of
his own mind. "When the tree bears fruit, you shall see it. Until then,
be satisfied that you have played a part in its planting."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was perhaps a month before I saw van Manderpootz again, but one
bright spring evening his broad, rubicund face looked out of the
phone-screen at me.

"It's ready," he announced impressively.

"What is?"

The professor looked pained at the thought that I could have forgotten.
"The tree has borne fruit," he explained. "If you wish to drop over to
my quarters, we'll proceed to the laboratory and try it out. I do not
set a time, so that it will be utterly impossible for you to be late."

I ignored that last dig, but had a time been set, I would doubtless
have been even later than usual, for it was with some misgivings that I
induced myself to go at all. I still remembered the unpleasantness of my
last two experiences with the inventions of van Manderpootz. However, at
last we were seated in the small laboratory, while out in the larger one
the professor's technical assistant, Carter, puttered over some device,
and in the far corner his secretary, the plain and unattractive Miss
Fitch, transcribed lecture notes, for van Manderpootz abhorred the
thought that his golden utterances might be lost to posterity. On the
table between the professor and myself lay a curious device, something
that looked like a cross between a pair of nose-glasses and a miner's
lamp.

"There it is," said van Manderpootz proudly. "There lies my
attitudinizor, which may well become an epoch-making device."

"How? What does it do?"

"I will explain. The germ of the idea traces back to that remark of
yours about everything depending on the point of view. A very obvious
statement, of course, but genius seizes on the obvious and draws from it
the obscure. Thus the thoughts of even the simplest mind can suggest to
the man of genius his sublime conceptions, as is evident from the fact
that I got this idea from you."

"What idea?"

"Be patient. There is much you must understand first. You must realize
just how true is the statement that everything depends on the point of
view. Einstein proved that motion, space, and time depend on the
particular point of view of the observer, or as he expressed it, on the
scale of reference used. I go farther than that, infinitely farther. I
propound the theory that the observer _is_ the point of view. I go even
beyond that, I maintain that the world itself is merely the point of
view!"

"Huh?"

"Look here," proceeded van Manderpootz. "It is obvious that the world I
see is entirely different from the one in which you live. It is equally
obvious that a strictly religious man occupies a different world than
that of a materialist. The fortunate man lives in a happy world; the
unfortunate man sees a world of misery. One man is happy with little,
another is miserable with much. Each sees the world from his own point
of view, which is the same as saying that each lives in his own world.
Therefore there are as many worlds as there are points of view."

"But," I objected, "that theory is to disregard reality. Out of all the
different points of view, there must be one that is right, and all the
rest are wrong."

"One would think so," agreed the professor. "One would think that
between the point of view of you, for instance, as contrasted with that
of, say van Manderpootz, there would be small doubt as to which was
correct. However, early in the twentieth century, Heisenberg enunciated
his Principle of Uncertainty, which proved beyond argument that a
completely accurate scientific picture of the world is quite impossible,
that the law of cause and effect is merely a phase of the law of chance,
that no infallible predictions can ever be made, and that what science
