The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bulfinch's Mythology: The Age of Fable, by
Thomas Bulfinch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bulfinch's Mythology: The Age of Fable

Author: Thomas Bulfinch

Posting Date: February 4, 2012 [EBook #3327]
Release Date: July 2002
First Posted: April 2, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BULFINCH'S MYTHOLOGY: AGE OF FABLE ***




Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer.









                       BULFINCH'S MYTHOLOGY
                         THE AGE OF FABLE


                    Revised by Rev. E. E. Hale




CONTENTS

Chapter I

Origin of Greeks and Romans.  The Aryan Family.  The Divinities
of these Nations.  Character of the Romans.  Greek notion of
the World.  Dawn, Sun, and Moon.  Jupiter and the gods of
Olympus.  Foreign gods.   Latin Names.-- Saturn or Kronos.
Titans.  Juno, Vulcan, Mars, Phoebus-Apollo, Venus, Cupid,
Minerva, Mercury, Ceres, Bacchus.  The Muses.  The Graces.
The Fates.  The Furies.  Pan.   The Satyrs.  Momus.  Plutus.
  Roman gods.

Chapter II

Roman Idea of Creation.  Golden Age.  Milky Way.  Parnassus.
The Deluge.  Deucalion and Pyrrha.  Pandora.  Prometheus.
Apollo and Daphne.  Pyramus and Thisbe.  Davy's Safety Lamp.
Cephalus and Procris

Chapter III

Juno.  Syrinx, or Pandean Pipes.  Argus's Eyes.  Io.
Callisto   Constellations of Great and Little Bear.  Pole-star.
  Diana.  Actaeon.  Latona.  Rustics turned to Frogs.  Isle
of Delos.  Phaeton.  Palace of the Sun.  Phoebus.  Day.
Month.  Year.  Hours.  Seasons.  Chariot of the sun.  People
of Aethiopia.  Libyan Desert.  The Wells Dry.  The Sea
Shrinks.  Phaeton's Tomb.  The Heliades

Chapter IV

Silenus.  Midas.  Bacchus's Reward to Midas.  River Pactolus.
  Pan Challenges Apollo.  Midas's Ears.  Gordian Knot.  Baucis
and Philemon.  Aetna.  Perpetual Spring.  Pluto carries off
Prosperine.  Cere's Search.  Prosperine's Release.  Eleusinian
Mysteries.  Glaucis changed to a Fish.  Scylla

Chapter V

Pygmalion's Statue.  Dryope and Iole.  Lotus Tree.  Venus and
Adonis.  Anemone or Wind Flower.  Apollo and Hyacinthus.  Game
of Quoits.  Flower Hyacinthus.  Ceyx and Halcyone.  Palace of
the King of Sleep.  Morpheus.  Halcyon Birds.

Chapter VI

Hamadryads.  Pomona.  Vertumnus.  Iphis.  Cupid and Psyche.
Zephyr.  Temple of Ceres.  Temple of Venus.  The Ant.  Golden
Fleece.  Pluto.  Cerberus.  Charon.  The Treasure.  Stygian
Sleep.  Cup of Ambrosia.  Birth of Pleasure.  Greek name of
Psyche.

Chapter VII

Cadmus.  Origin of City of Thebes.  Tyrians.  Serpent.
Dragon's Teeth.  Harmonia.  Serpent Sacred to Mars.  Myrmidons.
  Cephalus.  Aeacus.  Pestilence Sent by June.  Origin of
Myrmidons.

Chapter VIII

Minos, King of Crete.  Nisus, his purple hair.  Scylla's
Betrayal.  Her Punishment.  Echo.  Juno's Sentence.
Narcissus.  Love for his own image.  Clytie.  Hopeless Love
for Apollo.  Becomes a Flower.  Hero and Leander.  Hellespont

Chapter IX

Goddess of Wisdom.  Arachne.  Her Challenge with Minerva.
Minerva's Web.  Arachne's Web.  Transformation.  Niobe Queen
of Thebes.  Mount Cynthus.  Death of Niobe's Children.  Changed
to stone.  The Gray-haired Sisters.  The Gorgon Medusa.  Tower
of brass.  Danae.  Perseus.  Net of Dicte.  Minerva.  King
Atlas.  Andromeda.  Sea Monster.  Wedding Feast.  Enemies
Turned to Stone.

Chapter X

Attributes of Monsters.  Laius.  Oedipus.  The Oracle.
Sphinx.  The Riddle.  Oedipus made King.  Jocasta.  Origin of
Pegasus.  Fountain of Hippocrene.  The Chimaera.
Bellerophontic Letters.  The Centaurs.  The Pygmies.
Description of the Griffin.  The Native Country.  One-Eyed
People

Chapter XI

The Ram with the Golden Fleece.  The Hellespont.  Jason's
Quest.  Sowing the Dragon's Teeth.  Jason's Father.
Incantations of Medea.  Ancient Name of Greece.  Great
Gatherings of the Greeks.  Wild Boar.  Atalanta's Race.  Three
Golden Apples.  Lovers' Ingratitude.  Venus's Revenge.
Corybantes

Chapter XII

Labors of Hercules.-- Fight with Nemean Lion.-- Slaughter of the
Hydra.  Cleaning the Augean Stables.-- Girdle of the Queen of the
Amazons.-- Oxen of Geryon.-- Golden Apples of Hesperides.--
Victory over Antaeus.-- Cacus Slain.-- Hercules, Descent into
Hades.-- He Becomes the Slave of Omphale.-- Dejanira's Charm.--
Death of Hercules.-- Hebe, Goddess of Youth

Chapter XIII

Theseus Moves the Fated Stone, and Proceeds to Athens.--
Procrustes's Bedstead.-- Tribute to Minos.-- Ariadne.-- Clew of
Thread.-- Encounter with the Minotaur.-- Theseus Becomes King of
Athens.-- Friendship of Theseus and Pirithous.  The Theseum.--
Festival of Panathenaea.-- Elgin Marbles.-- National Greek
Games.-- The Labyrinth.-- Daedalus' Wings.-- Invention of the
Saw.-- Castor and Pollux.-- Argonautic Expedition.-- Orpheus's
Harp.-- Gemini

Chapter XIV

Destruction of Semele.-- Infancy of Bacchus.-- March of Bacchus.-
- One of the Bacchanals taken Prisoner.-- Pentheus.-- Worship of
Bacchus Established in Greece.-- Ariadne.-- Bacchus's Marriage.--
Ariadne's Crown

Chapter XV

Pan.-- Shepherd's Pipe.-- Panic Terror.-- Signification of the
Name Pan.-- Latin Divinities.-- Wood Nymphs.-- Water Nymphs.--
Sea Nymphs.  Pleasing Traits of Old Paganism.-- Mrs. Browning's
Poem.-- Violation of Cere's Grove.-- Erisichthon's Punishment.--
Rhoecus.-- Water Deities.-- Neptune's Symbol of Power.-- Latin
Name for the Muses, and other Deities.-- Personification of the
Winds.  The Harpies.-- Worship of Fortuna

Chapter XVI

Transformation of Achelous.-- Origin of the Cornucopia.-- Ancient
Meaning of fight of Achelous with Hercules.-- Aesculapius.-- The
Cyclops.  Antigone.-- Expedition of the "Seven against Thebes."-
- Antigone's Sisterly Devotion.-- Antigone's Burial.-- Penelope.-
- Statue to Modesty.-- Ulysses.-- Penelope's suitors.--
Penelope's Web

Chapter XVII

Orpheus's Lyre.-- Unhappy Prognostics at Orpheus's Marriage.--
Eurydice's Death.-- Orpheus Descends to the Stygian Realm.--
Orpheus Loses Eurydice Forever.-- Thracian Maidens.-- Honey.--
Aristaeus's Loss and Complaint.-- Cyrene's Apartments.-- Proteus
Captured.-- His Directions to Orpheus.-- Swarm of Bees.--
Celebrated Mythical Poets and Musicians.-- First Mortal Endowed
with Prophetic Powers

Chapter XVIII

Adventures of Real Persons.-- Arion, Famous Musician.--
Description of Ancient Theatres.-- Murder of Ibycus.-- Chorus
Personating the Furies.-- Cranes of Ibycus.-- The Murderers
Seized.-- Simonides.-- Scopa's Jest.  Simonides's Escape.--
Sappho.-- "Lover's Leap"

Chapter XIX

Endymion.-- Mount Latmos. Gift of Perpetual Youth and Perpetual
Sleep.-- Orion.-- Kedalion.-- Orion's Girdle.-- The Fatal Shot
The Pleiads.-- Aurora.-- Memnon.-- statue of Memnon.-- Scylla.--
Acis and Galatea.-- River Acis

Chapter XX

Minerva's Competition.-- Paris's Decision.-- Helen.-- Paris's
Elopement.-- Ulysses's Pretence.-- The Apple of Discord.-- Priam,
King of Troy.-- Commander of Grecian Armament.-- Principal
Leaders of the Trojans.-- Agamemnon Kills the Sacred Stag.--
Iphigenia.-- The Trojan War.-- The Iliad.-- Interest of Dods and
Goddesses in the War.-- Achilles's Suit of Armor.-- Death of
Hector.-- Ransom Sent to Achilles.-- Achilles Grants Priam's
Request.-- Hector's Funeral Solemnities.

Chapter XXI

Achilles Captivated by Polyxena.-- Achilles' Claim.-- Bestowal of
Achilles' Armor.-- The Hyacinth.-- Arrows of Hercules.-- Death of
Paris.-- Celebrated Statue of Minerva.-- Wooden Horse.-- Greeks
Pretend to Abandon the Siege.-- Sea Serpents.-- Laocoon.-- Troy
subdued.-- Helen and Menelaus.-- Nepenthe.-- Agamemnon's
Misfortunes.-- Orestes.-- Electra.-- Site of the City of Troy

Chapter XXII

The Odyssey.-- The Wanderings of Ulysses.-- Country of the
Cyclops.-- The Island of Aeolus.-- The Barbarous Tribe of
Laestrygonians.-- Circe.-- The Sirens.-- Scylla and Charybdis.--
Cattle of Hyperion.-- Ulysses's Raft.-- Calypso Entertains
Ulysses.-- Telemachus and Mentor Escape from Calypso's Isle

Chapter XXIII

Ulysses Abandons the Raft.-- The Country of the Phaeacians.--
Nausicaa's Dream.-- A Game of Ball.-- Ulysses's Dilemma.--
Nausicaa's Courage.-- The Palace of Alcinous.-- Skill of the
Phaeacian Women.-- Hospitality to Ulysses.-- Demodocus, the Blind
Bard.-- Gifts to Ulysses

Chapter XXV

Virgil's Description of the Region of the Dead.-- Descend into
Hades.-- The Black River and Ferryman.-- Cape Palinurus.-- The
Three-Headed Dog.-- Regions of Sadness.-- Shades of Grecian and
Trojan Warriors.-- Judgment Hall of Rhadamanthus.-- The Elysian
Fields.-- Aeneas Meets His Father.-- Anchises Explains the Plan
of Creation.-- Transmigration of Souls.-- Egyptian Name of
Hades.-- Location of Elysium.-- Prophetic Power of the Sibyl.--
Legend of the Nine Books




Stories of Gods and Heroes.



Chapter I

Introduction

The literature of our time, as of all the centuries of
Christendom, is full of allusions to the gods and goddesses of
the Greeks and Romans.  Occasionally, and, in modern days, more
often, it contains allusions to the worship and the superstitions
of the northern nations of Europe.  The object of this book is to
teach readers who are not yet familiar with the writers of Greece
and Rome, or the ballads or legends of the Scandinavians, enough
of the stories which form what is called their mythology, to make
those allusions intelligible which one meets every day, even in
the authors of our own time.

The Greeks and Romans both belong to the same race or stock.  It
is generally known in our time as the Aryan family of mankind;
and so far as we know its history, the Greeks and Romans
descended from the tribes which emigrated from the high table-
lands of Northern India.  Other tribes emigrated in different
directions from the same centre, so that traces of the Aryan
language are found in the islands of the Pacific ocean.

The people of this race, who moved westward, seem to have had a
special fondness for open air nature, and a willingness to
personify the powers of nature.  They were glad to live in the
open air, and they specially encouraged the virtues which an
open-air people prize.  Thus no Roman was thought manly who could
not swim, and every Greek exercised in the athletic sports of the
palaestra.

The Romans and Grecian and German divisions of this great race
are those with which we have most to do in history and in
literature.  Our own English language is made up of the dialects
of different tribes, many of whom agreed in their use of words
which they had derived from our Aryan ancestry.  Thus our
substantive verb I AM appears in the original Sanscrit of the
Aryans as ESMI, and m for ME (MOI), or the first person singular,
is found in all the verbal inflections.  The Greek form of the
same verb was ESMI, which became ASMI,   and in Latin the first
and last vowels have disappeared, the verb is SUM.  Similar
relationships are traced in the numerals, and throughout all the
languages of these nations.

The Romans, like the Etruscans who came before them, were neither
poetical nor imaginative in temperament.  Their activity ran in
practical directions.  They therefore invented few, if any
stories, of the gods whom they worshipped with fixed rites.  Mr.
Macaulay speaks of these gods as "the sober abstractions of the
Roman pantheon."  We owe most of the stories of the ancient
mythology to the wit and fancy of the Greeks,   more playful and
imaginative,   who seized from Egypt and from the East such
legends as pleased them,   and adapted them in their own way.  It
often happens that such stories, resembling each other in their
foundation, are found in the Greek and Roman authors in several
different forms.

To understand these stories, we will here first acquaint
ourselves with the ideas of the structure of the universe, which
the poets and others held, and which will form the scenery, so to
speak, of the narratives.

The Greek poets believed the earth to be flat and circular, their
own country occupying the middle of it, the central point being
either Mount Olympus, the abode of the gods, or Delphi, so famous
for its oracle.

The circular disk of the earth was crossed from west to east, and
divided into two equal parts by the SEA, as they called the
Mediterranean, and its continuation the Euxine.

Around the earth flowed the RIVER OCEAN, its course being from
south to north on the western side of the earth, and in a
contrary direction on the eastern side.  It flowed in a steady,
equable current, unvexed by storm or tempest.  The sea, and all
the rivers on earth, received their waters from it.

The northern portion of the earth was supposed to be inhabited by
a happy race named the Hyperboreans [this word means "who live
beyond the north" from the word "hyper," beyond, and boreas, the
north wind], dwelling in everlasting bliss and spring beyond the
lofty mountains whose caverns were supposed to send forth the
piercing blasts of the north wind, which chilled the people of
Hellas (Greece).  Their country was inaccessible by land or sea.
They lived exempt from disease or old age, from toils and
warfare.  Moore has given us the "Song of a Hyperborean,"
beginning

  "I come from a land in the sun-bright deep,
  Where golden gardens glow,
  Where the winds of the north, becalmed in sleep,
  Their conch-shells never blow."

On the south side of the earth, close to the stream of Ocean,
dwelt a people happy and virtuous as the Hyperboreans.  They were
named the AEthiopians.  The gods favored them so highly that they
were wont to leave at times their Olympian abodes, and go to
share their sacrifices and banquets.

On the western margin of the earth, by the stream of Ocean, lay a
happy place named the Elysian Plain, whither mortals favored by
the gods were transported without tasting of death, to enjoy an
immortality of bliss.  This happy region was also called the
"fortunate fields," and the "Isles of the Blessed."

We thus see that the Greeks of the early ages knew little of any
real people except those to the east and south of their own
country, or near the coast of the Mediterranean.  Their
imagination meantime peopled the western portion of this sea with
giants, monsters, and enchantresses; while they placed around the
disk of the earth, which they probably regarded as of no great
width, nations enjoying the peculiar favor of the gods, and
blessed with happiness and longevity.

The Dawn, the Sun, and the Moon were supposed to rise out of the
Ocean, on the western side, and to drive through the air, giving
light to gods and men.  The stars also, except those forming
Charles' Wain or Bear, and others near them, rose out of and sank
into the stream of Ocean.  There the sun-god embarked in a winged
boat, which conveyed him round by the northern part of the earth,
back to his place of rising in the east.  Milton alludes to this
in his "Commmus."

  "Now the gilded car of day
  His golden axle doth allay
  In the steep Atlantic stream,
  And the slope sun his upward beam
  Shoots against the dusky pole,
  Pacing towards the other goal
  Of his chamber in the east."

The abode of the gods was on the summit of Mount Olympus, in
Thessaly.  A gate of clouds, kept by the goddesses named the
Seasons, opened to permit the passage of the Celestials to earth,
and to receive them on their return.  The gods had their separate
dwellings; but all, when summoned, repaired to the palace of
Jupiter [Or Zeus.  The relation of these names to each other will
be explained on the next page], as did also those deities whose
usual abode was the earth, the waters, or the underworld.  It was
also in the great hall of the palace of the Olympian king that
the gods feasted each day on ambrosia and nectar, their food and
drink, the latter being handed round by the lovely goddess Hebe.
Here they conversed of the affairs of heaven and earth; and as
they quaffed their nectar, Apollo, the god of music, delighted
them with the tones of his lyre, to which the muses sang in
responsive strains.  When the sun was set, the gods retired to
sleep in their respective dwellings.

The following lines from the Odyssey will show how Homer
conceived of Olympus:--

  "So saying, Minerva, goddess azure-eyed,
  Rose to Olympus, the reputed seat
  Eternal of the gods, which never storms
  Disturb, rains drench, or snow invades, but calm
 The expanse and cloudless shines with purest day.
  T here the inhabitants divine rejoice
  Forever.:" Cowper

Such were the abodes of the gods as the Greeks conceived them.
The Romans, before they knew the Greek poetry, seem to have had
no definite imagination of such an assembly of gods.  But the
Roman and Etruscan races were by no means irreligious.  They
venerated their departed ancestors,   and in each family the
worship of these ancestors was an important duty.  The images of
the ancestors were kept in a sacred place,   each family
observed, at fixed times, memorial rites in their honor,   and
for these and other religious observances the family hearth was
consecrated.  The earliest rites of Roman worship are supposed to
be connected with such family devotions.

As the Greeks and Romans became acquainted with other nations,
they imported their habits of worship, even in early times.  It
will be remembered that as late as St. Paul's time, he found an
altar at Athens "to an unknown god."  Greeks and Romans alike
were willing to receive from other nations the legends regarding
their gods, and to incorporate them as well as they could with
their own.  It is thus that in the poetical mythology of those
nations, which we are now to study, we frequently find a Latin
and a Greek name for one imagined divinity.  Thus Zeus, of the
Greeks, becomes in Latin   with the addition of the word pater (a
father) [The reader will observe that father is one of the words
derived from an Ayan root.  Let p and t become rough, as the
grammarians say,   let p become ph, and t th, and you have
phather or father], Jupiter   Kronos of the Greeks appears as
"Vulcanus" of the Latins, "Ares" of the Greeks is "Mars" or
Mavors of the Latins, "Poseidon" of the Greeks is "Neptunus" of
the Latins, "Aphrodite" of the Greeks is "Venus" of the Latins.
This variation is not to be confounded with a mere translation,
as where "Paulos" of the Greek becomes "Paulus" in Latin, or
"Odysseus" becomes "Ulysses,"   or as when "Pierre" of the French
becomes "Peter" in English.  What really happened was, that as
the Romans, more cultivated than their fathers, found in Greek
literature a god of fire and smithery,   they transferred his
name "Hephaistos" to their own old god "Vulcanus,"   who had the
same duties,   and in their after literature the Latin name was
used for the stories of Greek and Latin origin.

As the English literature came into being largely on French and
Latin models, and as French is but a degraded Latin and retains
Latin roots largely,   in our older English poets the Latin forms
of these names are generally used.  In our own generation, with
the precision now so much courted, a fashion has come in, of
designating Mars by his Greek name of "Ares," Venus by her name
of "Aphrodite," and so on.  But in this book, as our object is to
make familiar the stores of general English literature which
refer to such subjects, we shall retain, in general, the Latin
names,   only calling the attention of the reader to the Greek
names, as they appear in Greek authors,   and in many writers of
the more recent English schools.

The real monarch of the heavens in the mythology of both Greece
and Rome is Jupiter (Zeus-pater, father-Jove) [Jove appears to be
a word derived from the same root as Zeus, and it appears in the
root dev of the Sanscrit, where devas are gods of different
forms.  Our English word devil probably comes from the French
diable, Italian diavolo, Latin diabolus, one who makes division,-
- literally one who separates balls, or throws balls about,--
instead of throwing them frankly and truly at the batsman.  It is
not to be traced to the Sanscrit deva.]

In the mythological system we are tracing Zeus is himself the
father of many of the gods, and he is often spoken of as father
of gods and men.  He is the father of Vulcan [In Greek
Hephaistos], of Venus [in Greek Aphrodite], of Minerva [in Greek
Pallas Athene, or either name separately], of Apollo [of
Phoebus], Diana [in Greek Artemis], and of Mercury [in Greek
Hermes], who are ranked among the twelve superior gods, and of
many inferior deities.  But Jupiter himself is not the original
deity in these systems.  He is the son of Saturnus, as in the
Greek Zeus is the son of Kronos.  Still the inevitable question
would occur where did Saturnus or Kronos come from.  And, in
forms and statements more and more vague, the answer was that he
was born from Uranus or Ouranos, which is the name of the Heaven
over all which seemed to embrace all things.  The Greek name of
Saturn was spelled Kronos.  The Greek name of Time was spelled
Chronos.  A similarity between the two was imagined.  And the
whole statement, when reduced to rationalistic language, would be
that from Uranus, the infinite, was born Chronos, Time,-- that
from Time, Zeus or Jupiter was born, and that he is the only
child of Time who has complete sway over mortals and immortals.

  "The will of Jove I own,
  Who mortals and immortals rules alone."
  Homer, II.xii

Jupiter was son of Saturn (Kronos) [The names included in
parentheses are the Greek, the others being the Roman or Latin
names] and Ops (Rhea in Greek, sometimes confounded with the
Phrygian Cybele).

Saturn and Rhea were of the race of Titans, who were the children
of Earth and Heaven, which sprang from Chaos, of which we shall
give a further account in our next chapter.

In allusion to the dethronement of Ouranos by Kronos, and of
Kronos or Saturnus by Zeus or Jupiter, Prometheus says in
AEschylus's tragedy,--

  "You may deem
  Its towers impregnable; but have I not
  already seen two monarchs hurled from them."

Thee is another cosmogony, or account of the creation, according
to which Earth, Erebus, and Love were the first of beings.  Love
(Eros)_ issued from the egg of Night, which floated on Chaos.  By
his arrows and torch he pierced and vivified all things,
producing life and joy.

Saturn and Rhea were not the only Titans.  There were others,
whose names were Oceanus, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Ophion, males;
and Themis, Mnemosyne, Eurynome, females.  They are spoken of as
the elder gods, whose dominion was afterwards transferred to
others.  Saturn yielded to Jupiter, Oceanus to Neptune, Hyperion
to Apollo.  Hyperion was the father of the Sun, Moon, and Dawn.
He is therefore the original sun-god, and is painted with the
splendor and beauty which were afterwards bestowed on Apollo.

"Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself."   Shakespeare

Ophion and Eurynome ruled over Olympus till they were dethroned
by Saturn and Rhea.  Milton alludes to them in Paradise Lost.  He
says the heathen seem to have had some knowledge of the
temptation and fall of man,--

  "And fabled how the serpent, whom they called
  Ophion, with Eurynome (the wide-
  Encroaching Eve perhaps), had first the rule
  Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven."

The representations given of Saturn are not very consistent, for
on the one hand his reign is said to have been the golden age of
innocence and purity, and on the other he is described as a
monster who devoured his own children [This inconsistency arises
