laughter. "Florence, _did_ you hear? Floridy Alabamy."

And the girls laughed till the tears ran down their cheeks.

"Bubbles, you are too ridiculous," said Dimple, while Bubbles pinned her
bit of scarlet on her doll.

Just then Sylvy called her, and she ran off, holding her doll admiringly
at arm's length.

"She will dress it just like a darkey. You see," said Dimple, "she has a
purple dress on it now; think of that, with a scarlet overskirt; and I
know she will make it a blue waist out of one of my old sash ribbons I
gave her."

And sure enough, Floridy Alabamy did wear the three colors in triumph.

"Do you like big or little dolls best?" asked Florence.

"I don't know," said Dimple. "I think rather big or real little. Middle
sizes are so hard to dress. They have to have such little fidgety
sleeves and waists. I have two little dolls upstairs, and we can dress
them up next. I believe one of them has an arm off, but it can be
mended. How many dolls have you?"

"Four, now," answered Florence. "I had five, but Gertrude broke one.
Gertrude is such a mischief, I have to keep all my things locked up. I
hope to goodness they won't let her get at them while I'm away."

"Oh, you must make a traveling dress for your Celestine. I have a piece
of grey linen that will just do."

By the time the dinner bell rang, both the dolls were dressed
gorgeously.

"Aren't they lovely, papa?" said Dimple, as she hobbled out to meet him.

"Yes; they look like two butterflies," he said, lifting her up, doll and
all.

"Are you having a good time, Florence? I hope Dimple hasn't pinched or
scratched you yet."

"Why, papa," said Dimple, looking very much hurt. "Florence will think I
am a regular little cat," but seeing a twinkle in his eyes, she knew he
was only in fun, and was consoled by the kiss he gave her as he put her
in her chair at the table.

There was a long afternoon before them, and, although Dimple could not
walk very well with her bandaged foot, she managed to get down to her
favorite place, under a big tree, where the grass was long and thick.

"Now we can play beautifully with our dolls, Florence," she said, "and
have no one to disturb us, for Bubbles doesn't count. She has to be in
the kitchen for a while anyhow."

They had not been out very long before Bubbles came running to them.
"There is a lady and a boy in the house, Miss Dimple," she said, "and
your mamma's a bringin' the boy out hyah."

"A boy!" said both the girls in horror.

"Think of it, Florence, a horrid boy! What will we do with him? I can't
run, and boys despise dolls. As for talking, I never could talk to boys.
They shut me up like a clam. I always feel as if they wanted to get
away, and I believe they would if they could," said Dimple in a
disgusted tone.

But, by this time, Mrs. Dallas had come up to them.

"This is Rock Hardy, girls," said she. "As Dimple is a little lame, I
brought him out here, rather than take her in the house," and so saying,
she left them. There was a deep silence after they had shaken hands; all
looking rather bashful for a few minutes.

Finally Rock took courage to say, "What pretty dolls."

This was encouraging; Florence and Dimple exchanged pleased glances.

"Do you think they are pretty?" asked Dimple. "I thought boys hated
dolls."

"I don't," said Rock. "I played with them myself for a long time, and I
have one now, but I don't play with it because I like to read better."

"He _is_ a nice boy," thought the girls.

"How funny," said Florence. "How came you to play with dolls?"

"Why, you see, I haven't any brothers and sisters. When I was a little
fellow I used to get so lonely, that my mother dressed a boy doll for
me, and I talked to it and pretended it was another boy."

"I haven't any brothers, or sisters either," said Dimple, "but Florence
has. I have Bubbles, though. Everybody can't have a Bubbles; she is next
best to a sister, or a cousin."

"Who is Bubbles?" asked Rock.

"She is the little colored girl you saw when you came out of the house;
she has lived here ever since I was a baby; she is a year older than I
am; her mother ran off and left her, and she is real nice to play with."

Dimple was fast getting over her embarrassment.

"Don't you go to school?" asked Rock.

"No, mamma has always taught me at home, but I am going next year. It is
vacation now."

"Yes, I know," said Rock, "that is why we came here. We are going to
stay for some time. I like to play with girls. Will you let me come and
play with you sometimes?"

"Yes, indeed," said Dimple, in her warm-hearted way. "My foot is nearly
well, and I can soon run about. I think I should like to play with a
nice boy."

"I hope I'm a nice boy," said Rock, "but I don't know. I suppose
everybody is mean sometimes."

"I think you look nice," said Dimple, honestly, looking at him from head
to foot.

"Why don't you say something, Florence?"

Florence thus appealed to, could say nothing.

"Florence is my cousin," said Dimple. "She lives in Baltimore and she
came here yesterday."

"Why, I live in Baltimore," said Rock. "What street do you live on,
Florence?"

Florence told him, and they found it was in the next street to that on
which Rock lived, so they all began to feel like old friends.

"If I had my scroll saw here, I could make you each a chair for your
dolls," said Rock. "Maybe my mother will let me send for it. I will ask
her."

"Oh, that would be lovely," said the girls.

"And I will lend you some of my books to read," said Dimple. "If you
will please hand me that little cane, we will go in and you can choose
them."

"Oh, thank you," said Rock. "I shall like to have them, for I like to
read better than to do anything else."

They all went in and found Rock's mother and Mrs. Dallas in the parlor.

Dimple told her mamma what they had come for, and her mamma suggested
her taking Rock into the library first, as he might find something there
that he liked.

So Rock was taken to the bookcase, and found there a book of travels he
had been wanting to read, so he bade them good-bye, with it under his
arm, promising soon to come again.

Then Dimple and Florence returned to the garden where they had left a
colony of grasshoppers imprisoned in a small house built for them out of
bits of wood and bark.

"Baby Grasshopper has gone," said Florence, in dismay, as she peeped in
to see the prisoners.

"I knew he would get out; he was so little," returned Dimple. "Let's set
them all free, Florence. We'll pretend that they escaped in the night,
or that peace has been declared."

"Or that a tornado blew down their prison."

"Yes, that will be the best. We'll blow real hard, and maybe it will
come down."

So, with cheeks much puffed out they blew and blew, but without avail,
and finally they picked up their hats and fanned the little bark
structure so vigorously that it toppled over, and the grasshoppers
escaped in every direction, the children laughing to see how quickly
they disappeared.

They sat there in the grass wondering what to do next when Dimple
exclaimed, "There comes papa with Mr. Coulter,--he's the carpenter, you
know--I wonder what he is going to do. See, Mr. Coulter is measuring the
ground, and papa is explaining something. I can tell by the way he
keeps doing so, with his hand. He always does that when he is
explaining. Help me up, Florence, and let's go over there and see what's
going on. Papa must mean to have something built. I hope it isn't a
fence. No, it can't be that, for it would be too near the other one.
Isn't it funny to watch men talking? They do so many funny things. Mr.
Coulter keeps nodding his head like a horse."

Florence laughed and they made their way over to where the two men
stood. As soon as they were within speaking distance, Dimple began to
put her questions. "Are you going to build something, papa? What is it?
Please don't say it's a fence, or a--a pig-sty."

Mr. Coulter chuckled as he went on laying his foot-rule along the
ground.

"I hope it won't turn into a pig-sty," Mr. Dallas replied, with a smile.
"It won't unless little pigs get into it."

"Are you going to keep little pigs?" Dimple asked.

"I didn't say so."

"Oh, papa, you are so mystiferious. I wish you would tell us all about
it. What are you going to build? Any sort of house?"

"Yes, one sort of house."

"What is it to be for?"

"Little chicks."

"Ah!" Dimple was quite satisfied. "I see. You need a new hen house.
Isn't the old one big enough? To be sure we don't get very many eggs
just now, for so many of the hens are sitting. Oh, I know, maybe you are
going to build a place like Mr. Lind's, with a--what is that thing? A
inkybator. Are you going to have one of those? and a brooder? Are you,
papa?"

"I haven't decided exactly what is to be in it, just yet. I think we'll
let mamma see to that--she knows best what is needed. You shall know all
about it in good time. But, Dimple, I don't want you to worry Mr.
Coulter with questions, and I want you two little girls to keep away
from the building while the work is going on."

"Yes, uncle." Florence gave her promise promptly.

"Yes--papa--but--" Dimple was disappointed. She dearly liked to watch
the workmen when they came on the place, and she felt this was a
deprivation which seemed unnecessary. "Why, papa, can't we look at the
workmen? We won't ask questions and bother them," she said.

"I think it is best that you shouldn't this time. Can't you trust papa?
When the proper time comes I'll show you the whole thing, and explain it
all. Meantime I want you to be an obedient little girl, and keep out of
the way."

Dimple looked up wistfully.

"Won't you please your father by minding what he says?" continued Mr.
Dallas.

"Yes, papa," replied Dimple, faintly, "I will be sure to mind, only I
wish you could let me see the house going up. It is such fun to climb
about over the boards and things."

"I know it is, and I know I'm requiring a great deal of you, but I think
in the end you will see why," returned her father.

"Have we many little chicks to go in it. I mean will there be a great
many?"

Mr. Dallas and Mr. Coulter glanced at each other and smiled; then Mr.
Dallas said, "It might be a good plan to go to the barn and see how old
Speckle is getting on. Her time is about up, so perhaps we'll find some
little chicks. I'll carry you there on my back."

"And maybe we'll find some eggs," spoke up Florence, who dearly liked to
hunt eggs. "We found two yesterday. Indeed, uncle, I think you do need
more hens, for auntie said yesterday that she didn't get all the eggs
she wanted."

They found old Speckle ready to be quite flustered when they took her
off the nest, for they found that four little chicks were already
hatched, and the shells of several other eggs were chipped.

Mr. Dallas gave the children each two of the little chicks to carry up
to the house, that they might be kept safely till Speckle came off with
the rest of the brood, and Bubbles, who had followed them, trotted along
behind with her hands full of the eggs they were fortunate enough to
find.

The new building was begun at once, and Dimple found it hard to keep
away from it, but she resolutely stuck to her promise. One day, to be
sure, she did not venture nearer than usual, but suddenly she exclaimed
in a loud voice, "Get thee hence, satan!" and turning ran directly into
Bubbles who, as usual, had followed her.

"What dat yuh call me, Miss Dimple," exclaimed Bubbles, in an aggrieved
tone.

"You! Oh, I wasn't talking to you."

This seemed rather a lame excuse to Bubbles, since no one else was near.
"Yass 'm, yuh is call me sumpin'," she insisted. "Dey ain't nobody
else."

"There was somebody else," Dimple replied, with dignity. "And don't you
contradict me. I reckon I know what I'm talking about better than you
do."

This puzzled Bubbles, but it also silenced her, although she looked
furtively around to see where Dimple's hidden acquaintance might be;
that somebody else to whom she spoke so defiantly. "Hit's dat no 'count
little niggah Jim, I'll be bound," she muttered, under her breath. "He
done shy a stone at the de birds and dat mek Miss Dimple mad. She don't
'low nobody 'buse de birds." Thus settling the matter, she cheerfully
smiled when Dimple gave her a glance, and Dimple laughed. Then she stood
still.

"Bubbles," she said, "papa never said you mustn't go near that house,
did he?"

"No 'm."

"Well, just go peep in and tell me what it looks like. From the looks of
the outside, I should say that it is nearly done. You peep in at the
window."

Bubbles obeyed, and came back with the information. "Hit's got a flo'
an' a stove."

"Ah!" Dimple pondered. "Oh yes, that's to keep the baby chicks warm, I
suppose. I wish I could see for myself. Is that all, Bubbles?"

"Yass 'm."

"I wish I hadn't told you to peep in," Dimple remarked, after a pause.
"I don't believe it was quite honest for me to do it, and I'll have to
be uncomfortable till I tell mamma or papa. You oughtn't to have peeped,
Bubbles."

"Yuh tole me to."

"So I did, but--well, you shouldn't have done it, just the same."

Bubbles rolled her eyes reproachfully, and began to mutter.

"There, never mind. It wasn't your fault," Dimple confessed, hastily.
But although Bubbles' countenance cleared, Dimple herself did not feel
at ease till she had told her mother, which she did that night at
bedtime.

"It was not right," her mother told her, "and was a bad example to
Bubbles. That is where the trouble often comes in. Not so much in the
actual wrong we do, but its effect upon others."

"I do want to see, so very much. Papa never made it so hard for me
before."

"I know it, dear. I have realized very clearly all along how hard it
must be for you, but I think when you do know you will be so pleased
that you will forget this part of it. I am glad my little girlie was
brave enough to tell of her asking Bubbles to peep."

And kissing her good-night, Mrs. Dallas left her little girl feeling
comforted.




CHAPTER III

A Quarrel


"Raining! Isn't that too bad?" said Florence, leaning on one elbow in
bed, and looking out of the window.

"Hm, hm," said Dimple, sleepily, from her pillow.

Florence slipped out of bed and stood looking dolefully at the falling
drops.

"What do you suppose the birds do, Dimple?" she asked, going up to her,
and softly shaking her.

"Oh," said Dimple, now awake, and sitting up in bed, rubbing her eyes,
"I suppose they get under the leaves just as we do under an umbrella, or
they go under the eaves, and places like that. I have seen them lots of
times. It is raining, isn't it, Florence?"

"I said so, long ago," answered Florence; "now we can't go out of doors
to play, and it is so nice outdoors. I don't see the sense of its
raining in summer."

"Why," returned Dimple, sitting down on the floor to put on her shoes
and stockings, "that is the very time for it to rain, or everything
would dry up."

"Well, I wish it didn't have to," said Florence, coming away from the
window, and sitting on the floor too. "What color stockings do you like
best, Dimple?"

"I don't know; black, I think. Don't you?"

"I believe I do. My! there is the breakfast bell, and we are only
beginning to get dressed. You fasten my buttons, and I will fasten
yours, Dimple, so we will get dressed in a hurry."

Their fingers flew, and they rushed down to breakfast two steps at a
time.

"It was so dark this morning that we went to sleep again after you
called us, mamma," explained Dimple.

"I will excuse you this time, but your breakfast is not as warm as it
would have been earlier," said Mrs. Dallas, "and papa had to go away
without his morning kiss."

"I am sorry," said Dimple. "Cold eggs aren't very good," she went on,
pushing away her plate. "What can we do to-day, mamma?"

"What should you like to do?"

"I don't know," returned Dimple. "My feelings hurt me rainy days, and I
don't know what I want."

Mrs. Dallas smiled, as she replied, "You might make paper dolls, they
are good rainy day people; that would be one thing. Then you can paint."

"I haven't but one brush, and I have used up all the books and papers
you gave me to paint in."

"I can find some more, perhaps, and you and Florence can take turn about
with the paint brush."

Dimple looked as if that would not suit very well, and Florence seeing
her look, felt a little hurt.

Paper dolls did not amuse them very long; and when Dimple was ready to
color the pictures Mrs. Dallas had found for them, Florence declined
absolutely to paint at all. So they both sat with their elbows on the
window-sill, decidedly out of humor.

"Florence," said Dimple, presently, "I have an idea. Do you see that
hogshead down there? It is running over."

"I see it," said Florence. "What of it; it isn't anything very
wonderful."

"Well, you needn't be so disagreeable," said Dimple. "What I was going
to say, is this; let's make paper boats, and put paper dolls in them. We
can pretend the hogshead is Niagara Falls, and the water that runs down
the gutter can be Niagara river."

"We will get sopping wet."

"Oh no, we won't; it isn't raining so awfully hard. I will put on my
rubber waterproof, and you can put on mamma's. We can slip around there
without any one seeing us, for mamma is busy on the other side of the
house. Don't you think it would be fun?"

"Ye-es," said Florence, doubtfully.

"Let's hurry and make the boats then. Which paper dolls shall we take?
The ugliest, I think, because they will all be drowned anyhow; and don't
let's take any pretty frocks, because we can make dolls to fit the
frocks when these are drowned."

With paper boats, dolls and waterproofs they stole softly down the front
stairs, and shutting the door after them very gently, ran around the
house to the hogshead. The roses were heavy with rain, and the
honeysuckle shook big drops on them, as they ran by.

The boats went topsy-turvy over the falls, upsetting the dolls, who went
careering down the stream, to the great delight of the children.

They played till the last boat load was lost beyond all hope, and then,
with wet feet and streaming sleeves, they crept back to the house.

"Now, what shall we do? It was lots of fun, Dimple," said Florence, "but
I know your mother will scold, when she sees how wet our feet are, and
your foot just well too, and see my sleeves. If we change our clothes
she will wonder and then--What shall we do?"

"I don't think it was a bit of harm," said Dimple, determined to brave
it out, "but it won't do to keep these wet frocks on. I know. We will go
up into the attic, take them off, and hang them up to dry; then we can
dress up in other things. There are trunks and boxes full of clothes up
there, and we can play something."

"So we can," exclaimed Florence. "That is a perfectly lovely plan. Do
you think our clothes will dry before supper?"

"Of course," said Dimple; "anyhow it will be funny to put on trains and
things. Come on."

They raced up to the garret, and were soon diving into the boxes and
trunks of winter clothing that Mrs. Dallas had packed away.

"Here," said Dimple, on her knees before a trunk, "take this skirt of
mamma's," and she dragged out a cashmere skirt. "Florence, see what is
in those band-boxes, and get us each a bonnet, while I hunt for a shawl
or coat, or something."

After much tumbling up of clothing, she found what she wanted, and they
had taken off their frocks when they heard Mrs. Dallas calling,

"Children, where are you?"

Both were silent for a moment, and stood with quickly beating hearts.

After a second call, Dimple mustered up courage to answer, "Up here,
mamma."

"Where?"

"In the garret."

"What are you doing?"

"Just playing."

"Well, don't get into any mischief," came from the bottom of the stairs,
and then Mrs. Dallas went off.

Presently there came another fright: a footstep on the stairs.

"Who is that?" asked Dimple, fearfully.

"Me," came the answer, as Bubbles' woolly head appeared.

"It is only Bubbles," said Dimple, much relieved. "Come up, Bubbles; we
are dressing up, and you shall too; but if you dare to tell on us--off
you go to the orphan asylum."

"I wouldn't tell fur nothin', Miss Dimple," said she, as Dimple threw
her an old wrapper.

"I am going to be Lady Melrose, and Florence Lady Beckwith. You can
be--Oh, Florence, let's dress Bubbles up in a coat and trousers, and
have her for a footman."

"All right," said Florence, and shaking with laughter, Bubbles was
attired in coat, trousers, and tall hat.

"Oh, she is too funny," said Florence, holding her sides. "Where is my
bonnet?"

"That's mine," exclaimed Dimple, as Florence possessed herself of a
bonnet with feathers in it.

"No, I chose this first," said Florence.

"Well, it's my mother's, I reckon, and I have the best right to it."

"Well, I'm company, and you're very impolite."

"I'm not," retorted Dimple, getting very red in the face.

"You are. I'd have my mother teach me how to behave, if I were you,
Dimple Dallas."

"You horrid, red-headed thing!" cried Dimple, now thoroughly angry. "I'd
like to know how you would look in a garnet velvet bonnet anyhow. You'd
better take something that's not quite so near the color of your hair."

"My hair isn't red, it's auburn," said Florence, bursting into a sob,
"and I'm not going to stay here another minute. I'm going straight home
to my mother." And she tore off the clothes in which she had decked
herself, leaving them in a heap on the floor. She snatched up her wet
frock and ran downstairs.

Dimple sat quite still after Florence left her. She did not dare to go
downstairs for fear of encountering her mother, and yet, suppose
Florence should really mean to go home. How dreadful! She considered the
question till she could bear it no longer, and, slowly putting on her
own clothes, she crept downstairs, hoping as she went from room to room
that she would find Florence. She even peeped cautiously in upon her
mother, busy with her sewing, but no Florence was to be seen.

"Perhaps she has started to go home," Dimple said to herself, in real
alarm. "Oh, dear, I hope there hasn't been any train along that she
could take." She put on her hat, seized an umbrella from the rack, and
sallied forth. It was still raining hard, and as she splashed along, the
little girl was very miserable.

It was quite a walk to the railway station, and Dimple hurried her
steps, fearing she might be too late to intercept her cousin. She
entered the waiting-room of the station, and looked anxiously around. No
Florence was there. Her heart sank and she turned to go. Florence had
really meant what she said. And her aunt and cousins in Baltimore, what
would they think of her? The tears began to roll down Dimple's cheeks
as she looked up and down the long track. She did not know what to do
next. It would be so dreadful to go home and tell her mother that she
had driven her cousin away by her rudeness. She was about to turn toward
home, when she bethought herself of making some inquiry about the
trains; and she entered the waiting-room again.

Standing on tiptoe she asked the ticket agent. "When was the last train
to Baltimore?"

"Next train leaves at 4:50," said the man, without looking up.

"Not the next train, but the last train. When did it go?"
