peace for this county--that's all.'

As this intimation produced a less stunning effect upon the prisoner
than he had anticipated, Sir Robert proceeded in his investigation with
an increasing dislike to the object of it.

'Is your name Vanbeest Brown, sir?'

'It is,' answered the prisoner.

'So far well; and how are we to design you farther, sir?' demanded the
Justice.

'Captain in his Majesty's---regiment of horse,' answered Bertram.

The Baronet's ears received this intimation with astonishment; but he
was refreshed in courage by an incredulous look from Glossin, and by
hearing him gently utter a sort of interjectional whistle, in a note of
surprise and contempt. 'I believe, my friend,' said Sir Robert, 'we
shall find for you, before we part, a more humble title.'

'If you do, sir,' replied his prisoner, 'I shall willingly submit to
any punishment which such an imposture shall be thought to deserve.'

'Well, sir, we shall see,' continued Sir Robert. 'Do you know young
Hazlewood of Hazlewood?'

'I never saw the gentleman who I am informed bears that name excepting
once, and I regret that it was under very unpleasant circumstances.'

'You mean to acknowledge, then,' said the Baronet, 'that you inflicted
upon young Hazlewood of Hazlewood that wound which endangered his life,
considerably lacerated the clavicle of his right shoulder, and
deposited, as the family surgeon declares, several large drops or slugs
in the acromion process?'

'Why, sir,' replied Bertram, 'I can only say I am equally ignorant of
and sorry for the extent of the damage which the young gentleman has
sustained. I met him in a narrow path, walking with two ladies and a
servant, and before I could either pass them or address them, this
young Hazlewood took his gun from his servant, presented it against my
body, and commanded me in the most haughty tone to stand back. I was
neither inclined to submit to his authority nor to leave him in
possession of the means to injure me, which he seemed disposed to use
with such rashness. I therefore closed with him for the purpose of
disarming him; and, just as I had nearly effected my purpose, the piece
went off accidentally, and, to my regret then and since, inflicted upon
the young gentleman a severer chastisement than I desired, though I am
glad to understand it is like to prove no more than his unprovoked
folly deserved.'

'And so, sir,' said the Baronet, every feature swoln with offended
dignity, 'you, sir, admit, sir, that it was your purpose, sir, and your
intention, sir, and the real jet and object of your assault, sir, to
disarm young Hazlewood of Hazlewood of his gun, sir, or his
fowling-piece, or his fuzee, or whatever you please to call it, sir,
upon the king's highway, sir? I think this will do, my worthy
neighbour! I think he should stand committed?'

'You are by far the best judge, Sir Robert,' said Glossin, in his most
insinuating tone; 'but if I might presume to hint, there was something
about these smugglers.'

'Very true, good sir. And besides, sir, you, Vanbeest Brown, who call
yourself a captain in his Majesty's service, are no better or worse
than a rascally mate of a smuggler!'

'Really, sir,' said Bertram, 'you are an old gentleman, and acting
under some strange delusion, otherwise I should be very angry with you.'

'Old gentleman, sir! strange delusion, sir!' said Sir Robert, colouring
with indignation. 'I protest and declare--Why, sir, have you any papers
or letters that can establish your pretended rank and estate and
commission?'

'None at present, sir,' answered Bertram; 'but in the return of a post
or two---'

'And how do you, sir,' continued the Baronet, 'if you are a captain in
his Majesty's service--how do you chance to be travelling in Scotland
without letters of introduction, credentials, baggage, or anything
belonging to your pretended rank, estate, and condition, as I said
before?'

'Sir,' replied the prisoner, 'I had the misfortune to be robbed of my
clothes and baggage.'

'Oho! then you are the gentleman who took a post-chaise from---to
Kippletringan, gave the boy the slip on the road, and sent two of your
accomplices to beat the boy and bring away the baggage?'

'I was, sir, in a carriage, as you describe, was obliged to alight in
the snow, and lost my way endeavouring to find the road to
Kippletringan. The landlady of the inn will inform you that on my
arrival there the next day, my first inquiries were after the boy.'

'Then give me leave to ask where you spent the night, not in the snow,
I presume? You do not suppose that will pass, or be taken, credited,
and received?'

'I beg leave,' said Bertram, his recollection turning to the gipsy
female and to the promise he had given her--'I beg leave to decline
answering that question.'

'I thought as much,' said Sir Robert. 'Were you not during that night
in the ruins of Derncleugh?--in the ruins of Derncleugh, sir?'

'I have told you that I do not intend answering that question,' replied
Bertram.

'Well, sir, then you will stand committed, sir,' said Sir Robert, 'and
be sent to prison, sir, that's all, sir. Have the goodness to look at
these papers; are you the Vanbeest Brown who is there mentioned?'

It must be remarked that Glossin had shuffled among the papers some
writings which really did belong to Bertram, and which had been found
by the officers in the old vault where his portmanteau was ransacked.

'Some of these papers,' said Bertram, looking over them, 'are mine, and
were in my portfolio when it was stolen from the post-chaise. They are
memoranda of little value, and, I see, have been carefully selected as
affording no evidence of my rank or character, which many of the other
papers would have established fully. They are mingled with
ship-accounts and other papers, belonging apparently to a person of the
same name.'

'And wilt thou attempt to persuade me, friend,' demanded Sir Robert,
'that there are TWO persons in this country at the same time of thy
very uncommon and awkwardly sounding name?'

'I really do not see, sir, as there is an old Hazlewood and a young
Hazlewood, why there should not be an old and a young Vanbeest Brown.
And, to speak seriously, I was educated in Holland, and I know that
this name, however uncouth it may sound in British ears---'

Glossin, conscious that the prisoner was now about to enter upon
dangerous ground, interfered, though the interruption was unnecessary,
for the purpose of diverting the attention of Sir Robert Hazlewood, who
was speechless and motionless with indignation at the presumptuous
comparison implied in Bertram's last speech. In fact, the veins of his
throat and of his temples swelled almost to bursting, and he sat with
the indignant and disconcerted air of one who has received a mortal
insult from a quarter to which he holds it unmeet and indecorous to
make any reply. While, with a bent brow and an angry eye, he was
drawing in his breath slowly and majestically, and puffing it forth
again with deep and solemn exertion, Glossin stepped in to his
assistance. 'I should think now, Sir Robert, with great submission,
that this matter may be closed. One of the constables, besides the
pregnant proof already produced, offers to make oath that the sword of
which the prisoner was this morning deprived (while using it, by the
way, in resistance to a legal warrant) was a cutlass taken from him in
a fray between the officers and smugglers just previous to their attack
upon Woodbourne. And yet,' he added, 'I would not have you form any
rash construction upon that subject; perhaps the young man can explain
how he came by that weapon.'

'That question, sir,' said Bertram, 'I shall also leave unanswered.'

'There is yet another circumstance to be inquired into, always under
Sir Robert's leave,' insinuated Glossin. 'This prisoner put into the
hands of Mrs. MacCandlish of Kippletringan a parcel containing a
variety of gold coins and valuable articles of different kinds.
Perhaps, Sir Robert, you might think it right to ask how he came by
property of a description which seldom occurs?'

'You, sir, Mr. Vanbeest Brown, sir, you hear the question, sir, which
the gentleman asks you?'

'I have particular reasons for declining to answer that question,'
answered Bertram.

'Then I am afraid, sir,' said Glossin, who had brought matters to the
point he desired to reach, 'our duty must lay us under the necessity to
sign a warrant of committal.'

'As you please, sir,' answered Bertram; 'take care, however, what you
do. Observe that I inform you that I am a captain in his
Majesty's---regiment, and that I am just returned from India, and
therefore cannot possibly be connected with any of those contraband
traders you talk of; that my lieutenant-colonel is now at Nottingham,
the major, with the officers of my corps, at Kingston-upon-Thames. I
offer before you both to submit to any degree of ignominy if, within
the return of the Kingston and Nottingham posts, I am not able to
establish these points. Or you may write to the agent for the regiment
if you please, and---'

'This is all very well, sir,' said Glossin, beginning to fear lest the
firm expostulation of Bertram should make some impression on Sir
Robert, who would almost have died of shame at committing such a
solecism as sending a captain of horse to jail--'this is all very well,
sir; but is there no person nearer whom you could refer to?'

'There are only two persons in this country who know anything of me,'
replied the prisoner. 'One is a plain Liddesdale sheep-farmer, called
Dinmont of Charlie's Hope; but he knows nothing more of me than what I
told him, and what I now tell you.'

'Why, this is well enough, Sir Robert!' said Glossin. 'I suppose he
would bring forward this thick-skulled fellow to give his oath of
credulity, Sir Robert, ha, ha, ha!'

'And what is your other witness, friend?' said the Baronet.

'A gentleman whom I have some reluctance to mention because of certain
private reasons, but under whose command I served some time in India,
and who is too much a man of honour to refuse his testimony to my
character as a soldier and gentleman.'

'And who is this doughty witness, pray, sir?' said Sir Robert,' some
half-pay quartermaster or sergeant, I suppose?'

'Colonel Guy Mannering, late of the---regiment, in which, as I told
you, I have a troop.'

'Colonel Guy Mannering!' thought Glossin, 'who the devil could have
guessed this?'

'Colonel Guy Mannering?' echoed the Baronet, considerably shaken in his
opinion. 'My good sir,' apart to Glossin, 'the young man with a
dreadfully plebeian name and a good deal of modest assurance has
nevertheless something of the tone and manners and feeling of a
gentleman, of one at least who has lived in good society; they do give
commissions very loosely and carelessly and inaccurately in India. I
think we had better pause till Colonel Mannering shall return; he is
now, I believe, at Edinburgh.'

'You are in every respect the best judge, Sir Robert,' answered
Glossin--'in every possible respect. I would only submit to you that we
are certainly hardly entitled to dismiss this man upon an assertion
which cannot be satisfied by proof, and that we shall incur a heavy
responsibility by detaining him in private custody, without committing
him to a public jail. Undoubtedly, however, you are the best judge, Sir
Robert; and I would only say, for my own part, that I very lately
incurred severe censure by detaining a person in a place which I
thought perfectly secure, and under the custody of the proper officers.
The man made his escape, and I have no doubt my own character for
attention and circumspection as a magistrate has in some degree
suffered. I only hint this: I will join in any step you, Sir Robert,
think most advisable.' But Mr. Glossin was well aware that such a hint
was of power sufficient to decide the motions of his self-important but
not self-relying colleague. So that Sir Robert Hazlewood summed up the
business in the following speech, which proceeded partly upon the
supposition of the prisoner being really a gentleman, and partly upon
the opposite belief that he was a villain and an assassin:--

'Sir, Mr. Vanbeest Brown--I would call you Captain Brown if there was
the least reason or cause or grounds to suppose that you are a captain,
or had a troop in the very respectable corps you mention, or indeed in
any other corps in his Majesty's service, as to which circumstance I
beg to be understood to give no positive, settled, or unalterable
judgment, declaration, or opinion,--I say, therefore, sir, Mr. Brown,
we have determined, considering the unpleasant predicament in which you
now stand, having been robbed, as you say, an assertion as to which I
suspend my opinion, and being possessed of much and valuable treasure,
and of a brass-handled cutlass besides, as to your obtaining which you
will favour us with no explanation,--I say, sir, we have determined and
resolved and made up our minds to commit you to jail, or rather to
assign you an apartment therein, in order that you may be forthcoming
upon Colonel Mannering's return from Edinburgh.'

'With humble submission, Sir Robert,' said Glossin, 'may I inquire if
it is your purpose to send this young gentleman to the county jail? For
if that were not your settled intention, I would take the liberty to
hint that there would be less hardship in sending him to the bridewell
at Portanferry, where he can be secured without public exposure, a
circumstance which, on the mere chance of his story being really true,
is much to be avoided.'

'Why, there is a guard of soldiers at Portanferry, to be sure, for
protection of the goods in the custom-house; and upon the whole,
considering everything, and that the place is comfortable for such a
place, I say, all things considered, we will commit this person, I
would rather say authorise him to be detained, in the workhouse at
Portanferry.'

The warrant was made out accordingly, and Bertram was informed he was
next morning to be removed to his place of confinement, as Sir Robert
had determined he should not be taken there under cloud of night, for
fear of rescue. He was during the interval to be detained at Hazlewood
House.

'It cannot be so hard as my imprisonment by the looties in India,' he
thought; 'nor can it last so long. But the deuce take the old formal
dunderhead, and his more sly associate, who speaks always under his
breath; they cannot understand a plain man's story when it is told
them.'

In the meanwhile Glossin took leave of the Baronet with a thousand
respectful bows and cringing apologies for not accepting his invitation
to dinner, and venturing to hope he might be pardoned in paying his
respects to him, Lady Hazlewood, and young Mr. Hazlewood on some future
occasion.

'Certainly, sir,' said the Baronet, very graciously. 'I hope our family
was never at any time deficient in civility to our neighbours; and when
I ride that way, good Mr. Glossin, I will convince you of this by
calling at your house as familiarly as is consistent--that is, as can
be hoped or expected.'

'And now,' said Glossin to himself, 'to find Dirk Hatteraick and his
people, to get the guard sent off from the custom-house; and then for
the grand cast of the dice. Everything must depend upon speed. How
lucky that Mannering has betaken himself to Edinburgh! His knowledge of
this young fellow is a most perilous addition to my dangers.' Here he
suffered his horse to slacken his pace. 'What if I should try to
compound with the heir? It's likely he might be brought to pay a round
sum for restitution, and I could give up Hatteraick. But no, no, no!
there were too many eyes on me--Hatteraick himself, and the gipsy
sailor, and that old hag. No, no! I must stick to my original plan.'
And with that he struck his spurs against his horse's flanks, and rode
forward at a hard trot to put his machines in motion.




CHAPTER XLIV

     A prison is a house of care,
     A place where none can thrive,
     A touchstone true to try a friend,
     A grave for one alive
     Sometimes a place of right,
     Sometimes a place of wrong,
     Sometimes a place of rogues and thieves,
     And honest men among

          Inscription on Edinburgh Tolbooth


Early on the following morning the carriage which had brought Bertram
to Hazlewood House was, with his two silent and surly attendants,
appointed to convey him to his place of confinement at Portanferry.
This building adjoined to the custom-house established at that little
seaport, and both were situated so close to the sea-beach that it was
necessary to defend the back part with a large and strong rampart or
bulwark of huge stones, disposed in a slope towards the surf, which
often reached and broke upon them. The front was surrounded by a high
wall, enclosing a small courtyard, within which the miserable inmates
of the mansion were occasionally permitted to take exercise and air.
The prison was used as a house of correction, and sometimes as a chapel
of ease to the county jail, which was old, and far from being
conveniently situated with reference to the Kippletringan district of
the county. Mac-Guffog, the officer by whom Bertram had at first been
apprehended, and who was now in attendance upon him, was keeper of this
palace of little-ease. He caused the carriage to be drawn close up to
the outer gate, and got out himself to summon the warders. The noise of
his rap alarmed some twenty or thirty ragged boys, who left off sailing
