The rabbit kept on singing,

  "Now I dance on the edge of the field,
  Now I dance on the edge of the field,
  Hi, la, hi, la, hi!"

At last, Brother Rabbit reached the edge of the field; then he jumped
into the blackberry bushes and ran away. The wolf tried to give chase,
but he was so dizzy that he could not run. And the rabbit got away
without having his ears cut off.

--SOUTHERN INDIAN TALE.




BLOCK CITY


  What are you able to build with your blocks?
  Castles and palaces, temples and docks.
  Rain may keep raining, and others go roam,
  But I can be happy and building at home.

  Let the sofa be mountains, the carpet be sea,
  There I'll establish a city for me:
  A kirk and a mill and a palace beside,
  And a harbor as well where my vessels may ride.

  Great is the palace with pillar and wall,
  A sort of a tower on the top of it all,
  And steps coming down in an orderly way
  To where my toy vessels lie safe in the bay.

  This one is sailing and that one is moored:
  Hark to the song of the sailors on board!
  And see on the steps of my palace, the kings
  Coming and going with presents and things!

  Now I have done with it, down let it go.
  All in a moment the town is laid low,
  Block upon block lying scattered and free,
  What is there left of my town by the sea?

--ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




A GOOD PLAY


  We built a ship upon the stairs
  All made of the back-bedroom chairs,
  And filled it full of sofa pillows
  To go a-sailing on the billows.

  We took a saw and several nails,
  And water in the nursery pails;
  And Tom said, "Let us also take
  An apple and a slice of cake;"--
  Which was enough for Tom and me
  To go a-sailing on, till tea.

  We sailed along for days and days,
  And had the very best of plays;
  But Tom fell out and hurt his knee,
  So there was no one left but me.

--ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




THE MONKEY'S FIDDLE

I


Once upon a time there was a great famine in the land, and Monkey could
find no food. There were no bulbs, no beans, no insects, nor anything
else to eat.

At last Monkey said to himself, "Why should I perish here with hunger?
My uncle Orang-outang has enough and to spare; I shall go to him, and he
will give me food and shelter."

So he set out and soon came to the place where Orang-outang lived. For a
long time Monkey was happy in his new home, but by and by he heard that
there was no longer a famine in his own land. Then he decided to go
back.

Before he started, Orang-outang made him a present of a fiddle and of a
bow and arrow,

"With this bow and arrow you can kill any animal," he said. "With this
fiddle you can make anything dance until you bid it stop."

Thanking his uncle for the presents, Monkey set out on his homeward
journey. On the way he met Brother Wolf.

"What news, Brother Wolf?" asked Monkey.

When Wolf had told him the news, Monkey asked, "What have you been doing
to-day?"

"Oh," said Wolf, "I have been following a deer all the morning, but I
have been unable to get near enough to kill him. Now I am faint with
hunger."

"I can help you," said Monkey. "I have a magic bow and arrow. Show me
the deer, and I will bring him down."

When Wolf showed him the deer, Monkey fitted an arrow to the bow and
took aim. Hardly had the arrow left the bow when the deer fell dead.

Monkey and Wolf sat down and had a good feast. As Wolf ate, he thought
of the magic bow and arrow, and he planned to get them away from Monkey.

"First I will ask for them," he said to himself. "If Monkey will not
give them to me, I will use force."

[Illustration: Wolf demands the bow and arrow]

When Wolf had finished eating, he said to Monkey, "Please give me the
bow and arrow."

"I will not," said Monkey. "They were a present from my dear uncle; why
should I give them to you?"

"Very well," said Wolf. "I am stronger than you, and I will take them by
force."


II


Wolf was just about to snatch the bow and arrow from Monkey when Jackal
came along. Then Wolf thought of a new plan.

He called out to Jackal, "Help! help! Monkey has stolen my magic bow and
arrow."

Jackal came running to them. Wolf told his side of the story, and Monkey
told his.

"I cannot believe either of you," said Jackal. "Let us lay the question
before the court. There Lion, Tiger, and the other animals will hear you
both; perhaps they will be able to decide to whom the magic bow and
arrow belong. But to keep you two from quarreling, I had better take
care of the bow and arrow."

Monkey gave them to Jackal, and all three started off to court. When
they arrived, there sat Lion on the throne. Seated around were the other
animals of the jungle.

Monkey told his story first. Standing in front of the throne, he made a
low bow and said, "The great famine, my lord, drove me out of my
country, and I had to take refuge with my uncle. When I started back
home, he gave me this bow and arrow. Finding Wolf almost starving, I
shot a deer for him. Instead of being grateful for the food, he tried to
rob me of the bow and arrow. I am here to ask that you restore them to
me."

"He does not tell the truth," cried Wolf.

Then Jackal said, "I believe that the bow and arrow belong to Wolf; he
and Monkey were quarreling about them when I came along. They agreed to
leave the question to you, King Lion. I know you will see that justice
is done."

Wolf looked very innocent and said nothing.

King Lion rose and asked, "What say you? To whom do the bow and arrow
belong?"

"To Wolf," they all cried.

"Stealing is a crime that must be punished," said King Lion. "What shall
be done?"

"Let Monkey be hanged," they all cried.

Monkey still had his magic fiddle. Holding it in his hand, he made a
deep bow and said: "Give me leave to play a tune on my fiddle before I
hang, O King."

Now, the beasts all loved a merry tune, and knowing that Monkey was a
master player they called out, "Let him play."


III


Monkey placed the fiddle under his chin, drew the bow across the
strings, and struck up "Cockcrow." This was a favorite tune with the
court. At the first notes all nodded their heads in time to the music.
As Monkey played on, the entire court began to dance.

Round and round they went like a whirlwind. Over and over, quicker and
quicker sounded the tune of "Cockcrow." Faster and faster flew the
dancers, until one after another fell to the ground worn out.

Monkey saw nothing of all this. With eyes closed and his head placed
lovingly against the fiddle, he played on and on, keeping time with his
foot.

Wolf was the first one to cry out, "Please stop, Cousin Monkey. For
pity's sake, stop."

But Monkey did not seem to hear him. Again and again sounded the magic
notes of "Cockcrow."

King Lion had gone round and round with his young wife so many times
that both were ready to drop. At last, as he passed Monkey, he roared,
"Stop, ape! My whole kingdom is yours if you will only stop playing."

"I do not want it," said Monkey. "Make Wolf confess that he tried to
steal my bow and arrow. Then I will stop playing."

"I confess! I confess!" panted Wolf, who was ready to fall to the
ground.

"Good," cried King Lion, as the music stopped. "Monkey is innocent. Let
him have his bow and arrow."

"Punish Wolf!" cried the animals.

So Wolf was soundly beaten and driven from the court. Then Monkey went
off rejoicing, carrying with him his magic gifts.

--AFRICAN TALE.




THE THREE TASKS

I


There were once two brothers who set out to seek their fortune. They
wasted their time and their money in all sorts of foolish ways, and
before long they were nearly penniless.

After the two brothers had been gone some time, their younger brother,
who had always been thought the simpleton of the family, set out to seek
his fortune.

One day as he was passing through a village far away from home, he found
his two brothers.

"Where are you going?" they asked.

"I am going to seek my fortune," he replied.

"Ha, ha! how foolish you are!" they cried. "With all our wit and wisdom
we have been unable to make our fortune. It is silly of you even to
try." And they laughed and made fun of him.

Nevertheless, the three brothers decided to travel on together. As they
journeyed on, they saw a large ant hill by the side of the road. The two
elder brothers were about to destroy it, when the simpleton said, "Leave
the poor ants alone. I will not let you disturb them."

They went on their way until they came to a pond upon which two ducks
were swimming. The two older brothers were about to kill them, when the
simpleton said, "Leave them alone. I will not let you kill them."

Soon the three came to a tree, in the trunk of which was a wild bee's
nest. The two older brothers wished to steal the honey. They started to
make a fire under the tree and smoke out the bees. The simpleton said,
"Leave the poor bees alone. I will not let you rob them."


II


At last the three brothers came to a castle where everything looked as
if it had been turned to stone. There was not a single human being to be
seen. They walked along the great wide hall, but still they saw no one.

"The castle must be enchanted," the brothers said to one another.

After passing through many rooms, they came to a door in which there
were three locks. In the middle of the door was a little grating through
which they could look into the room beyond.

They saw a little man, dressed in gray, seated at a table. Twice they
called to him, but he did not answer. They called a third time. Then he
rose, opened the three locks, and came out.

He said not a word, but led them to a table on which a feast was spread.
When they had eaten and drunk as much as they wished, the old man showed
each of them to a bedroom. There they rested well all night.

The next morning the little gray man came to the eldest brother and
beckoned him to follow. He led him to a room in which there was a stone
table, and on the table there lay three stone tablets.

[Illustration: The little gray man and the tablets]

On the table near the tablets was written:

"This castle is enchanted. Before the enchantment can be broken, there
are three tasks to be performed. The one who performs these three tasks
shall marry the youngest and dearest of the three princesses who now lie
asleep in the castle."

When the eldest brother had read this, the old man gave him the first
tablet. On it was written:

"In the forest, hidden beneath the thick moss, are the pearls which
belonged to the princesses. They are a thousand in number. These must be
collected by sunset. If one single pearl is missing, then he who has
sought them shall be turned to stone."

The eldest brother searched the whole day long, but by sunset he had
found only a hundred pearls. So he was turned to stone.

The following day the second brother tried his luck, but by sunset he
had found but two hundred pearls. So he, too, was turned to stone.

Then it came the simpleton's turn. He searched all day amidst the moss,
but he fared little better than his brothers. At last he sat down upon a
stone and burst into tears.

As he sat there, the king of the ants, whose life he had once saved,
came with five thousand ants. Before long the little creatures had found
every one of the pearls and piled them up in a heap.

The little gray man then gave the simpleton the second tablet. Upon it
