The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jewels of Aptor, by Samuel R. Delany

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Jewels of Aptor

Author: Samuel R. Delany

Release Date: February 3, 2013 [EBook #41981]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JEWELS OF APTOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     _THE JEWELS OF APTOR_

                      by SAMUEL R. DELANY


    ACE BOOKS, INC.
    1120 Avenue of the Americas
    New York 36, N.Y.

    THE JEWELS OF APTOR

    Copyright (C), 1962, by Ace Books, Inc.
    All Rights Reserved

    Printed in U.S.A.




    The waves flung up against the purple glow
    of double sleeplessness. Along the piers
    the ships return; but sailing I would go
    through double rings of fire, double fears.
    So therefore let your bright vaults heave the night
    about with ropes of wind and points of light,
    and say, as all the rolling stars go, "I
    have stood my feet on rock and seen the sky."

     --These are the opening lines from _The Galactica_, by the
     one-armed poet Geo, the epic of the conflicts of Leptar and Aptor.




PROLOGUE


Afterwards, she was taken down to the sea.

She didn't feel too well, so she sat on a rock down where the sand was
wet and scrunched her bare toes in and out of the cool surface.

She turned away, looked toward the water, and hunched her shoulders a
little. "I think it was awful," she said. "I think it was pretty
terrible. Why did you show it to me? He was just a little boy. What
reason could they have possibly had for doing that to him?"

"It was just a film," he said. "We showed it to you so you would learn."

"But it was a film of something that really happened."

"It happened several years ago, several hundred miles away."

"But it did happen; you used a tight beam to spy on them, and when the
image came in on the vision screen, you made a film of it, and--But why
did you show it to me?"

"What have we been teaching you?"

But she couldn't think, and only had the picture in her mind, vivid
movements, scarlets, and bright agony. "He was just a child," she said.
"He couldn't have been more than eleven or twelve."

"You are just a child," he said. "You are not sixteen yet."

"What was I supposed to learn?"

"Look around you," he said. "You should see something."

But the picture in her mind was still too vivid, too bright.

"You should be able to learn it right here on this beach, in the trees
back there, in the rocks, in the bleached shells around your feet. You
do see it; you just don't recognize it." Suddenly he changed his tone.
"Actually you're a very fine student. You learn quickly. Do you remember
anything about telepathy? You studied it months ago."

"'By a method similar to radio broadcast and reception,'" she recited,
"'the synapse patterns of conscious thoughts are read from one cranial
cortex and duplicated in another, resulting in similar sensual
impressions experienced--'" Suddenly she broke off. "But I can't do it,
so it doesn't help me any!"

"What about history, then?" he said. "You did extremely well during the
examination. What good does knowing about all the happenings in the
world before and after the Great Fire do you?"

"Well, it's ..." she started. "It's just interesting."

"The film you saw," he said, "was, in a way, history. That is, it
happened in the past."

"But it was so--" Again she stopped. "--horrible!"

"Does history fascinate you because it's just interesting?" he asked.
"Or does it do something else? Don't you ever want to know what the
reason is behind some of the things these people do in the pages of the
books?"

"Yes, I want to know the reasons," she said. "Like I want to know the
reason they nailed that man to the oaken cross. I want to know why they
did that to him."

"A good question," he mused. "Which reminds me, at about the same time
as they were nailing him to that cross, it was decided in China that the
forces of the universe were to be represented by a circle, half black,
half white. But to remind themselves that there was no pure force, no
purely unique reason, they put a spot of white paint in the black half
and a spot of black paint in the white. Isn't that interesting?"

She looked at him and wondered how he had gotten from one to the other.
But he was going on.

"And do you remember the goldsmith, the lover, how he recorded in his
autobiography that at age four, he and his father saw the Fabulous
Salamander on their hearth by the fire; and his father suddenly smacked
the boy ten feet across the room into a rack of kettles, saying
something to the effect that little Cellini was too young to remember
the incident unless some pain accompanied it."

"I remember that story," she said. "And I remember that Cellini said
that he wasn't sure if the smack was the reason he remembered the
Salamander, or the Salamander the reason he remembered the smack."

"Yes, yes!" he cried. "That's it. The reason, the reasons ... Don't you
see the pattern?"

"Only I don't know what a Salamander is," she told him.

"Well, it's like the blue lizards that sing outside your window
sometimes," he explained. "Only it isn't blue, and it doesn't sing."

"Then why should anyone want to remember it?" she grinned. It was an
attempt to annoy him, but he was not looking at her, and was talking of
something else.

"And the painter," he was saying, "he was a friend of Cellini, you
remember, in Florence. He was painting a picture of "La Gioconda." As a
matter of fact, he had to take time from the already crumbling picture
of "The Last Supper" of the man who was nailed to the cross of oak to
paint her. And he put a smile on her face of which men asked for
centuries, 'What is the reason she smiles so strangely?' Yes, the
reason, don't you see? Just look around."

"What about the Great Fire?" she asked. "When they dropped flames from
the skies and the harbors boiled, that was reasonless. That was like
what they did to that boy."

"Oh no," he said to her. "Not reasonless. True, when the Great Fire
came, people all over the earth screamed, 'Why? Why? How can man do this
to man? What is the reason?' But just look around you, right here. On
this beach."

"I guess I can't see it yet," she said. "I can just see what they did to
him, and it was awful."

"Well," said the man in the dark robe, "perhaps when you stop seeing
what they did so vividly, you will start seeing why they did it. I think
it's time for us to go back now."

As she slid off the rock and started walking beside him, barefooted in
the sand, she asked, "That boy--I wasn't sure, he was all tied up, but
he had four arms, didn't he?"

"He did."

"You know, I can't just go around saying it was awful. I think I'm going
to write a poem. Or make something. Or both. I've got to get it out of
my head."

"That wouldn't be a bad idea," he mumbled as they approached the trees
in front of the river. "Not at all."

And several days later, and several hundred miles away ...




CHAPTER I


Waves flung themselves at the blue evening. Low light burned on the wet
hulks of ships that slipped by mossy pilings into the docks as water
sloshed at the rotten stone embankment of the city.

Gangplanks, chained from wooden pullies, scraped into place on concrete
blocks, and the crew, after the slow captain and the tall mate,
descended raffishly along the wooden boards which sagged with the
pounding of bare feet. In bawling groups, pairs, or singly they howled
into the narrow waterfront streets, into the yellow light from open inn
doors, the purple shadowed portals leading to dim rooms full of blue
smoke and stench of burnt poppies.

The captain, with eyes the color of sea under fog, touched his sword
hilt with his fist and said quietly to the mate, "Well, they're gone. We
better start collecting new sailors for the ten we lost at Aptor. Ten
good men, Jordde. I'm sick when I think of the bone and broken meat they
became."

"Ten for the dead," sneered the mate, "and twenty for the living we'll
never see again. Any sailor that would want to continue this trip with
us is insane. We'll do well if we only lose that many." He was a tall,
wire bound man, which made the green tunic he wore look baggy.

"I'll never forgive her for ordering us to that monstrous island," said
the captain.

"I wouldn't speak too loudly," mumbled the mate. "Yours isn't to forgive
her. Besides, she went with them, and was in as much danger as they
were. It's only luck she came back."

Suddenly the captain asked, "Do you believe the sailor's stories of
magic they tell of her?"

"Why, sir?" asked the mate. "Do you?"

"No, I don't," said the captain with a certainty that came too quickly.
"Still, with three survivors out of thirteen, that she should be among
them, with hardly a robe torn."

"Perhaps they wouldn't touch a woman," suggested the mate, Jordde.

"Perhaps," said the captain.

"And she's been strange," continued Jordde, "ever since then. She walks
at night. I've seen her going by the rails, looking from the sea-fire to
the stars, and then back."

"Ten good men," mused the captain. "Hacked up, torn in bits. I wouldn't
have believed that much barbarity in the world, if I hadn't seen that
arm, floating on the water. It gives me chills now, the way the men ran
to the rail to see, pointed at it. And it just raised itself up, like a
beckoning, a signal, and then sank in a wash of foam and green water."

"Well," said the mate, "we have men to get."

"I wonder if she'll come ashore?"

"She'll come if she wants, Captain. Her doing is no concern of yours.
Your job is the ship and to do what she says."

"I have more of a job than that," and he looked back at his still craft.

The mate touched the captain's shoulder. "If you're going to speak
things like that, speak them softly, and only to me."

"I have more of a job than that," the captain repeated. Then, suddenly,
he started away, and the mate was following him down the darkening
dockside street.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dock was still for a moment. Then a barrel toppled from a pile of
barrels, and a figure moved like a bird's shadow across the opening
between mounds of cargo set about the pier.

At the same time two men approached down a narrow street filled with the
day's last light. The bigger one threw a great shadow that aped his
gesticulating arms behind him on the greenish faces of the buildings.
Bare feet like halved hams, shins bound with thongs and pelts, he waved
one hand in explanation, while he rubbed the back of the other on his
short, mahogany beard.

"You're going to ship out, eh friend? You think they'll take your rhymes
and jingles instead of muscles and rope pulling?"

The smaller, in a white tunic looped with a thick leather belt, laughed
beneath his friend's rantings. "Fifteen minutes ago you thought it was a
fine idea; said it would make me a man."

"Oh, it's a life to make," his hand went up, "and it's a life to break
men," and it fell.

The slighter one pushed back black hair from his forehead, stopped, and
looked at the ships. "You still haven't told me why no ship has taken
you on in the past three months," he said absently, following the rope
rigging against the sky like black knife slashes on blue silk. "A year
ago I'd never see you in for more than three days at once."

The gesticulating arm suddenly encircled the smaller man's waist and
lifted a leather pouch from the wide belt. "Are you sure, friend Geo,"
began the giant, "that we couldn't use up some of this silver on wine
before we go. If you want to do this right, then right is how it should
be done. When you sign up on a ship you're supposed to be broke and a
little tight. It shows that you're capable of getting along without the
inconvenience of money and can hold your liquor, too."

"Urson, get your paw off that." Geo snatched the purse away.

"Now here," countered Urson, reaching for it once more, "you don't have
to grab."

"Look, I've kept you drunk five nights now, and it's time to sober up.
And suppose they don't take us, who's going--" But Urson, the idea
having taken the glow of a game, made another swipe with his big hand.

Geo leapt back with the purse. "Now cut that out," he began; but in
leaping, his feet struck the fallen barrel, and he fell backwards to the
wet cobbles. The pouch splattered away, jingling.

Both of them scrambled.

Then the bird's shadow moved in the opening between the cargo piles, a
slight figure bounded forward, swept the purse up with one hand, pushed
himself away from the pile of cargo with another, and there were two
more fists pumping at his side as he ran.

"What the devil," began Urson, and then, "What the _devil_!"

"Hey you," called Geo, lurching to his feet. "Come back!" And Urson had
already loped a couple of steps after the fleeting mutant, now halfway
down the block.

Suddenly, from behind them, like a wine-glass stem snapping, only twenty
times as loud, a voice called, "Stop, little thief. Stop."

The running form stopped as though it had hit a wall.

"Come back, now! Come back!"
