expected to see the wolves rush in after him--as there appeared to be no
impediment to their doing so--but, to the astonishment of all, the
latter came to a sudden halt, and then went sneaking back--some of them
even running off as if terrified!  At first the hunters attributed this
strange conduct to their own presence, and the smoke of the camp; but a
moment's reflection convinced them that this could not be the reason of
it, as they were all well acquainted with the nature of the prairie
wolf, and had never witnessed a similar exhibition before.

They had no time to think of the wolves just then.  The buck was the
main attraction, and, calling to each other to surround the thicket, all
four started in different directions.  In a couple of minutes they had
placed themselves at nearly equal distances around the copse, and stood
watching eagerly for the reappearance of the wapiti.

The willows covered about an acre of ground, but they were tolerably
thick and full-leaved, and the buck could not be seen from any side.
Wherever he was, he was evidently at a standstill, for not a rustle
could be heard among the leaves, nor were any of the tall stalks seen to
move.

Marengo was now sent in.  This would soon start him, and all four stood
with guns cocked and ready.  But before the dog had made three lengths
of himself into the thicket, a loud snort was heard, followed by a
struggle and the stamping of hoofs, and the next moment the wapiti came
crashing through the bushes.  A shot was fired--it was the crack of
Lucien's small rifle--but it had missed, for the buck was seen passing
onward and outward.  All ran round to the side he had taken, and had a
full view of the animal as he bounded off.  Instead of running free as
before, he now leaped heavily forward, and what was their astonishment
on seeing that he _carried another animal upon his back_!

The hunters could hardly believe their eyes, but there it was, sure
enough, a brown shaggy mass, lying flat along the shoulders of the
wapiti, and clutching it with large-spreading claws.  Francois cried
out, "A panther!" and Basil at first believed it to be a bear, but it
was hardly large enough for that.  Norman, however, who had lived more
in those parts where the animal is found, knew it at once to be the
dreaded "wolverene."  Its head could not be seen, as that was hid behind
the shoulder of the wapiti, whose throat it was engaged in tearing.  But
its short legs and broad paws, its busily tail and long shaggy hair,
together with its round-arching back and dark-brown colour, were all
familiar marks to the young fur-trader; and he at once pronounced it a
"wolverene."

When first seen, both it and the wapiti were beyond the reach of their
rifles; and the hunters, surprised by such an unexpected apparition, had
suddenly halted.  Francois and Basil were about to renew the pursuit,
but were prevented by Norman who counselled them to remain where they
were.

"They won't go far," said he; "let us watch them a bit.  See! the buck
takes the water!"

The wapiti, on leaving the willows, had run straight out in the first
direction that offered, which happened to be in a line parallel with the
edge of the lake.  His eye, however, soon caught sight of the water,
and, doubling suddenly round, he made directly towards it, evidently
with the intention of plunging in.  He had hopes, no doubt, that by this
means he might rid himself of the terrible creature that was clinging to
his shoulders, and tearing his throat to pieces.

A few bounds brought him to the shore.  There was no beach at the spot.
The bank--a limestone bluff--rose steeply from the water's edge to a
height of eight feet, and the lake under it was several fathoms in
depth.  The buck did not hesitate, but sprang outward and downwards.  A
heavy plash followed, and for some seconds both wapiti and wolverene
were lost under the water.  They rose to the surface, just as the boys
reached the bank, but they came up _separately_.  The dip had proved a
cooler to the fierce wolverene; and while the wapiti was seen to strike
boldly out into the lake and swim off, the latter--evidently out of his
element--kept plunging about clumsily, and struggling to get back to the
shore.  Their position upon the cliff above gave the hunters an
excellent opportunity with their rifles, and both Basil and Norman sent
their bullets into the wolverene's back.  Francois also emptied his
double-barrelled gun at the same object, and the shaggy brute sank dead
to the bottom of the lake.  Strange to say, not one of the party had
thought of firing at the buck.  This persecution by so many enemies had
won for him their sympathy, and they would now have suffered him to go
free, but the prospect of fresh venison for supper overcame their
commiseration, and the moment the wolverene was despatched all set about
securing the deer.  Their guns were reloaded, and, scattering along the
shore, they prepared to await his return.  But the buck, seeing there
was nothing but death in his rear, swam on, keeping almost in a direct
line out into the lake.  It was evident to all that he could not swim
across the lake, as its farther shore was not even visible.  He must
either return to where they were, or drown; and knowing this to be his
only alternative, they stood still and watched his motions.  When he had
got about half-a-mile from the shore, to the surprise of all, he was
seen to rise higher and higher above the surface, and then all at once
stop, with half of his body clear out of the water!  He had come upon a
shoal, and, knowing the advantage of it, seemed determined to remain
there.

Basil and Norman ran to the canoe, and in a few minutes the little craft
was launched, and shooting through the water.  The buck now saw that it
was likely to be all up with him, and, instead of attempting to swim
farther, he faced round and set his antlers forward in a threatening
attitude.  But his pursuers did not give him the chance to make a rush.
When within fifty yards or so, Norman, who used the paddles, stopped and
steadied the canoe, and the next moment the crack of Basil's rifle
echoed over the lake, and the wapiti fell upon the water, where, after
struggling a moment, he lay dead.

The canoe was paddled up, and his antlers being made fast to the stern,
he was towed back to the shore, and carried into camp.  What now
surprised our voyageurs was, their finding that the wapiti had been
wounded before encountering either the wolves, wolverene, or themselves.
An arrow-head, with a short piece of the shaft, was sticking in one of
his thighs.  The Indians, then, had been after him, and very lately too,
as the wound showed.  It was not a mortal wound, had the arrow-head been
removed; but of course, as it was, it would have proved his death in the
long run.  This explained why the wolves had assailed an animal, that
otherwise, from his great size and strength, would have defied them.
The wolverene, moreover, rarely attacks game so large as the wapiti; but
the latter had, no doubt, chanced upon the lair of his fierce enemy, who
could not resist such a tempting opportunity of getting a meal.  The
wolves had seen the wolverene as they approached the thicket, and that
accounted for their strange behaviour in the pursuit.  These creatures
are as great cowards as they are tyrants, and their dread of a wolverene
is equal to that with which they themselves often inspire the wounded
deer.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A PAIR OF DEEP DIVERS.

The wapiti was carefully skinned, and the skin spread out to dry.  Since
their mishap our voyageurs had been very short of clothing.  The three
skins of the woodland caribou had made only a pair of jackets, instead
of full hunting-shirts, and even these were pinched fits.  For beds and
bed-clothes they had nothing but the hides of buffaloes, and these,
although good as far as they went, were only enough for two.  Lucien,
the most delicate of the party, appropriated one, as the others insisted
upon his so doing.  Francois had the other.  As for Basil and Norman,
they were forced each night to lie upon the naked earth, and but for the
large fires which they kept blazing all the night, they would have
suffered severely from cold.  Indeed, they did suffer quite enough; for
some of the nights were so cold, that it was impossible to sleep by the
largest fire without one-half of their bodies feeling chilled.  The
usual practice with travellers in the Far West is to lie with their feet
to the fire, while the head is at the greatest distance from it.  This
is considered the best mode, for so long as the feet are warm, the rest
of the body will not suffer badly; but, on the contrary, if the feet are
allowed to get cold, no matter what state the other parts be in, it is
impossible to sleep with comfort.  Of course our young voyageurs
followed the well-known practice of the country, and lay with their feet
to the fire in such a manner that, when all were placed, their bodies
formed four radii of a circle, of which the fire was the centre.
Marengo usually lay beside Basil, whom he looked upon as his proper
master.

Notwithstanding a bed of grass and leaves which they each night spread
for themselves, they were sadly in want of blankets, and therefore the
skin of the wapiti, which was a very fine one, would be a welcome
addition to their stock of bedding.  They resolved, therefore, to remain
one day where they had killed it, so that the skin might be dried and
receive a partial dressing.  Moreover, they intended to "jerk" some of
the meat--although elk-venison is not considered very palatable where
other meat can be had.  It is without juice, and resembles dry
short-grained beef more than venison.  For this reason it is looked upon
by both Indians and white hunters as inferior to buffalo, moose,
caribou, or even the common deer.  One peculiarity of the flesh of this
animal is, that the fat becomes hard the moment it is taken off the
fire.  It freezes upon the lips like suet, and clings around the teeth
of a person eating it, which is not the case with that of other species
of deer.  The skin of the wapiti, however, is held in high esteem among
the Indians.  It is thinner than that of the moose, but makes a much
better article of leather.  When dressed in the Indian fashion--that is
to say, soaked in a lather composed of the brains and fat of the animal
itself, and then washed, dried, scraped, and smoked--it becomes as soft
and pliable as a kid-glove, and will wash and dry without stiffening
like chamois leather.  That is a great advantage which it has, in the
eyes of the Indians, over the skins of other species of deer, as the
moose and caribou--for the leather made from these, after a wetting,
becomes harsh and rigid and requires a great deal of rubbing to render
it soft again.

Lucien knew how to dress the elk-hide, and could make leather out of it
as well as any Indian squaw in the country.  But travelling as they
were, there was not a good opportunity for that; so they were content to
give it such a dressing as the circumstances might allow.  It was spread
out on a frame of willow-poles, and set up in front of the fire, to be
scraped at intervals and cleared of the fatty matter, as well as the
numerous parasites that at this season adhere to the skins of the
wapiti.

While Lucien was framing the skin, Basil and Norman occupied themselves
in cutting the choice pieces of the meat into thin slices and hanging
them up before the fire.  This job being finished, all sat down to watch
Lucien currying his hide.

"Ho, boys!" cried Francois, starting up as if something had occurred to
him; "what about the wolverene?  It's a splendid skin--why not get it
too?"

"True enough," replied Norman, "we had forgotten that.  But the beasts
gone to the bottom--how can we get at him?"

"Why, fish him up, to be sure," said Francois.  "Let's splice one of
these willow-poles to my ramrod, and I'll screw it into him, and draw
him to the surface in a jiffy.  Come!"

"We must get the canoe round, then," said Norman.  "The bank's too steep
for us to reach him without it."

"Of course," assented Francois, at the same time going towards the
willows; "get you the canoe into the water, while I cut the sapling."

"Stay!" cried Basil, "I'll show you a shorter method.  Marengo!"

As Basil said this, he rose to his feet, and walked down to the bluff
where they had shot the wolverene.  All of them followed him as well as
Marengo, who bounded triumphantly from side to side, knowing he was
wanted for some important enterprise.

"Do you expect the dog to fetch him out?" inquired Norman.

"No," replied Basil; "only to help."

"How?"

"Wait a moment--you shall see."

Basil flung down his 'coon-skin cap, and stripped off his caribou
jacket, then his striped cotton shirt, then his under-shirt of fawn
skin, and, lastly, his trousers, leggings, and mocassins.  He was now as
naked as Adam.

"I'll show you, cousin," said he, addressing himself to Norman, "how we
take the water down there on the Mississippi."

So saying, he stepped forward to the edge of the bluff; and having
carefully noted the spot where the wolverene had gone down, turned to
the dog, and simply said--

"Ho!  Marengo!  _Chez moi_!"  The dog answered with a whimper, and a
look of intelligence which showed that he understood his master's wish.

Basil again pointed to the lake, raised his arms over his head, placing
his palms close together, launched himself out into the air, and shot
down head-foremost into the water.

Marengo, uttering a loud bay, sprang after so quickly that the plunges
were almost simultaneous, and both master and dog were for some time
hidden from view.  The latter rose first, but it was a long time before
Basil came to the surface--so long that Norman and the others were
beginning to feel uneasy, and to regard the water with some anxiety.  At
length, however, a spot was seen to bubble, several yards from where he
had gone down, and the black head of Basil appeared above the surface.
It was seen that he held something in his teeth, and was pushing a heavy
body before him, which they saw was the wolverene.

Marengo, who swam near, now seized hold of the object, and pulled it
away from his master, who, calling to the dog to follow, struck out
towards a point where the bank was low and shelving.  In a few minutes
Basil reached a landing-place, and shortly after Marengo arrived towing
the wolverene, which was speedily pulled out upon the bank, and carried,
or rather dragged, by Norman and Francois to the camp.  Lucien brought
Basil's clothes, and all four once more assembled around the blazing
fire.

There is not a more hideous-looking animal in America than the
wolverene.  His thick body and short stout legs, his shaggy coat and
bushy tail, but, above all, his long curving claws and doglike jaws,
give him a formidable appearance.  His gait is low and skulking, and his
look bold and vicious.  He walks somewhat like a bear, and his tracks
are often mistaken for those of that animal.  Indians and hunters,
however, know the difference well.  His hind-feet are plantigrade, that
is, they rest upon the ground from heel to toe; and his back curves like
the segment of a circle.  He is fierce and extremely voracious--quite as
much so as the "glutton," of which he is the American representative.
No animal is more destructive to the small game, and he will also attack
and devour the larger kinds when he can get hold of them; but as he is
somewhat slow, he can only seize most of them by stratagem.  It is a
common belief that he lies in wait upon trees and rocks to seize the
deer passing beneath.  It has been also asserted that he places moss,
such as these animals feed upon, under his perch, in order to entice
them within reach; and it has been still further asserted, that the
arctic foxes assist him in his plans, by hunting the deer towards the
spot where he lies in wait, thus acting as his jackals.  These
assertions have been made more particularly about his European cousin,
the "glutton," about whom other stories are told equally strange--one of
them, that he eats until scarce able to walk, and then draws his body
through a narrow space between two trees, in order to relieve himself
and get ready for a fresh meal.  Buffon and others have given credence
to these tales upon the authority of one "Olaus Magnus," whose name,
from the circumstance, might be translated "great fibber."  There is no
doubt, however, that the glutton is one of the most sagacious of
animals, and so, too, is the wolverene.  The latter gives proof of this
by many of his habits; one in particular fully illustrates his cunning.
It is this.  The marten-trappers of the Hudson Bay territory set their
traps in the snow, often extending over a line of fifty miles.  These
traps are constructed out of pieces of wood found near the spot, and are
baited with the heads of partridges, or pieces of venison, of which the
marten (_Mustela martes_) is very fond.  As soon as the marten seizes
the bait, a trigger is touched, and a heavy piece of wood falling upon
the animal, crushes or holds it fast.  Now the wolverene _enters the
trap from behind_, tears the back out of it before touching the bait,
and thus avoids the falling log!  Moreover, he will follow the tracks of
the trapper from one to another, until he has destroyed the whole line.
Should a marten happen to have been before him, and got caught in the
trap, he rarely ever eats it, as he is not fond of its flesh.  But he is
not satisfied to leave it as he finds it.  He usually digs it from under
the log, tears it to pieces, and then buries it under the snow.  The
