Project Gutenberg's The Story of the Heavens, by Robert Stawell Ball

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of the Heavens

Author: Robert Stawell Ball

Release Date: December 1, 2008 [EBook #27378]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE HEAVENS ***




Produced by K. Nordquist, Brenda Lewis, Stephen Hope, Greg
Bergquist and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






  Transcriber's Note

  The punctuation and spelling from the original text have been faithfully
  preserved. Only obvious typographical errors have been corrected.




THE STORY OF THE HEAVENS




[Illustration: PLATE I.

THE PLANET SATURN, IN 1872.]




  THE

  STORY OF THE HEAVENS

  SIR ROBERT STAWELL BALL, LL.D. D.Sc.

  _Author of_ "_Star-Land_"

  FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, HONORARY FELLOW OF THE ROYAL
  SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH, FELLOW OF THE ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY,
  SCIENTIFIC ADVISER TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF IRISH LIGHTS, LOWNDEAN
  PROFESSOR OF ASTRONOMY AND GEOMETRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, AND
  FORMERLY ROYAL ASTRONOMER OF IRELAND

  _WITH TWENTY-FOUR COLOURED PLATES AND NUMEROUS
  ILLUSTRATIONS_

  NEW AND REVISED EDITION

  CASSELL AND COMPANY, LIMITED
  _LONDON, PARIS, NEW YORK & MELBOURNE_
  1900

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

[Illustration: LA.BELLE SAUVAGE]




PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION.


I have to acknowledge the kind aid which I have received in the
preparation of this book.

Mr. Nasmyth has permitted me to use some of the beautiful drawings of
the Moon, which have appeared in the well-known work published by him in
conjunction with Mr. Carpenter. To this source I am indebted for Plates
VII., VIII., IX., X., and Figs. 28, 29, 30.

Professor Pickering has allowed me to copy some of the drawings made at
Harvard College Observatory by Mr. Trouvelot, and I have availed myself
of his kindness for Plates I., IV., XII., XV.

I am indebted to Professor Langley for Plate II., to Mr. De la Rue for
Plates III. and XIV., to Mr. T.E. Key for Plate XVII., to Professor
Schiaparelli for Plate XVIII., to the late Professor C. Piazzi Smyth for
Fig. 100, to Mr. Chambers for Fig. 7, which has been borrowed from his
"Handbook of Descriptive Astronomy," to Dr. Stoney for Fig. 78, and to
Dr. Copeland and Dr. Dreyer for Fig. 72. I have to acknowledge the
valuable assistance derived from Professor Newcomb's "Popular
Astronomy," and Professor Young's "Sun." In revising the volume I have
had the kind aid of the Rev. Maxwell Close.

I have also to thank Dr. Copeland and Mr. Steele for their kindness in
reading through the entire proofs; while I have also occasionally
availed myself of the help of Mr. Cathcart.

  ROBERT S. BALL.

  OBSERVATORY, DUNSINK, CO. DUBLIN.
  _12th May, 1886._




NOTE TO THIS EDITION.


I have taken the opportunity in the present edition to revise the work
in accordance with the recent progress of astronomy. I am indebted to
the Royal Astronomical Society for the permission to reproduce some
photographs from their published series, and to Mr. Henry F. Griffiths,
for beautiful drawings of Jupiter, from which Plate XI. was prepared.

  ROBERT S. BALL.

  CAMBRIDGE,
  _1st May, 1900_.




CONTENTS.


                                                            PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                                 1

  CHAPTER

  I. THE ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY                              9

  II. THE SUN                                                 29

  III. THE MOON                                               70

  IV. THE SOLAR SYSTEM                                       107

  V. THE LAW OF GRAVITATION                                  122

  VI. THE PLANET OF ROMANCE                                  150

  VII. MERCURY                                               155

  VIII. VENUS                                                167

  IX. THE EARTH                                              192

  X. MARS                                                    208

  XI. THE MINOR PLANETS                                      229

  XII. JUPITER                                               245

  XIII. SATURN                                               268

  XIV. URANUS                                                298

  XV. NEPTUNE                                                315

  XVI. COMETS                                                336

  XVII. SHOOTING STARS                                       372

  XVIII. THE STARRY HEAVENS                                  409

  XIX. THE DISTANT SUNS                                      425

  XX. DOUBLE STARS                                           434

  XXI. THE DISTANCES OF THE STARS                            441

  XXII. STAR CLUSTERS AND NEBULAE                             461

  XXIII. THE PHYSICAL NATURE OF THE STARS                    477

  XXIV. THE PRECESSION AND NUTATION OF THE EARTH'S AXIS      492

  XXV. THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT                               503

  XXVI. THE ASTRONOMICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF HEAT                513

  XXVII. THE TIDES                                           531

  APPENDIX                                                   558




LIST OF PLATES.

PLATE

  I. The Planet Saturn                        _Frontispiece_

  II. A Typical Sun-spot                   _To face page_  9

  A. The Sun                                       "  "   44

  III. Spots and Faculae on the Sun                 "  "   37

  IV. Solar Prominences or Flames                  "  "   57

  V. The Solar Corona                              "  "   62

  VI. Chart of the Moon's Surface                  "  "   81

  B. Portion of the Moon                           "  "   88

  VII. The Lunar Crater Triesnecker                "  "   93

  VIII. A Normal Lunar Crater                      "  "   97

  IX. The Lunar Crater Plato                       "  "  102

  X. The Lunar Crater Tycho                        "  "  106

  XI. The Planet Jupiter                           "  "  254

  XII. Coggia's Comet                              "  "  340

  C. Comet A., 1892, 1 Swift                       "  "  358

  XIII. Spectra of the Sun and of three Stars      "  "   47

  D. The Milky Way, near Messier II.               "  "  462

  XIV. The Great Nebula in Orion                   "  "  466

  XV. The Great Nebula in Andromeda                "  "  468

  E. Nebulae in the Pleiades                        "  "  472

  F. o Centauri                                    "  "  474

  XVI. Nebulae observed with Lord Rosse's Telescope "  "  476

  XVII. The Comet of 1882                          "  "  357

  XVIII. Schiaparelli's Map of Mars                "  "  221




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  FIG.                                                               PAGE

  1. Principle of the Refracting Telescope                             11

  2. Dome of the South Equatorial at Dunsink Observatory, Co. Dublin   12

  3. Section of the Dome of Dunsink Observatory                        13

  4. The Telescope at Yerkes Observatory, Chicago                      15

  5. Principle of Herschel's Reflecting Telescope                      16

  6. South Front of the Yerkes Observatory, Chicago                    17

  7. Lord Rosse's Telescope                                            18

  8. Meridian Circle                                                   20

  9. The Great Bear                                                    27

  10. Comparative Sizes of the Earth and the Sun                       30

  11. The Sun, photographed September 22, 1870                         33

  12. Photograph of the Solar Surface                                  35

  13. An ordinary Sun-spot                                             36

  14. Scheiner's Observations on Sun-spots                             38

  15. Zones on the Sun's Surface in which Spots appear                 39

  16. Texture of the Sun and a small Spot                              43

  17. The Prism                                                        45

  18. Dispersion of Light by the Prism                                 46

  19. Prominences seen in Total Eclipses                               53

  20. View of the Corona in a Total Eclipse                            62

  21. View of Corona during Eclipse of January 22, 1898                63

  22. The Zodiacal Light in 1874                                       69

  23. Comparative Sizes of the Earth and the Moon                      73

  24. The Moon's Path around the Sun                                   76

  25. The Phases of the Moon                                           76

  26. The Earth's Shadow and Penumbra                                  78

  27. Key to Chart of the Moon (Plate VI.)                             81

  28. Lunar Volcano in Activity: Nasmyth's Theory                      97

  29. Lunar Volcano: Subsequent Feeble Activity                        97

  30.    "      "     Formation of the Level Floor by Lava             98

  31. Orbits of the Four Interior Planets                             115

  32. The Earth's Movement                                            116

  33. Orbits of the Four Giant Planets                                117

  34. Apparent Size of the Sun from various Planets                   118

  35. Comparative Sizes of the Planets                                119

  36. Illustration of the Moon's Motion                               130

  37. Drawing an Ellipse                                              137

  38. Varying Velocity of Elliptic Motion                             140

  39. Equal Areas in Equal Times                                      141

  40. Transit of the Planet of Romance                                153

  41. Variations in Phase and apparent Size of Mercury                160

  42. Mercury as a Crescent                                           161

  43. Venus, May 29, 1889                                             170

  44. Different Aspects of Venus in the Telescope                     171

  45. Venus on the Sun at the Transit of 1874                         177

  46. Paths of Venus across the Sun in the Transits of 1874 and 1882  179

  47. A Transit of Venus, as seen from Two Localities                 183

  48. Orbits of the Earth and of Mars                                 210

  49. Apparent Movements of Mars in 1877                              212

  50. Relative Sizes of Mars and the Earth                            216

  51, 52. Drawings of Mars                                            217

  53. Elevations and Depressions on the Terminator of Mars            217

  54. The Southern Polar Cap on Mars                                  217

  55. The Zone of Minor Planets between Mars and Jupiter              234

  56. Relative Dimensions of Jupiter and the Earth                    246

  57-60. The Occultation of Jupiter                                   255

  61. Jupiter and his Four Satellites                                 258

  62. Disappearances of Jupiter's Satellites                          259

  63. Mode of Measuring the Velocity of Light                         264

  64. Saturn                                                          270

  65. Relative Sizes of Saturn and the Earth                          273

  66. Method of Measuring the Rotation of Saturn's Rings              288

  67. Method of Measuring the Rotation of Saturn's Rings              289

  68. Transit of Titan and its Shadow                                 295

  69. Parabolic Path of a Comet                                       339

  70. Orbit of Encke's Comet                                          346

  71. Tail of a Comet directed from the Sun                           363

  72. Bredichin's Theory of Comets' Tails                             366

  73. Tails of the Comet of 1858                                      367

  74. The Comet of 1744                                               368

  75. The Path of the Fireball of November 6, 1869                    375

  76. The Orbit of a Shoal of Meteors                                 378

  77. Radiant Point of Shooting Stars                                 381

  78. The History of the Leonids                                      385

  79. Section of the Chaco Meteorite                                  398

  80. The Great Bear and Pole Star                                    410

  81. The Great Bear and Cassiopeia                                   411

  82. The Great Square of Pegasus                                     413

  83. Perseus and its Neighbouring Stars                              415

  84. The Pleiades                                                    416

  85. Orion, Sirius, and Neighbouring Stars                           417

  86. Castor and Pollux                                               418

  87. The Great Bear and the Lion                                     419

  88. Booetes and the Crown                                            420

  89. Virgo and Neighbouring Constellations                           421

  90. The Constellation of Lyra                                       422

  91. Vega, the Swan, and the Eagle                                   423

  92. The Orbit of Sirius                                             426

  93. The Parallactic Ellipse                                         444

  94. 61 Cygni and the Comparison Stars                               447

  95. Parallax in Declination of 61 Cygni                             450

  96. Globular Cluster in Hercules                                    463

  97. Position of the Great Nebula in Orion                           466

  98. The Multiple Star th Orionis                                    467

  99. The Nebula N.G.C. 1499                                          471

  100. Star-Map, showing Precessional Movement                        493

  101. Illustration of the Motion of Precession                       495




THE

STORY OF THE HEAVENS.


"The Story of the Heavens" is the title of our book. We have indeed a
wondrous story to narrate; and could we tell it adequately it would
prove of boundless interest and of exquisite beauty. It leads to the
contemplation of grand phenomena in nature and great achievements of
human genius.

Let us enumerate a few of the questions which will be naturally asked by
one who seeks to learn something of those glorious bodies which adorn
our skies: What is the Sun--how hot, how big, and how distant? Whence
comes its heat? What is the Moon? What are its landscapes like? How does
our satellite move? How is it related to the earth? Are the planets
globes like that on which we live? How large are they, and how far off?
What do we know of the satellites of Jupiter and of the rings of Saturn?
How was Uranus discovered? What was the intellectual triumph which
brought the planet Neptune to light? Then, as to the other bodies of our
system, what are we to say of those mysterious objects, the comets? Can
we discover the laws of their seemingly capricious movements? Do we know
anything of their nature and of the marvellous tails with which they are
often decorated? What can be told about the shooting-stars which so
often dash into our atmosphere and perish in a streak of splendour? What
is the nature of those constellations of bright stars which have been
recognised from all antiquity, and of the host of smaller stars which
our telescopes disclose? Can it be true that these countless orbs are
really majestic suns, sunk to an appalling depth in the abyss of
unfathomable space? What have we to tell of the different varieties of
stars--of coloured stars, of variable stars, of double stars, of
multiple stars, of stars that seem to move, and of stars that seem at
rest? What of those glorious objects, the great star clusters? What of
the Milky Way? And, lastly, what can we learn of the marvellous nebulae
which our telescopes disclose, poised at an immeasurable distance? Such
are a few of the questions which occur when we ponder on the mysteries
of the heavens.

The history of Astronomy is, in one respect, only too like many other
histories. The earliest part of it is completely and hopelessly lost.
The stars had been studied, and some great astronomical discoveries had
been made, untold ages before those to which our earliest historical
records extend. For example, the observation of the apparent movement of
the sun, and the discrimination between the planets and the fixed stars,
are both to be classed among the discoveries of prehistoric ages. Nor is
it to be said that these achievements related to matters of an obvious
character. Ancient astronomy may seem very elementary to those of the
present day who have been familiar from childhood with the great truths
of nature, but, in the infancy of science, the men who made such
discoveries as we have mentioned must have been sagacious philosophers.

Of all the phenomena of astronomy the first and the most obvious is that
of the rising and the setting of the sun. We may assume that in the dawn
of human intelligence these daily occurrences would form one of the
first problems to engage the attention of those whose thoughts rose
above the animal anxieties of everyday existence. A sun sets and
disappears in the west. The following morning a sun rises in the east,
moves across the heavens, and it too disappears in the west; the same
appearances recur every day. To us it is obvious that the sun, which
appears each day, is the same sun; but this would not seem reasonable to
one who thought his senses showed him that the earth was a flat plain of
indefinite extent, and that around the inhabited regions on all sides
extended, to vast distances, either desert wastes or trackless oceans.
How could that same sun, which plunged into the ocean at a fabulous
distance in the west, reappear the next morning at an equally great
distance in the east? The old mythology asserted that after the sun had
dipped in the western ocean at sunset (the Iberians, and other ancient
nations, actually imagined that they could hear the hissing of the
waters when the glowing globe was plunged therein), it was seized by
Vulcan and placed in a golden goblet. This strange craft with its
astonishing cargo navigated the ocean by a northerly course, so as to
reach the east again in time for sunrise the following morning. Among
the earlier physicists of old it was believed that in some manner the
sun was conveyed by night across the northern regions, and that darkness
was due to lofty mountains, which screened off the sunbeams during the
voyage.

In the course of time it was thought more rational to suppose that the
sun actually pursued his course below the solid earth during the course
of the night. The early astronomers had, moreover, learned to recognise
the fixed stars. It was noticed that, like the sun, many of these stars
rose and set in consequence of the diurnal movement, while the moon
obviously followed a similar law. Philosophers thus taught that the
various heavenly bodies were in the habit of actually passing beneath
the solid earth.

By the acknowledgment that the whole contents of the heavens performed
these movements, an important step in comprehending the constitution of
the universe had been decidedly taken. It was clear that the earth could
not be a plane extending to an indefinitely great distance. It was also
obvious that there must be a finite depth to the earth below our feet.
Nay, more, it became certain that whatever the shape of the earth might
be, it was at all events something detached from all other bodies, and
poised without visible support in space. When this discovery was first
announced it must have appeared a very startling truth. It was so
difficult to realise that the solid earth on which we stand reposed on
nothing! What was to keep it from falling? How could it be sustained
without tangible support, like the legendary coffin of Mahomet? But
difficult as it may have been to receive this doctrine, yet its
necessary truth in due time commanded assent, and the science of
Astronomy began to exist. The changes of the seasons and the recurrence
of seed-time and harvest must, from the earliest times, have been
associated with certain changes in the position of the sun. In the
summer at mid-day the sun rises high in the heavens, in the winter it is
always low. Our luminary, therefore, performs an annual movement up and
down in the heavens, as well as a diurnal movement of rising and
setting. But there is a third species of change in the sun's position,
which is not quite so obvious, though it is still capable of being
detected by a few careful observations, if combined with a philosophical
habit of reflection. The very earliest observers of the stars can hardly
have failed to notice that the constellations visible at night varied
with the season of the year. For instance, the brilliant figure of
Orion, though so well seen on winter nights, is absent from the summer
skies, and the place it occupied is then taken by quite different groups
of stars. The same may be said of other constellations. Each season of
the year can thus be characterised by the sidereal objects that are
conspicuous by night. Indeed, in ancient days, the time for commencing
the cycle of agricultural occupations was sometimes indicated by the
position of the constellations in the evening.

By reflecting on these facts the early astronomers were enabled to
demonstrate the apparent annual movement of the sun. There could be no
rational explanation of the changes in the constellations with the
seasons, except by supposing that the place of the sun was altering, so
as to make a complete circuit of the heavens in the course of the year.
This movement of the sun is otherwise confirmed by looking at the west
after sunset, and watching the stars. As the season progresses, it may
be noticed each evening that the constellations seem to sink lower and
lower towards the west, until at length they become invisible from the
brightness of the sky. The disappearance is explained by the supposition
that the sun appears to be continually ascending from the west to meet
the stars. This motion is, of course, not to be confounded with the
ordinary diurnal rising and setting, in which all the heavenly bodies
participate. It is to be understood that besides being affected by the
common motion our luminary has a slow independent movement in the
opposite direction; so that though the sun and a star may set at the
same time to-day, yet since by to-morrow the sun will have moved a
little towards the east, it follows that the star must then set a few
minutes before the sun.[1]

The patient observations of the early astronomers enabled the sun's
track through the heavens to be ascertained, and it was found that in
its circuit amid the stars and constellations our luminary invariably
followed the same path. This is called the _ecliptic_, and the
constellations through which it passes form a belt around the heavens
known as the _zodiac_. It was anciently divided into twelve equal
portions or "signs," so that the stages on the sun's great journey could
be conveniently indicated. The duration of the year, or the period
required by the sun to run its course around the heavens, seems to have
been first ascertained by astronomers whose names are unknown. The skill
of the early Oriental geometers was further evidenced by their
determination of the position of the ecliptic with regard to the
celestial equator, and by their success in the measurement of the angle
between these two important circles on the heavens.

The principal features of the motion of the moon have also been noticed
with intelligence at an antiquity more remote than history. The
attentive observer perceives the important truth that the moon does not
occupy a fixed position in the heavens. During the course of a single
night the fact that the moon has moved from west to east across the
heavens can be perceived by noting its position relatively to adjacent
stars. It is indeed probable that the motion of the moon was a discovery
prior to that of the annual motion of the sun, inasmuch as it is the
immediate consequence of a simple observation, and involves but little
exercise of any intellectual power. In prehistoric times also, the time
of revolution of the moon had been ascertained, and the phases of our
satellite had been correctly attributed to the varying aspect under
which the sun-illuminated side is turned towards the earth.

But we are far from having exhausted the list of great discoveries which
have come down from unknown antiquity. Correct explanations had been
given of the striking phenomenon of a lunar eclipse, in which the
brilliant surface is plunged temporarily into darkness, and also of the
still more imposing spectacle of a solar eclipse, in which the sun
itself undergoes a partial or even a total obscuration. Then, too, the
acuteness of the early astronomers had detected the five wandering stars
or planets: they had traced the movements of Mercury and Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn. They had observed with awe the various
configurations of these planets: and just as the sun, and in a lesser
degree the moon, were intimately associated with the affairs of daily
life, so in the imagination of these early investigators the movements
of the planets were thought to be pregnant with human weal or human woe.
At length a certain order was perceived to govern the apparently
capricious movements of the planets. It was found that they obeyed
certain laws. The cultivation of the science of geometry went hand in
hand with the study of astronomy: and as we emerge from the dim
prehistoric ages into the historical period, we find that the theory of
the phenomena of the heavens possessed already some degree of coherence.

Ptolemy, following Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, acknowledged that
the earth's figure was globular, and he demonstrated it by the same
arguments that we employ at the present day. He also discerned how this
mighty globe was isolated in space. He admitted that the diurnal
movement of the heavens could be accounted for by the revolution of the
earth upon its axis, but unfortunately he assigned reasons for the
deliberate rejection of this view. The earth, according to him, was a
fixed body; it possessed neither rotation round an axis nor translation
through space, but remained constantly at rest in what he supposed to be
the centre of the universe. According to Ptolemy's theory the sun and
the moon moved in circular orbits around the earth in the centre. The
explanation of the movements of the planets he found to be more
complicated, because it was necessary to account for the fact that a
planet sometimes advanced and that it sometimes retrograded. The ancient
geometers refused to believe that any movement, except revolution in a
circle, was possible for a celestial body: accordingly a contrivance was
devised by which each planet was supposed to revolve in a circle, of
which the centre described another circle around the earth.

Although the Ptolemaic doctrine is now known to be framed on quite an
extravagant estimate of the importance of the earth in the scheme of the
heavens, yet it must be admitted that the apparent movements of the
celestial bodies can be thus accounted for with considerable accuracy.
This theory is described in the great work known as the "Almagest,"
which was written in the second century of our era, and was regarded for
fourteen centuries as the final authority on all questions of astronomy.

Such was the system of Astronomy which prevailed during the Middle Ages,
and was only discredited at an epoch nearly simultaneous with that of
the discovery of the New World by Columbus. The true arrangement of the
solar system was then expounded by Copernicus in the great work to which
he devoted his life. The first principle established by these labours
showed the diurnal movement of the heavens to be due to the rotation of
the earth on its axis. Copernicus pointed out the fundamental difference
between real motions and apparent motions; he proved that the
appearances presented in the daily rising and setting of the sun and the
stars could be accounted for by the supposition that the earth rotated,
just as satisfactorily as by the more cumbrous supposition of Ptolemy.
He showed, moreover, that the latter supposition must attribute an
almost infinite velocity to the stars, so that the rotation of the
entire universe around the earth was clearly a preposterous supposition.
