consider what was best to be done.

Although he had not gone out that day to shoot, but to botanise, he
carried a light double-barrelled shot gun, in case he might get a chance
at a hare, which was always acceptable to the lady of Kinlossie.

While the incidents just described were being enacted at the base of the
Eagle Cliff higher up, on a distant part of the same cliff, MacRummle
might have been seen prowling among the grey rocks, with the spirit of
Nimrod, and the aspect of Bacchus.

It was the habit of MacRummle, being half blind, to supplement his
vision with that peculiar kind of glasses which support--or refuse to
support--themselves on the human countenance by means of the nose.
These, although admirably adapted for reading, and even for quietly
fishing by the river-side, he found to be miserably unsuited for
sporting among the cliffs, for they were continually tumbling off as he
stumbled along, or were twitched off by his rifle when he was in the act
of making false points.

Perseverance was, however, the strong point in the old man's character--
if it had a strong point at all.  He replaced the glasses perpetually,
and kept pointing persistently.  He did little more than point, because
the thing that he pointed at, whatever it was, usually got out of the
way before MacRummle obtained a reliable aim.  With a shot gun he might
have done better, for that weapon admits of snap-shooting, with some
chance of success, even in feeble hands.  But the old man was ambitious.
His object was to "pot" something, as he expressed it, with a single
ball.  Of course it was not all pointing.  He did fire occasionally,
with no other result than awaking the echoes and terrifying the rabbits.
But the memory of his former success with the same weapon was strong
upon him, and perseverance, as we have said, was rampant.  On the whole,
the fusillade that he kept up was considerable, much to the amusement of
Barret (before meeting Mrs Moss!), who rightly guessed the cause of all
the noise.

About midday, like Barret, he prepared to comfort himself with lunch,
and, unlike our unfortunate hero, he enjoyed it in comfort, sitting on a
green patch or terrace, high up near the summit of the cliffs, and a
full mile distant from the spot where the peculiar meeting took place.

Like a giant refreshed MacRummle rose from lunch, a good deal more like
Bacchus, and much less like Nimrod.  A rabbit had been watching him from
the cliff above nearly all the time he was eating.  It moved quietly
into its burrow when he rose, though there was no occasion to do so,
because, although within easy rifle shot, MacRummle did not see it.
When the sportsman was past, the rabbit came out and looked after him.

Fixing his glasses firmly he advanced in that stooping posture, with the
rifle at the "ready," which is so characteristic of keen sportsmen!
Next moment a rabbit stood before him--an easy shot.  It sat up on its
hind legs even, as if inviting its fate, and gazed as though uncertain
whether the man was going to advance or not.  He did not advance, but
took a steady, deadly aim, and was on the point of pulling the trigger
when the glasses dropped off.

MacRummle was wonderfully patient.  He said nothing.  He merely replaced
his glasses and looked.  The rabbit was gone.  Several surrounding
rabbits saw it go, but did not follow its example.  They evidently felt
themselves safe.

Proceeding cautiously onward, the sportsman again caught sight of one of
the multitude that surrounded him.  It was seated on the edge of its
burrow, ready for retreat.  Alas! for that rabbit, if MacRummle had been
an average shot, armed with a shot gun.  But it was ignorant, and with
the characteristic presumption of ignorance, it sat still.  The
sportsman took a careful and long--very long--aim, and fired!  The
rabbit's nose pointed to the world's centre, its tail to the sky, and
when the smoke cleared away, it also was gone.

"Fallen into its hole!  Dead, I suppose," was the remark with which the
sportsman sought to comfort himself.  A bullet-mark on a rock, however,
two feet to the left of the hole, and about a foot too high, shook his
faith a little in this view.

It was impossible, however, that a man should expend so much ammunition
in a region swarming with his particular prey without experiencing
something in the shape of a fluke.  He did, after a time, get one shot
which was effectual.  A young rabbit sat on the top of a mound looking
at him with an air of impudence which is sometimes associated with
extreme youth.  A fat old kinsman--or woman--was seated in a hollow some
distance farther on.  MacRummle fired at the young one, missed it, and
shot the kinsman through the heart.  The disappointment of the old man
when he failed to find the young one, and his joy on discovering the
kinsman, we leave to the reader's imagination.

Thus he went on, occasionally securing something for the pot,
continually alarming the whole rabbit fraternity, and disgusting the
eagle, which watched him from a safe distance in the ambient atmosphere
above.

By degrees he worked his way along till he came to the neighbourhood of
the place where poor John Barret sat in meditative dejection.  Although
near, however, the two friends could neither see nor get at each other,
being separated by an impassable gulf--the one being in a crevice, as we
have said, not far from the foot of the cliff, the other hidden among
the crags near the summit.  Thus it came to pass that although Barret
knew of MacRummle's position by his noise, the latter was quite ignorant
of the presence of the former.

"This is horrible!" muttered the youth in his crevice below.

"Now I call this charming!" exclaimed the old man on his perch above.

Such is life--viewed from different standpoints!  Ay, and correctly
estimated, too, according to these different standpoints; for the old
man saw only the sunny surrounding of the Present, while the young one
gazed into the gloomy wreck of the Future.

Being somewhat fatigued, MacRummle betook himself to a sequestered ledge
among the cliffs, and sat down under a shrub to rest.  It chanced to be
a well concealed spot.  He remained quietly there for a considerable
time, discussing with himself the relative advantages of fishing and
shooting.  It is probable that his sudden disappearance and his
prolonged absence induced the eagle to imagine that he had gone away,
for that watchful bird, after several circlings on outstretched and
apparently motionless wings, made a magnificent swoop downwards, and
again resumed its floating action in the lower strata of its atmospheric
world.  There it devoted its exclusive attention to the young man, whose
position was clearly exposed to its view.

As he sat there in gloomy thought, Barret chanced to raise his eyes, and
observed the bird high above him--far out of gunshot.

"Fortunate creature!" he said aloud; "whatever may be the troubles of
your lot, you are at least safe from exasperating _rencontres_ with your
future mother-in-law!"

We need not point out to the intelligent reader that Barret, being quite
ignorant of the eagle's domestic relations, indulged in mere assumptions
in the bitterness of his soul.

He raised his fowling-piece as he spoke, and took a long, deliberate aim
at the bird.

"Far beyond range," he said, lowering the gun again; "but even if you
were only four yards from the muzzle, I would not fire, poor bird!  Did
not Milly say you were noble, and that it would be worse than murder to
kill you?  No, you are safe from me, at all events, even if you were not
so wary as to keep yourself safe from everybody.  And yet, methinks, if
MacRummle were still up there, he would have the chance of giving you a
severe fright, though he has not the skill to bring you down."

Now it is well-known to trappers and backwoodsmen generally that the
most wary of foxes, which cannot by any means be caught by one trap, may
sometimes be circumvented by two traps.  It is the same with decoys,
whether these be placed intentionally, or place themselves accidentally.
On this occasion Barret acted the part of a decoy, all unwittingly to
that eagle or to MacRummle.

In its extreme interest in the youth's proceedings the great bird soared
straight over his head, and slowly approached the old man's position.
MacRummle was not on the alert.  He never was on the alert! but his eyes
chanced to be gazing in the right direction, and his glasses happened to
be on.  He saw it coming--something big and black!  He grasped his
repeater and knocked his glasses off.

"A raven, I think!  I'll try it.  I should like it as a trophy--a sort
of memorial of--"

Bang!

The man who was half blind, who had scarcely used gun or rifle all his
life, achieved that which dead shots and ardent sportsmen had tried in
vain for years--he shot the eagle right through the heart, and that,
too, with a single bullet!

Straight down it fell with a tremendous flutter, and disappeared over
the edge of its native cliff.

MacRummle went on his knees, and, craning his neck, replaced his
glasses; but nothing whatever could be seen, save the misty void below.
Shrinking back from the giddy position, he rose and pulled out his
watch.

"Let me see," he muttered, "it will take me a full hour to go round so
as to reach the bottom.  No; too late.  I'll go home, and send the
keeper for it in the morning.  The eagle may have picked its bones by
that time, to be sure; but after all, a raven is not much of a trophy."

While he was thus debating, a very different scene was taking place
below.

Barret had been gazing up at the eagle when the shot was fired.  He saw
the spout of smoke.  He heard the crashing shot and echoes, and beheld
the eagle descending like a thunder-bolt.  After that he saw and heard
no more, for, in reaching forward to see round a projecting rock that
interfered with his vision, his foot slipped, and he fell headlong from
the cliff.  He had not far to fall, indeed, and a whin bush broke the
force of the shock when he did strike; but he was rendered insensible,
and rolled down the remainder of the slope to the bottom.  There he lay
bruised, bleeding, and motionless on the grass, close to the road, with
his bent and broken gun beneath him, and the dead eagle not more than a
dozen yards from his side!

"It is not like Barret to be late," observed the laird that evening, as
he consulted his watch.  "He is punctuality itself, as a rule.  He must
have fallen in with some unusually interesting plants.  But we can't
wait.  Order dinner, my dear, for I'm sure that my sister must be very
hungry after her voyage."

"Indeed I am," returned the little old lady, with a peculiar smile.
"Sea-sickness is the best tonic I know of, but it is an awful medicine
to take."

"Almost as good as mountain air," remarked MacRummle, as they filed out
of the drawing-room.  "I do wish I had managed to bring that raven
home."

At first the party at dinner was as merry as usual.  The sportsmen were
graphic in recounting the various incidents of the day; Mrs Moss was
equally graphic on the horrors of the sea; MacRummle was eulogistic of
repeating rifles, and inclined to be boastful about the raven, which he
hoped to show them on the morrow, while Milly proved herself, as usual,
a beautiful and interested listener, as well as a most hearty laugher.

But as the feast went on they became less noisy.  Then a feeling of
uneasiness manifested itself, but no one ventured to suggest that
anything might have occurred to the absentee until the evening had
deepened into night.  Then the laird started up suddenly.  "Something
_must_ have happened to our friend," he exclaimed, at the same time
ringing the bell violently.  "He has never been late before, and however
far he may have gone a-field, there has been more than time for him to
return at his slowest pace.  Duncan," (as the butler entered), "turn out
all the men and boys as fast as you can.  Tell Roderick to get lanterns
ready--as many as you have.  Gentlemen, we must all go on this search
without another moment's delay!"

There is little need to say that Barret's friends and comrades were not
slow to respond to the call.  In less than a quarter of an hour they
were dispersed, searching every part of the Eagle Cliff, where he had
been last seen by Giles Jackman.

They found him at last, pale and blood-stained, making ineffectual
efforts to crawl from the spot where he had fallen, both the eagle and
the broken gun being found beside him.

"No bones broken, thank God!" said Giles, after having examined him and
bound up his wounds.  "But he is too weak to be questioned.  Now, lads,
fetch the two poles and the plaid.  I'll soon contrive a litter."

"All right, old fellow!  God bless you!" said Barret, faintly, as his
friend bent over him.

Roderick and Ivor raised him softly, and, with the eagle at his side,
bore him towards Kinlossie House.  Soon after, their heavy tramp was
heard in the hall as they carried him to his room, and laid him gently
in bed.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

SUSPICIONS, REVELATIONS, AND OTHER MATTERS.

With a swelled and scratched face, a discoloured eye, a damaged nose,
and a head swathed in bandages--it is no wonder that Mrs Moss failed to
recognise in John Barret the violent young man with the talent for
assaulting ladies!

She was not admitted to his room until nearly a week after the accident,
for, although he had not been seriously injured, he had received a
rather severe shock, and it was thought advisable to keep him quiet as a
matter of precaution.  When she did see him at last, lying on a sofa in
a dressing-gown, and with his head and face as we have described, his
appearance did not call to her remembrance the faintest resemblance to
the confused, wild, and altogether incomprehensible youth, who had
tumbled her over in the streets of London, and almost run her down in
the Eagle Pass.

Of course Barret feared that she would recognise him, and had been
greatly exercised as to his precise duty in the circumstances; but when
he found that she did not recognise either his face or his voice, he
felt uncertain whether it would not be, perhaps, better to say nothing
at all about the matter in the meantime.  Indeed, the grateful old lady
gave him no time to make a "clean breast of it," as he had at first
intended to do.

"Oh!  Mr Barret," she exclaimed, sitting down beside him, and laying
her hand lightly on his arm, while the laird sat down on another chair
and looked on benignly, "I cannot tell you how thankful I am that you
have not been killed, and how very grateful I am to you for all your
bravery in saving my darling Milly's life.  Now, don't say a word about
disclaiming credit, as I know you are going to do--"

"But, dear madam," interrupted the invalid, "allow me to explain.  I
cannot bear to deceive you, or to sail under false colours--"

"Sail under false colours!  Explain!" repeated Mrs Moss, quickly.
"What nonsense do you talk?  Has not my daughter explained, and _she_ is
not given to colouring things falsely."

"Excuse me, Mrs Moss," said Barret; "I did not mean that.  I only--"

"I don't care what you mean, Mr Barret," said the positive little
woman; "it's of no use your denying that you have behaved in a noble,
courageous manner, and I won't listen to anything to the contrary; so
you need not interrupt me.  Besides, I have been told not to allow you
to speak much; so, sir, if I am to remain beside you at all, I must
impose silence."

Barret sank back on his couch with a sigh, and resigned himself to his
fate.

So much for the mother.  Later in the same day the daughter sat beside
his couch.  The laird was not present on that occasion.  They were
alone.

"Milly," said the invalid, taking her small hand in his, "have you
mentioned it yet to your mother?"

"Yes, John," replied Milly, blushing in spite of--nay, rather more in
consequence of--her efforts not to do so.  "I spoke to her some days
ago.  Indeed, soon after the accident, when we were sure you were going
to get well.  And she did not disapprove."

"Ay, but have you spoken since she has seen me--since this morning?"

"Yes, John."

"And she is still of the same mind--not shocked or shaken by my
appearance?"

"She is still of the same mind," returned Milly; "and not shocked in the
least.  My darling mother is far too wise to be shocked by trifles--I--I
mean by scratches and bruises.  She judges of people by their hearts."

"I'm glad to hear that, Milly, for I have something shocking to tell her
about myself, that will surprise her, if it does nothing else."

"Indeed!" said Milly, with the slightest possible rise of her pretty
eyebrows.

"Yes.  You have heard from your mother about that young rascal who ran
into her with his bicycle in London some time ago?"

"Yes; she wrote to me about it," replied Milly, with an amused smile.
"You mean, I suppose, the reckless youth who, after running her down,
had the cowardice to run away and leave her lying flat on the pavement?
Mother has more than once written about that event with indignation, and
rightly, I think.  But how came you to know about it, John?"

"Milly," said Barret, holding her hand very tight, and speaking
solemnly, "_I am that cowardly man_!"

"Now, John, you are jesting."

"Indeed--indeed I am not."

"Do you really mean to say that it was _you_ who ran against my--Oh! you
_must_ be jesting!"

"Again I say I am _not_.  I am the man--the coward."

"Well, dear John," said Milly, flushing considerably, "I must believe
you; but the fact does not in the least reduce my affection for you,
though it will lower my belief in your prudence, unless you can
explain."

"I will explain," said Barret; and we need scarcely add that the
explanation tended rather to increase than diminish Milly's affection
for, as well as her belief in, her lover!  But when Barret went on
further to describe the meeting in the Eagle Pass, she went off into
uncontrollable laughter.

"And you are sure that mother has no idea that you are the man?" she
asked.

"Not the remotest."

"Well, now, John, you must not let her know for some time yet.  You must
gain her affections, sir, before you venture to reveal your true
character."

Of course Barret agreed to this.  He would have agreed to anything that
Milly proposed, except, perhaps, the giving up of his claim to her own
hand.  Deception, however, invariably surrounds the deceiver with more
or less of difficulty.  That same evening, while Milly was sitting alone
with her mother, the conversation took a perplexing turn.

There had been a pretty long pause, after a rather favourable commentary
on the character of Barret, when the thin little old lady had wound up
with the observation that the subject of their criticism was a
remarkably agreeable man, with a playfully humorous and a delightfully
serious turn of mind--"and _so_ modest" withal!

Apparently the last words had turned her mind into the new channel, for
she resumed--

"Talking of insolence, my dear--"

"_Were_ we talking of insolence, mother?" said Milly, with a surprised
smile.

"Well, my love, I was thinking of the opposite of modesty, which is the
same thing.  Do you know, I had a meeting on the day of my arrival here
which surprised me very much?  To say truth, I did not mention it
sooner, because I wished to give you a little surprise.  Why do you
change your seat, my love?  Did you feel a draught where you were?"

"No--no.  I--I only want to get the light a little more at my back--to
keep it off my face.  But go on, mother.  What was the surprise about?
I'm anxious to know."

If Milly did not absolutely know, she had at least a pretty good idea of
what was coming!

"Well, of course you remember about that young man--that--that
_cowardly_ young man who--"

"Who ran you down in London?  Yes, yes, _I_ know," interrupted the
daughter, endeavouring to suppress a laugh, and putting her handkerchief
suddenly to her face.  "I remember well.  The monster!  What about him?"

"You may well call him a monster!  Can you believe it?  I have met him
here--in this very island, where he must be living somewhere, of course;
and he actually ran me down again--all _but_."  She added the last two
words in order to save her veracity.

"You don't really mean it?" exclaimed Milly, giving way a little in
spite of herself.  "With a bicycle?"

It was the mother's turn to laugh now.

"No, you foolish thing; even _I_ have capacity to understand that it
would be impossible to use those hideous--frightful instruments, on the
bad hill-roads of this island.  No; but it seems to be the nature of
this dis-disagreeable--I had almost said detestable--youth, to move only
under violent impulse, for he came round a corner of the Eagle Cliff at
