"I don't believe in ghosts, Leonidas," he said, "but this one certainly
looks like that of Harry Kenton."

"Colonel Talbot," called Harry, "I'm not a ghost.  I'm the real Harry
Kenton, hunting for our army."

"Pale but substantial," said St. Clair, who rode just behind the two
colonels.  "He's our old Harry himself, and I'd know him anywhere."

"No ghost at all and the Yankee bullets can't make him one," said Happy
Tom.

A weakness seized Harry and a blackness came before his eyes.  When he
recovered St. Clair was holding him up, and Colonel Talbot was trying
to pour strong waters down his throat.

"How long have I been this way?" he asked anxiously.

"About sixty seconds," replied Colonel Talbot, "but what difference
does it make?"

"Because I'm in a big hurry to get to General Lee!  Oh!  Colonel!
Colonel!  You must speed me on my way!  I've got a message from Colonel
Sherburne to General Lee that means everything, and on the road I
captured another from General Meade to General Pleasanton.  Put me on a
horse, won't you, and gallop me to the commander-in-chief!"

"Are you strong enough to ride alone?"

"I'm strong enough to do anything now."

"Then up with you!  Here, on Carter's horse!  Carter can ride behind
Hubbell!  St. Clair, you and Langdon ride on either side of him!  You
should reach the commander-in-chief in three-quarters of an hour,
Harry!"

"And there is no Yankee cavalry in between?"

"No, they're thick on the slopes above us!  You knew that, but here
you're inside our own lines.  Judging by your looks you've had quite a
time, Harry.  Now hurry on with him, boys!"

"So I have had, Colonel, but the appearance of you, Lieutenant-Colonel
St. Hilaire and the boys was like a light from Heaven.  Good-by!"

"Good-by!" the two colonels called back, but their voices were already
dying in the distance as Harry and his comrades were now riding rapidly
down the valley, knee to knee, because St. Clair and Langdon meant to
keep very close to him.  They saw that he was a little unsteady, and
that his eyes were unnaturally bright.  They knew, too, that if he said
he had great news for General Lee he told the truth, and they meant
that he should get there with it in the least time possible.

The valley opened out before them, broadening considerably as they
advanced.  The night was far gone, there was not much moonlight, but
their eyes had grown used to the dark, and they could see well.  They
passed sentinels and small detachments of cavalry, to whom St. Clair
and Langdon gave the quick password.  They saw fields of wheat stubble
and pastures and crossed two brooks.  The curiosity of Langdon and St.
Clair was overwhelming but they restrained it for a long time.  They
could tell by his appearance that he had passed through unimaginable
hardships, but they were loath to ask questions.

An owl on their right hooted, and both of them saw Harry shiver.

"What makes an owl's cry disturb you so, Harry?" asked Langdon.

"Because one of them tried to put the hoodoo on me as they say down in
your country, Happy.  I was lying back there in the forest on the hill
and the biggest and reddest-eyed owl that was ever born sat on a bough
over head, and kept telling me that I was finished, right at the end of
my rope.  But he was a liar, because here I am, with you fellows on
either side of me, inside our lines and riding to the camp of the
commander-in-chief."

"I think you're a bit shaky, Harry," said St. Clair, "and I don't
wonder at it.  If I had been through all I think you've been through
I'd tumble off that horse into the road and die."

"Has any messenger come from Colonel Sherburne at the river to General
Lee?"

"Not that I've heard of.  No, I'm sure that none's come," replied St.
Clair.

"Then I'll get to him first.  Don't think, Arthur, it's just a foolish
ambition of mine to lead, but the sooner some one reaches the general
the better."

"We'll see that you're first old man," said Langdon.  "It's not more
than a half-hour now."

But Harry reeled in his saddle.  The singular weakness that he had felt
a while back returned, and the road grew dark before him.  With a
mighty effort he steadied himself in the saddle and St. Clair heard him
say in a fierce undertone: "I will go through with it!"  St. Clair
looked across at Langdon and the signaling look of Happy Tom replied.
They drew in just a little closer.  Now and then they talked to him
sharply and briskly, rousing him again and again from the lethargy into
which he was fast sinking.

"Look!  In the woods over there, Harry!" exclaimed St. Clair.  "See the
men stretched asleep on the grass!  They're the survivors of Pickett's
brigades that charged at Gettysburg."

"And I was there!" said Harry.  "I saw the greatest charge ever made in
the history of the world!"

He reeled a little toward St. Clair, who caught him by the shoulder and
straightened him in the saddle.

"Of course you had a pleasant, easy ride from the Potomac," said Happy
Tom, "but I don't understand how as good a horseman as you lost your
horse.  I suppose he ran away while you were picking berries by the
roadside."

"Me pick berries by the roadside, while I'm on such a mission!"
exclaimed Harry indignantly, rousing himself up until his eyes flashed,
which was just what Happy wished.  "I didn't see any berries!  Besides
I didn't start on a horse.  I left in a boat."

"A boat?  Now, Harry, I know you've turned romancer.  I guess your
mystic troubles with the owl--if you really saw an owl--have been a
sort of spur to your fancy."

"Do you mean to say, Tom Langdon, that I didn't see an owl and talk
with him?  I tell you I did, and his conversation was a lot more
intelligent than yours, even if it was unpleasant."

"Of course it was," said St. Clair.  "Happy's chief joy in life is
talking.  You know how he chatters away, Harry.  He hates to sleep,
because then he loses good time that he might use in talk.  I'll wager
you anything against anything, Harry, that when the Angel Gabriel blows
his horn Happy will rise out of his grave, shaking his shroud and
furious with anger.  He'll hold up the whole resurrection while he
argues with Gabriel that he blew his horn either too late or too early,
or that it was a mighty poor sort of a horn anyhow."

"I may do all that, Harry," said Happy, "but Arthur is sure to be the
one who will raise the trouble about the shroud.  You know how finicky
he is about his clothes.  He'll find fault with the quality of his
shroud, and he'll say that it's cut either too short or too long.  Then
he'll insist, while all the billions wait, on draping the shroud in the
finest Greek or Roman toga style, before he marches up to his place on
the golden cloud and receives his harp."

Harry laughed.

"That'll be old Arthur, sure," he said.  Then his head drooped again.
Fatigue was overpowering him.  St. Clair and Langdon put a hand on
either shoulder and held him erect, but Harry was so far sunk in
lethargy that he was not conscious of their grasp.  Men looked
curiously at the three young officers riding rapidly forward, the one
in the center apparently held on his horse by the other two.

St. Clair took prompt measures.

"Harry Kenton!" he called sharply.

"Here!"

"Do you know what they do with a sentinel caught asleep?"

"They shoot him!"

"What of a messenger, bearing great news who has ridden two or three
days and nights through a thousand dangers, and then becomes
unconscious in his saddle within five hundred yards of his journey's
end?"

"The stake wouldn't be too good for him," replied Harry as with a
mighty effort he shook himself, both body and mind.  Once more his eyes
cleared and once more he sat erect in his saddle without help.

"I won't fail, Arthur," he said.  "Show the way."

"There's a big tree by the roadside almost straight ahead," said St.
Clair.  "General Lee is asleep under that, but he'll be as wide awake
as any man can be a half-minute after you arrive."

They sprang from their horses, St. Clair spoke quickly with a watching
officer who went at once to awaken Lee.  Harry dimly saw the form of
the general who was sleeping on a blanket, spread over small boughs.
Near him a man in brilliant uniform was walking softly back and forth,
and now and then impatiently striking the tops of his high
yellow-topped boots with a little riding whip.  Harry knew at once that
it was Stuart, but the cavalry leader had not yet noticed him.

Harry saw the officer bend over the commander-in-chief, who rose in an
instant to his feet.  He was fully dressed and he showed gray in the
dusky light, but he seemed as ever calm and grave.  Harry felt
instantly the same swell of courage that the presence of Jackson had
always brought to him.  It was Lee, the indomitable, the man of genius,
who could not be beaten.  He heard him say to the officer who had
awakened him, "Bring him immediately!" and he stepped forward,
strengthening himself anew and filled with pride that he should be the
first to arrive, as he felt that he certainly now was.

"Lieutenant Kenton!" said Lee.

"Yes, sir," said Harry, lifting his cap.

"You were sent with Colonel Sherburne to see about the fords of the
Potomac."

"I was, sir."

"And he has sent you back with the report?"

"He has, sir.  He did not give me any written report for fear that I
might be captured.  He did me the honor to say that my verbal message
would be believed."

"It will.  I know you, as I do the other members of my staff.  Proceed."

"The Potomac is in great flood, sir, and the bridge is destroyed. It
can't be crossed until it runs down to its normal depth."

Harry saw other generals of high rank drawing near.  One he recognized
as Longstreet.  They were all silent and eager.

"Colonel Sherburne ordered me to say to you, sir," continued Harry,
"that the best fords would be between Williamsport and Hagerstown when
the river ran down."

"When did you leave him?"

"Nearly two days ago, sir."

"You have made good speed through a country swarming with our enemy.
You are entitled to rest."

"It's not all, sir?"

"What else?"

"On my way I captured a messenger with a letter from General Meade to
General Pleasanton.  I have the message, sir."

He brought forth the paper from his blouse and extended it to General
Lee, who took it eagerly.  Some one held up a torch and he read it
aloud to his generals.

"And so Meade means to trap me," he said, "by coming down on our flank!"

"Since the river is unfordable he'll have plenty of time to attack us
there," said Longstreet.

"But will he dare to attack?" said Stuart defiantly.  "He was able to
hold his own in defense at Gettysburg, but it's another thing to take
the offensive.  We hear that General Meade is cautious and that he
makes many complaints to his government.  A complainer is not the kind
of man who can destroy the Army of Northern Virginia."

"Sometimes it's well to be cautious, General," said Lee.

Then he turned to Harry and said:

"Again I commend you."

Harry saluted proudly, and then fell unconscious at the feet of General
Lee.

When the young staff officer awoke, he was lying in a wagon which was
moving slowly, with many jolts over a very rough road.  It was perhaps
one of these jolts that awoke him, because his eyes still felt very
heavy with sleep.  His position was comfortable as he lay on a heap of
blankets, and the sides of the wagon looked familiar.  Moreover the
broad back of the driver was not that of a stranger.  Moving his head
into a higher place on the blankets he called.

"Hey you, Dick Jones, where are you taking me?"

Jones turned his rubicund and kindly face.

"Don't it beat all how things come about?" he said.  "This wagon wasn't
built for passengers, but I have you once and then I have you twice,
sleepin' like a prince on them blankets.  I guess if the road wasn't so
rough you'd have slept all the way to Virginia.  But I'm proud to have
you as a passenger.  They say you've been coverin' yourself with glory.
I don't know about that, but I never before saw a man who was so all
fired tuckered out."

"Where did you find me?"

"I didn't exactly find you myself.  They say you saluted General Lee so
deep and so strong that you just fell down at his feet an' didn't move,
as if you intended to stay there forever.  But four of your friends
brought you to my wagon feet foremost, with orders from General Lee if
I didn't treat you right that I'd get a thousand lashes, be tarred an'
feathered, an' hung an' shot an' burned, an' then be buried alive. For
all of which there was no need, as I'm your friend and would treat you
right anyway."

"I know you would," laughed Harry.  "You can't afford to lose your best
passenger.  How long have I been sleeping in this rough train of yours?"

"Since about three o'clock in the morning."

"And what time might it be now."

"Well it might be ten o'clock in the morning or it might be noon, but
it ain't either."

"Well, then, what time is it?"

"It's about six o'clock in the afternoon, Mr. Kenton, and I judge that
you've slept nigh on to fifteen hours, which is mighty good for a man
who was as tired as you was."

"And what has the army been doing while I slept?"

"Oh, it's been marchin' an' marchin' an' marchin'.  Can't you hear the
wagons an' the cannons clinkin' an' clankin'?  An' the hoofs of the
horses beatin' in the road?  An the feet of forty or fifty thousand men
comin' down ker-plunk! ker-plunk! an' all them thousands talkin' off
an' on?  Yes, we're still marchin', Mr. Kenton, but we're retreatin'
with all our teeth showin' an' our claws out, sharpened specially.
Most of the boys don't care if Meade would attack us.  They'd be glad
of the chance to get even for Gettysburg."

There was a beat of hoofs and St. Clair rode up by the side of the
wagon.

"All right again, Harry?" he said cheerfully.  "I'm mighty glad of it.
Other messengers have got through from Sherburne, confirming what you
said, but you were the first to arrive and the army already was on the
march because of the news you brought.  Dalton arrived about noon, dead
beat.  Happy is coming with a horse for you, and you can rejoin the
staff now."

"Before I leave I'll have to thank Mr. Jones once more," said Harry.
"He runs the best passenger service that I know."

"Welcome to it any time, either you or your friend," said Jones,
saluting with his whip.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CROSSING


Harry left the wagon at midnight and overtook the staff, an orderly
providing him with a good horse.  Dalton, who had also been sleeping in
a wagon, came an hour or two later, and the two, as became modest young
officers, rode in the rear of the group that surrounded General Lee.

Although the darkness had come fully, the Army of Northern Virginia had
not yet stopped.  The infantry flanked by cavalry, and, having no fear
of the enemy, marched steadily on.  Harry closely observed General Lee,
and although he was well into his fifties he could discern no weakness,
either physical or mental, in the man who had directed the fortunes of
the South in the terrific and unsuccessful three days at Gettysburg and
who had now led his army for nearly a week in a retreat, threatened, at
any moment, with an attack by a veteran force superior in numbers. All
the other generals looked worn and weary, but he alone sat erect, his
hair and beard trimmed neatly, his grave eye showing no sign of
apprehension.

