"It is a true tale," he said, "and worse than I deemed, for your bird has
flown!  Last night he so spoke with me in the church when I lodged him
there, that I reckoned him a simple man and a pious.  But he has vanished
from among his brethren, none knows how or whither."

"The devil, his master, knows," I said.  "Faith, he has a shrewd care of
his own.  But this, I misdoubt me, is the beginning of evil to us and to
the Maid."

"A knave more or less is of little count in the world," said he; "but now
I must make your peace with the Maid, for she speaks of no less than
sending you forth from her household."

His promise he kept so well--for he was a very honourable man, as any in
France--that the Maid sent for me and showed me the best countenance,
even begging my pardon with all sweetness, and in so fair a manner that I
could have wept.

"It was my first blow in war," she said, smiling kindly, as was her
manner, "and I hope to strike no more as with my own hand, wherefore I
carry my banner to avoid the slaying of men.  But verily I deemed that
you were about stabbing my prisoner, and him a priest.  Belike we shall
hear no more of him, and I misdoubt that he is no true son of Holy
Church.  To-day let me see you bear yourself as boldly against armed men,
that I may report well of you to your lady and my friend."

Therewith she held out her hands and took mine, as frankly as does one
brother in arms with another.  And I kissed her hand, and kept my tears
in my own heart.  But no deadlier blow for France and for herself was
ever dealt than when the Maid struck down my sword, that was thirsting
for the blood of Brother Thomas, and was within an inch of his throat.
Often have I marvelled how the saints, who, as then, guarded her, gave
her no warning, as they did of the onslaught on St. Loup; but it might
not be, or it was not their will, to which we must humbly submit
ourselves.  And now I think I see that wolf's face, under the hood, with
anger and fear in the ominous eyes.  In the Church of St. Loup we found
him, and he was a wolf of the holy places.  None the less, the words of
the Maid brought more keenly to my mind the thought of Elliot, whom in
these crowded hours, between my sorrow and anger, and fear of the Maid's
wrath, I had to some degree forgotten.  They were now ordering an
onslaught on a post of the English beyond the river, and there came into
my heart that verse of the "Book of a Hundred Ballades": how a lover must
press into breach, and mine, and escalade to win advancement and his
lady's favour; and I swore within myself that to-day I would be among the
foremost.




CHAPTER XIII--OF THE FIGHTING AT LES AUGUSTINS AND THE PROPHECY OF THE
MAID


Just above the broken bridge of Orleans there is a broad island, lying
very near the opposite shore, with a narrow, swift passage of water
between bank and island.  Some two furlongs higher up the river, and on
the further bank, the English had built a small fort, named St. Jean le
Blanc, to guard the road, and thither they sent men from Les Augustins.
The plan of our captains was to cross by boats on to the island, and
thence by a bridge of planks laid on boats to win over the narrow
channel, and so make an onslaught on St. Jean le Blanc.  For this
onslaught the Maid had now been armed by her women, and with all her
company, and many knights, was making ready to cross.  But before she, or
we with her, could attain the shore, horses being ill beasts in a boat
ferry, the light-armed townsfolk had crossed over against St. Jean le
Blanc to spy on it, and had found the keep empty, for the English had
drawn back their men to the Bastille of Les Augustins.

Thus there was no more to do, for the captains deemed not that we were of
any avail to attack Les Augustins.  They were retreating then to the
bridge of boats, and Messires de Gaucourt, De Villars, and other good
knights were guarding the retreat, all orderly, lest the English might
sally out from Les Augustins, and, taking us in the rear, might slay many
in the confusion of crossing the boat-bridge, when the Maid and La Hire,
by great dint of toil, passed their horses in a ferry-boat on to the
further bank.  At this moment the English sallied forth, with loud cries,
from Les Augustins, and were falling on our men, who, fearing to be cut
off, began to flee disorderly, while the English called out ill words, as
"cowards" and "ribaulds," and were blaspheming God that He should damn
all Frenchmen.

Hereon the Maid, with her banner, and La Hire, with lance in rest, they
two alone, spurred into the press, and now her banner was tossing like
the flag of a ship in the breakers, and methought there was great
jeopardy lest they should be taken.  But the other French and Scots,
perceiving the banner in such a peril, turned again from their flight,
and men who once turn back to blows again are ill to deal with.  Striking,
then, and crying, Montjoie! St. Denis! and St. Andrew for Scotland! they
made the English give ground, till they were within the palisade of Les
Augustins, where they deemed them safe enough.  Now I had struggled
through the throng on the island, some flying, some advancing, as each
man's heart bade him, till I leaped into the water up to my waist and won
the land.  There I was running to the front of the fight when D'Aulon
would have stopped me, for he had a command to hold a certain narrow way,
lest the English should drive us to the water again.

All this was rightly done, but I, hearing the cry of St. Andrew, was as
one possessed, and paying no heed to D'Aulon, was for thrusting me
forward, when a certain Spaniard, Alphonse de Partada, caught me by the
arm, and told me, with an oath, that I might well bide where better men
than I were content to be.  At this I made answer that my place was with
the Maid, and, as for better men, bigger he might well be, but I, for
one, was not content to look on idly where blows were being dealt.  He
answered in such terms that I bade him follow me, and see which of us
would fare furthest into the press.

"And for that you may be swifter of foot than I, as you have longer
legs," I cried, "clasp hands on this bargain, and let us reach the
palisades with the same step."

To this he agreed, and D'Aulon not refusing permission (for he loved to
look on a vaillance), we, clasping hands, ran together swiftly, and
struck our swords in the same moment against the wooden fence.  A little
opening there was, not yet closed, or he that kept it deemed he might win
more honour by holding it with his body.  He was a great knight and tall,
well armed, the red cross of St. George on his breast, and he fought with
a mighty sword.  Together, then, we made at him, two to one, as needs
must be, for this was no gentle passage of arms, but open battle.  One
sweep of his sword I made shift to avoid, but the next lighting on my
salade, drove me staggering back for more yards than two or three, and I
reeled and fell on my hands.  When I rose, Alphonse de Partada was
falling beneath a sword-stroke, and I was for running forward again; but
lo! the great English knight leaped in the air, and so, turning, fell on
his face, his hands grasping at the ground and his feet kicking.

Later I heard from D'Aulon that he had bidden John the Lorrainer mark the
man with his couleuvrine, for that he did overmuch mischief.  But,
thinking of nought save to be foremost in the breach, I ran in, stumbling
over the dead man's body, and shouldered at the same time by Alphonse,
who warded off a stab of a pike that was dealt at me.  Then it was a fair
mellay, our men pressing after us through the gap, and driving us forward
by mere weight of onset, they coming with all speed against our enemies
that ran together from all parts of the keep, and so left bare the
further wall.  It was body to body, weight against weight, short strokes
at close quarters, and, over our heads, bills striking and foining at the
English.  Each man smote where he could; we wavered and swayed, now off
our feet in the press, now making some yard of ground, and evil was the
smell and thick the dust that arose.  Meanwhile came the sound of the
riving of planks from the other side of the palisade; above the steel
points and the dust I saw the Maid's pennon advancing with the face of my
lady painted thereon, and I pressed towards it, crying "St. Andrew" with
such breath as was in me.  Then rang out the Maid's voice, like a
clarion, "St. Denis!" and so, stroke echoing stroke, and daggers going at
close quarters, beaten on and blinded, deaf and breathless, now up, now
down, we staggered forward, till I and the Maid stood side by side, and
the English broke, some falling, some flying to the out-gate.

And, when all was done, there was I, knowing little enough of what had
come and gone, dazed, with my sword bloody and bent, my head humming, and
my foot on the breast of an English knight, one Robert Heron.  Him I took
to prisoner, rescue or no rescue, and so sat we down, very weary, in the
midst of blood and broken arms, for many had been slain and a few taken,
though the more part had fled into the boulevard of Les Tourelles.  And
here, with a joyous face, and the vizor of her helm raised, stood the
Maid, her sword sheathed, waving her banner in the sight of the English
that were on the bridge fort.

Natheless, her joy was but for a moment, and soon was she seated lowly on
the ground, holding in her arms the head of an English knight, sore
wounded, for whom her confessor, Father Pasquerel, was doing the offices
of religion.  Tears were running down her cheeks, even as if he had been
one of her own people; and so, comforting and helping the wounded as she
might, she abode till the darkness came, and the captains had made shift
to repair the fortress and had set guards all orderly.  And all the river
was dark with boats coming and going, their lanterns glittering on the
stream, and they were laden with food and munitions of war.  In one of
these boats did the Maid cross the river, taking with her us of her
company, and speaking to me, above others, in the most gracious manner,
for that I had been the first, with that Spanish gentleman, to pass
within the English palisade.  And now my heart was light, though my flesh
was very weary, for that I had done my devoir, and taken the firstfruits
of Elliot's wedding portion.  No heavy ransom I put on that knight, Sir
Robert Heron, and it was honourably paid in no long time, though he ill
liked yielding him to one that had not gained his spurs.  But it was
fortune of war.  So, half in a dream, we reached our house, and there was
the greatest concourse of townsfolk clamouring in the praise of the Maid,
who showed herself to them from the window, and promised that to-morrow
they should take Les Tourelles.  That night was Friday, yet, so worn were
we all that the Maid bade us sup, and herself took some meat and a little
wine in her water, though commonly she fasted on Friday.  And now we were
about to boun us for bed, and the Maid had risen, and was standing with
her arms passed about the neck of the daughter of the house, a fair lass
and merry, called Charlotte Boucher, who always lay with her (for she had
great joy to be with girls of her own age), when there came the sound of
a dagger-hilt beating at the door.  We opened, and there stood a tall
knight, who louted low to the Maid, cap in hand, and she bade him drink
to the taking of Les Tourelles that should be to-morrow.

But he, with the flagon full in his hands, and withal a thirsty look upon
his face, shook his head.

"To another pledge, Maiden, I will gladly drink, namely, to the bravest
damsel under the sky."

And therewith he drank deep.

"But now I am sent from Gaucourt, and the Bastard, for all the captains
are in counsel again.  And they bid me tell you that enough hath been
done, and they are right well content.  But we are few against so great a
host, in a place so strong that men may not avail to master it by main
force.  The city is now well seen in all manner of victual; moreover, we
can now come and go by Sologne and the left bank.  The skill is therefore
to hold the city till the English wax weary and depart, or till we have
succour anew from the King.  Therefore to-morrow the men-at-arms shall
take rest, having great need thereof; and therefore, gentle Maid, pardon
me that I drank not to the pledge which a lady called."

Then he drained the flagon.

The Maid, holding the girl Charlotte yet closer to her, smote her right
hand on the table, so that it dirled, and the cups and dishes leaped.

"You have been with your counsel," she cried, "and I have been with mine!
The counsel of Messire will stand fast and prevail, and yours shall
perish, for it is of men.  Go back, and bear my words to the captains,"
quoth she; and then, turning to us, who looked on her in amazement, she
said--

"Do ye all rise right early, and more than ye have done to-day shall ye
do.  Keep ever close by me in the mellay, for to-morrow I shall have much
to do, and more than ever yet I did.  And to-morrow shall my blood leap
from my body, above my breast, for an arrow shall smite here!" and she
struck the place with her hand.

Thereon the knight, seeing that she was not to be moved, made his
obeisance, and went back to them that sent him, and all we lay down to
sleep while we might.

These words of the Maid I, Norman Leslie, heard, and bear record that
they are true.




CHAPTER XIV--OF THE FIGHTING AT THE BRIDGE, AND OF THE PRIZE WON BY
NORMAN LESLIE FROM THE RIVER


On that night I slept soft, and woke oft, being utterly foredone.  In the
grey dawn I awoke, and gave a little cough, when, lo! there came a hot
sweet gush into my mouth, and going to the window, I saw that I was
spitting of blood, belike from my old wound.  It is a strange thing that,
therewith, a sickness came over me, and a cold fit as of fear, though
fear I had felt none where men met in heat of arms.  None the less,
seeing that to-day, or never, I was to be made or marred, I spoke of the
matter neither to man nor woman, but drinking a long draught of very cold
water, I spat some deal more, and then it stanched, and I armed me and
sat down on my bed.

My thoughts, as I waited for the first stir in the house, were not glad.
Birds were singing in the garden trees; all else was quiet, as if men
were not waking to slay each other and pass unconfessed to their account.
There came on me a great sickness of war.  Yesterday the boulevard of Les
Augustins, when the fight was over, had been a shambles; white bodies
that had been stripped of their armour lay here and there like sheep on a
hillside, and were now smirched with dust, a thing unseemly.  I put it to
myself that I was engaged, if ever man was, in a righteous quarrel,
fighting against cruel oppression; and I was under the protection of one
sent, as I verily believed, by Heaven.

But blood runs tardy in the cold dawn; my thoughts were chilled, and I
deemed, to speak sooth, that I carried my death within me, from my old
wound, and, even if unhurt, could scarce escape out of that day's labour
and live.  I said farewell to life and the sun, in my own mind, and to
Elliot, thinking of whom, with what tenderness she had nursed me, and of
her mirth and pitiful heart, I could scarce forbear from weeping.  Of my
brother also I thought, and in death it seemed to me that we could
scarcely be divided.  Then my thought went back to old days of childhood
at Pitcullo, old wanderings by Eden banks, old kindness and old quarrels,
and I seemed to see a vision of a great tree, growing alone out of a
little mound, by my father's door, where Robin and I would play "Willie
Wastle in his castle," for that was our first manner of holding a siege.
A man-at-arms has little to make with such fancies, and well I wot that
Randal Rutherford troubled himself therewith in no manner.  But now there
came an iron footstep on the stairs, and the Maid's voice rang clear, and
presently there arose the sound of hammers on rivets, and all the din of
men saddling horses and sharpening swords, so I went forth to join my
company.

Stiff and sore was I, and felt as if I could scarce raise my sword-arm;
but the sight of the Maid, all gleaming in her harness, and clear of
voice, and swift of deed, like St. Michael when he marshalled his angels
against the enemies of heaven, drove my brooding thoughts clean out of
mind.  The sun shone yellow and slanting down the streets; out of the
shadow of the minster came the bells, ringing for war.  The armed
townsfolk thronged the ways, and one man, old and ill-clad, brought to
the Maid a great fish which he had caught overnight in the Loire.  Our
host prayed her to wait till it should be cooked, that she might
breakfast well, for she had much to do.  Yet she, who scarce seemed to
live by earthly meat, but by the will of God, took only a sop of bread
dipped in wine, and gaily leaping to her selle and gathering the reins,
as a lady bound for a hunting where no fear was, she cried, "Keep the
fish for supper, when I will bring back a goddon {25} prisoner to eat his
part.  And to-night, gentle sir, my host, I will return by the
bridge!"--which, as we deemed, might in no manner be, for an arch of the
bridge was broken.  Thereon we all mounted, and rode down to the Burgundy
gate, the women watching us, and casting flowers before the Maiden.  But
when we won the gate, behold, it was locked, and two ranks of
men-at-arms, with lances levelled, wearing the colours of the Sieur de
Gaucourt, were drawn up before it.  That lord himself, in harness, but
bareheaded, stood before his men, and cried, "Hereby is no passage.  To-
day the captains give command that no force stir from the town."

"To-day," quoth the Maid, "shall we take Les Tourelles, and to-morrow not
a goddon, save prisoners and slain men, shall be within three leagues of
Orleans.  Gentle sir, bid open the gate, for to-day have I work to do."

Thereat Gaucourt shook his head, and from the multitude of townsfolk rose
one great angry shout.  They would burn the gate, they cried; they would
fire the town, but they would follow the Maid and the guidance of the
saints.

Thereon stones began to fly, and arbalests were bended, till the Maid
turned, and, facing the throng, her banner lifted as in anger--

"Back, my good friends and people of Orleans," she said, "back and open
the postern door in the great tower on the river wall.  By one way or
another shall I meet the English this day, nor shall might of man prevent
me."

Then many ran back, and soon came the cry that the postern was opened,
and thither streamed the throng.  Therefore Gaucourt saw well that an
onslaught would verily be made; moreover, as a man wise in war, he knew
that the townsfolk, that day, would be hard to hold, and would go far.  So
he even yielded, not ungraciously, and sending a messenger to the Bastard
and the captains, he rode forth from the Burgundy Gate by the side of the
Maid.  He was, indeed, little minded to miss his part of the honour; nor
were the other captains more backward, for scarce had we taken boat and
reached the farther bank, when we saw the banners of the Bastard and La
Hire, Florent d'Illiers and Xaintrailles, Chambers and Kennedy, above the
heads of the armed men who streamed forth by the gate of Burgundy.  Less
orderly was no fight ever begun, but the saints were of our party.  It
was the wise manner of the Maid to strike swift, blow upon blow, each
stroke finding less resistance among the enemy, that had been used to a
laggard war, for then it was the manner of captains to dally for weeks or
months round a town, castle, or other keep, and the skill was to starve
the enemy.  But the manner of the Maid was ever to send cloud upon cloud
of men to make escalade by ladders, their comrades aiding them from under
cover with fire of couleuvrines and bows.  Even so fought that famed
Knight of Brittany, Sir Bertrand du Guesclin.  But he was long dead, and
whether the Maid (who honoured his memory greatly) fought as she did
through his example, or by direct teaching of the saints, I know not.

If disorderly we began, the fault was soon amended; they who had
beleaguered the boulevard all night were set in the rear, to rest out of
shot; the fresh men were arrayed under their banners, in vineyards and
under the walls of fields, so that if one company was driven back another
was ready to come on, that the English might have no repose from battle.

Now, the manner of the boulevard was this: first, there was a strong
palisade, and many men mustered within it; then came a wide, deep, dry
fosse; then a strong wall of earth, bound in with withes and palisaded,
and within it the gate of the boulevard.  When that was won, and the
