appeared sinful or dangerous, he was determined that his followers
must accept his views. Under his rule Geneva, formerly so gay, became
like a city of death, where all citizens went about as if in mourning.
Such an unnatural condition of affairs could not be permanent. The
people soon grew tired of their dictator and of his methods; the
authorities of Berne were roused to hostility by his refusal to accept
their doctrinal programme or their model religious organisation; the
Synod of Lausanne declared against him for a similar reason, and in
1538 he and his principal supporters were driven from the city.
Cardinal Sadoleto took occasion to address a stirring appeal to Geneva
to return to the old faith, but his appeal fell upon deaf ears.

Calvin retired at first to Strassburg, and later he took charge of a
parish in France. During the interval he devoted himself to a closer
study of the disputed religious questions, and wrote much in favour of
the Reformation. It was at this time (1540) that he married the widow
of one of the Anabaptist leaders. Meanwhile Geneva was torn by
disputes between two factions, the Libertines as they were called, who
were opposed to Calvin, and the Guillermins, who clamoured for his
return. The latter body gained ground rapidly, and a decree was issued
recalling Calvin to Geneva (October 1540). Knowing well that his
presence was necessary to restore peace to the city he refused to
return unless the conditions imposed by him should be accepted. In the
end he went back to Geneva practically as its religious and political
dictator (1541).

The form of government introduced was theocratic. Calvin was
recognised as the spiritual and temporal ruler of the city. He was
assisted in the work of government by the Consistory, which was
composed of six clerics and twelve laymen. The latter was the worst
form of inquisition court, taking cognisance of the smallest
infractions of the rules laid down for the conduct of the citizens,
and punishing them by the severest form of punishment. Any want of
respect for the Consistory or opposition to its authority was treated
as a rebellion against God. Calvin formulated a very severe code of
rules for the guidance of the people not merely in their duties as
citizens and as members of his religious organisation, but also in
their social intercourse with one another. Even the privacy of family
life was not sacred in his eyes. All kinds of amusements, theatres,
dances, cards, &c., were banned as ungodly, as were also extravagance
of dress and anything savouring of frivolity. Nobody was allowed to
sell wine or beer except a limited number of merchants licensed to do
so by the Consistory.

Nor were these mere empty regulations designed only to keep religion
before the eyes of the people without any intention of enforcing them.
The preachers were invested with extraordinary powers, and were
commissioned to make house to house visitations, to inquire about
violations of the rules. In their reports to the Congregation and to
the Consistory they noted even the most minute transgressions. Not
content with this Calvin had his spies in all parts of the city, who
reported to him what people were saying about his methods and his
government. The punishment meted out by the courts were of a very
severe and brutal kind. No torture that could be inflicted was deemed
too much for any one bold enough to criticise the Consistory or the
dictator.

It was natural that such methods should be highly distasteful to those
of the citizens of Geneva who were not religious fanatics. A strong
party tried to resist him. They accused him of being much more
tyrannical than the Pope, but Calvin denounced such opponents as
libertines, heretics, and atheists. He handed them over to the devil
at least in so far as his ecclesiastical censures were effective,[2]
threatened the severest spiritual punishment against their aiders and
abettors, and when all such means of reproof failed he had recourse to
the secular arm.

Sebastian Castellio, a well-known preacher and Scriptural scholar, was
punished because he could not agree with Calvin's teaching on
predestination, as was also the physician Bolsec; Ameaux one of the
members of the Council was put to death because he denounced the
tyranny of Calvin and of the Consistory; Gentilis was condemned to
execution for differing with Calvin's teaching on the Trinity, and was
compelled to make a most abject public retraction before he could
obtain a reprieve. Several of the citizens were punished with long
imprisonment for dancing even on the occasion of a wedding, as
happened in the case of Le Fevre, whose son-in-law was obliged to flee
to France because he resented warmly such methods of promoting
religion. In Geneva and in the adjoining territory all Catholic
practices were put down by violence, and the peasants were allowed no
choice in their religious views. Possibly, however, the most glaring
example of Calvin's tyranny and high-handed methods was his treatment
of Michael Servetus, a Spaniard who had written against the Trinity.
He was on a journey through the territory of Geneva and was doing
nothing to spread his doctrines nor acting in any way likely to bring
him under the ire of Calvin. The latter having heard of his presence
there had him arrested, tried, and condemned to death. To justify such
harshness he published a pamphlet in which he advocated death as the
only proper remedy for heresy. Theodore Beza wrote strongly in support
of this opinion of his master's, as did also Melanchthon who, though
differing from Calvin on so many points, hastened to forward his
warmest congratulations on the execution of Servetus.[3]

Calvin's acts of cruelty were not the result of violent outbursts of
temper. By nature cold and immovable, he did not allow himself to be
hurried to extremes either by anger or by passion. How he succeeded in
maintaining his position for so many years in Geneva is intelligible
only to those who understand the strength of the religious fanaticism
that he was able to arouse amongst his followers, the terror which his
spiritual and temporal punishments inspired among his opponents, his
own wonderful capacity for organisation and administration, the
activity of his ministers and spies, and the almost perfect system of
repression that he adopted in his two-fold character of religious and
political dictator.

To strengthen his position and to provide for the continuance of his
system he established an academy at Geneva (1558) principally for the
study of theology and philosophy. It was attended by crowds of
scholars from Switzerland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, England,
and Scotland. By means of the academy, Calvinism was spread throughout
Switzerland notwithstanding the opposition of the Zwinglian preachers,
and Calvin's system of ecclesiastical organisation became the model
aimed at by his disciples in most countries of Europe, notably France,
the Netherlands, and Scotland. The Zurich school, at the head of which
stood Bullinger, did not yield ground to the new teaching without a
severe struggle, and Calvin found himself obliged to come to terms
with them in the /Consensus Tigurninus/ (1549). In his desire to
secure the religious unity of Switzerland he had no difficulty in
abandoning or minimising his own doctrine in the hope of overcoming or
winning over his opponents. After a life of tireless energy his health
began to fail in 1561, and three years later he passed away (1564).

Calvin was a man of morose and gloomy temperament, severe even to
harshness with his followers, and utterly devoid of human sympathy.
Not so however his disciple and assistant Theodore Beza. The latter
was born in Burgundy in 1519, and after completing his classical
studies at Orleans he drifted to Paris, where he plunged into all the
pleasures and dissipations of the capital, and where at first he was
remarkable more for his love songs than for his theology. He devoted
himself to the study of law, and in 1539 he took his licentiate at
Paris. Having become attached to the opinions of the Swiss Reformers
he left Paris and settled at Geneva, where he fell completely under
the influence of Calvin, but not even Calvin's temperament and system
could change his naturally gay and sympathetic disposition. For this
reason he became a general favourite, and did much to win the good-
will of those who felt themselves rebelled by the harshness of the
dictator. Beza was, besides, a man of very superior ability, and had
been especially well equipped in Hebrew and in the classics. He was
master of a striking style whether he wrote in French or in Latin,
eloquent beyond most of his contemporaries, and in every way capable
of making a good impression not merely on the ordinary citizen but on
the more educated classes. His writings in defence of Calvin's system
and his translations of the Scriptures gave him a great reputation
throughout Europe, and gained for him a commanding position in Geneva,
where he died in 1605.

Calvin's system was modelled to a great extent on the doctrines of
Luther and Zwingli, but it was coloured largely by his own harsh and
morose disposition. For the distinguishing feature of his system,
namely, absolute predestination, he was dependent largely upon the
works of Wycliffe. Like Luther, he began with the assumption that the
condition of man before the Fall was entirely natural, and that
consequently by the Fall he was deprived of something that was
essential to his nature and without which human nature was completely
corrupted. Man was no longer free, and every act of his was sinful.
His want of freedom was the result of the play of external forces
directed and arranged by God, rather than of any internal necessity by
which he was forced to sin. God is, according to Calvin, the author of
sin, in the sense that he created a certain number of men to work evil
through them in order that He might have an opportunity of displaying
the divine attribute of mercy. Hence the motive of God in bringing
about evil is different from the motive of the sinner, and therefore
though the sinner is blameworthy God is nowise responsible for his
crime.

Adam sinned because it was decreed by God that he should fall in order
that the divine mercy should be manifested to the world. For the same
reason God did not intend that all should be equally good or that all
should be saved. He created some men that they might sin and that
their punishment might afford an example of God's justice, while He
made others that they might be saved to show His overwhelming mercy.
The former are condemned to hell by an irreversible decree, the
others, the elect, are predestined absolutely to glory. The elect are
assured of justification through the merits of Christ, and once
justified they are always justified, for justification cannot be lost.
Faith such as that advocated by Luther was the means of acquiring
justification, but, mindful of his other doctrine that even the best
of men's works are sinful, Calvin took care to explain that justifying
faith was only the instrument by which a man laid hold of the merits
of Christ. It was like a vessel which, though containing some
priceless treasure, was in itself worthless.

As might be expected, Calvin refused to admit that the sacraments were
endowed with any objective power of conferring Grace. In the case of
their reception by the elect, however, he held that they were the
means of strengthening the faith by which justification is acquired,
but for those predestined to damnation they were mere signs without
any spiritual effect. In regard to the Eucharist, while he rejected
the Catholic view of Transubtantiation, he maintained against the
Lutherans that Impanation or Companation was equally absurd. Nor did
he agree with Zwingli that the Eucharist is a mere sign of Christ's
love for men. According to him Christ is really present, in the sense
that though the bread and wine remain unchanged, the predestined
receive with the Eucharistic elements a heavenly food that proceeds
from the body of Christ in Heaven.

Like Luther he contended that the true Church of Christ is invisible,
consisting in his view only of the predestined, but, realising the
necessity for authority and organisation, he was driven to hold that
the invisible Church manifested itself through a visible religious
society. Unlike Luther, however, he was unwilling to subordinate the
Church to the civil power, believing as he did that it was a society
complete in itself and entirely independent of temporal sovereigns.
Each Calvinistic community should be to a great extent a self-
governing republic, all of them bound together into one body by the
religious synods, to which the individual communities should elect
representatives. The churches were to be ruled by pastors, elders, and
deacons. Candidates for the sacred ministry were to receive the
confirmation of their vocation by a call from some Calvinistic church
body, and were to be ordained by the imposition of the hands of the
presbyters or elders. For Calvin as for Luther the Holy Scriptures
were the sole rule of faith to be adopted by both the preachers and
the synods. The special illumination of the Holy Ghost was sufficient
to guard individuals from being deceived either in determining what
books are inspired, or what is the precise meaning which God wished to
convey in any particular book or passage.[4]
                              ----------

[1] Baird, /Theodore Beza, Counsellor of the French Reform/, 1900.

[2] Galli, /Die Lutheran, und Calvinist, Kirchenstrafen im
    Reformationszeitalter/, 1878.

[3] Rouquette, /L'Inquisition protestante. Les victimes de Calvin/,
    1906. Galiffe, /Quelques pages d'histoire exacte sur les proces
    intentes a Geneve/, 1862. Paulus, /Luther und Gewissensfreiheit/,
    1905. Id., /Melanchthon und Gewissensfreiheit/ (/Katholik/, i.,
    546 sqq.).

[4] Schwane, /Dogmengeschichte der neuerenzeit/. Cunningham, /The
    Reformers and the Theology of the Reformation/, 1862.


                       (b) Calvinism in France.

  Lavisse, /Histoire de France/ (vols v.-vi.), 1904-5. De Meaux,
  /Les luttes religieuses en France au XVIe siecle/, 1879. Imbart de
  la Tour, /Les origines de la Reforme/, vols. i.-ii., 1904-9.
  Hauser, /Etudes sur la Reforme francaise/, 1909. Capefigue,
  /Histoire de la reforme, de la ligue et du regne de Henri IV./, 4
  vols., 1834. Maimbourg, /Histoire du Calvinisme/, 1682. Soldan,
  /Geschichte des Protestantismus in Frankreich bis zum Tode Karls
  ix./, 2 Bde, 1855. Baird, /History of the Rise of the Huguenots in
  France/, 2 vols., 1879. See also bibliography, chap. iii. (a).

Many causes combined to favour the introduction of the reformed
doctrines into France. Owing to the anti-papal attitude adopted by the
French theologians during the Great Western Schism, there was still
lurking in many circles a strong feeling against the Holy See and in
favour of a national Church, over which the Pope should retain merely
a supremacy of honour. Besides, the influence of the old sects, the
Albigenses and the Waldenses, had not disappeared entirely, and the
principles of the French mystics favoured the theory of religious
individualism, that lay behind the whole teaching of the reformers.
The Renaissance, too, was a power in France, more especially in Paris,
where it could boast of powerful patrons such as Margaret of Navarre,
sister of Francis I. and wife of the King of Navarre, the king's
mistress, his favourite minister Du Bellay, and the latter's brother,
the Bishop of Paris. Not all the French Humanists, however, were
equally dangerous. A few of them were undoubtedly favourable to
Luther's views, while many others, infuriated by the charges of
unorthodoxy levelled against them, were inclined to look with
complacency on whatever was condemned by their Scholastic opponents.
The proximity of Strassburg, where Lutheran and Zwinglian doctrines
found support, and the close relations existing between the Paris
University and German scholars helped to disseminate among Frenchmen
the writings of Erasmus, Luther, and Melanchthon and with them the new
religious views.

Against the success of the Reformation in France was the fact that the
people, Latin rather than Teuton in their sympathies, were thoroughly
devoted to their religion and to the Holy See, that the bishops though
nominated by the king according to the Concordat of 1516, were more
zealous than their German brethren, that in the main Paris University,
then the great centre of intellectual life in France, was thoroughly
Catholic, and that the queen-mother, the chancellor of state, the
leading ministers both lay and ecclesiastic, and the parliamentary
authorities could be relied upon to offer Lutheranism their strongest
opposition. Nor, however much Francis I. might be inclined to
vacillate in the hope of securing the help of the German Protestant
princes in his struggle with the empire, had he any desire to see his
kingdom convulsed by the religious strife raging on the other side of
the Rhine.

In 1521 the Parliament of Paris with the approval of the king forbade
the publication of writings dealing with the new religious views.
Luther's books were condemned, and the Paris University drew up a list
of erroneous propositions extracted from the works of the German
theologians (1523). At the request of the queen-mother the theological
faculty of Paris formulated a plan for preventing the spread of the
German errors in France, the main points of which were that heretical
books should be forbidden, that the bishops should be exhorted to seek
out such works in their dioceses and have them destroyed, and that the
Sorbonne should have a free hand in maintaining religious unity. Yet
in spite of these precautions a Lutheran community was formed at Meaux
in the vicinity of Paris, and in the South of France, where the
Waldensian party was still strong, Lutheran teaching found many
supporters. In some places various attempts were made to imitate the
tactics adopted so successfully at Wittenberg and Berne to bring about
by force the discontinuance of Catholic worship. But these attempts
failed, owing mainly to the independent attitude of the local
parliaments and to the energy of the bishops, who removed one of the
most dangerous weapons wielded by the heretics by insisting on a
thorough reform of the clergy.

But though Francis I. had been moved to take action against the
sectaries, and though Calvin and other leaders were obliged to leave
France, the reforming party, relying on the influence of patrons like
Margaret of Navarre[1] and on the Humanist section at the university
and at the newly established College de France, felt confident of
ultimate success. They realised that the king was most anxious to
arrive at an understanding with the Protestant princes of Germany
against Charles V., and that therefore it was unlikely that he would
indulge in a violent persecution of their co-religionists at home.
They knew, too, that Francis I. had set his heart on securing complete
control of the Church in his own dominions, as was evident by the hard
bargain which he drove with Leo X. in the Corcordat of 1516,[2] and
they were not without hope that Luther's teaching on the spiritual
supremacy of the civil rulers might prove an irresistible bait to a
man of such a temperament. Negotiations were opened with Francis I. by
some of the German reformers, who offered to accept most of the
Catholic doctrines together with episcopal government if only the king
would support their cause (1534). As it was impossible to arrange for
a conference, the Lutheran party submitted a summary of their views
embodied in twelve articles to the judgment of the Sorbonne. In reply
to this communication the doctors of the Sorbonne, instead of wasting
their energies in the discussion of particular tenets, invited the
Germans to state explicitly whether or not they accepted the authority
of the Church and the writings of the Fathers. Such an attitude put an
end to all hopes of common action between the French and German
theologians, but at the same time Francis I. was not willing, for
political reasons, to break with Protestantism. The publication,
however, of a particularly offensive pamphlet against Catholicism,
printed in Switzerland and scattered broadcast throughout France,
served as a warning to the king that his own country was on the brink
of being plunged into the civil strife which Protestantism had
fomented in Germany, and that if he wanted to preserve national unity
and peace the time for decisive action had arrived. Many of the
leading reformers were arrested and some of them were put to death,
while others were banished from France (1535).

From this time the Lutherans began to lose hope of securing the active
co-operation of Francis I., but the friendly political relations
between the king and the German Protestant princes, together with the
close proximity of Strassburg, Geneva, and Berne, from which preachers
and pamphlets made their way into France, helped to strengthen the
heretical party in the country despite the efforts of the
ecclesiastical and lay authorities. In the South many of the Waldenses
in Dauphiny and Provence went over formally to the side of the
Calvinists. In places where they possessed considerable strength they
indulged in violent attacks on the clergy, for which reason severe
measures of repression were adopted by the local administrators and by
the king. As in Switzerland, so too in France Calvinism proved to be
the most attractive of the new religious systems. Calvinistic
communities were formed at Paris, Rouen, Lyons and Orleans, all of
which looked to Geneva for direction. The name given to the French
followers of Calvin was Huguenots.

Henry II. (1547-59), who succeeded on the death of Francis I. had no
difficulty in allying himself with the German Protestants, and in
despatching an army to assist Maurice of Saxony in his rebellion
against the Emperor, while at the same time taking every precaution
against the spread of heresy at home. He established a new inquisition
department presided over by a Dominican for the detection and
punishment of the Huguenots, and pledged the civil power to carry out
its decisions. In this attitude he was supported strongly by the
University of Paris, which merited the heartiest congratulations of
Julius III. by its striking defence of Catholic doctrines, especially
the necessity of obedience to the Holy See. Yet notwithstanding all
measures taken against them the Huguenots continued to increase in
numbers. The Bishop of Navarre went over to their side, as did a
certain number of the clergy, and the attitude of some of the others
was uncertain. So strong did the Huguenot party find itself in France
that a Synod representing the different reformed communities was held
in Paris in 1559, at which the doctrine and ecclesiastical
organisation introduced by Calvin into Switzerland were formally
adopted. The accession of Elizabeth to the throne in England, and the
hopes entertained in France of detaching that country from Spain made
the French government less anxious to adopt severe measures against
the Protestants. After the Peace of Cateau Cambresis (1559), when
Henry determined to make a great effort to extirpate Calvinism, he was
prevented by death.

Francis II. who lived only one year (1559-60) succeeded, and he was
followed by Charles IX. (1560-74). The latter of these was a mere
child, and during the minority the government of the country was in
the hands of Catharine de' Medici, his mother, who became regent of
France. At the court two parties struggled for supremacy, the family
of Guise which stood for Catholicism, and the Bourbons who favoured
Calvinism. The regent, not being a woman of very decided religious
convictions or tendencies, set herself to play off one party against
the other so as to increase her own power, and in this way a splendid
opportunity was given to the Calvinists to pursue their religious
campaign. Several of the more powerful people in the kingdom favoured
their schemes solely out of hatred to the Duke of Guise[3] and with
the hope of lessening his power. Amongst the prominent Calvinist
leaders at this period were Antoine de Bourbon,[4] King of Navarre,
and his brother Louis Prince de Conde, the Constable de Montmorency
and Admiral Coligny,[5] the recognised head and ablest leader of the
Huguenot party.

Taking advantage of the bitter feeling aroused amongst their followers
by the execution of some of their number, the Huguenots formed a
conspiracy (Tumult of Amboise 1560) to seize the young king, to
overthrow the Duke of Guise, and to set up in his place the Prince de
Conde. The Calvinist theologians, having been consulted about the
lawfulness of such an enterprise, declared that the conspirators might
proceed without fear of sinning so long as a prince of the royal
family was amongst their leaders. The plot was discovered, however,
before their plans were matured, and several of those who took part in
it were put to death. Instead of weakening, it served only to
strengthen the family of Guise. Francis, Duke of Guise, was appointed
a lieutenant-general of France with the title of saviour of his
country, while his brother, the Cardinal of Lorraine, became chief
inquisitor and one of the papal legates appointed for the reform of
abuses in France. The King of Navarre, to whom Pius IV. addressed a
personal appeal, confessed his unfaltering loyalty to the Catholic
religion, although at the same time he was doing much to spread
Calvinism in his own dominions and throughout the South of France.

Though the royal edict against the Calvinists, published in 1560, was
severe, yet little was done to enforce its terms except against those
who had recourse to arms. The Prince de Conde organised a new
conspiracy and attempted to secure Lyons. He was arrested, tried, and
condemned to death, but before the sentence could be carried out
Francis II. passed away.

A new grouping of parties now took place. The regent, Catharine de'
Medici, alarmed at the growing influence of the Guise faction, threw
the whole weight of her influence into the scales in favour of the
Prince de Conde and of the Huguenots. A royal edict was issued
suspending all prosecutions against heretics and ordering the release
of all prisoners detained on account of their religion (1561). The
regent wrote to the Pope praising the religious fervour of the
Calvinists, and calling upon him to suppress several Catholic
practices to which the heretics had taken exception. She professed
herself anxious for a national council to settle the religious
differences, and failing this she insisted upon a religious
disputation at Poissy. The disputation ("Colloquy" of Poissy) took
place (1561) in presence of the young king, his mother, and a large
number of cardinals, bishops, and ministers of state. The Catholics
were represented by the Cardinal of Lorraine, the Jesuit General
Lainez, and other distinguished clergy, while the Calvinists sent a
large number of their ablest leaders, conspicuous amongst whom were
Theodore Beza and Francois de Morel. The principal doctrines in
dispute, notably the authority of the Church and the Eucharist, were
discussed at length without result. Then a small committee, composed
of five theologians representing each side, was appointed, but without
any better success. In the end, as no agreement could be secured, the
conference was dismissed.

Owing to the close alliance between the regent and the Prince de Conde
the former issued a new edict, in which she allowed the Calvinists
free exercise of their religion outside the cities provided that they
assembled unarmed, commanded them to restore the goods and churches
they had seized, and forbade them to have recourse to violence or to
conspiracies to promote their views (1562). Encouraged by these
concessions, the Calvinists especially in the South of France
attempted to force their religion on the people. They attacked
churches, profaned the Blessed Sacrament, murdered several priests and
laymen, and obliged the peasants to listen to their preachers. Feeling
between the two parties was extremely bitter, and the Catholics were
especially incensed that a small minority should be allowed to have
their own way regardless of the opinions of the vast body of the
French people.

In these circumstances it required very little to lead to serious
conflict. At Vassy some soldiers accompanying the Duke of Guise
quarrelled with a party of Calvinists, whose psalm-singing was
disturbing the Mass at which the Duke was assisting. The latter,
hearing the noise, hastened out to restore peace, and was struck with
a stone. His followers, incensed at this outrage, drew their swords
and killed a large number of the Calvinists. This incident, referred
to generally as the massacre of Vassy, led to a new civil war (1562).
The Calvinists hastened to take up arms, and the Prince de Conde was
