The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Dust, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Red Dust

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: December 9, 2012 [EBook #41586]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED DUST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                          The RED DUST

                      _By Murray Leinster_

                 _A Sequel to "The Mad Planet."_

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from January 1927
    Amazing Stories. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: Burl raised his spear, and plunged down on the back of
the moving thing, thrusting his spear with all the force he could
command. He had fallen upon the shining back of one of the huge,
meat-eating beetles, and his spear had slid across the horny armor and
then stuck fast, having pierced only the leathery tissue between the
insect's head and thorax.]


    _You who have read "The Mad Planet" by Murray Leinster, will welcome
    the sequel to that story. The world, in a far distant future, is
    peopled with huge insects and titanic fungus growths. Life has been
    greatly altered, and tiny Man is now in the process of becoming
    acclimated to the change. We again meet our hero Burl, but this time
    a far greater danger menaces the human race. The huge insects are
    still in evidence, but the terror they inspire is as nothing
    compared to the deadly Red Dust. You will follow this remarkable
    story with breathless interest._




CHAPTER I

Prey


The sky grew gray and then almost white. The overhanging banks of clouds
seemed to withdraw a little from the steaming earth. Haze that hung
always among the mushroom forests and above the fungus hills grew more
tenuous, and the slow and misty rain that dripped the whole night long
ceased reluctantly.

As far as the eye could see a mad world stretched out, a world of
insensate cruelties and strange, fierce maternal solicitudes. The
insects of the night--the great moths whose wings spread far and wide in
the dimness, and the huge fireflies, four feet in length, whose beacons
made the earth glow in their pale, weird light--the insects of the night
had sought their hiding-places.

Now the creatures of the day ventured forth. A great ant-hill towered a
hundred feet in the air. Upon its gravel and boulder-strewn side a
commotion became visible.

The earth crumbled, and fell into an invisible opening, then a dark
chasm appeared, and two slender, threadlike antennae peered out.

A warrior ant emerged, and stood for an instant in the daylight, looking
all about for signs of danger to the ant-city. He was all of ten inches
long, this ant, and his mandibles were fierce and strong. A second and
third warrior came from the inside of the ant-hill, and ran with tiny
clickings about the hillock, waving their antennae restlessly, searching,
ever searching for a menace to their city.

They returned to the gateway from which they had made their appearance,
evidently bearing reassuring messages, because shortly after they had
reentered the gateway of the ant-city, a flood of black, ill-smelling
workers poured out of the opening and dispersed upon their business. The
clickings of their limbs and an occasional whining stridulation made an
incessant sound as they scattered over the earth, foraging among the
mushrooms and giant cabbages, among the rubbish-heaps of the gigantic
bee-hives and wasp colonies, and among the remains of the tragedies of
the night for food for their city.

The city of the ants had begun its daily toil, toil in which every one
shared without supervision or coercion. Deep in the recesses of the
pyramid galleries were hollowed out and winding passages that led down a
fathomless distance into the earth below.

Somewhere in the maze of tunnels there was a royal apartment, in which
the queen-ant reposed, waited upon by assiduous courtiers, fed by royal
stewards, and combed and rubbed by the hands of her subjects and
children.

But even the huge monarch of the city had her constant and pressing duty
of maternity. A dozen times the size of her largest loyal servant, she
was no less bound by the unwritten but imperative laws of the city than
they. From the time of waking to the time of rest, she was ordained to
be the queen-mother in the strictest and most literal sense of the word,
for at intervals to be measured only in terms of minutes she brought
forth a single egg, perhaps three inches in length, which was instantly
seized by one of her eager attendants and carried in haste to the
municipal nursery.

There it was placed in a tiny cell a foot or more in length until a
sac-shaped grub appeared, all soft, white body save for a tiny mouth.
Then the nurses took it in charge and fed it with curious, tender
gestures until it had waxed large and fat and slept the sleep of
metamorphosis. When it emerged from its rudimentary cocoon it took the
places of its nurses until its soft skin had hardened into the horny
armor of the workers and soldiers, and then it joined the throng of
workers that poured out from the city at dawn to forage for food, to
bring back its finds and to share with the warriors and the nurses, the
drone males and the young queens, and all the other members of its
communities, their duties in the city itself. That was the life of the
social insect, absolute devotion to the cause of its city, utter
abnegation of self-interest for the sake of its fellows--and death at
their hands when their usefulness was past. They neither knew nor
expected more or less.

It is a strange instinct that prompts these creatures to devote their
lives to their city, taking no smallest thought for their individual
good, without even the call of maternity or sex to guide them. Only the
queen knows motherhood. The others know nothing but toil, for purposes
they do not understand, and to an end of which they cannot dream. At
intervals all over the world of Burl's time these ant-cities rose above
the surrounding ground, some small and barely begun, and others ancient
colonies which were truly the continuation of cities first built when
the ants were insects to be crushed beneath the feet of men. These
ancient strongholds towered two, three, and even four hundred feet above
the plains, and their inhabitants would have had to be numbered in
millions if not billions.

Not all the earth was subject to the ants, however. Bees and wasps and
more deadly creatures crawled over and flew above its surface. The bees
were four feet and more in length. And slender-waisted wasps darted here
and there, preying upon the colossal crickets that sang deep bass music
to their mates--and the length of the crickets was the length of a man,
and more.

Spiders with bloated bellies waited, motionless, in their snares, whose
threads were the size of small cables, waiting for some luckless giant
insect to be entangled in the gummy traps. And butterflies fluttered
over the festering plains of this new world, tremendous creatures whose
wings could only be measured in terms of yards.

An outcropping of rock jutted up abruptly from a fungus-covered plain.
Shelf-fungi and strangely colored molds stained the stone until the
shining quartz was hidden almost completely from view, but the whole
glistened like tinted crystal from the dank wetness of the night. Little
wisps of vapor curled away from the slopes as the moisture was taken up
by the already moisture-laden air.

Seen from a distance, the outcropping of rock looked innocent and still,
but a nearer view showed many things.

Here a hunting wasp had come upon a gray worm, and was methodically
inserting its sting into each of the twelve segments of the faintly
writhing creature. Presently the worm would be completely paralyzed, and
would be carried to the burrow of the wasp, where an egg would be laid
upon it, from which a tiny maggot would presently hatch. Then weeks of
agony for the great gray worm, conscious, but unable to move, while the
maggot fed upon its living flesh--

There the tiny spider, youngest of hatchlings, barely four inches
across, stealthily stalked some other still tinier mite, the little,
many-legged larva of the oil-beetle, known as the bee-louse. The almost
infinitely small bee-louse was barely two inches long, and could easily
hide in the thick fur of a great bumblebee.

This one small creature would never fulfill its destiny, however. The
hatchling spider sprang--it was a combat of midgets which was soon over.
When the spider had grown and was feared as a huge, black-bellied
tarantula, it would slay monster crickets with the same ease and the
same implacable ferocity.

The outcropping of rock looked still and innocent. There was one point
where it overhung, forming a shelf, beneath which the stone fell away in
a sheer-drop. Many colored fungus growths covered the rock, making it a
riot of tints and shades. But hanging from the rooflike projection of
the stone there was a strange, drab-white object. It was in the shape of
half a globe, perhaps six feet by six feet at its largest. A number of
little semicircular doors were fixed about its sides, like inverted
arches, each closed by a blank wall. One of them would open, but only
one.

The house was like the half of a pallid orange, fastened to the roof of
rock. Thick cables stretched in every direction for yards upon yards,
anchoring the habitation firmly, but the most striking of the things
about the house--still and quiet and innocent, like all the rest of the
rock outcropping--were the ghastly trophies fastened to the outer walls
and hanging from long silken chains below.

Here was the hind leg of one of the smaller beetles. There was the
wing-case of a flying creature. Here a snail-shell, two feet in
diameter, hanging at the end of an inch-thick cable. There a boulder
that must have weighed thirty or forty pounds, dangling in similar
fashion.

But fastened here and there, haphazard and irregularly, were other more
repulsive remnants. The shrunken head-armor of a beetle, the fierce jaws
of a cricket--the pitiful shreds of a hundred creatures that had formed
forgotten meals for the bloated insect within the home.

Comparatively small as was the nest of the clotho spider, it was
decorated as no ogre's castle had ever been adorned--legs sucked dry of
their contents, corselets of horny armor forever to be unused by any
creature, a wing of this insect, the head of that. And dangling by the
longest cord of all, with a silken cable wrapped carefully about it to
keep the parts together, was the shrunken, shriveled, dried-up body of a
long-dead man!

Outside, the nest was a place of gruesome relics. Within, it was a place
of luxury and ease. A cushion of softest down filled all the bulging
bottom of the hemisphere. A canopy of similarly luxurious texture
interposed itself between the rocky roof and the dark, hideous body of
the resting spider.

The eyes of the hairy creature glittered like diamonds, even in the
darkness, but the loathsome, attenuated legs were tucked under the
round-bellied body, and the spider was at rest. It had fed.

It waited, motionless, without desires or aversions, without emotions or
perplexities, in comfortable, placid, machinelike contentment until time
should bring the call to feed again.

A fresh carcass had been added to the decorations of the nest only the
night before. For many days the spider would repose in motionless
splendor within the silken castle. When hunger came again, a nocturnal
foray, a creature would be pounced upon and slain, brought bodily to the
nest, and feasted upon, its body festooned upon the exterior, and
another half-sleeping, half-waking period of dreamful idleness within
the sybaritic charnel-house would ensue.

Slowly and timidly, half a dozen pink-skinned creatures made their way
through the mushroom forest that led to the outcropping of rock under
which the clotho spider's nest was slung. They were men, degraded
remnants of the once dominant race.

Burl was their leader, and was distinguished solely by two three-foot
stumps of the feathery, golden antennae of a night-flying moth he had
bound to his forehead. In his hand was a horny, chitinous spear, taken
from the body of an unknown flying creature killed by the flames of the
burning purple hills.

Since Burl's return from his solitary--and involuntary--journey, he had
been greatly revered by his tribe. Hitherto it had been but a
leaderless, formless group of people, creeping to the same hiding-place
at nightfall to share in the food of the fortunate, and shudder at the
fate of those who might not appear.

Now Burl had walked boldly to them, bearing, upon his back the gray bulk
of a labyrinth spider he had slain with his own hands, and clad in
wonderful garments of a gorgeousness they envied and admired. They hung
upon his words as he struggled to tell them of his adventures, and
slowly and dimly they began to look to him for leadership. He was
wonderful. For days they had listened breathlessly to the tale of his
adventures, but when he demanded that they follow him in another and
more perilous affair, they were appalled.

A peculiar strength of will had come to Burl. He had seen and done
things that no man in the memory of his tribe had seen or done. He had
stood by when the purple hills burned and formed a funeral pyre for the
horde of army ants, and for uncounted thousands of flying creatures. He
