Larner did not answer. He only pondered. The more he ran over the
strange happenings of the last week in his mind the more he believed he
was dreaming. His thoughts took a strange turn: "Why do these vain
people go around dressed in jeweled ornaments?"

Nern again anticipated a question. "Diamonds, gold and many of what you
call precious stones are common on Venus," he volunteered. "Talc and
many other things are more valuable."

"Talc?"

"Yes, we use an immense quantity of it. We have a wood that is harder
than your steel. We build machinery with it. We cannot use oil to
lubricate these wooden shafts and bearings as it softens the wood, so
all parts exposed to friction are sprayed constantly by a gust of talc
from a blower.

"You use talc mostly for toilet purposes. We use it for various
purposes. There is little left on Venus, and it is more valuable to us
than either gold or diamonds. We draw on your planet now for talc. You
dump immense quantities. We just shipped one hundred 1,000-ton globes of
it from the Cripple Creek district, and the district never missed it. We
drew most of it from your mine dumps."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nern tried not to look bored as he explained more in detail: "We brought
100 hollow spheres constructed of duranium. We suspended these over the
Cripple Creek district at an altitude of 10,000 feet above the earth's
surface. Because of the crystal glint of duranium they were invisible to
earth dwellers at that height. Then we used a suction draft at night,
drawing the talc from the earth, filling one drum after another. This is
done by tuning in a certain selective attraction that attracts only
talc. It draws it right out of your ground in tiny particles and
assembles it in the transportation drums as pure talc. On the earth, if
noticed at all, it would have been called a dust storm.

"The drums, when loaded with talc, are set to attract the proper
planetary force and they go speeding toward Venus at the rate of 426,000
miles an hour. They are prevented from colliding with meteors by an
automatic magnetic device. This is controlled by magnetic force alone,
and when the targo gets too close to a meteor it changes its course
instantly. The passenger targo we ride in acts similarly. And now may I
return to the subject of the vampires of Venus?"

"Pardon my ignorance," said Larner, and for the first time in his life
he felt very ignorant indeed.

"I know little more than I have told you," said Nern, rather hopelessly.
"Our knowledge of your world, your people and your language comes from
our listening in on you and observing you without being observed or
heard. This might seem like taking an advantage of you, were it not for
the fact that we respect confidences, and subjugate all else to science.
We have helped you at times, by telepathically suggesting ideas to your
thinkers.

"We would have given you all our inventions in this way, gladly, but in
many instances we were unable to find minds attuned to accept such
advanced ideas. We have had the advantage of you because our planet is
so many millions of years older than your own." There was a plaintive
note in Nern's voice as he talked.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But now we are on our knees to you, so to speak. We do not know
everything and, desperately, we need the aid of a man of your caliber.
In behalf of the distraught people of Venus, I am asking you bluntly to
make a great sacrifice. Will you face the dangers of a trip to Venus and
use your knowledge to aid us in exterminating these creatures of hell?"
There was positive pleading in his voice, and in the eyes of his
beautiful sister there were tears.

"But what would my superiors in the Government Bureau think?" feebly
protested Larner, "I could not explain...."

"You have no superiors in your line. Our Government needs you at this
time more than any earthly government. Your place here is a fixture. You
can always return to it, should you live. We are asking you to face a
horrible death with us. You can name your own compensation, but I know
you are not interested so much in reward.

"Now, honestly, my good professor, there is no advantage to be gained by
explanation. Just disappear. In the name of God and in the interests of
science and the salvation of a people who are at your mercy, just drop
out of sight. Drop out of life on this planet. Come with us. The cause
is worthy of the man I believe you to be."

"I will go," said Larner, and his hosts waited for no more. An instant
later the targo shot out into interstellar space.

"How do you know what course to follow?" asked Larner after a reasonable
time, when he had recovered from his surprise at the sudden take-off.

"We do not need to know. Our machine is tuned to be attracted by the
planetary force of Venus alone. We could not go elsewhere. A repulsion
ray finds us as we near Venus and protects us against too violent a
landing. We will land on Venus like a feather about three months from
to-night."

The time of the journey through outer space was of little moment save
for one incident. Larner and the other travelers were suddenly and
rather rudely jostled about the rapidly flying craft.

Larner lost his breath but not his speech. "What happened?" he inquired.

"We just automatically dodged a meteor," explained Nern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of the time of the trip was spent by Larner in listening to
explanations of customs and traditions of the people of the brightest
planet in the universe.

There was a question Larner had desired to ask Nern Bela, yet he
hesitated to do so. Finally one evening during the journey to Venus,
when the travelers had been occupying themselves in a scientific
discussion of comparative evolution on the two planets, Larner saw his
opportunity.

"Why," he asked rather hesitatingly, "did the people of Venus always
remain so small? Why did you not strive more for height? The Japanese,
who are the shortest in stature of earth people, always wanted to be
tall."

"Without meaning any offense," replied Nern, "I must say that it is
characteristic of earth dwellers to want something without knowing any
good reason why they want it. It is perfectly all right for you people
to be tall, but for us it is not so fitting. You see, Venus is smaller
than the earth. Size is comparative. You think we are not tall because
you are used to taller people. Comparatively we are tall enough. In
proportion to the size of our planet we are exactly the right size. We
keep our population at 900,000,000, and that is the perfectly exact
number of people who can live comfortably on our planet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Arriving on Venus, Larner was assigned a laboratory and office in one of
the Government buildings. It was a world seemingly made of glass.
Quartz, of rose, white and crystal coloring, Larner found, was the
commonest country rock of the planet. In many cases it was shot full of
splinters of gold which the natives had not taken the trouble to
recover. This quartz was of a terrific hardness and was used in
building, paving, and public works generally. The effect was
bewildering. It was a world of shimmering crystal.

The atmosphere of Venus had long puzzled Larner. While not an astronomer
in the largest sense of the word, yet he had a keen interest in the
heavens as a giant puzzle picture, and he had given some spare time to
the study.

He knew that from all indications Venus had a most unusual atmosphere.
He had read that the atmosphere was considerably denser than that of the
earth, and that its presence made observation difficult. The actual
surface of the planet he knew could hardly be seen due, either to this
atmosphere, or seemingly perpetual cloud banks.

He had read that the presence of atmosphere surrounding Venus is
indicated to earthly astronomers, during the planet's transit, by rings
of light due to the reflection and scattering of collected sunlight by
its atmosphere.

Astronomers on earth, he knew, had long been satisfied of the presence
of great cloud banks, as rocks and soils could not have such high
reflecting power. He knew that like the moon, Venus, when viewed from
the earth, presents different phases from the crescent to the full or
total stage.

Looking up at the sky from the quartz streets of Venus, Larner beheld,
in sweeping grandeur, massed cloud banks, many of them apparently rain
clouds.

Nern noted his skyward gaze, and said:

"We have accomplished meteorological control. Those clouds were brought
under control when we conquered interplanetary force, and what you call
gravity. We form them and move them at will. They are our rain factory.
We make rain when and where we will. This insures our crops and makes
for health and contentment.

"The air, you will note, is about the same or a little more moist than
the earth air at sea level. This is due to the planet's position nearer
the sun.

"We have been striving for centuries to make the air a little drier and
more rare, but we have not succeeded yet. The heavy content of
disintegrated quartz in our soil makes moisture very necessary for our
crops, so our moist atmosphere is evidently a provision of providence.
We are used to breathing this moist air, and when I first visited the
earth I was made uncomfortable by your rarified atmosphere. Now I can
adjust myself to breathing the air of either planet. However, I find
myself drinking a great deal more water on earth than on Venus."

       *       *       *       *       *

In this fairyland which had enjoyed centuries of peace, health and
accord, stark terror now reigned. In some instances the finely-bred,
marvellously intelligent people were in a mental condition bordering on
madness.

This was especially true in the farming districts, where whole herds of
lats had been wiped out. Lats, Larner gleaned, were a common farm animal
similar to the bovine species on earth, only more wooly. On these
creatures the Venus dwellers depended for their milk and dairy supplies,
and for their warmer clothing, which was made from the skin. The hair
was used for brushes, in the building trades, and a thousand ways in
manufacturing.

Besides the domestic animals hundreds of people continued to meet death,
and only a few of the flying vampires had been hunted down. The giant
insects were believed to breed slowly as compared to earth insects,
their females producing not more than ten eggs, by estimate, after which
death overtook the adult. In spite of this they were reported to be
increasing.

In the Government building Larner was placed in touch with all the
Government scientists of Venus. His nearest collaborator was one Zorn
Zada, most profound scientist of the planet. The two men, with a score
of assistants, worked elbow to elbow on the most gigantic scientific
mystery in the history of two planets.

A specimen of the dread invader was mounted and studied by the
scientists, who were so engrossed in their work that they hardly took
time to eat. As for sleep, there was little of it. Days were spent in
research and nights in hunting the monsters. This hunting was done by
newly recruited soldiers and scientists. The weapons used were a short
ray-gun of high destructive power which disintegrated the bodies of the
enemies by atomic energy blasts. The quarry was wary, however, and
struck at isolated individuals rather than massed fighting lines.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seated at his work-bench Larner asked Zorn Zada what had become of Nern
Bela. In his heart he had a horrible lurking fear that the beautiful
Tula Bela might fall before a swarm of the strange vampires, but he did
not voice this anxiety.

"Nern and his sister are explorers and navigators," was the reply. "They
have been assigned to carry you anywhere on this or any other planet
where your work may engage you. They await your orders. They are too
valuable as space-navigators to be placed in harm's way."

Breathing a sigh of relief, Larner bent to his labors.

"What other wild animals or harmful insects have you on this planet?" he
asked Zorn.

"I get your thought," replied the first scientist of Venus. "You are
seeking a natural enemy to this deadly flying menace, are you not?"

"Yes," admitted Larner.

"All insects left on Venus with this one exception are beneficial," said
Zorn. "There are no wild animals, and no harmful insects. All animals,
insects and birds have been domesticated and are fed by their keepers.
We get fabrics from forms of what you call spiders and other
web-builders and cocoon spinners. All forms of birds, beasts and
crawling and flying things have been brought under the dominion of man.
We will have to seek another way out than by finding an enemy parasite."

"Where do you think these insect invaders came from?" asked Larner.

"You have noticed they are unlike anything you have on earth in
anatomical construction," said the savant. "They partake of the general
features of Coleoptera (beetles), in that they wear a sheath of armor,
yet their mouth parts are more on the order of the Diptera (flys). I
regard them more as a fly than a beetle, because most Coleoptera are
helpful to humanity while practically all, if not all, Diptera are
malignant.

"As to their original habitat, I believe they migrated here from some
other planet."

"They could not fly through space," said Larner.

"No, that is the mystery of it," agreed Zorn. "How they got here and
where they breed are the questions that we have to answer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Long days passed on Venus. Long days and sleepless nights. The big
insects were hunted nightly by men armed with ray-guns, and nightly the
blood-sucking monsters took their toll of humanity and animals.

Finally Larner and Zorn determined to capture one of the insects alive,
muzzle its lance and suction pad, and give it sufficient freedom to find
its way back to its hiding place. By following the shackled monster the
scientists hoped to find the breeding grounds.

All the provinces of the planet joined in the drive. Men turned out in
automatic vehicles, propelled by energy gathered from the atmosphere.
They came on foot and in aircraft. Mobilization was at given points and,
leading the van, were Zorn and Larner and their confreres in the targo
of Nern and Tula Bela. The great army of Venus carried giant
searchlights and was armed with deadly ray-guns.

       *       *       *       *       *

Headquarters of the vast Army of Offense was in the targo of the Belas.
Larner was in supreme command. Just before the big army set out to scour
the planet to seek the breeding place of the monsters Larner issued a
bulletin that set all Venus by the ears.

Addressed to President Vole Vesta of the Republic of Pana and the good
people of Venus, it read:

    As is generally known, it has been the habit of the nation's
    space-flying merchantmen to visit the sunlit side of the planet
    Mercury to obtain certain rare woods and other materials not found
    on this planet.

    One side of Mercury, as is known, is always turned from the sun and
    is in a condition of perpetual night. In this perpetual darkness
    and dampness, where many rivers flow into warm black swamps, the
    vampires have bred for centuries. Conditions were ideal for their
    growth, and so through the ages they evolved into the monsters we
    have encountered lately on Venus.

    During some comparatively recent visit to Mercury the grubs of
    these insects have found their way abroad a vegetation-laden targo
    left standing near the edge of the black swamps of Mercury. These
    grubs were thus transported to Venus and underwent their natural
    metamorphosis here. Reaching adult stage, they have found some
    place to hide and breed, and thus is explained the origin of the
    vampires of Venus.

This was widely read and discussed and was finally accepted as the means
of the invasion of peaceful, beautiful Venus by a horror that might well
have originated in hell.

However, this did not reveal the breeding grounds, or remove the
nation-wide scourge of the horrible winged vampires, so the mobilization
of all the forces of the planet continued.

       *       *       *       *       *

As day followed day the hordes of fighting Venus dwellers grew in the
concentration camps. In the targo of the Belas, Larner, brain-weary and
body-racked as he was with overwork, found a grain of happiness in being
