They were passing along some fields where the corn was ripening, when a
rabbit suddenly sprang out at their feet, and standing on its hind legs,
it sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her,' replied the man, 'she is old enough to give
you an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe
they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of
my father.

And when the rabbit heard that, he cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom
the ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

But the father paid no heed to what the rabbit said, and only walked on
the faster, bidding Thakane to keep close behind him. By-and-by they met
with a troop of great deer, called elands, and they stopped when they
saw Thakane and sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to give you
an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe
they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of
my father.

And the elands all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre should
eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

By this time it was nearly dark, and the father said they could travel
no further that night, and must go to sleep where they were. Thakane was
thankful indeed when she heard this, for she was very tired, and found
the two skins fastened round her almost too heavy to carry. So, in spite
of her dread of the ogre, she slept till dawn, when her father woke her,
and told her roughly that he was ready to continue their journey.

Crossing the plain, the girl and her father passed a herd of gazelles
feeding. They lifted their heads, wondering who was out so early, and
when they caught sight of Thakane, they sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to answer
for herself.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe
they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of
my father.

And the gazelles all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre
should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

At last they arrived at the village where the ogre lived, and they went
straight to his hut. He was nowhere to be seen, but in his place was his
son Masilo, who was not an ogre at all, but a very polite young man. He
ordered his servants to bring a pile of skins for Thakane to sit on, but
told her father he must sit on the ground. Then, catching sight of the
girl's face, which she had kept down, he was struck by its beauty, and
put the same question that the rabbit, and the elands, and the gazelles
had done.

Thakane answered him as before, and he instantly commanded that she
should be taken to the hut of his mother, and placed under her care,
while the man should be led to his father. Directly the ogre saw him he
bade the servant throw him into the great pot which always stood ready
on the fire, and in five minutes he was done to a turn. After that the
servant returned to Masilo and related all that had happened.

Now Masilo had fallen in loved with Thakane the moment he saw her. At
first he did not know what to make of this strange feeling, for all his
life he had hated women, and had refused several brides whom his parents
had chosen for him. However, they were so anxious that he should marry,
that they willingly accepted Thakane as their daughter-in-law, though
she did bring any marriage portion with her.

After some time a baby was born to her, and Thakane thought it was the
most beautiful baby that ever was seen. But when her mother-in-law saw
it was a girl, she wrung her hands and wept, saying:

'O miserable mother! Miserable child! Alas for you! why were you not a
boy!'

Thakane, in great surprise, asked the meaning of her distress; and the
old woman told her that it was the custom in that country that all the
girls who were born should be given to the ogre to eat.

Then Thakane clasped the baby tightly in her arms, and cried:

'But it is not the customer in MY country! There, when children die,
they are buried in the earth. No one shall take my baby from me.'

That night, when everyone in the hut was asleep, Thakane rose, and
carrying her baby on her back, went down to a place where the river
spread itself out into a large lake, with tall willows all round the
bank. Here, hidden from everyone, she sat down on a stone and began to
think what she should do to save her child.

Suddenly she heard a rustling among the willows, and an old woman
appeared before her.

'What are you crying for, my dear?' said she.

And Thakane answered: 'I was crying for my baby--I cannot hide her for
ever, and if the ogre sees her, he will eat her; and I would rather she
was drowned than that.'

'What you say is true,' replied the old woman. 'Give me your child, and
let me take care of it. And if you will fix a day to meet me here I will
bring the baby.'

Then Thakane dried her eyes, and gladly accepted the old woman's offer.
When she got home she told her husband she had thrown it in the river,
and as he had watched her go in that direction he never thought of
doubting what she said.

On the appointed day, Thakane slipped out when everybody was busy, and
ran down the path that led to the lake. As soon as she got there, she
crouched down among the willows, and sang softly:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo
cast out!

And in a moment the old woman appeared holding the baby in her arms.
Dilah had become so big and strong, that Thakane's heart was filled with
joy and gratitude, and she stayed as long as she dared, playing with her
baby. At last she felt she must return to the village, lest she should
be missed, and the child was handed back to the old woman, who vanished
with her into the lake.

Children grow up very quickly when they live under water, and in less
time than anyone could suppose, Dilah had changed from a baby to a
woman. Her mother came to visit her whenever she was able, and one day,
when they were sitting talking together, they were spied out by a man
who had come to cut willows to weave into baskets. He was so surprised
to see how like the face of the girl was to Masilo, that he left his
work and returned to the village.

'Masilo,' he said, as he entered the hut, 'I have just beheld your wife
near the river with a girl who must be your daughter, she is so like
you. We have been deceived, for we all thought she was dead.'

When he heard this, Masilo tried to look shocked because his wife had
broken the law; but in his heart he was very glad.

'But what shall we do now?' asked he.

'Make sure for yourself that I am speaking the truth by hiding among the
bushes the first time Thakane says she is going to bathe in the river,
and waiting till the girl appears.'

For some days Thakane stayed quietly at home, and her husband began
to think that the man had been mistaken; but at last she said to her
husband: 'I am going to bathe in the river.'

'Well, you can go,' answered he. But he ran down quickly by another
path, and got there first, and hid himself in the bushes. An instant
later, Thakane arrived, and standing on the bank, she sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo
cast out!

Then the old woman came out of the water, holding the girl, now tall and
slender, by the hand. And as Masilo looked, he saw that she was indeed
his daughter, and he wept for joy that she was not lying dead in the
bottom of the lake. The old woman, however, seemed uneasy, and said to
Thakane: 'I feel as if someone was watching us. I will not leave the
girl to-day, but will take her back with me'; and sinking beneath the
surface, she drew the girl after her. After they had gone, Thakane
returned to the village, which Masilo had managed to reach before her.

All the rest of the day he sat in a corner weeping, and his mother who
came in asked: 'Why are you weeping so bitterly, my son?'

'My head aches,' he answered; 'it aches very badly.' And his mother
passed on, and left him alone.

In the evening he said to his wife: 'I have seen my daughter, in the
place where you told me you had drowned her. Instead, she lives at the
bottom of the lake, and has now grown into a young woman.'

'I don't know what you are talking about,' replied Thakane. 'I buried my
child under the sand on the beach.'

Then Masilo implored her to give the child back to him; but she would
not listen, and only answered: 'If I were to give her back you would
only obey the laws of your country and take her to your father, the
ogre, and she would be eaten.'

But Masilo promised that he would never let his father see her, and that
now she was a woman no one would try to hurt her; so Thakane's heart
melted, and she went down to the lake to consult the old woman.

'What am I to do?' she asked, when, after clapping her hands, the old
woman appeared before her. 'Yesterday Masilo beheld Dilah, and ever
since he has entreated me to give him back his daughter.'

'If I let her go he must pay me a thousand head of cattle in exchange,'
replied the old woman. And Thakane carried her answer back to Masilo.

'Why, I would gladly give her two thousand!' cried he, 'for she
has saved my daughter.' And he bade messengers hasten to all the
neighbouring villages, and tell his people to send him at once all the
cattle he possessed. When they were all assembled he chose a thousand of
the finest bulls and cows, and drove them down to the river, followed by
a great crowd wondering what would happen.

Then Thakane stepped forward in front of the cattle and sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo
cast out!

And Dilah came from the waters holding out her hands to Masilo and
Thakane, and in her place the cattle sank into the lake, and were driven
by the old woman to the great city filled with people, which lies at the
bottom.

[Contes Populaires des Bassoutos.]




The Wicked Wolverine



One day a wolverine was out walking on the hill-side, when, on turning a
corner, he suddenly saw a large rock.

'Was that you I heard walking about just now?' he asked, for wolverines
are cautious animals, and always like to know the reasons of things.

'No, certainly not,' answered the rock; 'I don't know how to walk.'

'But I SAW you walking,' continued the wolverine.

'I am afraid that you were not taught to speak the truth,' retorted the
rock.

'You need not speak like that, for I have SEEN you walking,' replied the
wolverine, 'though I am quite sure that you could never catch ME!'
and he ran a little distance and then stopped to see if the rock was
pursuing him; but, to his vexation, the rock was still in the same
place. Then the wolverine went up close, and struck the rock a blow with
his paw, saying: 'Well, will you catch me NOW?'

'I can't walk, but I can ROLL,' answered the rock.

And the wolverine laughed and said: 'Oh, that will do just as well'; and
began to run down the side of the mountain.

At first he went quite slowly, 'just to give the rock a chance,' he
thought to himself; but soon he quickened his pace, for he found that
the rock was almost at his heels. But the faster the wolverine ran, the
faster the rock rolled, and by-and-by the little creature began to get
very tired, and was sorry he had not left the rock to itself. Thinking
that if he could manage to put on a spurt he would reach the forest
of great trees at the bottom of the mountain, where the rock could not
come, he gathered up all his strength, and instead of running he leaped
over sticks and stones, but, whatever he did, the rock was always close
behind him. At length he grew so weary that he could not even see where
he was going, and catching his foot in a branch he tripped and fell. The
rock stopped at once, but there came a shriek from the wolverine:

'Get off, get off! can't you see that you are on my legs?'

'Why did you not leave me alone?' asked the rock. 'I did not want to
move--I hate moving. But you WOULD have it, and I certainly sha'n't move
now till I am forced to.'

'I will call my brothers,' answered the wolverine. 'There are many of
them in the forest, and you will soon see that they are stronger than
you.' And he called, and called, and called, till wolves and foxes
and all sorts of other creatures all came running to see what was the
matter.

'How DID you get under that rock?' asked they, making a ring round him;
but they had to repeat their question several times before the wolverine
would answer, for he, like many other persons, found it hard to confess
that he had brought his troubles on himself.

'Well, I was dull, and wanted someone to play with me,' he said at last,
in sulky voice, 'and I challenged the rock to catch me. Of course I
thought I could run the fastest; but I tripped, and it rolled on me. It
was just an accident.'

'It serves you right for being so silly,' said they; but they pushed and
hauled at the rock for a long time without making it move an inch.

'You are no good at all,' cried the wolverine crossly, for it was
suffering great pain, 'and if you cannot get me free, I shall see what
my friends the lightning and thunder can do.' And he called loudly to
the lightning to come and help him as quickly as possible.

In a few minutes a dark cloud came rolling up the sky, giving out such
terrific claps of thunder that the wolves and the foxes and all the
other creatures ran helter-skelter in all directions. But, frightened
though they were, they did not forget to beg the lightning to take off
the wolverine's coat and to free his legs, but to be careful not to hurt
him. So the lightning disappeared into the cloud for a moment to gather
up fresh strength, and then came rushing down, right upon the rock,
which it sent flying in all directions, and took the wolverine's coat so
neatly that, though it was torn into tiny shreds, the wolverine himself
was quite unharmed.

'That was rather clumsy of you,' said he, standing up naked in his
flesh. 'Surely you could have split the rock without tearing my coat
to bits!' And he stooped down to pick up the pieces. It took him a long
time, for there were a great many of them, but at last he had them all
in his hand.

'I'll go to my sister the frog,' he thought to himself, 'and she will
sew them together for me'; and he set off at once for the swamp in which
his sister lived.

'Will you sew my coat together? I had an unlucky accident, and it is
quite impossible to wear,' he said, when he found her.

'With pleasure,' she answered, for she had always been taught to be
polite; and getting her needle and thread she began to fit the pieces.
But though she was very good-natured, she was not very clever, and she
got some of the bits wrong. When the wolverine, who was very particular
about his clothes, came to put it on, he grew very angry.

'What a useless creature you are!' cried he. 'Do you expect me to go
about in such a coat as that? Why it bulges all down the back, as if
I had a hump, and it is so tight across the chest that I expect it to
burst every time I breathe. I knew you were stupid, but I did not think
you were as stupid as that.' And giving the poor frog a blow on her
head, which knocked her straight into the water, he walked off in a rage
to his younger sister the mouse.

'I tore my coat this morning,' he began, when he had found her sitting
