
"He is in Wales. Think you that we are all tied to the sons of
Lodbrok?"

"You might have worse leaders," I said.

And just then Kolgrim came along the lane, leading the three
horses, and on them were the armour and weapons of the slain. It
was not my comrade's way to leave for other folk aught that was
worth having.

At once the Dane knew what had happened, and he swung his horse
round and spurred it fiercely, making for flight. Then Harek looked
at me and touched his sword hilt, and I nodded. It was well to let
no tidings of our knowledge go back to the host. After the Dane
therefore went Harek, and I looked at Osmund.

"Jarl," I said, "I am in a strait here. If you go back, your life
is in Alfred's hands."

"I know it," he said, smiling faintly. "It is a hard place maybe
for us both, but there is only one way. You must get back to the
king, and I with you; for you have to answer for me, and my word is
passed not to escape."

Then Thora said:

"The king is just, as all men know. How should he slay you for what
you cannot help?"

"Ay," he answered, smiling at her, "that is right."

So she was satisfied, knowing nought perhaps of what the place of a
hostage is.

So we started back to Chippenham quickly, and after us I heard
Harek coming. He had a led horse when he joined us, and I knew that
none would take word to the Danish host that the king was warned.

When we came to the hilltop over which we had ridden so blithely an
hour ago or less, we looked back, and at first saw nothing. Then
over the white brow of a rolling down that shone in the level
sunlight came a black speck that grew and lengthened, sliding, as
it were, like a snake down the hillside. And that line sparkled
like ice in the sunlight from end to end; for it was the Danish
host on the march, and in two hours they would be where we stood,
and in two more they who were mounted would be in Chippenham
streets, where Alfred had not enough men even to guard the gates
against such a force as was coming.

Then we rode hard for the lives of all who were in the town, and as
I went I thought also that we rode to the death of the brave,
honest jarl who was beside me, saying nothing, but never letting
his horse falter. Just as bravely rode Thora.

In an hour we were at the gates, and I rode straight to the king's
house, and sought him on urgent business.

Ethered of Mercia came out to me.

"What is it, Ranald?" he said. "The Witan is set now."

I told him in few words, and his face changed.

"It seems impossible in frost and snow," he said.

"Ay; but there are proofs," I said, pointing through the great
doorway.

There was my party, and Kolgrim was binding a wound on Harek's arm
of which I knew nought till that moment, and the led horses and
spoils were plain enough to say all.

Then Ethered made haste and took me to the great hall, where Alfred
sat with some thirty thanes of his Witan {xi}, and many clergy.
I knew they were to meet on some business that I had nought to do
with. Ethered went to the king without any ceremony, and speaking
low told him my message. Whereon the king's face grew white and
then red, and he flashed out into terrible wrath:

"Forsworn and treacherous!" he cried, in a thick voice that shook
with passion. "The hostages--chain them and bring them here. Their
friends shall find somewhat waiting them here that shall make them
wish they had kept their oaths!"

Then he said to me:

"Speak out, Ranald, and tell these thanes your news."

I spoke plainly, and they listened with whitening faces and
muttered oaths. And when I ceased, one cried, hardly knowing what
he said, as I think:

"This outlander rode with Osmund the Dane to bring them on us even
now."

"Silence!" Alfred said; and then in a cold voice he asked me:

"Where is this Osmund? I suppose he has fled to his people."

"That he has not, though he could have done so," I answered.
"Moreover, the Dane I spoke with said in so many words that this is
no host of Guthrum's."

At that Alfred frowned fiercely.

"Whose then? What good is a king if he cannot make his people keep
their oaths?"

There was a stir at the door, and the eyes of all turned that way.
And when the thanes saw that the hostages were being led in, with
Osmund at their head, a great sullen growl of wrath broke from
them, and I thought all hope was gone for the lives of those
captives.

"Hear you this?" the king said, in a terrible voice, when the noise
ceased. "By the deed of your own people your lives are forfeit.
They have broken the peace, and even now are marching on us. Your
leader, Osmund himself, has seen them."

"It is true," Osmund said. "We are in the king's hands."

Then Alfred turned to the Witan, who were in disorder, and in
haste, as one might see, to be gone to their houses and fly.

"You heard the Danish oath taken at Exeter; what is your word on
this?"

They answered in one voice:

"Slay them. What else?"

"You hear," said the king to the Danes. "Is not the sentence just?"

"It is what one might look for," Osmund answered, "but I will say
this, that this is some new band of Danes, with whom we have nought
to do."

"What!" said Alfred coldly; "will you tell me that any Dane in the
country did not know that I held hostages for the peace? Go to.

"See to this matter, sheriff."

Then the sheriff of Chippenham came forward, and it seemed to me
that it was of no use for me to say aught; yet I would try what I
could do, so I spoke loudly, for a talk had risen among the thanes.

"What is this, lord king? Will you slay Osmund the jarl, who has
kept his troth, even to coming back to what he knew would be his
death? You cannot slay such a man for the oath breaking of others."

Then the king looked long at me, and the sheriff stayed, and at
first I expected passionate words; but the king's rage was cold and
dreadful now.

"His friends slay him--not I," he answered.

Then of a sudden I minded somewhat, and clear before me stood a
test by which I might know certainly if it were good that I should
leave the Asir and follow the way of the white Christ.

"King Alfred," I said, "I have heard the bishop tell, in the great
church here, of a king who slew the guiltless at Christmastide.
There was nought too hard for any to say of that man. Moreover, I
have heard strange and sweet words of peace at this time, of
forgiveness of enemies and of letting go of vengeance. Are these
things nought, or are they indeed those by which you guide
yourselves, as Neot says?"

He was silent, gazing fixedly on me; and all the Witan were
speechless, listening.

"These men are enemies maybe, but they at least have done nought.
Shall you avenge yourself on them for the wrongdoing of others?"

Then the king's face changed, and he looked past me, and in his
eyes grew and shone a wondrous light, and slowly he lifted up his
hand, and cried, in a great voice that seemed full of joy:

"Hear this, O ye Danes and foes of the Cross. For the love of
Christ, and in His name, I bid you go in peace!"

And then, as they stared at him in wonder and awe at his look and
words, Alfred said to me:

"Unbind them, my brother, and let them go--nay, see them safely to
some strong house; for the poor folk may slay them in their blind
anger, even as would I have done."

Then no man hindered me--for it seemed as if a great fear, as of
the might of the holy name, had fallen on all--and I went and cut
the bonds of the captives. And as I did so, Osmund said in a low
voice to me:

"First daughter and then father. We owe our lives to you."

"Nay," I answered, "but to the Christians' faith."

Then I hurried them out before news of what was on hand could get
among the townsfolk, and we went quickly to my lodgings; for that
was a strong house enough, and could be barred in such wise that
even if any tried to attack the place in the flight that would
begin directly, it would take too long to break the doors down to
be safe with the host at hand.

Then came Heregar, armed and mounted, with a single man behind him,
and he called for me.

"Ride out with me, King Ranald, for we must count these Danes, and
see that we are not overrating their number. After that we will
join the king, who goes to Glastonbury."

So I bade farewell to Osmund and to Thora, who said nought, but
looked very wistfully, as if she would say words of thanks but
could not; and at that I went quickly, for it seemed hard to leave
her, in some way that was not clear to me, amid all the turmoil of
the place.

But when we were on the road, Heregar said to me:

"It is in my mind that Osmund, your friend, will fare ill among
these Danes. They will hear how he rode back, and will hold that by
his means the king escaped."

"What can be done?"

"The man is one of a thousand, as it seems to me. Let us bid him
leave the town and get back to Guthrum as he can."

"He can have the Danish horses," I said.

Now before sunset we had seen the Danish force, and our hearts
sank. There were full ten thousand men, many of whom were mounted.

Then we rode back, and found the town in such tumult as it is not
good to think on. There is nothing more terrible to see than such a
flight, and in midwinter.

When we came to my lodging, Heregar went in to find Osmund. I would
not see him again, lest Thora should weep. But in a few minutes he
came out with the jarl.

"Here is a wise man," said Heregar. "He says that he swore to keep
the peace with Alfred, and he will do it. He and the Lady Thora
will go with us. There are one or two also of the other hostages
who blame him for returning. He cannot stay among the Danes here."

Then I was very glad, and we made haste to have all ready for
Thora's comfort on the ride that might be so long. And so we rode
out after the king along the road to Glastonbury, and I think that
the Danes were in the town half an hour after we left it.

Next we knew that Danes were on the road before us, and that more
were hard after us. Some had skirted the town in order to cut off
the king, and were pursuing him. So we struck off the road into
by-lanes that Heregar knew, resting at lonely houses as we went on.
And when we came to Glastonbury at last, the king was not there,
nor did any know of his fate.

Then we rode, with the Danes swarming everywhere, through the
Sedgemoor wastes to Bridgwater, and found rest at Cannington,
Heregar's great house not far off.



Chapter IX. The Sign of St. Cuthberht.


I suppose that in our flight from Glastonbury to Bridgwater we
passed through more dangers than we knew of; for Danes were hard
after us, riding even into sight from the town that evening, and
next day coming even to the eastern end of the old bridge, and
bandying words with the townsfolk who guarded it. Across it they
dared not come, for there is a strong earthwork on the little rise
from the river, which guards both bridge and town, and in it were
my Norsemen with the townsfolk.

So we were in safety for a time; and it seemed likely that we might
be so for long if but a few men could be gathered, for here was a
stretch of country that was, as it were, a natural fastness. Three
hundred years ago the defeated Welsh had turned to bay here while
Kenwalch of Wessex and his men could not follow them; and now it
seemed likely that here in turn would Wessex stand her ground.

It is a great square-sided patch of rolling, forest-covered
country, maybe twelve miles long from north to south, and half as
much across. None can enter it from the north, because there is the
sea, and a wild coast that is not safe for a landing; on the west
the great, steep, fort-crested Quantock Hills keep the border; on
the eastern side is the river Parret, and on the north the Tone,
which joins it. Except at Bridgwater, at the eastern inland corner,
and Taunton, at the western--one at the head of the tidal waters of
the Parret, and the other guarding the place where the Quantocks
end--there is no crossing the great and wide-stretching fens of
Sedgemoor and Stanmoor and the rest that lie on either bank of the
rivers. Paths there are that the fenmen know, winding through mere
and peat bog and swamp, but no host can win through them; and
perhaps those marches are safer borders than even the sea.

If one came from the sea, one must land at Watchet, and then win a
path across the Quantocks, and there is the ancient camp of
Dowsborough to block the way; or else put into the Parret, and
there, at the first landing place, where they say that Joseph of
Arimathaea landed, bearing the holy thorn staff in his hand, is the
strong hill fort of Combwich, old as the days of that Joseph, or
maybe older.

So with walled towns and hill forts the corners of Heregar's land
were kept; and with sea and marsh and hill the sides were strong,
and we thought to find Alfred the king here before us. But he was
not; and next day we rode on to Taunton to seek him there, for that
was the strongest fortress in that part of the west. And again he
was not to be heard of. Then fear for his life began to creep into
our minds, and we came back to Cannington sorely downcast.

