ancestor Yayati, who is the tenth from Prajapati, obtained for a wife the
unobtainable daughter of Sukra. I desire to hear of it in detail. Tell me
also, one after another, of those monarchs separately who were the
founders of dynasties.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'The monarch Yayati was in splendour like unto Indra
himself. I will tell thee, in reply to thy question, O Janamejaya, how
both Sukra and Vrishaparvan bestowed upon him, with due rites, their
daughters, and how his union took place with Devayani in special.

"'Between the celestials and the Asuras, there happened, of yore, frequent
encounters for the sovereignty of the three worlds with everything in them.
The gods, then, from desire of victory, installed the son of Angiras
(Vrihaspati) as their priest to conduct their sacrifices; while their
opponents installed the learned Usanas as their priest for the same
purpose. And between those two Brahmanas there are always much boastful
rivalry. Those Danavas assembled for encounter that were slain by the gods
were all revived by the seer Sukra by the power of his knowledge. And then
starting again, into life,--these fought with the gods. The Asuras also
slew on the field of battle many of the celestials. But the open-minded
Vrihaspati could not revive them, because he knew not the science called
Sanjivani (re-vivification) which Kavya endued with great energy knew so
well. And the gods were, therefore, in great sorrow. And the gods, in
great anxiety of heart and entertaining a fear of the learned Usanas, then
went to Kacha, the eldest son of Vrihaspati, and spoke unto him, saying,
"We pay court to thee, be kind to us and do us a service that we regard as
very great. That knowledge which resides in Sukra, that Brahmana of
immeasurable prowess, make thy own as soon as thou canst. Thou shalt find
the Brahmana in the court of Vrishaparvan. He always protects the Danavas
but never us, their opponents. Thou art his junior in age, and, therefore,
capable of adoring him with reverence. Thou canst also adore Devayani, the
favourite daughter of that high-souled Brahmana. Indeed, thou alone art
capable of propitiating them both by worship. There is none else that can
do so. By gratifying Devayani with thy conduct, liberality, sweetness, and
general behaviour, thou canst certainly obtain that knowledge." The son of
Vrihaspati, thus solicited by the gods, said "So be it," and went to where
Vrishaparvan was. Kacha, thus sent by the gods, soon went to the capital
of the chief of the Asuras, and beheld Sukra there. And beholding him, he
thus spoke unto him, "Accept me as thy disciple. I am the grandson of the
Rishi Angiras and son of Vrihaspati. By name I am known as Kacha. Thyself
becoming my preceptor, I shall practise the Brahmacharya mode of life for
a thousand years. Command me, then, O Brahmana!"

"'Sukra (hearing this) said, 'Welcome art thou, O Kacha! I accept thy
speech. I will treat thee with regard; for by so doing, it is Vrihaspati
who will be regarded.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Kacha commanded by Kavya or Usanas himself,
called also Sukra, then said, "So be it," and took the vow he had spoken
of. And, O Bharata, accepting the vow of which he had spoken, at the
proper time, Kacha began to conciliate regardfully both his preceptor and
(his daughter) Devayani. Indeed, he began to conciliate both. And as he
was young, by singing and dancing and playing on different kinds of
instruments, he soon gratified Devayani who was herself in her youth. And,
O Bharata, with his whole heart set upon it, he soon gratified the maiden
Devayani who was then a young lady, by presents of flowers and fruits and
services rendered with alacrity. And Devayani also with her songs and
sweetness of manners used, while they were alone, to attend upon that
youth carrying out his vow. And when five hundred years had thus passed of
Kacha's vow, the Danavas came to learn his intention. And having no
compunctions about slaying a Brahmana, they became very angry with him.
And one day they saw Kacha in a solitary part of the woods engaged in
tending (his preceptor's) kine. They then slew Kacha from their hatred of
Vrihaspati and also from their desire of protecting the knowledge of
reviving the dead from being conveyed by him. And having slain him, they
hacked his body into pieces and gave them to be devoured by jackals and
wolves. And (when twilight came) the kine returned to the fold without him
who tended them. And Devayani, seeing the kine returned from the woods
without Kacha, spoke, O Bharata, unto her father thus:

"'"Thy evening-fire hath been kindled. The Sun also hath set, O father! The
kine have returned without him who tendeth them. Kacha is, indeed, not to
be seen. It is plain that Kacha hath been lost, or is dead. Truly do I say,
O father, that without him I will not live."

"'Sukra hearing this said, "I will revive him by saying, 'Let this one
come.'" Then having recourse to the science of reviving the dead, Sukra
summoned Kacha. And summoned by his preceptor, Kacha appeared before him
in the gladness of heart tearing by virtue of his preceptor's science
the bodies of the wolves (that had devoured him). And asked about the
cause of his delay, he thus spoke unto Bhargava's daughter. Indeed,
asked by that Brahman's daughter, he told her, "I was dead. O thou of
pure manners, burdened with sacrificial fuel, Kusa grass, and logs of
wood, I was coming towards our abode. I sat under a banian tree. The
kine also, having been brought together, were staying under the shade
of that same banian tree. The Asuras, beholding me, asked 'Who art
thou?' They heard me answer, 'I am the son of Vrihaspati.' As soon as
I said this, the Danavas slew me, and hacking my body into pieces gave
my remains to jackals and wolves. And they then went home in the
gladness of heart. O amiable one, summoned by the high-souled
Bhargava, I after all come before thee fully revived."

"'On another occasion, asked by Devayani, the Brahmana Kacha went into the
woods. And as he was roving about for gathering flowers, the Danavas
beheld him. They again slew him, and pounding him into a paste they mixed
it with the water of the ocean. Finding him long still (in coming), the
maiden again represented the matter unto her father. And summoned again by
the Brahmana with the aid of his science, Kacha appearing before his
preceptor and his daughter told everything as it had happened. Then
slaying him for the third time and burning him and reducing him to ashes,
the Asuras gave those ashes to the preceptor himself, mixing them with his
wine. And Devayani again spoke unto her father, saying, "O father, Kacha
was sent to gather flowers. But he is not to be seen. It is plain he hath
been lost, or has died. I tell thee truly, I would not live without him."

"'Sukra hearing this said, "O daughter, the son of Vrihaspati hath gone to
the region of the dead. Though revived by my science, he is thus slain
frequently. What, indeed, am I to do? O Devayani, do not grieve, do not
cry. One like thee should not grieve for one that is mortal. Thou art
indeed, O daughter, in consequence of my prowess, worshipped thrice a day
during the ordained hours of prayer, by Brahmanas, the gods with Indra,
the Vasus, the Aswins, the Asuras, in fact, by the whole universe. It is
impossible to keep him alive, for revived by me he is often killed." To
all this Devayani replied, "Why shall I, O father, not grieve for him
whose grandfather is old Angiras himself, whose father is Vrihaspati who
is an ocean of ascetic merit, who is the grandson of a Rishi and the son
also of a Rishi? He himself too was a Brahmacharin and an ascetic; always
wakeful and skilled in everything. I will starve and follow the way Kacha
has gone. The handsome Kacha is, O father, dear unto me."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The great Rishi Kavya, then, afflicted by what
Devayani said, cried in anger, "Certainly, the Asuras seek to injure me,
for they slay my disciple that stayeth with me. These followers of Rudra
desire to divest me of my character as a Brahmana by making me participate
in their crime. Truly, this crime hath a terrible end. The crime of
slaying a Brahmana would even burn Indra himself." Having said this, the
Brahmana Sukra, urged by Devayani, began to summon Kacha who had entered
the jaws of Death. But Kacha, summoned with the aid of science, and afraid
of the consequence to his preceptor, feebly replied from within the
stomach of his preceptor, saying, "Be graceful unto me, O lord! I am Kacha
that worshippeth thee. Behave unto me as to thy own dearly-loved son."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Sukra then said, "By what path, O Brahmana, hast
thou entered my stomach, where thou stayest now? Leaving the Asuras this
very moment, I shall go over to the gods." Kacha replied, "By thy grace,
memory hath not failed me. Indeed, I do recollect everything as it hath
happened. My ascetic virtues have not been destroyed. It is, therefore,
that I am able to bear this almost insufferable pain. O Kavya, slain by
the Asuras and burnt and reduced to powder, I have been given to thee with
thy wine. When thou art present, O Brahmana, the art of the Asuras will
never be able to vanquish, the science of the Brahmana."

"'Hearing this, Sukra said, "O daughter, what good can I do to thee? It is
with my death that Kacha can get his life back. O Devayani, Kacha is even
within me. There is no other way of his coming out except by ripping open
my stomach." Devayani replied, "Both evils shall, like fire, burn me! The
death of Kacha and thy own death are to me the same! The death of Kacha
would deprive me of life. If thou also diest, I shall not be able to bear
my life." Then Sukra said, "O son of Vrihaspati, thou art, indeed, one
already crowned with success, because Devayani regards thee so well.
Accept the science that I will today impart to thee, if, indeed, thou be
not Indra in the form of Kacha. None can come out of my stomach with life.
A Brahmana, however, must not be slain, therefore, accept thou the science
I impart to thee. Start thou into life as my son. And possessed of the
knowledge received from me, and revived by me, take care that, on coming
out of my body, thou dost act gracefully."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Receiving the science imparted to him by his
preceptor the handsome Kacha, ripped open his stomach, came out like the
moon at evening on the fifteenth day of the bright fort-night. And
beholding the remains of his preceptor lying like a heap of penances,
Kacha revived him, aided by the science he had learned. Worshipping him
with regard, Kacha said unto his preceptor, "Him who poureth the nectar of
knowledge into one's ears, even as thou hast done into those of myself who
was void of knowledge, him do I regard both as my father and mother. And
remembering the immense service done by him, who is there so ungrateful as
to injure him? They that, having acquired knowledge, injure their
preceptor who is always an object of worship, who is the giver of
knowledge, who is the most precious of all precious objects on Earth, come
to be hated on Earth and finally go to the regions of the sinful."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The learned Sukra, having been deceived while
under the influence of wine, and remembering the total loss of
consciousness that is one of the terrible consequences of drink, and
beholding too before him the handsome Kacha whom he had, in a state of
unconsciousness, drunk with his wine, then thought of effecting a reform
in the manners of Brahmanas. The high-souled Usanas rising up from the
ground in anger, then spoke as follows: "The wretched Brahmana who from
this day, unable to resist the temptation, will drink wine shall be
regarded as having lost his virtue, shall be reckoned to have committed
the sin of slaying a Brahmana, shall be hated both in this and the other
worlds. I set this limit to the conduct and dignity of Brahmanas
everywhere. Let the honest, let Brahmanas, let those with regard for their
superiors, let the gods, let the three worlds, listen!" Having said these
words that high-souled one, that ascetic of ascetics, then summoning the
Danavas who had been deprived by fate of the good sense, told them these
words, "Ye foolish Danavas, know ye that Kacha hath obtained his wishes. He
will henceforth dwell with me. Having obtained the valuable knowledge of
reviving the dead, that Brahmana hath, indeed, become in prowess even as
Brahman himself!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Bhargava having said so much cut short his
speech. The Danavas were surprised and went away to their homes. Kacha,
too, having stayed with his preceptor for a full thousand years, then
prepared to return to the abode of the celestials, after having obtained
his preceptor's permission.'"


SECTION LXXVII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After the expiry of the period of his vow, Kacha,
having obtained his preceptor's leave, was about to return to the abode of
the celestials, when Devayani, addressing him, said, "O grandson of the
Rishi Angiras, in conduct and birth, in learning, asceticism and humility,
thou shinest most brightly. As the celebrated Rishi Angiras is honoured
and regarded by my father, so is thy father regarded and worshipped by me.
O thou of ascetic wealth, knowing this, listen to what I say. Recollect my
conduct towards thee during the period of thy vow (Brahmacharya). Thy vow
hath now been over. It behoveth thee to fix thy affections on me. O accept
my hand duly with ordained mantras."

"'Kacha replied, "Thou art to me an object of regard and worship even as
thy father! O thou of faultless features, thou art, indeed, even an object
of greater reverence! Thou art dearer than life to the high-souled
Bhargava, O amiable one! As the daughter of my preceptor, thou art ever
worthy of my worship! As my preceptor Sukra, thy father, is ever deserving
of my regards, so art thou, O Devayani! Therefore, it behoveth thee not to
say so." Hearing this, Devayani replied, "Thou, too, art the son of my
father's preceptor's son. Therefore, O best of Brahmanas, thou art
deserving of my regards and worship. O Kacha, when thou wert slain so many
times by the Asuras, recollect today the affection I showed for thee.
Remembering my friendship and affection for thee, and, indeed, my devoted
regard also, O virtuous one, it behoveth thee not to abandon me without
any fault. I am truly devoted to thee."

"'Hearing all this, Kacha said, "O thou of virtuous vows, do not urge me
into such a sinful course. O thou of fair eye-brows, be gracious unto me.
Beautiful one, thou art to me an object of greater regard than my
preceptor. Full of virtuous resolves, O large-eyed one, of face as
handsome as the moon, the place where thou hadst resided, viz., the body of
Kavya, hath also been my abode. Thou art truly my sister. Amiable one,
happily have we passed the days that we have been together. There is
perfect good understanding between us. I ask thy leave to return to my
abode. Therefore, bless me so that my journey may be safe. I must be
remembered by thee, when thou recallest me in connection with topics of
conversation, as one that hath not transgressed virtue. Always attend upon
my preceptor with readiness and singleness of heart." To all this,
Devaniya answered, "Solicited by me, if, indeed, thou truly refusest to
make me thy wife, then, O Kacha, this thy knowledge shall not bear fruit."

"'Hearing this, Kacha said, "I have refused thy request only because thou
art the daughter of my preceptor, and not because thou hast any fault. Nor
hath my preceptor in this respect issued any command. Curse me if it
please thee. I have told thee what the behaviour should be of a Rishi. I
do not deserve thy curse, O Devayani. But yet thou hast cursed me! Thou
hast acted under the influence of passion and not from a sense of duty.
Therefore, thy desire will not be fulfilled. No Rishi's son shall ever
accept thy hand in marriage. Thou hast said that my knowledge shall not
bear fruit. Let it be so. But in respect of him it shall bear fruit to
whom I may impart it."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'That first of Brahmanas, Kacha, having said so
unto Devayani speedily wended his way unto the abode of the chief of the
celestials. Beholding him arrived, the celestials with Indra ahead, having
first worshipped him, spoke unto him as follows, "Thou hast indeed,
performed an act of great benefit for us. Wonderful hath been thy
achievement! Thy fame shall never die! Thou shall be a sharer with us in
sacrificial offerings."'"


SECTION LXXVIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The dwellers in heaven became exceedingly glad in
welcoming Kacha who had mastered the wonderful science. And, O bull of
Bharata's race, the celestials then learnt that science from Kacha and
considered their object already achieved. And assembling together, they
spoke unto him of a hundred sacrifices, saying, "The time hath come for
showing prowess. Slay thy foes, O Purandara!" And thus addressed, Maghavat,
then accompanied by the celestials, set out, saying, "So be it." But on
his way he saw a number of damsels. These maidens were sporting in a lake
in the gardens of the Gandharva Chitraratha. Changing himself into wind,
he soon mixed up the garments of those maidens which they had laid on the
bank. A little while after, the maidens, getting up from the water,
approached their garments that had, indeed, got mixed up with one another.
And it so happened that from the intermingled heap, the garments of
Devayani were appropriated by Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan,
from ignorance that it was not hers. And, O king, thereupon, between them,
Devayani and Sarmishtha, then ensued a dispute. And Devayani said, "O
daughter of the Asura (chief), why dost thou take my attire, being, as
thou art, my disciple? As thou art destitute of good behaviour, nothing
good can happen to thee!" Sarmishtha, however, quickly replied, "Thy
father occupying a lower seat, always adoreth with downcast looks, like a
hired chanter of praises, my father, whether he sitteth at his ease or
reclineth at full length! Thou art the daughter of one that chanteth the
praises of others, of one that accepteth alms. I am the daughter of one
who is adored, of one who bestoweth alms instead of ever accepting them!
Beggar-woman as thou art, thou art free to strike thy breast, to use ill
words, to vow enmity to me, to give way to thy wrath. Acceptress of alms,
thou weepest tears of anger in vain! If so minded, I can harm thee, but
thou canst not. Thou desirest to quarrel. But know thou that I do not
reckon thee as my equal!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words, Devayani became exceedingly
angry and began to pull at her clothes. Sarmishtha thereupon threw her
into a well and went home. Indeed, the wicked Sarmishtha believing that
Devayani was dead, bent her steps home-wards in a wrathful mood.

"'After Sarmishtha had left, Yayati the son of Nahusha soon came to that
spot. The king had been out a-hunting. The couple of horses harnessed to
his car and the other single horse with him were all fatigued. And the
king himself was thirsty. And the son of Nahusha saw a well that was by.
And he saw that it was dry. But in looking down into it, he saw a maiden
who in splendour was like a blazing fire. And beholding her within it, the
blessed king addressed that girl of the complexion of the celestials,
soothing her with sweet words. And he said, "Who art thou, O fair one, of
nails bright as burnished copper, and with ear-rings decked with celestial
gems? Thou seemest to be greatly perturbed. Why dost thou weep in
affliction? How, indeed, hast thou fallen into this well covered with
creepers and long grass? And, O slender-waisted girl, answer me truly
whose daughter thou art."

"'Devayani then replied, "I am the daughter of Sukra who brings back into
life the Asuras slain by the gods. He doth not know what hath befallen me.
This is my right hand, O king, with nails bright as burnished copper. Thou
art well-born; I ask thee, to take and raise me up! I know thou art of
good behaviour, of great prowess, and of wide fame! It behoveth thee,
therefore, to raise me from this well."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'King Yayati, learning that she was a Brahmana's
daughter, raised her from that well by catching hold of her right hand.
And the monarch promptly raising her from the pit and squinting to her
tapering thighs, sweetly and courteously returned to his capital.

"'When the son of Nahusha had gone away, Devayani of faultless features,
afflicted with grief, then spoke unto her maid, Ghurnika by name, who met
her then. And she said, "O Ghurnika, go thou quickly and speak to my
father without loss of time of everything as it hath happened. I shall not
now enter the city of Vrishaparvan."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Ghurnika, thus commanded, repaired quickly to
the mansion, of the Asura chief, where she saw Kavya and spoke unto him
with her perception dimmed by anger. And she said, "I tell thee, O great
Brahmana, that Devayani hath been ill-used, O fortunate one, in the forest
by Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan." And Kavya, hearing that his
daughter had been ill-used by Sarmishtha speedily went out with a heavy
heart, seeking her in the woods. And when he found her in the woods, he
clasped her with affection and spoke unto her with voice choked with grief,
"O daughter, the weal or woe that befalleth people is always due to their
own faults. Thou hast therefore some fault, I ween, which hath been
expiated thus." Hearing this Devayani replied, "Be it a penalty or not,
listen to me with attention. O, hear that all Sarmishtha, the daughter of
Vrishaparvan, hath said unto me. Really hath she said that thou art only
the hired chanter of the praises of the Asura king! Even thus hath she--
that Sarmishtha, Vrishaparvan's daughter,--spoken to me, with reddened
eyes, these piercing and cruel words, 'Thou art the daughter of one that
ever chanteth for hire the praises of others, of one that asketh for
charities, of one that accepteth alms; whereas I am the daughter of one
that receiveth adorations, of one that giveth, of one that never accepteth
anything as gift!' These have been the words repeatedly spoken unto me by
the proud Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan, with eyes red with
anger. If, O father, I am really the daughter of a hired chanter of
praises, of one that accepteth gifts, I must offer my adorations in the
hope of obtaining her grace! Oh, of this I have already told her!"

"'Sukra replied, "Thou art, O Devayani, no daughter of a hired adorer, of
one that asketh for alms and accepteth gifts. Thou art the daughter of one
that adores none, but of one that is adored by all! Vrishaparvan himself
knoweth it, and Indra, and king Yayati too. That inconceivable Brahma,
that unopposable Godhead, is my strength! The self-create, himself,
gratified by me, hath said that I am for aye the lord of that which is in
all things on Earth or in Heaven! I tell thee truly that it is I who pour
rain for the good of creatures and who nourish the annual plants that
sustain all living things!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'It was by such sweet words of excellent import
that the father endeavoured to pacify his daughter afflicted with woe and
oppressed by anger.'"


SECTION LXXIX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Sukra continued, "Know, then, O Devayani, that he that mindeth not the
evil speeches of others, conquereth everything! The wise say that he is a
true charioteer who without slackening holdeth tightly the reins of his
horses. He, therefore, is the true man that subdueth, without indulging in
his rising wrath. Know thou, O Devayani, that by him is everything
conquered, who calmly subdueth his rising anger. He is regarded as a man
who by having recourse to forgiveness, shaketh off his rising anger like a
snake casting off its slough. He that suppresseth his anger, he that
regardeth not the evil speeches of others, he that becometh not angry,
though there be cause, certainly acquireth the four objects for which we
live (viz., virtue, profit, desire, and salvation). Between him that
performeth without fatigue sacrifices every month for a hundred years, and
him that never feeleth angry at anything, he that feeleth not wrath is
certainly the higher. Boys and girls, unable to distinguish between right
and wrong, quarrel with each other. The wise never imitate them." Devayani,
on hearing this speech of her father, said, "O father, I know, also what
the difference is between anger and forgiveness as regards the power of
each. But when a disciple behaveth disrespectfully, he should never be
forgiven by the preceptor if the latter is really desirous of benefiting
the former. Therefore, I do not desire to live any longer in a country
where evil behaviour is at a premium. The wise man desirous of good,
should not dwell among those sinfully inclined men who always speak ill of
good behaviour and high birth. But there should one live,--indeed, that
hath been said to be the best of dwelling places,--where good behaviour
and purity of birth are known and respected. The cruel words uttered by
Vrishaparvan's daughter burn my heart even as men, desirous of kindling a
fire, burn the dry fuel. I do not think anything more miserable for a man
in the three worlds than to adore one's enemies blessed with good fortune,
himself possessing none. It hath been indeed said by the learned that for
such a man even death would be better."'"


SECTION LXXX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Kavya, the foremost of Bhrigu's line, became
angry himself. And approaching Vrishaparvan where the latter was seated,
began to address him without weighing his words, "O king," he said,
"sinful acts do not, like the Earth, bear fruit immediately! But gradually
and secretly do they extirpate their doers. Such fruit visiteth either in
one's own self, one's son, or one's grandson. Sins must bear their fruit.
Like rich food they can never be digested. And because ye slew the
Brahmana Kacha, the grandson of Angiras, who was virtuous, acquainted with
the precepts of religion, and attentive to his duties, while residing in
my abode, even for this act of slaughter--and for the mal-treatment of my
daughter too, know, O Vrishaparvan, I shall leave thee and thy relatives!
Indeed, O king, for this, I can no longer stay with thee! Dost thou, O
Asura chief, think that I am a raving liar? Thou makest light of thy
offence without seeking to correct it!"

"'Vrishaparvan then said, "O son of Bhrigu, never have I attributed want of
virtue, of falsehood, to thee. Indeed, virtue and truth ever dwell in thee.
Be kind to me! O Bhargava, if, leaving us, thou really goest hence, we
shall then go into the depths of the ocean. Indeed, there is nothing else
for us to do."

"'Sukra then replied, "Ye Asuras, whether ye go into the depths of the
ocean or fly away to all directions, I care little. I am unable to bear my
daughter's grief. My daughter is ever dear to me. My life dependeth on her.
Seek ye to please her. As Vrihaspati ever seeketh the good of Indra, so do
I always seek thine by my ascetic merits."

"'Vrishaparvan then said, "O Bhargava, thou art the absolute master of
whatever is possessed by the Asura chiefs in this world-their elephants,
kine and horses, and even my humble self!"

"'Sukra then answered, "If it is true, O great Asura, that I am the lord of
all the wealth of the Asuras, then go and gratify Devayani."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'when the great Kavya was so addressed by
Vrishaparvan, he then went to Devayani and told her all. Devayani, however,
quickly replied, "O Bhargava, if thou art truly the lord of the Asura king
himself and of all his wealth, then let the king himself come to me and
say so in my presence." Vrishaparvan then approached Devayani and told her,
"O Devayani of sweet smiles, whatever thou desirest I am willing to give
thee, however difficult it may be to grant the same." Devayani answered,
"I desire Sarmishtha with a thousand maids to wait on me! She must also
follow me to where my father may give me away."

"'Vrishaparvan then commanded a maid-servant in attendance on him, saying,
"Go and quickly bring Sarmishtha hither. Let her also accomplish what
Devayani wisheth."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The maid-servant then repaired to Sarmishtha and
told her, "O amiable Sarmishtha, rise and follow me. Accomplish the good
of thy relatives. Urged by Devayani, the Brahmana (Sukra) is on the point
of leaving his disciples (the Asuras). O sinless one, thou must do what
Devayani wisheth." Sarmishtha replied, "I shall cheerfully do what
Devayani wisheth. Urged by Devayani Sukra is calling me. Both Sukra and
Devayani must not leave the Asuras through my fault."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Commanded by her father, then, Sarmishtha,
accompanied by a thousand maidens, soon came, in a palanquin, out of her
father's excellent mansion. And approaching Devayani she said, "With my
thousand maids, I am thy waiting-maid! And I shall follow thee where thy
father may give thee away." Devayani replied, "I am the daughter of one
who chanteth the praises of thy father, and who beggeth and accepteth alms;
thou, on the other hand, art the daughter of one who is adored. How canst
thou be my waiting-maid?"

"'Sarmishtha answered, "One must by all means contribute to the happiness
of one's afflicted relatives. Therefore shall I follow thee wherever thy
father may give thee away."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'When Sarmishtha thus promised to be Devayani's
waiting-maid the latter, O king, then spoke unto her father thus, "O best
of all excellent Brahmanas, I am gratified. I shall now enter the Asura
capital! I now know that thy science and power of knowledge are not
futile!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'That best of Brahmanas, of great reputation,
thus addressed by his daughter, then, entered the Asura capital in the
gladness of his heart. And the Danavas worshipped him with great
reverence.'"


SECTION LXXXI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After some length of time, O best of monarchs,
Devayani of the fairest complexion went into the same woods for purposes
of pleasure. And accompanied by Sarmishtha with her thousand maids she
reached the same spot and began to wander freely. And waited upon by all
those companions she felt supremely happy. And sporting with light hearts,
they began drinking the honey in flowers, eating various kinds of fruit
and biting some. And just at that time, king Yayati, the son of Nahusha,
again came there tired and thirsty, in course of his wanderings, in search
of deer. And the king saw Devayani and Sarmishtha, and those other maidens
also, all decked with celestial ornaments and full of voluptuous languor
in consequence of the flower-honey they drank. And Devayani of sweet
smiles, unrivalled for beauty and possessed of the fairest complexion
amongst them all, was reclining at her ease. And she was waited upon by
Sarmishtha who was gently kneading her feet.

"'And Yayati seeing all this, said, "O amiable ones, I would ask you both
your names and parentage. It seems that these two thousand maids wait on
you two." Hearing the monarch, Devayani then answered, "Listen to me, O
best of men. Know that I am the daughter of Sukra, the spiritual guide of
the Asuras. This my companion is my waiting-maid. She attendeth on me
wherever I go. She is Sarmishtha, the daughter of the Asura king
Vrishaparvan."

"'Yayati then asked, "I am curious to know why is this thy companion of
fair eye-brows, this maiden of the fairest complexion, the daughter of the
Asura chief thy waiting-maid!" Devayani replied, "O best of king,
everything resulteth from Fate. Knowing this also to be the result of Fate,
wonder not at it. Thy feature and attire are both like a king's. Thy
speech also is fair and correct as that of the Vedas. Tell me thy name,
whence thou art and whose son also."

"'The monarch replied, "During my vow of Brahmacharya, the whole Vedas
entered my ears. I am known as Yayati, a king's son and myself a king."
Devayani then enquired, "O king, what hast thou come here for? Is it to
gather lotuses or to angle or to hunt?" Yayati said, "O amiable one,
thirsty from the pursuit of deer, I have come hither in search of water. I
am very much fatigued. I await but your commands to leave this spot."

"'Devayani answered, "With my two thousand damsels and my waiting-maid
Sarmishtha, I wait but your commands. Prosperity to thee. Be thou my
friend and lord."

"'Yayati, thereupon, replied, "Beautiful one, I do not deserve thee. Thou
art the daughter of Sukra far superior to me. Thy father cannot bestow
thee even on a great king." To this Devayani replied, "Brahmanas had
before this been united with the Kshatriyas, and Kshatriyas with Brahmanas.
Thou art the son of a Rishi and thyself a Rishi. Therefore, O son of
Nahusha, marry me." Yayati, however, replied, "O thou of the handsomest
features, the four orders have, indeed, sprung from one body. But their
duties and purity are not the same, the Brahmana being truly superior to
all." Devayani answered, "This hand of mine hath never been touched before
by any man save thee. Therefore, do I accept thee for my lord. How, indeed,
shall any other man touch my hand which had before been touched by thyself
who art a Rishi?" Yayati then said, "The wise know that a Brahmana is more
to be avoided than an angry snake of virulent poison, or a blazing fire of
spreading flames." Devayani then told the monarch, "O bull amongst men,
why dost thou, indeed, say that Brahmana should be more avoided than an
angry snake of virulent poison or a blazing fire of spreading flames?" The
monarch answered, "The snake killeth only one. The sharpest weapon slayeth
but a single person. The Brahmana, when angry destroyeth whole cities and
kingdoms! Therefore, O timid one, do I deem a Brahmana as more to be
avoided than either. I cannot hence wed thee, O amiable one, unless thy
father bestoweth thee on me." Devayani then said, "Thou art, indeed,
chosen by me. And, O king, it is understood that thou wilt accept me if
my father bestoweth me on thee. Thou needst not fear to accept my poor
self bestowed on thee. Thou dost not, indeed, ask for me."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, Devayani quickly sent a maidservant
to her father. The maid represented to Sukra everything as it had happened.
And as soon as he had heard all, Bhargava came and saw Yayati. And
beholding Bhargava come, Yayati worshipped and adored that Brahmana, and
stood with joined palms in expectation of his commands.

"'And Devayani then said, "This O father, is the son of Nahusha. He took
hold of my hand, when I was in distress. I bow to thee. Bestow me upon him.
I shall not wed any other person in the world." Sukra exclaimed, "O thou
of splendid courage, thou hast, indeed, been accepted as her lord by this
my dear daughter. I bestow her on thee. Therefore, O son of Nahusha,
accept her as thy wife."

"'Yayati then said, "I solicit the boon, O Brahmana, that by so doing, the
sin of begetting a half-breed might not touch me." Sukra, however, assured
him by saying, "I shall absolve thee from the sin. Ask thou the boon that
thou desirest. Fear not to wed her. I grant thee absolution. Maintain
virtuously thy wife--the slender-waisted Devayani. Transports of happiness
be thine in her company. This other maiden, Vrishaparvan's daughter,
Sarmishtha should ever be regarded by thee. But thou shall not summon her
to thy bed."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Sukra, Yayati then walked
round the Brahmana. And the king then went through the auspicious ceremony
of marriage according to the rites of the scriptures. And having received
from Sukra this rich treasure of the excellent Devayani with Sarmishtha
and those two thousand maidens, and duly honoured also by Sukra himself
and the Asuras, the best of monarchs, then, commanded by the high-souled
Bhargava, returned to his capital with a joyous heart.'"


SECTION LXXXII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Yayati then, on returning to his capital which was
like unto the city of Indra, entered his inner apartments and established
there his bride Devayani. And the monarch, directed by Devayani,
established Vrishaparvan's daughter Sarmishtha in a mansion especially
erected near the artificial woods of Asokas in his gardens. And the king
surrounded Vrishaparvan's daughter Sarmishtha with a thousand maids and
honoured her by making every arrangement for her food and garments. But it
was with Devayani that the royal son of Nahusha sported like a celestial
for many years in joy and bliss. And when her season came, the fair
Devayani conceived. And she brought forth as her first child a fine boy.
And when a thousand years had passed away, Vrishaparvan's daughter
Sarmishtha having attained to puberty saw that her season had come. She
became anxious and said to herself, "My season hath arrived. But I have
not yet chosen a husband. O, what hath happened, what should I do? How am
I to obtain the fruition of my wishes? Devayani hath become mother. My
youth is doomed to pass away in vain. Shall I choose him also for my
husband whom Devayani hath chosen? This is, indeed, my resolve: that
monarch should give me a son. Will not the virtuous one grant me a private
interview?"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'While Sarmishtha was thus busy with her thoughts,
the king wandering listlessly came to that very wood of Asokas, and
beholding Sarmishtha before him, stood there in silence. Then Sarmishtha
of sweet smiles seeing the monarch before her with nobody to witness what
might pass, approached him and said with joined palms, "O son of Nahusha,
no one can behold the ladies that dwell in the inner apartments of Soma,
of Indra, of Vishnu, of Yama, of Varuna, and of thee! Thou knowest, O king,
that I am both handsome and well-born. I solicit thee, O king! My season
hath arrived. See that it goeth not in vain."

"'Yayati answered, "Well do I know that honour of birth is thine, born as
thou art in the proud race of the Danavas. Thou art also gifted with
beauty. I do not, indeed, see even the speck of a fault in thy feature.
But Usanas commanded me, while I was united with Devayani, that never
should Vrishaparvan's daughter be summoned to my bed."

"'Sarmishtha then said, "It hath been said, O king, that it is not sinful
to lie on the occasion of a joke, in respect of women sought to be enjoyed,
on occasions of marriage, in peril of immediate death and of the loss of
one's whole fortune. Lying is excusable on these five occasions. O king,
it is not true that he is fallen who speaks not the truth when asked. Both
Devayani and myself have been called hither as companions to serve the
same purpose. When, therefore, thou hadst said that you wouldst confine
thyself to one only amongst as, that was a lie thou hadst spoken." Yayati
replied, "A king should ever be a model in the eyes of his people. That
monarch certainly meets with destruction who speaks an untruth. As for
myself, I dare not speak an untruth even if the greatest loss threatens
me!" Sarmishtha answered, "O monarch, one may look upon her friend's
husband as her own. One's friend's marriage is the same as one's own. Thou
hast been chosen by my friend as her husband. Thou art as much my husband,
therefore." Yayati then said, "It is, indeed my vow always to grant what
one asketh. As thou askest me, tell me then what I am to do." Sarmishtha
then said, "Absolve me, O king, from sin. Protect my virtue. Becoming a
mother by thee, let me practise the highest virtue in this world. It is
said, O king, that a wife, a slave, and a son can never earn wealth for
themselves. What they earn always belongeth to him who owneth them. I am,
indeed, the slave of Devayani. Thou art Devayani's master and lord. Thou
art, therefore, O king, my master and lord as much as Devayani's! I
solicit thee! O, fulfil my wishes!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Sarmishtha, the monarch was
persuaded into the truth of all she spoke. He therefore, honoured
Sarmishtha by protecting her virtue. And they passed some time together.
And taking affectionate farewell of each other, they then parted, each
returning to whence he or she had come.

"'And it came to pass that Sarmishtha of sweet smiles and fair eyebrows
conceived in consequence of that connection of hers with that best of
monarchs. And, O king, that lotus-eyed lady then in due course of time
brought forth a son of the splendour of a celestial child and of eyes
like lotus-petals.'"


SECTION LXXXIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'When Devayani of sweet smiles heard of the birth of
this child, she became jealous, and O Bharata, Sarmishtha became an object
of her unpleasant reflections. And Devayani, repairing to her, addressed
her thus, "O thou of fair eye-brows, what sin is this thou hast committed
by yielding to the influence of lust?" Sarmishtha replied, "A certain
Rishi of virtuous soul and fully conversant with the Vedas came to me.
Capable of granting boons he was solicited by me to grant my wishes that
were based on considerations of virtue. O thou of sweet smiles, I would
not seek the sinful fulfilment of my desires. I tell thee truly that this
child of mine is by that Rishi!" Devayani answered, "It is all right if
that be the case, O timid one! But if the lineage, name, and family of
that Brahmana be known to thee, I should like to hear them." Sarmishtha
replied, "O thou of sweet smiles, in asceticism and energy, that Rishi is
resplendent like the Sun himself. Beholding him, I had not, any need to
make these enquiries--" Devayani then said, "If this is true, if indeed,
thou hast obtained thy child from such a superior Brahmana, then, O
Sarmishtha, I have no cause of anger."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having thus talked and laughed with each other,
they separated, Devayani returning to the palace with the knowledge
imparted to her by Sarmishtha. And, O king, Yayati also begot on Devayani
two sons called Yadu and Turvasu, who were like Indra and Vishnu. And
Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan, became through the royal sage
the mother of three sons in all, named Drahyu, Anu, and Puru.

"'And, O king, it so came to pass that one day Devayani of sweet smiles,
by Yayati, went into a solitary part of the woods, (in the king's
extensive park). And there she saw three children of celestial beauty
playing with perfect trustfulness. And Devayani asked in surprise, "Whose
children are they, O king, who are so handsome and so like unto the
children of the celestials? In splendour and beauty they are like thee, I
should think."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'And Devayani without waiting for a reply from
the king, asked the children themselves, "Ye children, what is your
lineage? Who is your father? Answer me truly. I desire to know all." Those
children then pointed at the king (with their forefingers) and spoke of
Sarmishtha as their mother.

"'And having so said, the children approached the king to clasp his knees.
But the king dared not caress them in the presence of Devayani. The boys
then left the place, and made towards their mother, weeping in grief. And
the king, at this conduct of the boys, became very much abashed. But
Devayani, marking the affection of the children for the king learnt the
secret and addressing Sarmishtha, said, "How hast thou dared to do me an
injury, being, as thou art, dependent on me? Dost thou not fear to have
recourse once more to that Asura custom of thine?"

"'Sarmishtha said, "O thou of sweet smiles, all that I told thee of a Rishi
is perfectly true. I have acted rightly and according to the precepts of
virtue, and therefore, do I not fear thee. When thou hadst chosen the king
for thy husband, I, too, chose him as mine. O beautiful one, a friend's
husband is, according to usage, one's own husband as well. Thou art the
daughter of a Brahmana and, therefore, deservest my worship and regard.
But dost thou not know that this royal sage is held by me in greater
