The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oomphel in the Sky, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Oomphel in the Sky

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: February 23, 2007 [EBook #20649]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OOMPHEL IN THE SKY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








OOMPHEL ...
... IN THE SKY

By H. BEAM PIPER

+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                              |
| Transcriber's Note                                           |
|                                                              |
| This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact--Science    |
| Fiction, November 1960. Extensive research did not uncover   |
| any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was |
| renewed.                                                     |
|                                                              |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+

[Illustration]

     _Since Logic derives from postulates, it never has, and never will,
     change a postulate. And a religious belief is a system of
     postulates ... so how can a man fight a native superstition with
     logic? Or anything else...?_

Illustrated by Bernklau


Miles Gilbert watched the landscape slide away below him, its quilt of
rounded treetops mottled red and orange in the double sunlight and, in
shaded places, with the natural yellow of the vegetation of Kwannon. The
aircar began a slow swing to the left, and Gettler Alpha came into view,
a monstrous smear of red incandescence with an optical diameter of two
feet at arm's length, slightly flattened on the bottom by the western
horizon. In another couple of hours it would be completely set, but by
that time Beta, the planet's G-class primary, would be at its
midafternoon hottest. He glanced at his watch. It was 1005, but that was
Galactic Standard Time, and had no relevance to anything that was
happening in the local sky. It did mean, though, that it was five
minutes short of two hours to 'cast-time.

He snapped on the communication screen in front of him, and Harry Walsh,
the news editor, looked out of it at him from the office in Bluelake,
halfway across the continent. He wanted to know how things were going.

"Just about finished. I'm going to look in at a couple more native
villages, and then I'm going to Sanders' plantation to see Gonzales. I
hope I'll have a personal statement from him, and the final
situation-progress map, in time for the 'cast. I take it Maith's still
agreeable to releasing the story at twelve-hundred?"

"Sure; he was always agreeable. The Army wants publicity; it was
Government House that wanted to sit on it, and they've given that up
now. The story's all over the place here, native city and all."

"What's the situation in town, now?"

"Oh, it's still going on. Some disorders, mostly just unrest. Lot of
street meetings that could have turned into frenzies if the police
hadn't broken them up in time. A couple of shootings, some
sleep-gassing, and a lot of arrests. Nothing to worry about--at least,
not immediately."

That was about what he thought. "Maybe it's not bad to have a little
trouble in Bluelake," he considered. "What happens out here in the
plantation country the Government House crowd can't see, and it doesn't
worry them. Well, I'll call you from Sanders'."

He blanked the screen. In the seat in front, the native pilot said:
"Some contragravity up ahead, boss." It sounded like two voices speaking
in unison, which was just what it was. "I'll have a look."

The pilot's hand, long and thin, like a squirrel's, reached up and
pulled down the fifty-power binoculars on their swinging arm. Miles
looked at the screen-map and saw a native village just ahead of the dot
of light that marked the position of the aircar. He spoke the native
name of the village aloud, and added:

"Let down there, Heshto. I'll see what's going on."

The native, still looking through the glasses, said, "Right, boss." Then
he turned.

His skin was blue-gray and looked like sponge rubber. He was humanoid,
to the extent of being an upright biped, with two arms, a head on top of
shoulders, and a torso that housed, among other oddities, four lungs.
His face wasn't even vaguely human. He had two eyes in front, close
enough for stereoscopic vision, but that was a common characteristic of
sapient life forms everywhere. His mouth was strictly for eating; he
breathed through separate intakes and outlets, one of each on either
side of his neck; he talked through the outlets and had his scent and
hearing organs in the intakes. The car was air-conditioned, which was a
mercy; an overheated Kwann exhaled through his skin, and surrounded
himself with stenches like an organic chemistry lab. But then, Kwanns
didn't come any closer to him than they could help when he was hot and
sweated, which, lately, had been most of the time.

"A V and a half of air cavalry, circling around," Heshto said. "Making
sure nobody got away. And a combat car at a couple of hundred feet and
another one just at treetop level."

He rose and went to the seat next to the pilot, pulling down the
binoculars that were focused for his own eyes. With them, he could see
the air cavalry--egg-shaped things just big enough for a seated man,
with jets and contragravity field generators below and a bristle of
machine gun muzzles in front. A couple of them jetted up for a look at
him and then went slanting down again, having recognized the Kwannon
Planetwide News Service car.


The village was typical enough to have been an illustration in a
sociography textbook--fields in a belt for a couple of hundred yards
around it, dome-thatched mud-and-wattle huts inside a pole stockade with
log storehouses built against it, their flat roofs high enough to
provide platforms for defending archers, the open oval gathering-place
in the middle. There was a big hut at one end of this, the khamdoo, the
sanctum of the adult males, off limits for women and children. A small
crowd was gathered in front of it; fifteen or twenty Terran air
cavalrymen, a couple of enlisted men from the Second Kwannon Native
Infantry, a Terran second lieutenant, and half a dozen natives. The rest
of the village population, about two hundred, of both sexes and all
ages, were lined up on the shadier side of the gathering-place, most of
them looking up apprehensively at the two combat cars which were
covering them with their guns.

Miles got to his feet as the car lurched off contragravity and the
springs of the landing-feet took up the weight. A blast of furnacelike
air struck him when he opened the door; he got out quickly and closed it
behind him. The second lieutenant had come over to meet him; he extended
his hand.

"Good day, Mr. Gilbert. We all owe you our thanks for the warning. This
would have been a real baddie if we hadn't caught it when we did."

He didn't even try to make any modest disclaimer; that was nothing more
than the exact truth.

"Well, lieutenant, I see you have things in hand here." He glanced at
the line-up along the side of the oval plaza, and then at the selected
group in front of the khamdoo. The patriarchal village chieftain in a
loose slashed shirt; the shoonoo, wearing a multiplicity of amulets and
nothing else; four or five of the village elders. "I take it the word of
the swarming didn't get this far?"

"No, this crowd still don't know what the flap's about, and I couldn't
think of anything to tell them that wouldn't be worse than no
explanation at all."

He had noticed hoes and spades flying in the fields, and the cylindrical
plastic containers the natives bought from traders, dropped when the
troops had surprised the women at work. And the shoonoo didn't have a
fire-dance cloak or any other special regalia on. If he'd heard about
the swarming, he'd have been dressed to make magic for it.

"What time did you get here, lieutenant?"

"Oh-nine-forty. I just called in and reported the village occupied, and
they told me I was the last one in, so the operation's finished."

That had been smart work. He got the lieutenant's name and unit and
mentioned it into his memophone. That had been a little under five hours
since he had convinced General Maith, in Bluelake, that the mass
labor-desertion from the Sanders plantation had been the beginning of a
swarming. Some division commanders wouldn't have been able to get a
brigade off the ground in that time, let alone landed on objective. He
said as much to the young officer.

"The way the Army responded, today, can make the people of the Colony
feel a lot more comfortable for the future."

"Why, thank you, Mr. Gilbert." The Army, on Kwannon, was rather more
used to obloquy than praise. "How did you spot what was going on so
quickly?"

This was the hundredth time, at least, that he had been asked that
today.

"Well, Paul Sanders' labor all comes from neighboring villages. If
they'd just wanted to go home and spend the end of the world with their
families, they'd have been dribbling away in small batches for the last
couple of hundred hours. Instead, they all bugged out in a bunch, they
took all the food they could carry and nothing else, and they didn't
make any trouble before they left. Then, Sanders said they'd been
building fires out in the fallow ground and moaning and chanting around
them for a couple of days, and idling on the job. Saving their strength
for the trek. And he said they had a shoonoo among them. He's probably
the lad who started it. Had a dream from the Gone Ones, I suppose."

"You mean, like this fellow here?" the lieutenant asked. "What are they,
Mr. Gilbert; priests?"

He looked quickly at the lieutenant's collar-badges. Yellow trefoil for
Third Fleet-Army Force, Roman IV for Fourth Army, 907 for his regiment,
with C under it for cavalry. That outfit had only been on Kwannon for
the last two thousand hours, but somebody should have briefed him better
than that.

He shook his head. "No, they're magicians. Everything these Kwanns do
involves magic, and the shoonoon are the professionals. When a native
runs into something serious, that his own do-it-yourself magic can't
cope with, he goes to the shoonoo. And, of course, the shoonoo works all
the magic for the community as a whole--rain-magic, protective magic for
the village and the fields, that sort of thing."

The lieutenant mopped his face on a bedraggled handkerchief. "They'll
have to struggle along somehow for a while; we have orders to round up
all the shoonoon and send them in to Bluelake."

"Yes." That hadn't been General Maith's idea; the governor had insisted
on that. "I hope it doesn't make more trouble than it prevents."

