The Project Gutenberg EBook of A March on London, by G. A. Henty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A March on London

Author: G. A. Henty

Posting Date: February 12, 2013 [EBook #7061]
Release Date: December, 2004
First Posted: March 4, 2003
[Last updated: January 18, 2014]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MARCH ON LONDON ***




Produced by Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team











[Illustration: "EDGAR STRUCK HIM A BUFFET ON THE FACE WHICH SENT HIM
REELING BACKWARDS."]




A MARCH ON LONDON BEING A STORY OF WAT TYLER'S INSURRECTION

BY G. A. HENTY




PREFACE


The events that took place during the latter half of the fourteenth
century and the first half of the fifteenth are known to us far better
than those preceding or following them, owing to the fact that three
great chroniclers, Froissart, Monstrelet, and Holinshed, have recounted
the events with a fulness of detail that leaves nothing to be desired.
The uprising of the Commons, as they called themselves--that is to say,
chiefly the folk who were still kept in a state of serfdom in the reign
of Richard II.--was in itself justifiable. Although serfdom in England
was never carried to the extent that prevailed on the Continent, the
serfs suffered from grievous disabilities. A certain portion of their
time had to be devoted to the work of their feudal lord. They
themselves were forbidden to buy or sell at public markets or fairs.
They were bound to the soil, and could not, except under special
circumstances, leave it.

Above all, they felt that they were not free men, and were not even
deemed worthy to fight in the wars of their country. Attempts have been
made to represent the rising as the result of Wickliffe's attack upon
the Church, but there seems to be very small foundation for the
assertion. Undoubtedly many of the lower class of clergy, discontented
with their position, did their best to inflame the minds of the
peasants, but as the rising extended over a very large part of England,
and the people were far too ignorant to understand, and far too much
irritated by their own grievances to care for the condition of the
Church, it may be taken that they murdered the Archbishop of Canterbury
and many other priests simply because they regarded them as being
wealthy, and so slew them as they slew other people of substance. Had
it been otherwise, the Church would not have been wholly ignored in the
demands that they set before the king, but some allusion would have
been made for the need of reforms in that direction.

The troubles in Flanders are of interest to Englishmen, since there was
for many years an alliance, more or less close, between our king and
some of the great Flemish cities. Indeed, from the time when the first
Von Artevelde was murdered because he proposed that the Black Prince
should be accepted as ruler of Flanders, to the day upon which
Napoleon's power was broken forever at Waterloo, Flanders has been the
theatre of almost incessant turmoil and strife, in which Germans and
Dutchmen, Spaniards, Englishmen, and Frenchmen have fought out their
quarrels.

G. A. HENTY.




CONTENTS


    I. TROUBLED TIMES

   II. A FENCING BOUT

  III. WAT TYLER

   IV. IN LONDON

    V. A RESCUE

   VI. A CITY MERCHANT

  VII. DEATH TO THE FLEMINGS!

 VIII. A COMBAT IN THE TOWER

   IX. DEATH OF THE TYLER

    X. A FIGHT IN THE OPEN

   XI. AN INVITATION

  XII. THE TROUBLES IN FLANDERS

 XIII. A STARVING TOWN

  XIV. CIVIL WAR

   XV. A CRUSHING DEFEAT

  XVI. A WAR OF THE CHURCH

 XVII. PRISONERS

XVIII. A NOBLE GIFT

  XIX. WELL SETTLED




ILLUSTRATIONS


"EDGAR STRUCK HIM A BUFFET ON THE FACE WHICH SENT HIM REELING
BACKWARDS."

EDGAR TALKS MATTERS OVER WITH THE PRIOR OF ST. ALWYTH.

"IN A MOMENT EDGAR'S SWORD FELL ON THE RUFFIAN'S WRIST."

THE LORD MAYOR STABS WAT THE TYLER IN PRESENCE OF THE BOY-KING.

EDGAR AND ALBERT ARE KNIGHTED BY KING RICHARD.

THE TWO YOUNG KNIGHTS CHARGE DOWN UPON THE PANIC-STRICKEN CROWD.

SIR EDGAR AT LAST SURRENDERS TO SIR ROBERT DE BEAULIEU.

THE PRISONERS MAKE THEIR ESCAPE OVER THE ROOFS OF YPRES.




A MARCH ON LONDON




CHAPTER I

TROUBLED TIMES


"And what do you think of it all, good Father?"

"'Tis a difficult question, my son, and I am glad that it is one that
wiser heads than mine will have to solve."

"But they don't seem to try to solve it; things get worse and worse.
The king is but a lad, no older than myself, and he is in the hands of
others. It seems to me a sin and a shame that things should go on as
they are at present. My father also thinks so."

The speaker was a boy of some sixteen years old. He was walking with
the prior in the garden of the little convent of St. Alwyth, four miles
from the town of Dartford. Edgar Ormskirk was the son of a scholar. The
latter, a man of independent means, who had always had a preference for
study and investigation rather than for taking part in active pursuits,
had, since the death of his young wife, a year after the birth of his
son, retired altogether from the world and devoted himself to study. He
had given up his comfortable home, standing on the heights of
Highgate--that being in too close proximity to London to enable him to
enjoy the seclusion that he desired--and had retired to a small estate
near Dartford.

Educated at Oxford, he had gone to Padua at his father's death, which
happened just as he left the university, and had remained at that seat
of learning for five years. There he had spent the whole of his income
in the purchase of manuscripts. The next two years were passed at
Bologna and Pisa, and he there collected a library such as few
gentlemen of his time possessed. Then Mr. Ormskirk had returned to
England and settled at Highgate, and two years later married the
daughter of a neighbouring gentleman, choosing her rather because he
felt that he needed someone to keep his house in order, than from any
of the feeling that usually accompanies such unions. In time, however,
he had come to love her, and her loss was a very heavy blow to him. It
was the void that he felt in his home as much as his desire for
solitude, that induced him to leave Highgate and settle in the country.

Here, at least, he had no fear of intrusive neighbours, or other
interruptions to his studies. The news from London seldom reached his
ears, and he was enabled to devote himself entirely to his experiments.
Like many other learned men of his age, it was to chemistry that he
chiefly turned his attention. His library comprised the works of almost
every known writer on the subject, and he hoped that he might gain an
immortal reputation by discovering one or both of the great secrets
then sought for--the elixir of life, or the philosopher's stone that
would convert all things into gold. It was not that he himself had any
desire for a long life, still less did he yearn for more wealth than he
possessed, but he fondly believed that these discoveries would
ameliorate the condition of mankind.

He did not see that if gold was as plentiful as the commonest metal it
would cease to be more valuable than others, or that the boon of a long
life would not add to the happiness of mankind. For some years he gave
little thought to his son, who was left to such care as the old
housekeeper and the still older man-servant chose to bestow upon him,
and who, in consequence, was left altogether to follow the dictates of
his own fancy. The child, therefore, lived almost entirely in the open
air, played, tussled, and fought with boys of his own age in the
village, and grew up healthy, sturdy, and active. His father scarcely
took any heed of his existence until the prior of the Convent of St.
Alwyth one day called upon him.

"What are you going to do with your boy, Mr. Ormskirk?" he asked.

"My boy?" the student repeated in tones of surprise. "Oh, yes; Edgar,
of course. What am I going to do with him? Well, I have never thought
about it. Does he want anything? My housekeeper always sees to that. Do
you think that he wants a nurse?"

"A nurse, Mr. Ormskirk!" the Prior said with a smile. "A nurse would
have a hard time with him. Do you know what his age is?"

"Four or five years old, I suppose."

"Nearly double that. He is nine."

"Impossible!" Mr. Ormskirk said. "Why, it is only the other day that he
was a baby."

"It is eight years since that time; he is now a sturdy lad, and if
there is any mischief in the village he is sure to be in it. Why, it
was but three days ago that Friar Anselmo caught him, soon after
daybreak, fishing in the Convent pool with two of the village lads. The
friar gave them a sound trouncing, and would have given one to your
son, too, had it not been for the respect that we all feel for you. It
is high time, Mr. Ormskirk, that he was broken of his wild ways and
received an education suited to his station."

"Quite so, quite so. I own that I have thought but little about him,
for indeed 'tis rarely that I see him, and save that at times his
racket in the house sorely disturbs my studies, I have well-nigh
forgotten all about him. Yes, yes; it is, of course, high time that he
began his education, so that if I should die before I have completed my
discoveries he may take up my work."

The Prior smiled quietly at the thought of the sturdy, dirty-faced boy
working among crucibles and retorts. However, he only said:

"Do you think of undertaking his education yourself?"

"By no means," Mr. Ormskirk said, hastily. "It would be impossible for
me to find time at present, but when he has completed his studies I
should then take him in hand myself, make him my companion and
assistant, and teach him all that is known of science."

"But in the meantime?"

"In the meantime? Yes, I suppose something must be done. I might get
him a tutor, but that would be a great disturbance to me. I might send
him up to the monastery at Westminster, where the sons of many
gentlemen are taught."

"I doubt whether the training, or rather want of training, that he has
had would fit him for Westminster," the Prior said, quietly. "There is
another plan that perhaps might be more suitable for him. One of our
brethren is a scholar, and already three or four of the sons of the
gentry in the neighbourhood come to him for three hours or so a day.
Our convent is a poor one, and the fees he receives are a welcome
addition to our means."

"Excellent!" Mr. Ormskirk said, delighted at the difficulty being taken
off his shoulders, "It would be the very thing."

"Then perhaps you will speak to the boy, and lay your orders upon him,"
the Prior said. "He was in the village as I passed by, and I brought
him up here, very much against his will I admit. Then I gave him in
charge on arrival to your servitor, knowing that otherwise the young
varlet would slip off again as soon as my back was turned. Perhaps you
will send for him."

Mr. Ormskirk rang a bell. The housekeeper entered.

"Where is Andrew?" he asked.

"He is looking after Master Edgar, sir. His reverence told him to do
so, and he dare not leave him for a moment or he would be off again."

"Tell Andrew to bring him in here."

A minute later the old servant entered with the boy. Edgar was in a
dishevelled condition, the result of several struggles with Andrew. His
face was begrimed with dirt, his clothes were torn and untidy. His
father looked at him in grave surprise. It was not that he had not seen
him before, for occasionally he had noticed him going across the
garden, but though his eyes had observed him, his mental vision had not
in any way taken him in, his thoughts being intent upon the work that
he had reluctantly left to take a hurried meal.

"Tut, tut, tut!" he murmured to himself, "and this is my son. Well,
well, I suppose he is not to be blamed; it is my own fault for being so
heedless of him. This is bad, Edgar," he said, "and yet it is my own
fault rather than thine, and I am thankful that the good prior has
brought your condition before me before it is too late. There must be
no more of this. Your appearance is disgraceful both to yourself and
me--to me because you are in rags, to yourself because you are dirty. I
had never dreamt of this. Henceforth all must be changed. You must be
clothed as befits the son of a gentleman, you must be taught as it is
right for the son of a scholar to be, and you must bear in mind that
some day you will become a gentleman yourself, and I trust a learned
one. I have arranged with the good prior here that you shall go every
day to the monastery to be instructed for three hours by one of his
monks. In future you will take your meals with me, and I will see that
your attire is in order, and that you go decent as befits your station.
What hours is he to attend, Prior?"

"From nine till twelve."

"You hear--from nine to twelve. In the afternoon I will procure a
teacher for you in arms. In these days every gentleman must learn the
use of his weapons. I, myself, although most peacefully inclined, have
more than once been forced, when abroad, to use them. A man who cannot
do so becomes the butt of fools, and loses his self-respect."

"I shall like that, sir," Edgar said, eagerly. "I can play at
quarter-staff now with any boy of my size in the village."

"Well, there must be no more of that," his father said. "Up to the
present you have been but a child, but it is time now that you should
cease to consort with village boys and prepare for another station in
life. They may be good boys--I know naught about them--but they are not
fit associates for you. I am not blaming you," he said more kindly as
he saw the boy's face fall. "It was natural that you, having no
associates of your own rank, should make friends where you could find
them. I trust that it has done you no harm. Well, Prior, this day week
the boy shall come to you. I must get befitting clothes for him, or the
other pupils will think that he is the son of a hedge tinker."

An hour later Andrew was despatched to Dartford in a cart hired in the
village, with orders to bring back with him a tailor, also to inquire
as to who was considered the best teacher of arms in the town, and to
engage him to come up for an hour every afternoon to instruct Edgar.

Seven years had passed since that time, and the rough and unkempt boy
had grown into a tall young fellow, who had done fair credit to his
teacher at the convent, and had profited to the full by the teaching of
the old soldier who had been his instructor in arms. His father had,
unconsciously, been also a good teacher to him. He had, with a great
effort, broken through the habits to which he had been so long wedded.
A young waiting-maid now assisted the housekeeper. The meals were no
longer hastily snatched and often eaten standing, but were decently
served in order, and occupied a considerable time, the greater portion
of which was spent in pleasant chat either upon the scenes which Mr.
Ormskirk had witnessed abroad, or in talk on the subjects the boy was
studying; sometimes also upon Mr. Ormskirk's researches and the hopes
he entertained from them; and as Edgar grew older, upon the ordinary
topics of the day, the grievances caused by the heavy taxation, the
troubles of the time and the course of events that had led to them;
for, although very ignorant of contemporary matters, Mr. Ormskirk was
well acquainted with the history of the country up to the time when he
had first gone abroad.

The recluse was surprised at the interest he himself came to feel in
these conversations. While endeavouring to open his son's mind he
