reason, and bear straight down upon his vessel.

There was, indeed, no reason for the strange movements of the smack in
question, except that there was at the helm a man who had rendered his
reason incapable of action.  With dull, fishy eyes, that stared
idiotically at nothing, his hand on the tiller, and his mind asleep,
Georgie Fox stood on the deck of the _Cormorant_ steering.

"Starboard a bit, Jay," said Lockley, with an anxious look, "she'll
barely clear us."

As he spoke, Fox moved his helm slightly.  It changed the course of his
vessel only a little, but that little sufficed to send the cutwater of
the _Cormorant_ straight into the port bows of the _Lively Poll_ with a
tremendous crash, for a smart breeze was blowing at the time.  The
bulwarks were cut down to the deck, and, as the _Cormorant_ recoiled and
again surged ahead, the bowsprit was carried away, and part of the
topmast brought down.

Deep and fierce was the growl that burst from Lockley's lips at this
disaster, but that did not mend matters.  The result was that the
_Lively Poll_ had to quit the fleet a week before her time of eight
weeks afloat was up, and run to Yarmouth for repairs.  Next day,
however, it fell calm, and several days elapsed before she finally made
her port.

Meanwhile Fred Martin reached London, with his feverish complaint
greatly aggravated, and his undressed wound much worse.  In London he
was detained some hours by his employers, and then sent on to Yarmouth,
which he reached late in the afternoon, and ultimately in a state of
great suffering and exhaustion, made his way to Gorleston, where his
mother lived.

With his mind in a species of wild whirl, and acute pains darting
through his wounded hand and arm, he wended his way slowly along the
road that led to his mother's house.  Perhaps we should style it her
attic, for she could claim only part of the house in which she dwelt.
From a quaint gable window of this abode she had a view of the sea over
the houses in front.

Part of Fred's route lay along the banks of the Yare, not far from its
mouth.  At a spot where there were many old anchors and cables, old and
new trawl-beams, and sundry other seafaring rusty and tarry objects, the
young fisherman met a pretty young girl, who stopped suddenly, and, with
her large blue eyes expressing unspeakable surprise, exclaimed, "Fred!"

The youth sprang forward, seized the girl with his uninjured hand, and
exclaimed, "Isa!" as he drew her towards him.

"Fred--not here.  Behave!" said Isa, holding up a warning finger.

Fred consented to behave--with a promise, however, that he would make up
for it at a more fitting time and place.

"But what is the matter!" asked Isa, with an anxious look, laying her
pretty little hands on the youth's arm.

Yes, you need not smile, reader; it is not a perquisite of ladies to
have pretty little hands.  Isa's hands were brown, no doubt, like her
cheeks, owing to exposure and sunshine, and they were somewhat roughened
by honest toil; but they were small and well-shaped, with taper fingers,
and their touch was very tender as she clasped them on her lover's arm.

"Nothing serious," replied the youth lightly; "only an accident with a
fish-bone, but it has got to be pretty bad for want of attention; an'
besides I'm out o' sorts somehow.  No physic, you see, or doctors in our
fleet, like the lucky dogs of the Short-Blue.  I've been knocked up more
or less for some weeks past, so they sent me home to be looked after.
But I won't need either physic or doctor now."

"No? why not?" asked the girl, with a simple look.

"Cause the sight o' your sweet face does away with the need of either."

"Don't talk nonsense, Fred."

"If that's nonsense," returned the fisherman, "you'll never hear me talk
sense again as long as I live.  But how about mother, Isa?  Is she
well!"

"Quite well.  I have just left her puzzling herself over a letter from
abroad that's so ill-written that it would bother a schoolmaster to read
it.  I tried to read it, but couldn't.  You're a good scholar, Fred, so
you have come just in time to help her.  But won't she be surprised to
see you!"

Thus conversing, and walking rather slowly, the pair made their way to
the attic of Mrs Martin, where the unexpected sight of her son threw
the patient woman into a great flutter of surprise and pleasure.  We use
the word "patient" advisedly, for Mrs Martin was one of those
wholesome-minded creatures who, having to battle vigorously for the bare
necessaries of life in the face of many adverse circumstances, carry on
the war with a degree of hearty, sweet-tempered resolution which might
put to shame many who are better off in every way.  Mrs Martin was a
widow and a washerwoman, and had a ne'er-do-well brother, a fisherman,
who frequently "sponged" upon her.  She also had a mother to support and
attend upon, as well as a "bad leg" to endure.  True, the attendance on
her mother was to the good woman a source of great joy.  It constituted
one of the few sunbeams of her existence, but it was not on that account
the less costly, for the old woman could do nothing whatever to increase
the income of the widow's household--she could not, indeed, move a step
without assistance.  Her sole occupation was to sit in the attic window
and gaze over the sands upon the sea, smiling hopefully, yet with a
touch of sadness in the smile; mouthing her toothless gums, and
muttering now and then as if to herself, "He'll come soon now."  Her
usual attitude was that of one who listens expectantly.

Thirty years before Granny Martin had stood at the same attic window, an
elderly woman even then, looking out upon the raging sea, and muttering
anxiously the same words, "He'll come soon now."  But her husband never
came.  He was lost at sea.  As years flew by, and time as well as grief
weakened her mind, the old woman seemed to forget the flight of time,
and spent the greater part of every day in the attic window, evidently
on the look-out for some one who was to come "soon."  When at last she
was unable to walk alone, and had to be half carried to her seat in the
attic window by her strong and loving daughter, the sadness seemed to
pass away, and her cheery spirit revived under the impression,
apparently, that the coming could not be delayed much longer.  To every
one Granny was condescendingly kind, especially to her grandchild Fred,
of whom she was very fond.

Only at intervals was the old woman's cheerfulness disturbed, and that
was during the occasional visits of her ne'er-do-well son Dick, for he
was generally drunk or "half-seas-over" when he came.  Granny never
mentioned his name when he was absent, and for a long time Mrs Martin
supposed that she tried to forget him, but her opinion changed on this
point one night when she overheard her mother praying with intense
earnestness and in affectionate terms that her dear Dick might yet be
saved.  Still, however much or frequently Granny's thoughts might at any
time be distracted from their main channel, they invariably returned
thereto with the cheerful assurance that "_he_ would soon come now."

"You're ill, my boy," said Mrs Martin, after the first greetings were
over.

"Right you are, mother," said the worn-out man, sitting down with a
weary sigh.  "I've done my best to fight it down, but it won't do."

"You must have the doctor, Fred."

"I've had the doctor already, mother.  I parted with Isa Wentworth at
the bottom o' the stair, an' she will do me more good than dozens o'
doctors or gallons o' physic."

But Fred was wrong.

Not long afterwards the _Lively Poll_ arrived in port, and Stephen
Lockley hastened to announce his arrival to his wife.

Now it was the experience of Martha Lockley that if, on his regular
return to land for his eight days' holiday, after his eight weeks' spell
afloat, her handsome and genial husband went straight home, she was wont
to have a happy meeting; but if by any chance Stephen first paid a visit
to the Blue Boar public-house, she was pretty sure to have a miserable
meeting, and a more or less wretched time of it thereafter.  A
conversation that Stephen had recently had with Fred Martin having made
an impression on him--deeper than he chose to admit even to himself--he
had made up his mind to go straight home this time.

"I'll be down by daybreak to see about them repairs," he said to Peter
Jay, as they left the _Lively Poll_ together, "and I'll go round by your
old friend, Widow Mooney's, and tell her to expect you some time
to-night."

Now Peter Jay was a single man, and lodged with Widow Mooney when on
shore.  It was not, however, pure consideration for his mate or the
widow that influenced Lockley, but his love for the widow's little
invalid child, Eve, for whose benefit that North Sea skipper had, in the
kindness of his heart, made a special collection of deep-sea shells,
with some shreds of bright bunting.

Little Eve Mooney, thin, wasted, and sad, sat propped up with dirty
pillows, in a dirty bed, in a dirtier room, close to a broken and
paper-patched window that opened upon a coal-yard with a prospect
rubbish-heap beyond.

"Oh, I'm _so_ glad it's you!" cried Eve, with flushed cheeks and
sparkling eyes, as the fisherman entered.

"Yes, Eve, my pretty.  I'm back sooner than I expected--and look what
I've brought you.  I haven't forgot you."

Joy beamed in the lustrous eyes and on every feature of the thin face as
the sick child surveyed the treasures of the deep that Lockley spread on
her ragged counterpane.

"How good--how kind of you, Stephen!" exclaimed Eve.

"Kind!" repeated the skipper; "nothing of the sort, Eve.  To please you
pleases me, so it's only selfishness.  But where's your mother?"

"Drunk," said the child simply, and without the most remote intention of
injuring her parent's character.  Indeed, that was past injury.  "She's
in there."

The child pointed to a closet, in which Stephen found on the floor a
heap of unwomanly rags.  He was unable to arouse the poor creature, who
slumbered heavily beneath them.  Eve said she had been there for many
hours.

"She forgot to give me my breakfast before she went in, and I'm too weak
to rise and get it for myself," whimpered Eve, "and I'm _so_ hungry!
And I got such a fright, too, for a man came in this morning about
daylight and broke open the chest where mother keeps her money and took
something away.  I suppose he thought I was asleep, for I was too
frightened to move, but I could see him all the time.  Please will you
hand me the loaf before you go?  It's in that cupboard."

We need scarcely add that Lockley did all that the sick child asked him
to do--and more.  Then, after watching her till the meal was finished,
he rose.

"I'll go now, my pretty," he said, "and don't you be afeared.  I'll soon
send some one to look after you.  Good-bye."

Stephen Lockley was unusually thoughtful as he left Widow Mooney's hut
that day, and he took particular care to give the Blue Boar a wide berth
on his way home.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE SKIPPER ASHORE.

Right glad was Mrs Lockley to find that her husband had passed the Blue
Boar without going in on his way home, and although she did not say so,
she could not feel sorry for the accident to the _Lively Poll_, which
had sent him ashore a week before his proper time.

Martha Lockley was a pretty young woman, and the proud mother of a
magnificent baby, which was bordering on that age when a child begins to
have some sort of regard for its own father, and to claim much of his
attention.

"Matty," said Stephen to his wife, as he jolted his daughter into a
state of wild delight on his knee, "Tottie is becoming very like you.
She's got the same pretty little turned-up nose, an' the same huge grey
eyes with the wicked twinkle in 'em about the corners."

"Don't talk nonsense, Stephen, but tell me about this robbery."

"I know nothin' about it more than I've told ye, Matty.  Eve didn't know
the man, and her description of him is confused--she was frightened,
poor thing!  But I promised to send some one to look after her at once,
for her drunken mother isn't fit to take care of herself, let alone the
sick child.  Who can I send, think 'ee?"

Mrs Lockley pursed her little mouth, knitted her brows, and gazed
thoughtfully at the baby, who, taking the look as personal, made a face
at her.  Finally she suggested Isabella Wentworth.

"And where is she to be found?" asked the skipper.

"At the Martins', no doubt," replied Mrs Lockley, with a meaning look.
"She's been there pretty much ever since poor Fred Martin came home,
looking after old granny, for Mrs Martin's time is taken up wi' nursing
her son.  They say he's pretty bad."

"Then I'll go an' see about it at once," said Stephen, rising, and
setting Tottie down.

He found Isa quite willing to go to Eve, though Mrs Mooney had stormed
at her and shut the door in her face on the occasion of her last visit.

"But you mustn't try to see Fred," she added.  "The doctor says he must
be kep' quiet and see no one."

"All right," returned the skipper; "I'll wait till he's out o'
quarantine.  Good day; I'll go and tell Eve that you're coming."

On his way to Mrs Mooney's hut Stephen Lockley had again to pass the
Blue Boar.  This time he did not give it "a wide berth."  There were two
roads to the hut, and the shorter was that which passed the
public-house.  Trusting to the strength of his own resolution, he chose
that road.  When close to the blue monster, whose creaking sign drew so
many to the verge of destruction, and plunged so many over into the
gulf, he was met by Skipper Ned Bryce, a sociable, reckless sort of man,
of whom he was rather fond.  Bryce was skipper of the _Fairy_, an iron
smack, which was known in the fleet as the Ironclad.

"Hullo!  Stephen.  _You_ here?"

"Ay, a week before my time, Ned.  That lubber Groggy Fox ran into me,
cut down my bulwarks, and carried away my bowsprit an' some o' my
top-hamper."

"Come along--have a glass, an' let's hear all about it," said Bryce,
seizing his friend's arm; but Lockley held back.

"No, Ned," he said; "I'm on another tack just now."

"What! not hoisted the blue ribbon, eh!"

"No," returned Lockley, with a laugh.  "I've no need to do that."

"You haven't lost faith in your own power o' self-denial surely?"

"No, nor that either, but--but--"

"Come now, none o' your `buts.'  Come along; my mate Dick Martin is in
here, an' he's the best o' company."

"Dick Martin in there!" repeated Lockley, on whom a sudden thought
flashed.  "Is he one o' your hands?"

"In course he is.  Left the Grimsby fleet a-purpose to j'ine me.  Rather
surly he is at times, no doubt, but a good fellow at bottom, and great
company.  You should hear him sing.  Come."

"Oh, I know him well enough by hearsay, but never met him yet."

Whether it was the urgency of his friend, or a desire to meet with Dick
Martin, that shook our skipper's wavering resolution we cannot tell, but
he went into the Blue Boar, and took a glass for good-fellowship.  Being
a man of strong passions and excitable nerves, this glass produced in
him a desire for a second, and that for a third, until he forgot his
intended visit to Eve, his promises to his wife, and his stern resolves
not to submit any longer to the tyranny of drink.  Still, the memory of
Mrs Mooney's conduct, and of the advice of his friend Fred Martin, had
the effect of restraining him to some extent, so that he was only what
his comrades would have called a little screwed when they had become
rather drunk.

There are many stages of drunkenness.  One of them is the confidential
stage.  When Dick Martin had reached this stage, he turned with a
superhumanly solemn countenance to Bryce and winked.

"If--if you th-think," said Bryce thickly, "th-that winkin' suits you,
you're mistaken."

"Look 'ere," said Dick, drawing a letter from his pocket with a maudlin
leer, and holding it up before his comrade, who frowned at it, and then
shook his head--as well he might, for, besides being very illegibly
written, the letter was presented to him upside down.

After holding it before him in silence long enough to impress him with
the importance of the document, Dick Martin explained that it was a
letter which he had stolen from his sister's house, because it contained
"something to his advantage."

"See here," he said, holding the letter close to his own eyes, still
upside down, and evidently reading from memory: "`If Mr Frederick
Martin will c-call at this office any day next week between 10 an' 12,
h-he will 'ear suthin' to his ad-advantage.  Bounce and Brag,
s'licitors.'  There!"

"But _you_ ain't Fred Martin," said Bryce, with a look of supreme
contempt, for he had arrived at the quarrelsome stage of drunkenness.

"Right you are," said Martin; "but I'm his uncle.  Same name c-'cause
his mother m-married her c-cousin; and there ain't much difference
'tween Dick and Fred--four letters, both of 'em--so if I goes wi' the
letter, an' says, `I'm Fred Martin,' w'y, they'll hand over the blunt,
or the jewels, or wotiver it is, to me--d'ee see?"

"No, I don't see," returned Bryce so irritatingly that his comrade left
the confidential stage astern, and requested to know, with an affable
air, when Bryce lost his eyesight.

"When I first saw _you_, and thought you worth your salt," shouted
Bryce, as he brought his fist heavily down on the table.

Both men were passionate.  They sprang up, grappled each other by the
throat, and fell on the floor.  In doing so they let the letter fall.
It fluttered to the ground, and Lockley, quietly picking it up, put it
in his pocket.

"You'd better look after them," said Lockley to the landlord, as he paid
his reckoning, and went out.

In a few minutes he stood in Widow Mooney's hut, and found Isa Wentworth
already there.

"I'm glad you sent me here," said the girl, "for Mrs Mooney has gone
out--"

She stopped and looked earnestly in Lockley's face.  "You've been to the
Blue Boar," she said in a serious tone.

"Yes, lass, I have," admitted the skipper, but without a touch of
resentment.  "I did not mean to go, but it's as well that I did, for
I've rescued a letter from Dick Martin which seems to be of some
importance, an' he says he stole it from his sister's house."

He handed the letter to the girl, who at once recognised it as the
epistle over which she and Mrs Martin had puzzled so much, and which
had finally been deciphered for them by Dick Martin.

"He must have made up his mind to pretend that he is Fred," said Isa,
"and so get anything that was intended for him."

"You're a sharp girl, Isa; you've hit the nail fair on the head, for I
heard him in his drunken swagger boast of his intention to do that very
thing.  Now, will you take in hand, lass, to give the letter back to
Mrs Martin, and explain how you came by it?"

Of course Isa agreed to do so, and Lockley, turning to Eve, said he
would tell her a story before going home.

The handsome young skipper was in the habit of entertaining the sick
child with marvellous tales of the sea during his frequent visits, for
he was exceedingly fond of her, and never failed to call during his
periodical returns to land.  His love was well bestowed, for poor Eve,
besides being of an affectionate nature, was an extremely imaginative
child, and delighted in everything marvellous or romantic.  On this
occasion, however, he was interrupted at the commencement of his tale by
the entrance of his own ship's cook, the boy Bob Lumsden, _alias_ Lumpy.

"Hullo, Lumpy, what brings you here?" asked the skipper.

But the boy made no answer.  He was evidently taken aback at the
unexpected sight of the sick child, and the skipper had to repeat his
question in a sterner tone.  Even then Lumpy did not look at his
commander, but, addressing the child, said--

"Beg parding, miss; I wouldn't have come in if I'd knowed you was in
bed, but--"
