The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forgotten Planet, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Forgotten Planet

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: December 16, 2012 [EBook #41637]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORGOTTEN PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          _The FORGOTTEN PLANET_

                          By MURRAY LEINSTER

    [Transcriber's Note: Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the copyright had been renewed.]


    ACE BOOKS
    A Division of A. A. Wyn, Inc.
    23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y.

    THE FORGOTTEN PLANET
    Copyright, 1954, by Murray Leinster
    An Ace Book, by arrangement with Gnome Press, Inc.

    _The Forgotten Planet_ is based upon _Mad Planet_ and _Red Dust_
    (copyrighted Amazing Stories 1926, 1927), and _Nightmare Planet_
    (copyrighted 1953 by Gernsback Publications Inc.).


    To Joan Patricia Jenkins




NATURE'S MISLEAD MADHOUSE!


Beneath dense gray clouds through which no sun shone lay a forgotten
planet. It was a nightmare world of grotesque and terrifying
animal-plant life. Gigantic beetles, spiders, bugs and ants filled the
putrid, musty earth--ready to kill and devour anything in sight.

There were men amidst this horror--men who cringed and ran from the
ravening monsters and huddled in the mushroom forests at night.

Burl was one of these creatures. But one day inspiration hit Burl. He
would find a weapon--he would fight back.

And with this idea the first step was taken in man's most desperate
flight for freedom in this most horrible of all worlds. But it was only
a first step.





About the characters in this book:


This is something of an oddity among fiction stories, because some of
its characters may be met in person if you wish. Down at the nearest
weed-patch or thicket you are quite likely to see a large and unusually
perfect spider-web with a zig-zag silk ribbon woven into its center. Its
engineer is the yellow-banded garden spider (_Epeira Fasciata_) whose
abdomen may be as big as your thumb. I do not name it to impress you,
but to suggest a sort of science-fiction experience.

Take a bit of straw and disturb the web. Don't break the cables. Simply
tap them a bit. The spider will know by the feel of things that you
aren't prey and that it can't eat you. So it will set out frightening
you away. It will run nimbly to the center of the web and shake itself
violently. The whole web will vibrate, so that presently the spider may
be swinging through an arc inches in length, and blurred by the speed of
its swing. You are supposed to be scared. When you are alarmed enough,
the spider will stop.

That spider, very much magnified, is in this book with crickets and
grasshoppers and divers beetles you may not know personally. But this is
not an insect book, but science-fiction. If the habits of the creatures
in it are authentic, it is because they are much more dramatic and
interesting than things one can invent.

Murray Leinster




_PROLOGUE_


The Survey-Ship _Tethys_ made the first landing on the planet, which had
no name. It was an admirable planet in many ways. It had an ample
atmosphere and many seas, which the nearby sun warmed so lavishly that a
perpetual cloud-bank hid them and most of the solid ground from view. It
had mountains and continents and islands and high plateaus. It had day
and night and wind and rain, and its mean temperature was within the
range to which human beings could readily accommodate. It was rather on
the tropic side, but not unpleasant.

But there was no life on it.

No animals roamed its continents. No vegetation grew from its rocks. Not
even bacteria struggled with its stones to turn them into soil. So there
was no soil. Rock and stones and gravel and even sand--yes. But no soil
in which any vegetation could grow. No living thing, however small, swam
in its oceans, so there was not even mud on its ocean-bottoms. It was
one of that disappointing vast majority of worlds which turned up when
the Galaxy was first explored. People couldn't live on it because
nothing had lived there before.

Its water was fresh and its oceans were harmless. Its air was germ-free
and breathable. But it was of no use whatever for men. The only possible
purpose it could serve would have been as a biological laboratory for
experiments involving things growing in a germ-free environment. But
there were too many planets like that already. When men first traveled
to the stars they made the journey because it was starkly necessary to
find new worlds for men to live on. Earth was over-crowded--terribly so.
So men looked for new worlds to move to. They found plenty of new
worlds, but presently they were searching desperately for new worlds
where life had preceded them. It didn't matter whether the life was meek
and harmless, or ferocious and deadly. If life of any sort were present,
human beings could move in. But highly organized beings like men could
not live where there was no other life.

So the Survey-Ship _Tethys_ made sure that the world had no life upon
it. Then it made routine measurements of the gravitational constant and
the magnetic field and the temperature gradient; it took samples of the
air and water. But that was all. The rocks were familiar enough. No
novelties there! But the planet was simply useless. The survey-ship put
its findings on a punched card, six inches by eight, and went hastily on
in search of something better. The ship did not even open one of its
ports while on the planet. There were no consequences of the _Tethys'_
visit except that card. None whatever.

No other ship came near the planet for eight hundred years.

Nearly a millenium later, however, the Seed-Ship _Orana_ arrived. By
that time humanity had spread very widely and very far. There were
colonies not less than a quarter of the way to the Galaxy's rim, and
Earth was no longer over-crowded. There was still emigration, but it was
now a trickle instead of the swarming flood of centuries before. Some of
the first-colonized worlds had emigrants, now. Mankind did not want to
crowd itself together again! Men now considered that there was no excuse
for such monstrous slums as overcrowding produced.

Now, too, the star-ships were faster. A hundred light-years was a short
journey. A thousand was not impractical. Explorers had gone many times
farther, and reported worlds still waiting for mankind on beyond. But
still the great majority of discovered planets did not contain life.
Whole solar systems floated in space with no single living cell on any
of their members.

So the Seed-Ships came into being. Theirs was not a glamorous service.
They merely methodically contaminated the sterile worlds with life. The
Seed-Ship _Orana_ landed on this planet--which still had no name. It
carefully infected it. It circled endlessly above the clouds, dribbling
out a fine dust,--the spores of every conceivable microorganism which
could break down rock to powder, and turn that dust to soil. It was also
a seeding of moulds and fungi and lichens, and everything which could
turn powdery primitive soil into stuff on which higher forms of life
could grow. The _Orana_ polluted the seas with plankton. Then it, too,
went away.

More centuries passed. Human ships again improved. A thousand
light-years became a short journey. Explorers reached the Galaxy's very
edge, and looked estimatingly across the emptiness toward other island
universes. There were colonies in the Milky Way. There were
freight-lines between star-clusters, and the commercial center of human
affairs shifted some hundreds of parsecs toward the Rim. There were many
worlds where the schools painstakingly taught the children what Earth
was, and where, and that all other worlds had been populated from it.
And the schools repeated, too, the one lesson that humankind seemed
genuinely to have learned. That the secret of peace is freedom, and the
secret of freedom is to be able to move away from people with whom you
do not agree. There were no crowded worlds any more. But human beings
love children, and they have them. And children grow up and need room.
So more worlds had to be looked out for. They weren't urgently needed
yet, but they would be.

Therefore, nearly a thousand years after the _Orana_, the Ecology-Ship
_Ludred_ swam to the planet from space and landed on it. It was a
gigantic ship of highly improbable purpose. First of all, it checked on
the consequences of the _Orana's_ visit.

They were highly satisfactory, from a technical point of view. Now there
was soil which swarmed with minute living things. There were fungi
which throve monstrously. The seas stank of minuscule life-forms. There
were even some novelties, developed by the strictly local conditions.
There were, for example, paramoecia as big as grapes, and yeasts had
increased in size until they bore flowers visible to the naked eye. The
life on the planet was not aboriginal, though. All of it was descended
and adapted and modified from the microorganisms planted by the
seed-ship whose hulk was long since rust, and whose crew were merely
names in genealogies--if that.

The _Ludred_ stayed on the planet a considerably longer time than either
of the ships that had visited it before. It dropped the seeds of plants.
It broadcast innumerable varieties of things which should take root and
grow. In some places it deliberately seeded the stinking soil. It put
marine plants in the oceans. It put alpine plants on the high ground.
And when all its stable varieties were set out it added plants which
were genetically unstable. For generations to come they would throw
sports, some of which should be especially suited to this planetary
environment.

Before it left, the _Ludred_ dumped finny fish into the seas. At first
they would live on the plankton which made the oceans almost broth.
There were many varieties of fish. Some would multiply swiftly while
small; others would grow and feed on the smaller varieties. And as a
last activity, the _Ludred_ set up refrigeration-units loaded with
insect-eggs. Some would release their contents as soon as plants had
grown enough to furnish them with food. Others would allow their
contents to hatch only after certain other varieties had multiplied--to
be their food-supply.

When the Ecology-Ship left, it had done a very painstaking job. It had
treated the planet to a sort of Russell's Mixture of life-forms. The
real Russell's Mixture is that blend of the simple elements in the
proportions found in suns. This was a blend of life-forms in which some
should survive by consuming the now-habituated flora, others by preying
on the former. The planet was stocked, in effect, with everything that
it could be hoped would live there.

But only certain things could have that hope. Nothing which needed
parental care had any chance of survival. The creatures seeded at this
time had to be those which could care for themselves from the instant
they burst their eggs. So there were no birds or mammals. Trees and
plants of many kinds, fish and crustaceans and tadpoles, and all kinds
of insects could be planted. But nothing else.

The _Ludred_ swam away through emptiness.

There should have been another planting centuries later. There should
have been a ship from the Zoological Branch of the Ecological Service.
It should have landed birds and beasts and reptiles. It should have
added pelagic mammals to the seas. There should have been herbivorous
animals to live on the grasses and plants which would have thriven, and
carnivorous animals to live on them in turn. There should have been
careful stocking of the planet with animal life, and repeated visits at
intervals of a century or so to make sure that a true ecological balance
had been established. And then when the balance was fixed men would come
and destroy it for their own benefit.

But there was an accident.

Ships had improved again. Even small private space-craft now journeyed
tens of light-years on holiday journeys. Personal cruisers traveled
hundreds. Liners ran matter-of-factly on ship-lines tens of thousands of
light-years long. An exploring-ship was on its way to a second island
universe. (It did not come back.) The inhabited planets were all members
of a tenuous organization which limited itself to affairs of space,
without attempting to interfere in surface matters. That tenuous
organization moved the Ecological Preparation Service files to Algol IV
as a matter of convenience. In the moving, a card-file was upset. The
cards it contained were picked up and replaced, but one was missed. It
was not picked up. It was left behind.

So the planet which had no name was forgotten. No other ship came to
prepare it for ultimate human occupancy. It circled its sun, unheeded
and unthought-of. Cloud-banks covered it from pole to pole. There were
hazy markings in some places, where high plateaus penetrated its clouds.
But that was all. From space the planet was essentially featureless.
Seen from afar it was merely a round white ball--white from its
cloud-banks--and nothing else.

But on its surface, on its lowlands, it was pure nightmare. But this
fact did not matter for a very long time.

Ultimately, it mattered a great deal--to the crew of the space-liner
_Icarus_. The _Icarus_ was a splendid ship of its time. It bore
passengers headed for one of the Galaxy's spiral arms, and it cut across
the normal lanes and headed through charted but unvisited parts of the
Galaxy toward its destination. And it had one of the very, very, very
few accidents known to happen to space-craft licensed for travel off the
normal space-lanes. It suffered shipwreck in space, and its passengers
and crew were forced to take to the life-craft.

The lifeboats' range was limited. They landed on the planet that the
_Tethys_ had first examined, that the _Orana_ and the _Ludred_ had
seeded, and of which there was no longer any record in the card-files of
the Ecological Service. Their fuel was exhausted. They could not leave.
They could not signal for help. They had to stay there. And the planet
was a place of nightmares.

After a time the few people--some few thousands--who knew that there was
a space-liner named _Icarus_, gave it up for lost. They forgot about it.
Everybody forgot. Even the passengers and crew of the ship forgot it.
Not immediately, of course. For the first few generations their
descendants cherished hopes of rescue. But the planet which had no
name--the forgotten planet--did not encourage the cherishing of hope.

After forty-odd generations, nobody remembered the _Icarus_ anywhere.
The wreckage of the lifeboats was long since hidden under the seething,
furiously striving fungi of the soil. The human beings had forgotten not
only their ancestors' ship, but very nearly everything their ancestors
had brought to this world: the use of metals, the existence of fire, and
even the fact that there was such a thing as sunshine. They lived in the
