increased the evil effects of the vapour. After four days the plant
itself died. Another plant was exposed in the same vessel for 15 m. to
forty minims. One young, small, and tender leaf had all its tentacles
inflected, and seemed much injured. Bits of raw meat were placed on
several glands on two other and older leaves.  These glands became dry
after 6 hrs.; and seemed injured; the tentacles never moved, excepting
one which was ultimately a little inflected. The glands of the other
tentacles continued to secrete, and appeared uninjured, but the whole
plant after three days became very sickly.  [page 220]

In the two foregoing experiments the doses were evidently too large and
poisonous. With weaker doses, the anaesthetic effect was variable, as
in the case of chloroform. A plant was exposed for 5 m. to ten drops
under a 12-oz. vessel, and bits of meat were then placed on many
glands. None of the tentacles thus treated began to move in a decided
manner until 40 m. had elapsed; but then some of them moved very
quickly, so that two reached the centre after an additional interval of
only 10 m. In 2 hrs. 12 m. from the time when the meat was given, all
the tentacles reached the centre. Another plant, with two leaves, was
exposed in the same vessel for 5 m. to a rather larger dose of ether,
and bits of meat were placed on several glands. In this case one
tentacle on each leaf began to bend in 5 m.; and after 12 m. two
tentacles on one leaf, and one on the second leaf, reached the centre.
In 30 m. after the meat had been given, all the tentacles, both those
with and without meat, were closely inflected; so that the ether
apparently had stimulated these leaves, causing all the tentacles to
bend.

Vapour of Nitric Ether.--This vapour seems more injurious than that of
sulphuric ether. A plant was exposed for 5 m. in a 12-oz. vessel to
eight drops in a watch-glass, and I distinctly saw a few tentacles
curling inwards before the glass was removed. Immediately afterwards
bits of meat were placed on three glands, but no movement ensued in the
course of 18 m. The same plant was placed again under the same vessel
for 16 m. with ten drops of the ether.  None of the tentacles moved,
and next morning those with the meat were still in the same position.
After 48 hrs. one leaf seemed healthy, but the others were much
injured.

Another plant, having two good leaves, was exposed for 6 m. under a
19-oz. vessel to the vapour from ten minims of the ether, and bits of
meat were then placed on the glands of many tentacles on both leaves.
After 36 m. several of them on one leaf became inflected, and after 1
hr. almost all the tentacles, those with and without meat, nearly
reached the centre.  On the other leaf the glands began to dry in 1 hr.
40 m., and after several hours not a single tentacle was inflected; but
by the next morning, after 21 hrs., many were inflected, though they
seemed much injured. In this and the previous experiment, it is
doubtful, owing to the injury which the leaves had suffered, whether
any anaesthetic effect had been produced.

A third plant, having two good leaves, was exposed for only 4 m. in the
19-oz. vessel to the vapour from six drops. Bits of meat were then
placed on the glands of seven tentacles on the [page 221] same leaf. A
single tentacle moved after 1 hr. 23 m.; after 2 hrs. 3 m. several were
inflected; and after 3 hrs. 3 m. all the seven tentacles with meat were
well inflected. From the slowness of these movements it is clear that
this leaf had been rendered insensible for a time to the action of the
meat. A second leaf was rather differently affected; bits of meat were
placed on the glands of five tentacles, three of which were slightly
inflected in 28 m.; after 1 hr. 21 m.  one reached the centre, but the
other two were still only slightly inflected; after 3 hrs. they were
much more inflected; but even after 5 hrs. 16 m. all five had not
reached the centre.  Although some of the tentacles began to move
moderately soon, they afterwards moved with extreme slowness. By next
morning, after 20 hrs., most of the tentacles on both leaves were
closely inflected, but not quite regularly. After 48 hrs. neither leaf
appeared injured, though the tentacles were still inflected; after 72
hrs. one was almost dead, whilst the other was re-expanding and
recovering.

Carbonic Acid.--A plant was placed under a 122-oz. bell-glass filled
with this gas and standing over water; but I did not make sufficient
allowance for the absorption of the gas by the water, so that towards
the latter part of the experiment some air was drawn in. After an
exposure of 2 hrs. the plant was removed, and bits of raw meat placed
on the glands of three leaves. One of these leaves hung a little down,
and was at first partly and soon afterwards completely covered by the
water, which rose within the vessel as the gas was absorbed. On this
latter leaf the tentacles, to which meat had been given, became well
inflected in 2 m. 30 s., that is, at about the normal rate; so that
until I remembered that the leaf had been protected from the gas, and
might perhaps have absorbed oxygen from the water which was continually
drawn inwards, I falsely concluded that the carbonic acid had produced
no effect.  On the other two leaves, the tentacles with meat behaved
very differently from those on the first leaf; two of them first began
to move slightly in 1 hr. 50 m., always reckoning from the time when
the meat was placed on the glands--were plainly inflected in 2 hrs. 22
m.--and in 3 hrs 22 m. reached the centre. Three other tentacles did
not begin to move until 2 hrs. 20 m.  had elapsed, but reached the
centre at about the same time with the others, viz. in 3 hrs. 22 m.

This experiment was repeated several times with nearly the same
results, excepting that the interval before the tentacles began to move
varied a little. I will give only one other case.  [page 222] A plant
was exposed in the same vessel to the gas for 45 m., and bits of meat
were then placed on four glands. But the tentacles did not move for 1
hr. 40 m.; after 2 hrs. 30 m. all four were well inflected, and after 3
hrs. reached the centre.

The following singular phenomenon sometimes, but by no means always,
occurred. A plant was immersed for 2 hrs., and bits of meat were then
placed on several glands. In the course of 13 m. all the submarginal
tentacles on one leaf became considerably inflected; those with the
meat not in the least degree more than the others. On a second leaf,
which was rather old, the tentacles with meat, as well as a few others,
were moderately inflected. On a third leaf all the tentacles were
closely inflected, though meat had not been placed on any of the
glands.  This movement, I presume, may be attributed to excitement from
the absorption of oxygen.  The last-mentioned leaf, to which no meat
had been given, was fully re-expanded after 24 hrs.; whereas the two
other leaves had all their tentacles closely inflected over the bits of
meat which by this time had been carried to their centres. Thus these
three leaves had perfectly recovered from the effects of the gas in the
course of 24 hrs.

On another occasion some fine plants, after having been left for 2 hrs.
in the gas, were immediately given bits of meat in the usual manner,
and on their exposure to the air most of their tentacles became in 12
m. curved into a vertical or sub-vertical position, but in an extremely
irregular manner; some only on one side of the leaf and some on the
other. They remained in this position for some time; the tentacles with
the bits of meat not having at first moved more quickly or farther
inwards than the others without meat. But after 2 hrs. 20 m.  the
former began to move, and steadily went on bending until they reached
the centre. Next morning, after 22 hrs., all the tentacles on these
leaves were closely clasped over the meat which had been carried to
their centres; whilst the vertical and sub-vertical tentacles on the
other leaves to which no meat had been given had fully re-expanded.
Judging, however, from the subsequent action of a weak solution of
carbonate of ammonia on one of these latter leaves, it had not
perfectly recovered its excitability and power of movement in 22 hrs.;
but another leaf, after an additional 24 hrs., had completely
recovered, judging from the manner in which it clasped a fly placed on
its disc.

I will give only one other experiment. After the exposure of a plant
for 2 hrs. to the gas, one of its leaves was immersed in a rather
strong solution of carbonate of ammonia, together with [page 223] a
fresh leaf from another plant. The latter had most of its tentacles
strongly inflected within 30 m.; whereas the leaf which had been
exposed to the carbonic acid remained for 24 hrs. in the solution
without undergoing any inflection, with the exception of two tentacles.
This leaf had been almost completely paralysed, and was not able to
recover its sensibility whilst still in the solution, which from having
been made with distilled water probably contained little oxygen.]

Concluding Remarks on the Effects of the foregoing Agents.--As the
glands, when excited, transmit some influence to the surrounding
tentacles, causing them to bend and their glands to pour forth an
increased amount of modified secretion, I was anxious to ascertain
whether the leaves included any element having the nature of
nerve-tissue, which, though not continuous, served as the channel of
transmission. This led me to try the several alkaloids and other
substances which are known to exert a powerful influence on the nervous
system of animals; I was at first encouraged in my trials by finding
that strychnine, digitaline, and nicotine, which all act on the nervous
system, were poisonous to Drosera, and caused a certain amount of
inflection. Hydrocyanic acid, again, which is so deadly a poison to
animals, caused rapid movement of the tentacles. But as several
innocuous acids, though much diluted, such as benzoic, acetic, &c., as
well as some essential oils, are extremely poisonous to Drosera, and
quickly cause strong inflection, it seems probable that strychnine,
nicotine, digitaline, and hydrocyanic acid, excite inflection by acting
on elements in no way analogous to the nerve-cells of animals. If
elements of this latter nature had been present in the leaves, it might
have been expected that morphia, hyoscyamus, atropine, veratrine,
colchicine, curare, and diluted alcohol would have produced some marked
effect; whereas [page 224] these substances are not poisonous and have
no power, or only a very slight one, of inducing inflection. It should,
however, be observed that curare, colchicine, and veratrine are
muscle-poisons--that is, act on nerves having some special relation
with the muscles, and, therefore, could not be expected to act on
Drosera. The poison of the cobra is most deadly to animals, by
paralysing their nerve-centres,* yet is not in the least so to Drosera,
though quickly causing strong inflection.

Notwithstanding the foregoing facts, which show how widely different is
the effect of certain substances on the health or life of animals and
of Drosera, yet there exists a certain degree of parallelism in the
action of certain other substances. We have seen that this holds good
in a striking manner with the salts of sodium and potassium. Again,
various metallic salts and acids, namely those of silver, mercury,
gold, tin, arsenic, chromium, copper, and platina, most or all of which
are highly poisonous to animals, are equally so to Drosera. But it is a
singular fact that the chloride of lead and two salts of barium were
not poisonous to this plant. It is an equally strange fact, that,
though acetic and propionic acids are highly poisonous, their ally,
formic acid, is not so; and that, whilst certain vegetable acids,
namely oxalic, benzoic, &c., are poisonous in a high degree, gallic,
tannic, tartaric, and malic (all diluted to an equal degree) are not
so. Malic acid induces inflection, whilst the three other just named
vegetable acids have no such power. But a pharmacopoeia would be
requisite to describe the diversified effects of various substances on
Drosera.

* Dr. Fayrer, 'The Thanatophidia of India,' 1872, p. 4.

  Seeing that acetic, hydrocyanic, and chromic acids, acetate of
  strychnine, and vapour of ether, are poisonous to Drosera, [[page
225]] it is remarkable that Dr. Ransom (' Philosoph. Transact.' 1867,
p. 480), who used much stronger solutions of these substances than I
did, states "that the rhythmic contractility of the yolk (of the ova of
the pike) is not materially influenced by any of the poisons used,
which did not act chemically, with the exception of chloroform and
carbonic acid." I find it stated by several writers that curare has no
influence on sarcode or protoplasm, and we have seen that, though
curare excites some degree of inflection, it causes very little
aggregation of the protoplasm.) [page 225]

Of the alkaloids and their salts which were tried, several had not the
least power of inducing inflection; others, which were certainly
absorbed, as shown by the changed colour of the glands, had but a very
moderate power of this kind; others, again, such as the acetate of
quinine and digitaline, caused strong inflection.

The several substances mentioned in this chapter affect the colour of
the glands very differently. These often become dark at first, and then
very pale or white, as was conspicuously the case with glands subjected
to the poison of the cobra and citrate of strychnine. In other cases
they are from the first rendered white, as with leaves placed in hot
water and several acids; and this, I presume, is the result of the
coagulation of the albumen.  On the same leaf some glands become white
and others dark-coloured, as occurred with leaves in a solution of the
sulphate of quinine, and in the vapour of alcohol. Prolonged immersion
in nicotine, curare, and even water, blackens the glands; and this, I
believe, is due to the aggregation of the protoplasm within their
cells. Yet curare caused very little aggregation in the cells of the
tentacles, whereas nicotine and sulphate of quinine induced strongly
marked aggregation down their bases. The aggregated masses in leaves
which had been immersed for 3 hrs. 15 m. in a saturated solution of
sulphate of quinine exhibited incessant [page 226] changes of form, but
after 24 hrs. were motionless; the leaf being flaccid and apparently
dead. On the other hand, with leaves subjected for 48 hrs. to a strong
solution of the poison of the cobra, the protoplasmic masses were
unusually active, whilst with the higher animals the vibratile cilia
and white corpuscles of the blood seem to be quickly paralysed by this
substance.

With the salts of alkalies and earths, the nature of the base, and not
that of the acid, determines their physiological action on Drosera, as
is likewise the case with animals; but this rule hardly applies to the
salts of quinine and strychnine, for the acetate of quinine causes much
more inflection than the sulphate, and both are poisonous, whereas the
nitrate of quinine is not poisonous, and induces inflection at a much
slower rate than the acetate. The action of the citrate of strychnine
is also somewhat different from that of the sulphate.

Leaves which have been immersed for 24 hrs. in water, and for only 20
m. in diluted alcohol, or in a weak solution of sugar, are afterwards
acted on very slowly, or not at all, by the phosphate of ammonia,
though they are quickly acted on by the carbonate. Immersion for 20 m.
in a solution of gum arabic has no such inhibitory power. The solutions
of certain salts and acids affect the leaves, with respect to the
subsequent action of the phosphate, exactly like water, whilst others
allow the phosphate afterwards to act quickly and energetically. In
this latter case, the interstices of the cell-walls may have been
blocked up by the molecules of the salts first given in solution, so
that water could not afterwards enter, though the molecules of the
phosphate could do so, and those of the carbonate still more easily.
[page 227]

The action of camphor dissolved in water is remarkable, for it not only
soon induces inflection, but apparently renders the glands extremely
sensitive to mechanical irritation; for if they are brushed with a soft
brush, after being immersed in the solution for a short time, the
tentacles begin to bend in about 2 m. It may, however, be that the
brushing, though not a sufficient stimulus by itself, tends to excite
movement merely by reinforcing the direct action of the camphor. The
vapour of camphor, on the other hand, serves as a narcotic.

Some essential oils, both in solution and in vapour, cause rapid
inflection, others have no such power; those which I tried were all
poisonous.

Diluted alcohol (one part to seven of water) is not poisonous, does not
induce inflection, nor increase the sensitiveness of the glands to
mechanical irritation. The vapour acts as a narcotic or anaesthetic,
and long exposure to it kills the leaves.

The vapours of chloroform, sulphuric and nitric ether, act in a
singularly variable manner on different leaves, and on the several
tentacles of the same leaf. This, I suppose, is owing to differences in
the age or constitution of the leaves, and to whether certain tentacles
have lately been in action. That these vapours are absorbed by the
glands is shown by their changed colour; but as other plants not
furnished with glands are affected by these vapours, it is probable
that they are likewise absorbed by the stomata of Drosera. They
sometimes excite extraordinarily rapid inflection, but this is not an
invariable result. If allowed to act for even a moderately long time,
they kill the leaves; whilst a small dose acting for only a short time
serves as a narcotic or anaesthetic. In this case the tentacles,
whether or not they have [page 228] become inflected, are not excited
to further movement by bits of meat placed on the glands, until some
considerable time has elapsed. It is generally believed that with
animals and plants these vapours act by arresting oxidation.

Exposure to carbonic acid for 2 hrs., and in one case for only 45 m.,
likewise rendered the glands insensible for a time to the powerful
stimulus of raw meat. The leaves, however, recovered their full powers,
and did not seem in the least injured, on being left in the air for 24
or 48 hrs. We have seen in the third chapter that the process of
aggregation in leaves subjected for two hours to this gas and then
immersed in a solution of the carbonate of ammonia is much retarded, so
that a considerable time elapses before the protoplasm in the lower
cells of the tentacles becomes aggregated. In some cases, soon after
the leaves were removed from the gas and brought into the air, the
tentacles moved spontaneously; this being due, I presume, to the
excitement from the access of oxygen. These inflected tentacles,
however, could not be excited for some time afterwards to any further
movement by their glands being stimulated. With other irritable plants
it is known* that the exclusion of oxygen prevents their moving, and
arrests the movements of the protoplasm within their cells, but this
arrest is a different phenomenon from the retardation of the process of
aggregation just alluded to. Whether this latter fact ought to be
attributed to the direct action of the carbonic acid, or to the
exclusion of oxygen, I know not.

* Sachs, 'Trait de Bot.' 1874, pp. 846, 1037.  [page 229]




                           CHAPTER X.

ON THE SENSITIVENESS OF THE LEAVES, AND ON THE LINES OF TRANSMISSION
                     OF THE MOTOR IMPULSE.

Glands and summits of the tentacles alone sensitive--Transmission of
the motor impulse down the pedicels of the tentacles, and across the
blade of the leaf--Aggregation of the protoplasm, a reflex
action--First discharge of the motor impulse sudden--Direction of the
movements of the tentacles--Motor impulse transmitted through the
cellular tissue-- Mechanism of the movements--Nature of the motor
impulse--Re-expansion of the tentacles.

WE have seen in the previous chapters that many widely different
stimulants, mechanical and chemical, excite the movement of the
tentacles, as well as of the blade of the leaf; and we must now
consider, firstly, what are the points which are irritable or
sensitive, and secondly how the motor impulse is transmitted from one
point to another. The glands are almost exclusively the seat of
irritability, yet this irritability must extend for a very short
distance below them; for when they were cut off with a sharp pair of
scissors without being themselves touched, the tentacles often became
inflected. These headless tentacles frequently re-expanded; and when
afterwards drops of the two most powerful known stimulants were placed
on the cut-off ends, no effect was produced. Nevertheless these
headless tentacles are capable of subsequent inflection if excited by
an impulse sent from the disc. I succeeded on several occasions in
crushing glands between fine pincers, but this did not excite any
movement; nor did raw meat and salts of ammonia, when placed on such
crushed glands.  [page 230] It is probable that they were killed so
instantly that they were not able to transmit any motor impulse; for in
six observed cases (in two of which however the gland was quite pinched
off) the protoplasm within the cells of the tentacles did not become
aggregated; whereas in some adjoining tentacles, which were inflected
from having been roughly touched by the pincers, it was well
aggregated. In like manner the protoplasm does not become aggregated
when a leaf is instantly killed by being dipped into boiling water. On
the other hand, in several cases in which tentacles became inflected
after their glands had been cut off with sharp scissors, a distinct
though moderate degree of aggregation supervened.

The pedicels of the tentacles were roughly and repeatedly rubbed; raw
meat or other exciting substances were placed on them, both on the
upper surface near the base and elsewhere, but no distinct movement
ensued. Some bits of meat, after being left for a considerable time on
the pedicels, were pushed upwards, so as just to touch the glands, and
in a minute the tentacles began to bend. I believe that the blade of
the leaf is not sensitive to any stimulant. I drove the point of a
lancet through the blades of several leaves, and a needle three or four
times through nineteen leaves: in the former case no movement ensued;
but about a dozen of the leaves which were repeatedly pricked had a few
tentacles irregularly inflected. As, however, their backs had to be
supported during the operation, some of the outer glands, as well as
those on the disc, may have been touched; and this perhaps sufficed to
cause the slight degree of movement observed. Nitschke*says

* 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1860, p. 234.  [page 231]

that cutting and pricking the leaf does not excite movement. The
petiole of the leaf is quite insensible.

The backs of the leaves bear numerous minute papillae, which do not
secrete, but have the power of absorption. These papillae are, I
believe, rudiments of formerly existing tentacles together with their
glands. Many experiments were made to ascertain whether the backs of
the leaves could be irritated in any way, thirty-seven leaves being
thus tried. Some were rubbed for a long time with a blunt needle, and
drops of milk and other exciting fluids, raw meat, crushed flies, and
various substances, placed on others. These substances were apt soon to
become dry, showing that no secretion had been excited. Hence I
moistened them with saliva, solutions of ammonia, weak hydrochloric
acid, and frequently with the secretion from the glands of other
leaves. I also kept some leaves, on the backs of which exciting objects
had been placed, under a damp bell-glass; but with all my care I never
saw any true movement. I was led to make so many trials because,
contrary to my previous experience, Nitschke states* that, after
affixing objects to the backs of leaves by the aid of the viscid
secretion, he repeatedly saw the tentacles (and in one instance the
blade) become reflexed.  This movement, if a true one, would be most
anomalous; for it implies that the tentacles receive a motor impulse
from an unnatural source, and have the power of bending in a direction
exactly the reverse of that which is habitual to them; this power not
being of the least use to the plant, as insects cannot adhere to the
smooth backs of the leaves.

I have said that no effect was produced in the above

* 'Bot. Zeitung.' 1860, p. 437.  [page 232]

cases; but this is not strictly true, for in three instances a little
syrup was added to the bits of raw meat on the backs of leaves, in
order to keep them damp for a time; and after 36 hrs.  there was a
trace of reflexion in the tentacles of one leaf, and certainly in the
blade of another. After twelve additional hours, the glands began to
dry, and all three leaves seemed much injured. Four leaves were then
placed under a bell-glass, with their footstalks in water, with drops
of syrup on their backs, but without any meat. Two of these leaves,
after a day, had a few tentacles reflexed. The drops had now increased
considerably in size, from having imbibed moisture, so as to trickle
down the backs of the tentacles and footstalks. On the second day, one
leaf had its blade much reflexed; on the third day the tentacles of two
were much reflexed, as well as the blades of all four to a greater or
less degree. The upper side of one leaf, instead of being, as at first,
slightly concave, now presented a strong convexity upwards. Even on the
fifth day the leaves did not appear dead. Now, as sugar does not in the
least excite Drosera, we may safely attribute the reflexion of the
blades and tentacles of the above leaves to exosmose from the cells
which were in contact with the syrup, and their consequent contraction.
When drops of syrup are placed on the leaves of plants with their roots
still in damp earth, no inflection ensues, for the roots, no doubt,
pump up water as quickly as it is lost by exosmose. But if cut-off
leaves are immersed in syrup, or in any dense fluid, the tentacles are
greatly, though irregularly, inflected, some of them assuming the shape
of corkscrews; and the leaves soon become flaccid. If they are now
immersed in a fluid of low specific gravity, the tentacles re-expand.
From these [page 233] facts we may conclude that drops of syrup placed
on the backs of leaves do not act by exciting a motor impulse which is
transmitted to the tentacles; but that they cause reflexion by inducing
exosmose. Dr. Nitschke used the secretion for sticking insects to the
backs of the leaves; and I suppose that he used a large quantity, which
from being dense probably caused exosmose. Perhaps he experimented on
cut-off leaves, or on plants with their roots not supplied with enough
water.

As far, therefore, as our present knowledge serves, we may conclude
that the glands, together with the immediately underlying cells of the
tentacles, are the exclusive seats of that irritability or
sensitiveness with which the leaves are endowed. The degree to which a
gland is excited can be measured only by the number of the surrounding
tentacles which are inflected, and by the amount and rate of their
movement. Equally vigorous leaves, exposed to the same temperature (and
this is an important condition), are excited in different degrees under
the following circumstances. A minute quantity of a weak solution
produces no effect; add more, or give a rather stronger solution, and
the tentacles bend. Touch a gland once or twice, and no movement
follows; touch it three or four times, and the tentacle becomes
inflected. But the nature of the substance which is given is a very
important element: if equal-sized particles of glass (which acts only
mechanically), of gelatine, and raw meat, are placed on the discs of
several leaves, the meat causes far more rapid, energetic, and widely
extended movement than the two former substances. The number of glands
which are excited also makes a great difference in the result: place a
bit of meat on one or two of the discal [page 234] glands, and only a
few of the immediately surrounding short tentacles are inflected; place
it on several glands, and many more are acted on; place it on thirty or
forty, and all the tentacles, including the extreme marginal ones,
become closely inflected. We thus see that the impulses proceeding from
a number of glands strengthen one another, spread farther, and act on a
larger number of tentacles, than the impulse from any single gland.

Transmission of the Motor Impulse.--In every case the impulse from a
gland has to travel for at least a short distance to the basal part of
the tentacle, the upper part and the gland itself being merely carried
by the inflection of the lower part. The impulse is thus always
transmitted down nearly the whole length of the pedicel. When the
central glands are stimulated, and the extreme marginal tentacles
become inflected, the impulse is transmitted across half the diameter
of the disc; and when the glands on one side of the disc are
stimulated, the impulse is transmitted across nearly the whole width of
the disc. A gland transmits its motor impulse far more easily and
quickly down its own tentacle to the bending place than across the disc
to neighbouring tentacles. Thus a minute dose of a very weak solution
of ammonia, if given to one of the glands of the exterior tentacles,
causes it to bend and reach the centre; whereas a large drop of the
same solution, given to a score of glands on the disc, will not cause
through their combined influence the least inflection of the exterior
tentacles. Again, when a bit of meat is placed on the gland of an
exterior tentacle, I have seen movement in ten seconds, and repeatedly
within a minute; but a much larger bit placed on several glands on the
disc does not cause [page 235] the exterior tentacles to bend until
half an hour or even several hours have elapsed.

The motor impulse spreads gradually on all sides from one or more
excited glands, so that the tentacles which stand nearest are always
first affected. Hence, when the glands in the centre of the disc are
excited, the extreme marginal tentacles are the last inflected. But the
glands on different parts of the leaf transmit their motor power in a
somewhat different manner. If a bit of meat be placed on the
long-headed gland of a marginal tentacle, it quickly transmits an
impulse to its own bending portion; but never, as far as I have
observed, to the adjoining tentacles; for these are not affected until
the meat has been carried to the central glands, which then radiate
forth their conjoint impulse on all sides. On four occasions leaves
were prepared by removing some days previously all the glands from the
centre, so that these could not be excited by the bits of meat brought
to them by the inflection of the marginal tentacles; and now these
marginal tentacles re-expanded after a time without any other tentacle
being affected. Other leaves were similarly prepared, and bits of meat
were placed on the glands of two tentacles in the third row from the
outside, and on the glands of two tentacles in the fifth row. In these
four cases the impulse was sent in the first place laterally, that is,
in the same concentric row of tentacles, and then towards the centre;
but not centrifugally, or towards the exterior tentacles. In one of
these cases only a single tentacle on each side of the one with meat
was affected. In the three other cases, from half a dozen to a dozen
tentacles, both laterally and towards the centre, were well inflected
or sub-inflected.  Lastly, in [page 236] ten other experiments, minute
bits of meat were placed on a single gland or on two glands in the
centre of the disc. In order that no other glands should touch the
meat, through the inflection of the closely adjoining short tentacles,
about half a dozen glands had been previously removed round the
selected ones. On eight of these leaves from sixteen to twenty-five of
the short surrounding tentacles were inflected in the course of one or
two days; so that the motor impulse radiating from one or two of the
discal glands is able to produce this much effect. The tentacles which
had been removed are included in the above numbers; for, from standing
so close, they would certainly have been affected. On the two remaining
leaves, almost all the short tentacles on the disc were inflected. With
a more powerful stimulus than meat, namely a little phosphate of lime
moistened with saliva, I have seen the inflection spread still farther
from a single gland thus treated; but even in this case the three or
four outer rows of tentacles were not affected. From these experiments
it appears that the impulse from a single gland on the disc acts on a
greater number of tentacles than that from a gland of one of the
exterior elongated tentacles; and this probably follows, at least in
part, from the impulse having to travel a very short distance down the
pedicels of the central tentacles, so that it is able to spread to a
considerable distance all round.

Whilst examining these leaves, I was struck with the fact that in six,
