
Having attended to their horses, which they hobbled to prevent
their straying, Mr. Hardy and the boys sat down and made a slight
meal. None of them felt very hungry, the excitement of the
approaching attack having driven away the keen appetite that they
would have otherwise gained from their ride; but Mr. Hardy begged
the boys to endeavor to eat something, as they would be sure to
feel the want of food later.

The meal over, Mr. Hardy lit his favorite pipe, while the boys went
cautiously up the hill to reconnoiter. There was no change; most of
the animals were lying down, and there was little sign of movement.
Two or three Indians, however, were standing motionless and rigid
by their horses' sides, evidently acting as sentries. The boys
thought that hour the longest that they had ever passed. At last,
however, their father looked at his watch, shook the ashes out of
his pipe and put it in his pocket. "Now, boys, it is five minutes
to the hour. Examine your carbines and revolvers, see that
everything is in order, and that there is no hitch. Tighten the
saddle-girths and examine the buckles. See that your ammunition and
spare carbine chambers are ready at hand."

In another five minutes the party were in their saddles.

"Now, boys, my last words. Don't ride ahead or lag behind: regulate
your pace by mine. Look out for armadillo holes--they are more
dangerous than the Indians. Remember my orders: on no account use
the second chamber of your carbines unless in case of great
urgency. Change the chambers directly you have emptied them, but
don't fire a shot until the spare ones are charged again. Now,
boys, hurrah for old England!"

"Hurrah!" the boys both shouted as they started at a canter up the
rise. As they caught sight of the Indians everything was quiet as
before; but in another moment they saw the men on watch throw
themselves on to their horses' backs, figures leaped up from the
grass and ran toward their horses, and in little over a minute the
whole were in motion.

"Surely they are not going to run away from three men!" Charley
said in a disgusted tone.

"They won't run far, Charley," Mr. Hardy said quietly. "By the time
that we are halfway to them they will see that we can have no one
with us, and then they will come on quickly enough."

It was as Mr. Hardy said. Keen as had been the watch kept by the
Indians, in spite of their belief that no pursuing force could be
sent after them, it was some little time before they could get the
weary animals on their legs and in motion; and even at the easy
canter at which Mr. Hardy approached, he had neared them to within
half a mile before they were fairly off. A small party only
continued to drive the animals, and the rest of the Indians,
wheeling sharp round, and uttering a wild war-cry, came back at
full gallop toward the whites.

"Halt, boys-steady, dismount: take up your positions quietly. Don't
fire till I give you the word. I shall try my rifle first."

The well-trained horses, accustomed to their masters firing from
their backs, stood as steady as if carved in stone, their heads
turned inquiringly toward the yelling throng of horsemen who were
approaching. Mr. Hardy and the boys had both dismounted, so that
the horses were between them and the Indians, the saddles serving
as rests for their firearms.

"Five hundred yards, Charley?" his father asked quietly.

"A little over, papa; nearly six, I should say."

Mr. Hardy waited another ten seconds, and then his rifle cracked;
and a yell of astonishment and rage broke from the Indians, as one
of their chiefs, conspicuous from an old dragoon helmet, taken
probably in some skirmish with the soldiers, fell from his horse.

"Hurrah!" Charley cried. "Shall we fire now, papa?"

"No, Charley," Mr. Hardy said as he reloaded his rifle; "wait till
they are four hundred yards off, then fire slowly. Count ten
between each shot, and take as steady an aim as possible. Now! Well
done, two more of the scoundrels down. Steady, Hubert, you missed
that time: there, that's better."

The Indians yelled with rage and astonishment as man after man
dropped before the steady and, to them, mysterious fire which was
kept up upon them. Still they did not abate the rapidity of their
charge.

"Done, papa," Charley said as the two boys simultaneously fired
their last shot, when the leading Indians were about two hundred
and fifty yards distant.

"Change your chambers and mount," Mr. Hardy said as he again took
aim with his rifle.

The enemy was not more than a hundred and fifty yards distant, when
they leaped into their saddles and started at a gallop.

"Steady, boys, keep your horses well in hand. Never mind their
balls; they could no more hit a man at this distance from the back
of a horse than they could fly. There is no chance of their
catching us; there won't be many horses faster than ours, and ours
are a good deal fresher. Keep a good lookout for holes."

Both pursuers and pursued were now going over the ground at a
tremendous pace. The Indians had ceased firing, for most of those
who had guns had discharged them as Mr. Hardy and his sons had
mounted, and it was impossible to load at the speed at which they
were going.

During the first mile of the chase Mr. Hardy had looked round
several times, and had said each time, "We are holding our own,
boys; they are a good hundred yards behind; keep your horses in
hand."

At the end of another mile his face brightened as he looked round.
"All right, boys, they are tailing off fast. Three-quarters of them
have stopped already. There are not above a score of the best
mounted anywhere near us. Another mile and we will give them a
lesson."

The mile was soon traversed, and Mr. Hardy saw that only about
twelve Indians had maintained their distance.

[Illustration: ONSET OF THE INDIANS.]

"Now is the time, boys. When I say halt, draw up and jump off, but
take very steady aim always at the nearest. Don't throw away a
shot. They are only a hundred yards off, and the revolvers will
tell. Don't try to use the second chamber; there is no time for
that. Use your pistols when you have emptied your carbines. Halt!"

Not five seconds elapsed after the word was spoken before Charley's
carbine rang out. Then came the sharp cracks of the carbines and
pistols in close succession. The Indians hesitated at the
tremendous fire which was opened upon them, then halted. The delay
was fatal to them. In little over half a minute the eighteen shots
had been fired. Five Indians lay upon the plain; another, evidently
a chief, had been carried off across the saddle of one of his
followers, who had leaped off when he saw him fall; and two others
were evidently wounded, and had difficulty in keeping their seats.

"Now, boys, change your chambers, and take a shot or two after
them," Mr. Hardy said as he again reloaded his rifle.

The boys, however, found by the time they were ready that the
flying Indians were beyond any fair chance of hitting; but their
father took a long and steady aim with his deadly rifle, and upon
its report a horse and man went down. But the rider was in an
instant upon his feet again, soon caught one of the riderless
horses which had galloped off with its companions, and followed his
comrades.

"Well done, boys," Mr. Hardy said, with a hearty pat on their
shoulders. "You have done gallantly for a first fight, and I feel
proud of you."

Both boys colored with pleasure.

"How many have we killed?"

"I think seven fell at our first attack, papa, and six here,
counting the one they carried off, besides wounded."

"Thirteen. It is enough to make them heartily wish themselves back.
Now let us give the horses ten minutes' rest, and then we will stir
them up again. We must not lose time; it will be sunset in another
three-quarters of an hour."

Half an hour's riding again brought them up to the Indians, who had
stopped within a mile of their former halting-place.

"The moon will be up by one o'clock, boys, and they mean to remain
where they are till then. Do you see that hollow that runs just
this side of where they are? No doubt there is a small stream
there."

This time the Indians made no move to retreat further. They knew
now that their assailants were only three in number. They were
armed, indeed, with weapons which, in their terrible rapidity of
fire, were altogether beyond anything they had hitherto seen; but
in the darkness these would be of no avail against a sudden rush.

But if the Indians did not run away neither did they, as before,
attack their assailants. Their horses had been placed in the middle
of the cattle, with a few Indians standing by them to keep them
quiet. The rest of the Indians were not to be seen, but Mr. Hardy
guessed that they were lying down in the long grass, or were
concealed among the animals.

"The rascals have got a clever chief among them, boys. Except those
half-dozen heads we see over the horses' backs, there is nothing to
see of them. They know that if we go close they can pick us off
with their guns and bows and arrows, without giving us a single
fair shot at them. Don't go any nearer, boys; no doubt there are
many of their best shots hidden in the grass."

"We could scatter the cattle with a rocket, papa."

"Yes, we could, Hubert, but we should gain nothing by it; they have
got men by their horses, and would soon get the herd together
again. No, we will keep that for the night. Halloo! to the right,
boys, for your lives."

Not a moment too soon did Mr. Hardy perceive the danger. The chief
of the Indians, expecting another attack, had ordered twenty of his
best mounted men to separate themselves from the main body, and to
hide themselves in a dip of the ground near the place where the
first attack had taken place. They were to allow the whites to
pass, and were then to follow quietly, and fall suddenly upon them.

Complete success had attended the maneuver; and it was fortunate
that the party had no firearms, these having been distributed among
the main body with the cattle, for they were within forty yards of
Mr. Hardy before they were seen. It was, in fact, a repetition of
the maneuver which had proved so successful in their attack upon
the cattle.

They were not immediately in the rear of Mr. Hardy, but rather to
the left. As Mr. Hardy and his sons turned to fly, a number of
Indians sprang upon their feet from among the grass, and discharged
a volley of guns and arrows at them. Fortunately the distance was
considerable. One of their arrows, however, struck Mr. Hardy's
horse in the shoulder, while another stuck in the rider's arm.
Another went through the calf of Hubert's leg, and stuck in the
flap of the saddle.

There was no time for word or complaint. They buried their spurs in
their horses' sides, and the gallant animals, feeling that the
occasion was urgent, seemed almost to fly. In a mile they were able
to break into a steady gallop, the enemy being now seventy or
eighty yards behind. Mr. Hardy had already pulled the arrow from
his arm, and Hubert now extracted his. As he stooped to do so his
father, who had not noticed that he was wounded, saw what he was
doing.

"Hurt much, old man?"

"Not much," Hubert said; but it did hurt a good deal nevertheless.

"I don't want to tire our horses any more, boys," Mr. Hardy said;
"I shall try and stop those rascals with one of my revolvers."

So saying, he drew one of his pistols from his holster, and turning
round in his saddle, took a steady aim and fired.

At the same instant, however, his horse trod in a hole and fell,
Mr. Hardy being thrown over its head with tremendous force. The
boys reined their horses hard in, and Hubert gave a loud cry as he
saw his father remain stiff and unmoved on the ground. The Indians
set up a wild yell of triumph.

"Steady, Hubert. Jump off. Pick up papa's pistol. Arrange the
horses in a triangle round him. That's right. Now don't throw away
a shot."

The nearest Indian was scarcely thirty yards off when Charley's
bullet crashed into his brain. The three immediately following him
fell in rapid succession, another chief's arm sank useless to his
side, while the horse of another fell, shot through the brain.

Both the boys were pale, but their hands were as steady as iron.
They felt as if, with their father lying insensible under their
protection, they could not miss.

So terrible was the destruction which the continued fire wrought
among the leaders that the others instinctively checked the speed
of their horses as they approached the little group, from which
fire and balls seemed to stream, and began to discharge arrows at
the boys, hanging on the other side of their horses, so that by
their foes they could not be seen, a favorite maneuver with
the Indians. As the boys fired their last barrels they drew their
revolvers from the holsters, and, taking aim as the Indians showed
a head or an arm under their horses' necks or over their backs,
their twelve barrels added to the Indians scattered over the
ground.

"Now, Hubert, give me the two last revolvers, and put the two fresh
chambers into the carbines."

Seeing only one of their foes on the defense, the Indians again
made a rush forward. Charley shot the two first with a revolver,
but the others charged up, and he stooped a moment to avoid a
spear, rising a little on one side, and discharging with both hands
his pistols at the Indians, who were now close. "Quick, Hubert," he
said, as he shot with his last barrel an Indian who had just driven
his spear into the heart of Mr. Hardy's horse.

The animal fell dead as it stood, and the Indians with a yell
charged at the opening, but as they did so Hubert slipped a carbine
into his brother's hand, and the two again poured in the deadly
fire which had so checked the Indians' advance.

The continuation of the fire appalled the Indians, and the seven
that survived turned and fled.

"I will load, Hubert," Charley said, trying to speak steadily. "See
to papa at once. Empty one of the water-gourds upon his face and
head."

Hubert looked down with a cold shudder. Neither of the boys had
dared to think during that brief fight. They had had many falls
before on the soft turf of the pampas, but no hurt had resulted,
and both were more frightened at the insensibility of their father
than at the Indian horde which were so short a distance away, and
which would no doubt return in a few minutes in overwhelming force.

Great, then, was Hubert's delight, when upon looking round he saw
that Mr. Hardy had raised himself with his arms.

"What has happened?" he said in a confused manner.

"Are you hurt, papa?" Hubert asked, with tears of joy running down
his face; "you frightened us both so dreadfully. Please drink a
little water, and I will pour a little over your face."

Mr. Hardy drank some water, and Hubert dashed some more in his
face. "That will do, Hubert," he said with a smile; "you will drown
me. There, I am all right now. I was stunned, I suppose. There you
are," and he got up on to his feet; "you see I am not hurt. And
now, where are the Indians?"

"There, papa," said the boys with pardonable triumph, as they
pointed to thirteen dead Indians.

