ornaments in her hand; I said a number of things such as girls like to
hear, and then I asked her if she were strictly watched, and whether they
gave her delicate little hands and feet--which were worthy of better
occupation than water-carrying--a great deal to do.  She did not hesitate
to answer, but with all she said she rarely raised her eyes.  The longer
you look at her the lovelier she is--and yet she is still a mere child-
though a child certainly who no longer loves staying at home, who has
dreams of splendor, and enjoyment, and freedom while she is kept shut up
in a dismal, dark place, and left to starve.

"The poor creatures may never quit the temple excepting for a procession,
or before sunrise.  It sounded too delightful when she said that she was
always so horribly tired, and so glad to go to sleep again after she was
waked, and had to go out at once just when it is coldest, in the twilight
before sunrise.  Then she has to draw water from a cistern called the
Well of the Sun."

"Do you know where that cistern lies?"  asked Publius.

"Behind the acacia-grove," answered Lysias.  "The guide pointed it out to
me.  It is said to hold particularly sacred water, which must be poured
as a libation to the god at sunrise, unmixed with any other.  The girls
must get up so early, that as soon as dawn breaks water from this cistern
shall not be lacking at the altar of Serapis.  It is poured out on the
earth by the priests as a drink-offering."

Publius had listened attentively, and had not lost a word of his friend's
narrative.  He now quitted him hastily, opened the tent-door, and went
out into the night, looking up to discover the hour from the stars which
were silently pursuing their everlasting courses in countless thousands,
and sparkling with extraordinary brilliancy in the deep blue sky.  The
moon was already set, and the morning-star was slowly rising--every night
since the Roman had been in the land of the Pyramids he had admired its
magnificent size and brightness.

A cold breeze fanned the young man's brow, and as he drew his robe across
his breast with a shiver, he thought of the sisters, who, before long,
would have to go out in the fresh morning air.  Once more he raised his
eyes from the earth to the firmament over his head, and it seemed to him
that he saw before his very eyes the proud form of Klea, enveloped in a
mantle sown over with stars.  His heart throbbed high, and he felt as if
the breeze that his heaving breast inhaled in deep breaths was as fresh
and pure as the ether that floats over Elysium, and of a strange potency
withal, as if too rare to breathe.  Still he fancied he saw before him
the image of Klea, but as he stretched out his hand towards the beautiful
vision it vanished--a sound of hoofs and wheels fell upon his ear.
Publius was not accustomed to abandon himself to dreaming when action was
needed, and this reminded him of the purpose for which he had come out
into the open air.  Chariot after chariot came driving past as he
returned into his tent.  Lysias, who during his absence had been pacing
up and down and reflecting, met him with the question:

"How long is it yet till sunrise?"

Hardly two hours," replied the Roman.  "And we must make good use of them
if we would not arrive too late."

"So I think too," said the Corinthian.  "The sisters will soon be at the
Well of the Sun outside the temple walls, and I will persuade Irene to
follow me.  You think I shall not be successful?  Nor do I myself--but
still perhaps she will if I promise to show her something very pretty,
and if she does not suspect that she is to be parted from her sister, for
she is like a child."

"But Klea," interrupted Publius thoughtfully, "is grave and prudent; and
the light tone which you are so ready to adopt will be very little to her
taste,  Consider that, and dare the attempt--no, you dare not deceive
her.  Tell her the whole truth, out of Irene's hearing, with the gravity
the matter deserves, and she will not hinder her sister when she knows
how great and how imminent is the danger that threatens her."

"Good!"  said the Corinthian.  "I will be so solemnly earnest that the
most wrinkled and furrowed graybeard among the censors of your native
city shall seem a Dionysiac dancer compared with me.  I will speak like
your Cato when he so bitterly complained that the epicures of Rome paid
more now for a barrel of fresh herrings than for a yoke of oxen.  You
shall be perfectly satisfied with me!--But whither am I to conduct Irene?
I might perhaps make use of one of the king's chariots which are passing
now by dozens to carry the guests home."

"I also had thought of that," replied Publius.  "Go with the chief of the
Diadoches, whose splendid house was shown to us yesterday.  It is on the
way to the Serapeum, and just now at the feast you were talking with him
incessantly.  When there, indemnify the driver by the gift of a gold
piece, so that he may not betray us, and do not return here but proceed
to the harbor.  I will await you near the little temple of Isis with our
travelling chariot and my own horses, will receive Irene, and conduct her
to some new refuge while you drive back Fuergetes' chariot, and restore
it to the driver."

"That will not satisfy me by any means," said Lysias very gravely; "I was
ready to give up my pomegranate-flower to you yesterday for Irene, but
herself--"

"I want nothing of her," exclaimed Publius annoyed.  "But you might--it
seems to me--be rather more zealous in helping me to preserve her from
the misfortune which threatens her through your own blunder.  We cannot
bring her here, but I think that I have thought of a safe hiding-place
for her.

"Do you remember Apollodorus, the sculptor, to whom we were recommended
by my father, and his kind and friendly wife who set before us that
capital Chios wine?  The man owes me a service, for my father
commissioned him and his assistants to execute the mosaic pavement in the
new arcade he was having built in the capitol; and subsequently, when the
envy of rival artists threatened his life, my father saved him.  You
yourself heard him say that he and his were all at my disposal."

"Certainly, certainly," said Lysias.  "But say, does it not strike you as
most extraordinary that artists, the very men, that is to say, who beyond
all others devote themselves to ideal aims and efforts, are particularly
ready to yield to the basest impulses; envy, detraction, and--"

"Man!" exclaimed Publius, angrily interrupting the Greek, "can you never
for ten seconds keep on the same subject, and never keep anything to
yourself that comes into your head?  We have just now, as it seems to me,
more important matters to discuss than the jealousy of each other shown
by artists--and in my opinion, by learned men too.  The sculptor
Apollodorus, who is thus beholden to me, has been living here for the
last six months with his wife and daughters, for he has been executing
for Philometor the busts of the philosophers, and the animal groups to
decorate the open space in front of the tomb of Apis.  His sons are
managers of his large factory in Alexandria, and when he next goes there,
down the Nile in his boat, as often happens, he can take Irene with him,
and put her on board a ship.

"As to where we can have her taken to keep her safe from Euergetes, we
will talk that over afterwards with Apollodorus."

"Good, very good," agreed the Corinthian.  "By Heracles!  I am not
suspicious--still it does not altogether please me that you should
yourself conduct Irene to Apollodorus, for if you are seen in her company
our whole project may be shipwrecked.  Send the sculptor's wife, who is
little known in Memphis, to the temple of Isis, and request her to bring
a veil and cloak to conceal the girl.  Greet the gay Milesian from me
too, and tell her--no, tell her nothing--I shall see her myself
afterwards at the temple of Isis."

During the last words of this conversation, slaves had been enveloping
the two young men in their mantles.  They now quitted the tent together,
wished each other success, and set out at a brisk pace; the Roman to have
his horses harnessed, and Lysias to accompany the chief of the Diadoches
in one of the king's chariots, and then to act on the plan he had agreed
upon with Publius.




CHAPTER XIII.

Chariot after chariot hurried out of the great gate of the king's palace
and into the city, now sunk in slumber.  All was still in the great
banqueting-hall, and dark-hued slaves began with brooms and sponges to
clean the mosaic pavement, which was strewed with rose leaves and with
those that had fallen from the faded garlands of ivy and poplar; while
here and there the spilt wine shone with a dark gleam in the dim light of
the few lamps that had not been extinguished.

A young flute-player, overcome with sleep and wine, still sat in one
corner.  The poplar wreath that had crowned his curls had slipped over
his pretty face, but even in sleep he still held his flute clasped fast
in his fingers.  The servants let him sleep on, and bustled about without
noticing him; only an overseer pointed to him, and said laughing:

"His companions went home no more sober than that one.  He is a pretty
boy, and pretty Chloes lover besides--she will look for him in vain this
morning."

"And to-morrow too perhaps," answered another; "for if the fat king sees
her, poor Damon will have seen the last of her."

But the fat king, as Euergetes was called by the Alexandrians, and,
following their example, by all the rest of Egypt, was not just then
thinking of Chloe, nor of any such person; he was in the bath attached to
his splendidly fitted residence.  Divested of all clothing, he was
standing in the tepid fluid which completely filled a huge basin of white
marble.  The clear surface of the perfumed water mirrored statues of
nymphs fleeing from the pursuit of satyrs, and reflected the shimmering
light of numbers of lamps suspended from the ceiling.  At the upper end
of the bath reclined the bearded and stalwart statue of the Nile, over
whom the sixteen infant figures--representing the number of ells to which
the great Egyptian stream must rise to secure a favorable inundation--
clambered and played to the delight of their noble father Nile and of
themselves.  From the vase which supported the arm of the venerable god
flowed an abundant stream of cold water, which five pretty lads received
in slender alabaster vases, and poured over the head and the enormously
prominent muscles of the breast, the back and the arms of the young king
who was taking his bath.

"More, more--again and again," cried Euergetes, as the boys began to
pause in bringing and pouring the water; and then, when they threw a
fresh stream over him, he snorted and plunged with satisfaction, and a
perfect shower of jets splashed off him as the blast of his breath
sputtered away the water that fell over his face.

At last he shouted out: "Enough!"  flung himself with all his force into
the water, that spurted up as if a huge block of stone had been thrown
into it, held his head for a long time under water, and then went up the
marble steps of the bath shaking his head violently and mischievously in
his boyish insolence, so as thoroughly to wet his friends and servants
who were standing round the margin of the basin; he suffered himself to
be wrapped in snowy-white sheets of the thinnest and finest linen, to be
sprinkled with costly essences of delicate odor, and then he withdrew
into a small room hung all round with gaudy hangings.

There he flung himself on a mound of soft cushions, and said with a deep-
drawn breath: "Now I am happy; and I am as sober again as a baby that has
never tasted anything but its mother's milk.  Pindar is right! there is
nothing better than water! and it slakes that raging fire which wine
lights up in our brain and blood.  Did I talk much nonsense just now,
Hierax?"

The man thus addressed, the commander-in-chief of the royal troops, and
the king's particular friend, cast a hesitating glance at the bystanders;
but, Euergetes desiring him to speak without reserve, he replied:

"Wine never weakens the mind of such as you are to the point of folly,
but you were imprudent.  It would be little short of a miracle if
Philometor did not remark--"

"Capital!" interrupted the king sitting up on his cushions.  "You,
Hierax, and you, Komanus, remain here--you others may go.  But do not go
too far off, so as to be close at hand in case I should need you.  In
these days as much happens in a few hours as usually takes place in as
many years."

Those who were thus dismissed withdrew, only the king's dresser, a
Macedonian of rank, paused doubtfully at the door, but Euergetes signed
to him to retire immediately, calling after him:

"I am very merry and shall not go to bed.  At three hours after sunrise I
expect Aristarchus--and for work too.  Put out the manuscripts that I
brought.  Is the Eunuch Eulaeus waiting in the anteroom?  Yes--so much
the better!

"Now we are alone, my wise friends Hierax and Komanus, and I must explain
to you that on this occasion, out of pure prudence, you seem to me to
have been anything rather than prudent.  To be prudent is to have the
command of a wide circle of thought, so that what is close at hand is no
more an obstacle than what is remote.  The narrow mind can command only
that which lies close under observation; the fool and visionary only that
which is far off.  I will not blame you, for even the wisest has his
hours of folly, but on this occasion you have certainly overlooked that
which is at hand, in gazing at the distance, and I see you stumble in
consequence.  If you had not fallen into that error you would hardly have
looked so bewildered when, just now, I exclaimed 'Capital!'

"Now, attend to me.  Philometor and my sister know very well what my
humor is, and what to expect of me.  If I had put on the mask of a
satisfied man they would have been surprised, and have scented mischief,
but as it was I showed myself to them exactly what I always am and even
more reckless than usual, and talked of what I wanted so openly that they
may indeed look forward to some deed of violence at my hands but hardly
to a treacherous surprise, and that tomorrow; for he who falls on his
enemy in the rear makes no noise about it.

"If I believed in your casuistry, I might think that to attack the enemy
