perspiration and body oil, grabbed him by the jacket and slammed him
back against the lockers. As he shifted his weight to keep his footing
someone drove a fist into his face. He started to raise his hands; and a
hard flat object crashed against the side of his skull.

The starch went out of his legs.


"Do you make anything out of it?" the psychoanalyst Milton Bergstrom,
asked.

John Zarwell shook his head. "Did I talk while I was under?"

"Oh, yes. You were supposed to. That way I follow pretty well what
you're reenacting."

"How does it tie in with what I told you before?"

Bergstrom's neat-boned, fair-skinned face betrayed no emotion other than
an introspective stillness of his normally alert gaze. "I see no
connection," he decided, his words once again precise and meticulous.
"We don't have enough to go on. Do you feel able to try another
comanalysis this afternoon yet?"

"I don't see why not." Zarwell opened the collar of his shirt. The day
was hot, and the room had no air conditioning, still a rare luxury on
St. Martin's. The office window was open, but it let in no freshness,
only the mildly rank odor that pervaded all the planet's habitable area.

"Good." Bergstrom rose. "The serum is quite harmless, John." He
maintained a professional diversionary chatter as he administered the
drug. "A scopolamine derivative that's been well tested."

The floor beneath Zarwell's feet assumed abruptly the near transfluent
consistency of a damp sponge. It rose in a foot-high wave and rolled
gently toward the far wall.

Bergstrom continued talking, with practiced urbanity. "When psychiatry
was a less exact science," his voice went on, seeming to come from a
great distance, "a doctor had to spend weeks, sometimes months or years
interviewing a patient. If he was skilled enough, he could sort the
relevancies from the vast amount of chaff. We are able now, with the
help of the serum, to confine our discourses to matters cogent to the
patient's trouble."

The floor continued its transmutation, and Zarwell sank deep into
viscous depths. "Lie back and relax. Don't ..."

The words tumbled down from above. They faded, were gone.


Zarwell found himself standing on a vast plain. There was no sky above,
and no horizon in the distance. He was in a place without space or
dimension. There was nothing here except himself--and the gun that he
held in his hand.

A weapon beautiful in its efficient simplicity.

He should know all about the instrument, its purpose and workings, but
he could not bring his thoughts into rational focus. His forehead
creased with his mental effort.

Abruptly the unreality about him shifted perspective. He was
approaching--not walking, but merely shortening the space between
them--the man who held the gun. The man who was himself. The other
"himself" drifted nearer also, as though drawn by a mutual attraction.

The man with the gun raised his weapon and pressed the trigger.

With the action the perspective shifted again. He was watching the face
of the man he shot jerk and twitch, expand and contract. The face was
unharmed, yet it was no longer the same. No longer his own features.

The stranger face smiled approvingly at him.


"Odd," Bergstrom said. He brought his hands up and joined the tips of
his fingers against his chest. "But it's another piece in the jig-saw.
In time it will fit into place." He paused. "It means no more to you
than the first, I suppose?"

"No," Zarwell answered.

He was not a talking man, Bergstrom reflected. It was more than
reticence, however. The man had a hard granite core, only partially
concealed by his present perplexity. He was a man who could handle
himself well in an emergency.

Bergstrom shrugged, dismissing his strayed thoughts. "I expected as
much. A quite normal first phase of treatment." He straightened a paper
on his desk. "I think that will be enough for today. Twice in one
sitting is about all we ever try. Otherwise some particular episode
might cause undue mental stress, and set up a block." He glanced down at
his appointment pad. "Tomorrow at two, then?"

Zarwell grunted acknowledgment and pushed himself to his feet,
apparently unaware that his shirt clung damply to his body.


The sun was still high when Zarwell left the analyst's office. The white
marble of the city's buildings shimmered in the afternoon heat, squat
and austere as giant tree trunks, pock-marked and gray-mottled with
windows. Zarwell was careful not to rest his hand on the flesh searing
surface of the stone.
