captured and 2000 men killed or taken prisoners. The English lost 70
killed and 230 wounded.

So impetuously did the English attack that even Sir William Howe
admitted that they could have carried the intrenchments. He alleges he
did not permit them to do so, because he intended to take the position
by regular approaches and wished therefore to avoid the loss of life
which an immediate assault would have occasioned. On the 27th and 28th
regular approaches were commenced, but on the 29th, under cover of a
fog, the Americans embarked in boats and succeeded in carrying the whole
of their force, without the loss of a man, across to the mainland.

The escape of this body of men was disgraceful in the extreme to the
English commanders. They had a great fleet at their disposal, and had
they placed a couple of frigates in the East River, between Long Island
and New York, the escape would have been impossible, and General
Washington and his army of 15,000 men must have been taken prisoners.
Whether this misfortune would have proved conclusive of the war it is
now too late to speculate; but so splendid an opportunity was never
before let slip by an English general, and the negligence was the more
inexcusable inasmuch as the fleet of boats could be seen lying alongside
of the American position. Their purpose must have been known, and they
could at any moment have been destroyed by the guns of a ship-of-war
taking up its position outside them.

Lord Howe dispatched the American General Sullivan, who had been taken
prisoner on Long Island, to Congress, repeating his desire to treat. A
committee of three members accordingly waited on Lord Howe, who informed
them that it was the most ardent wish of the king and the government of
Great Britain to put an end to the dissatisfaction between the mother
country and the colonists. To accomplish this desire every act of
Parliament which was considered obnoxious to the colonists should
undergo a revisal, and every just cause of complaint should be removed,
if the colonists would declare their willingness to submit to the
authority of the British government. The committee replied that it was
not America which had separated herself from Great Britain, but Great
Britain had separated herself from America. The latter had never
declared herself independent until the former had made war upon her, and
even if Congress were willing to place America in her former situation,
it could not do so, as the Declaration of Independence had been made in
consequence of the congregated voice of the whole people, by whom alone
it could be abolished. The country was determined not to return under
the domination of England.

The negotiations were therefore broken off. Lord Howe published a
declaration to the people of America, giving the answer of the committee
to his offer of reconciliation. He acquainted them with the fact that
the parent country was willing to receive into its bosom and protection
all who might be willing to return to their former obedience. In taking
this step, Lord Howe was convinced that a majority of the inhabitants of
America were still willing to enter into an accommodation of the
differences between the two powers, and the conviction was not ill
founded. The declaration, however, produced but little effect, for the
dominant section, that resolved to break off all connection with
England, had acquired the sole management of affairs, and no offers
which could possibly have been made would have been accepted by them.

Convinced that all further negotiations would be ineffectual, Lord Howe
prepared to carry his army across from Long Island to New York, where
the American army had taken up their post after the retreat from Long
Island. The armies were separated by the East River, with a breadth of
about thirteen hundred yards. A cannonade was kept up for several days.
On September 13 some ships-of-war were brought up to cover the passage.
Washington, seeing the preparations, began to evacuate the city and to
abandon the strong intrenchments which he had thrown up. At eleven
o'clock on the morning of the 15th the men-of-war opened a heavy fire,
and Clinton's division, consisting of 4000 men in eighty-four boats,
sailed up the river, landed on Manhattan Island at a place called Kipp's
Bay, and occupied the heights of Inclenberg, the enemy abandoning their
intrenchments at their approach. General Washington rode toward Kipp's
Bay to take command of the troops stationed there, but found the men who
had been posted at the lines running away, and the brigades which should
have supported them flying in every direction, heedless of the exertions
of their generals.

Puttenham's division of 4000 men was still in the lower city, and would
be cut off unless the British advance should be checked. Washington
therefore made the greatest efforts to rally the fugitives and to get
them to make a stand to check the advancing enemy, but in vain; for, as
soon as even small bodies of redcoats were seen advancing, they broke
and fled in panic.

Howe, as usual, delayed giving orders for an advance, and thus permitted
the whole of Puttenham's brigade, who were cut off and must have been
taken prisoners, to escape unharmed. And thus, with comparatively little
loss, the Americans drew off, leaving behind them only a few heavy
cannon and some bayonets and stores.

So rapid had been their flight at the approach of the English that only
fifteen were killed, two men falling on the English side.




CHAPTER IX.


THE SURPRISE OF TRENTON.

The Americans, finding that they were not pursued, rallied from their
panic and took up a position at Harlem and Kingsbridge. So great was the
disorganization among them that had the British advanced at once they
would have taken the place with scarcely any loss, strong as it was by
nature and by the intrenchments which Washington had prepared. Great
numbers deserted, disputes broke out between the troops of the various
States, insubordination prevailed, and the whole army was utterly
disheartened by the easy victories which the British had obtained over
them. Washington reported the cowardice of his troops to Congress, who
passed a law inflicting the punishment of death for cowardice.

Before leaving New York the Americans had made preparations for burning
the whole town, but the speediness of their retreat prevented the
preparations being carried into effect. Fire was set to it in several
places and a third of the town was destroyed.

The position taken up by the enemy was so strong that it was determined
to operate in the rear. Some redoubts were thrown up to cover New York
during the absence of the main part of the British force.

A portion of the British army was landed at a point threatening the
retreat of the Americans, and a series of skirmishes of no great
importance took place. The enemy fell back from their most advanced
works, but no general move was undertaken, although, as the numbers on
both sides were about even and the superior fighting powers of the
English had been amply demonstrated, there could have been no doubt as
to the result of a general battle. Lord Howe, however, wasted the time
in a series of petty movements, which, although generally successful,
had no influence upon the result and served only to enable the Americans
to recover from the utter depression which had fallen upon them after
the evacuation of Long Island and the loss of New York.

Gradually the Americans fell back across a country so swampy and
difficult that it was now no longer possible to bring on a general
action. Their retreat had the effect of isolating the important
positions of Kingsbridge and Fort Washington. The latter post was of the
utmost importance, inasmuch as it secured the American intercourse with
the Jersey shore. The fortifications were very strong and stood upon
rising and open ground. It was garrisoned by 3000 of the best American
troops under the command of Colonel Magaw. Washington was gradually
withdrawing his army, and had already given orders that Fort Washington
should be evacuated; but General Lee, who was second in command, so
strongly urged that it should be retained that, greatly against his own
judgment, he was obliged to consent to its being defended, especially as
Colonel Magaw insisted that the fort could stand a siege. On the night
of November 14 the British passed some troops across the creek, and Lord
Howe summoned the place to surrender on pain of the garrison being put
to the sword. Magaw had upon the previous day received large numbers of
re-enforcements, and replied that he should defend the fort. Soon after
daybreak on the 16th the artillery opened on both sides. Five thousand
Hessians, under the command of General Knyphausen, moved up the hill,
penetrated some of the advanced works of the enemy, and took post within
a hundred yards of the fort. The second division, consisting of the
guards and light infantry, with two battalions of Hessians and the
Thirty-third Regiment, landed at Island Creek, and after some stiff
fighting forced the enemy from the rocks and trees up the steep and
rugged mountain. The third and fourth divisions fought their way up
through similar defenses. So steep was the hill that the assailants
could only climb it by grasping the trees and bushes, and so obstinate
was the defense that the troops were sometimes mixed up together.

The bravery and superior numbers of the British troops bore down all
resistance, and the whole of the four divisions reached their places
round the fort. They then summoned it to surrender, and its commander,
after half an hour's consideration, seeing the impossibility of
resisting the assault which was threatened, opened the gates.

Upon the English side about 800 men were killed and wounded, of whom the
majority were Hessians. These troops fought with extreme bravery. The
American loss, owing to their superior position, was about 150 killed
and wounded, but the prisoners taken amounted to over 3000.

On the 18th Lord Howe landed a strong body on the Jersey shore under
Lord Cornwallis, who marched to Fort Lee and surprised it. A deserter
had informed the enemy of his approach and the garrison had fled in
disorder, leaving their tents, provisions, and military stores behind
them. Lord Cornwallis, pushing forward with great energy, drove the
Americans out of New Jersey. Another expedition occupied Rhode Island.

Cold weather now set in and the English went into winter quarters. Their
success had been complete, without a single check, and had they been led
vigorously the army of Washington might on two occasions have been
wholly destroyed. In such a case the moderate portion of the population
of the colonies would have obtained a hearing, and a peace honorable to
both parties might have been arrived at.

The advantage gained by the gallantry of the British troops was,
however, entirely neutralized by the lethargy and inactivity of their
general, and the colonists had time given them to recover from the alarm
which the defeat of their troops had given them, to put another army in
the field, and to prepare on a great scale for the following campaign.

The conduct of General Howe in allowing Washington's army to retire
almost unmolested was to the officers who served under him
unaccountable. His arrangements for the winter were even more singularly
defective. Instead of concentrating his troops he scattered them over a
wide extent of country at a distance too great to support each other,
and thus left it open to the enemy to crush them in detail.

General Howe now issued a proclamation offering a free pardon to all who
surrendered, and great numbers of colonists came in and made their
submission. Even in Philadelphia the longing for peace was so strong
that General Washington was obliged to send a force there to prevent the
town from declaring for England.

During the operations which had taken place since the landing of the
British troops on Long Island Captain Wilson's company had taken but
little part in the operations. All had been straightforward work and
conducted on the principles of European warfare. The services of the
volunteers as scouts had not, therefore, been called into requisition.
The success which at first attended the expedition had encouraged
Captain Wilson to hope, for the first time since the outbreak of the
Revolution, that the English might obtain such decisive successes that
the colonists would be willing to accept some propositions of peace such
as those indicated by Lord Howe--a repeal of all obnoxious laws, freedom
from any taxation except that imposed by themselves, and a recognition
of the British authority. When he saw that Lord Howe, instead of
actively utilizing the splendid force at his disposal, frittered it away
in minor movements and allowed Washington to withdraw with his beaten
army unmolested, his hopes again faded, and he felt that the colonists
would in the long run succeed in gaining all that they contended for.

When the army went into winter quarters the company was ordered to take
post on the Delaware. There were four frontier posts, at Trenton,
Bordentown, White Horse, and Burlington. Trenton, opposite to which lay
Washington with the main body of his army, was held by only 1200
Hessians, and Bordentown, which was also on the Delaware, was, like
Trenton, garrisoned by these troops. No worse choice could have been
made. The Hessians were brave soldiers, but their ignorance of the
language and of the country made them peculiarly unsuitable troops for
outpost work, as they were unable to obtain any information. As
foreigners, too, they were greatly disliked by the country people.

Nothing was done to strengthen these frontier posts, which were left
wholly without redoubts or intrenchments into which the garrison could
withdraw in case of attack.

Captain Wilson's little company were to act as scouts along the line of
frontier. Their headquarters were fixed at Bordentown, where Captain
Wilson obtained a large house for their use. Most of the men were at
home at work of this kind, and Peter Lambton, Ephraim, and the other
frontiersmen were dispatched from time to time in different directions
to ascertain the movements and intentions of the enemy. Harold asked
his father to allow him, as before, to accompany Peter. The inactivity
of a life at a quiet little station was wearisome, and with Peter he
was sure of plenty of work, with a chance of adventure. The life of
exercise and activity which he had led for more than a year had
strengthened his muscles and widened his frame, and he was now able to
keep up with Peter, however long and tiresome the day's work might be.
Jake, too, was of the party. He had developed into an active soldier,
and although he was but of little use for scouting purposes, even Peter
did not object to his accompanying him, for the negro's unfailing good
temper and willingness to make himself useful had made him a favorite
with the scout.

The weather was now setting in exceedingly cold. The three men had more
than once crossed the Delaware in a canoe and scouted in the very heart
of the enemy's country. They were now sitting by the bank, watching some
drifting ice upon the river.

"There won't be many more passages of the river by water," Peter
remarked. "Another ten days, and it'll be frozen across."

"Then we can cross on foot, Peter."

"Yes, we can do that," the scout said, "and so can the enemy. Ef their
general has got any interprise with him, and ef he can get them chaps as
he calls soldiers to fight, he'll be crossing over one of these nights
and capturing the hull of them Hessians at Trenton. What General Howe
means by leaving 'em there is more nor I can think; he might as well
have sent so many babies. The critters can fight, and fight well, too,
and they're good soldiers; but what's the good of 'em in a frontier
post? They know nothing of the country; they can't speak to the people,
nor ask no questions, nor find out nothing about what's doing the other
side of the river. They air no more than mere machines. What was wanted
was two or three battalions of light troops, who would make friends with
the country people and larn all that's doing opposite. If the Americans
are sharp they'll give us lots of trouble this winter, and you'll find
there won't be much sitting quiet for us at Bordentown. Fortunately
Bordentown and Trenton aint far apart, and one garrison ought to be able
to arrive to the assistance of the other before it's overpowered. We
shall see. Now, I propose that we cross again to-night and try and find
out what the enemy's doing. Then we can come back and manage for you to
eat your Christmas dinner with yer father, as you seem to have bent yer
mind upon that, though why it matters about dinner one day more than
another is more nor I can see."

That night the three scouts crossed the river in the canoe. Avoiding all
houses, they kept many miles straight on beyond the river and lay down
for a few hours before morning dawned; then they turned their faces the
other way and walked up to the first farmhouse they saw.

"Can we have a drink of milk?" the hunter asked.

"You can," the farmer replied, "and some breakfast if you like to pay
for it. At first I was glad to give the best I had to those who came
along, but there have been such numbers going one way and the other,
either marching to join the army or running away to return to their
homes, that I should be ruined if I gave to all comers."

"We're ready to pay," Peter said, drawing some money from his pocket.

"Then come in and sit down."

In a few minutes an excellent breakfast was put before them.

"You are on your way to join the army, of course?" the farmer asked.

"Jest that," Peter replied. "We think it's about our time to do a little
shooting, though I don't suppose there'll be much done till the spring."

"I don't know," the farmer said. "I should not be surprised if the
general wakes up them Germans when the Delaware gets frozen. I heard
some talk about it from some men who came past yesterday. Their time was
expired, they said, and they were going home. I hear, too, that they are
gathering a force down near Mount Holly, and I reckon that they are
going to attack Bordentown."

"Is that so?" Peter asked. "In that case we might as well tramp in that
direction. It don't matter a corn-shuck to us where we fight, so as it's
soon. We've come to help lick these British, and we means to do it."

"Ah!" the farmer said, "I have heard that sentiment a good many times,
but I have not seen much come of it yet. So far, it seems to me as the
licking has been all the other way."

"That's so," Peter agreed. "But everyone knows that the Americans are
just the bravest people on the face of the habitable arth. I reckon
their dander's not fairly up yet; but when they begin in arnest you'll
see what they'll do."

The farmer gave a grunt which might mean anything. He had no strong
sympathies either way, and the conduct of the numerous deserters and
disbanded men who had passed through his neighborhood had been far from
impressing him favorably.

"I don't pretend to be strong either for the Congress or the king. I
don't want to be taxed, but I don't see why the colonists should not pay
something toward the expenses of the government; and now that Parliament
seems willing to give all we ask for, I don't see what we want to go on
fighting for."

"Waal!" Peter exclaimed in a tone of disgust, "you're one of the
half-hearted ones."

"I am like the great majority of the people of this country. We are of
English stock and we don't want to break with the Old Country; but the
affairs have got into the hands of the preachers, and the newspaper men,
and the chaps that want to push themselves forward and make their pile
out of the war. As I read it, it's just the civil war in England over
again. We were all united at the first against what we considered as
tyranny on the part of the Parliament, and now we have gone setting up
demands which no one dreamed of at first and which most of us object to
now, only we have no longer the control of our own affairs."

"The great heart of this country beats for freedom," Peter Lambton said.

"Pooh!" said the farmer contemptuously. "The great heart of the country
wants to work its farms and do its business quietly. The English general
has made fair offers, which might well be accepted; and as for freedom,
there was no tyranny greater than that of the New England States. As
long as they managed their own affairs there was neither freedom of
speech nor religion. No, sir; what they call freedom was simply the
freedom to make everyone else do and think like the majority."

"Waal, we won't argue it out," Peter said, "for I'm not good at
argument, and I came here to fight and not to talk. Besides, I want
to get to Mount Holly in time to jine in this battle, so I guess
we'll be moving."

Paying for the breakfast, they started at once in the direction of Mount
Holly, which lay some twenty-five miles away. As they approached the
place early in the afternoon they overtook several men going in the same
direction. They entered into conversation with them, but could only
learn that some 450 of the militia from Philadelphia and the counties of
Gloucester and Salem had arrived on the spot. The men whom they had
overtaken were armed countrymen who were going to take a share in the
fight on their own account.

Entering the place with the others, Peter found that the information
given him was correct.

"We better be out of this at once," he said to Harold, "and make for
Bordentown."

"You don't think that there is much importance in the movement," Harold
said as they tramped along.

"There aint no importance whatever," Peter said, "and that's what I want
to tell 'em. They're never thinking of attacking the two thousand
