swell on, the compressed air would escape and its place be taken by
water, the buoyancy necessary for keeping her afloat being thus lost.

It only remains to be said that the risks run in steaming around to
Halifax by herself were, as it was, very great, and had the wind and sea
been less favorable, the undertaking would probably have proved a
disastrous failure.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE THERMIC MOTOR OF THE FUTURE?


Up to recent years there was no reason for putting the question that
forms the title of this article, for it was admitted by all that the
conversion of thermic energy, or heat produced by the combustion of
coal, into mechanical energy or work could no longer be effected
economically except by having recourse to steam. In ordinary language,
and even to manufacturers, steam engine was the equivalent of thermic
motor, and it would not have occurred to any one to use anything else
but steam to effect the transformation.

The progress that has been made during the last twenty years in the
thermatic study and construction of gas motors (without speaking of hot
air motors) has shown that the use of steam is not absolutely
indispensable for the production of work, and it has demonstrated that,
as regards dynamic product, the gas motor preserves the advantage,
although the relatively high price of the illuminating gas employed in
the production of the motive power generally renders the use of this
combustible more costly than steam, especially for high powers.

The economic truth of twenty years ago, when gas motors absorbed 1,500
liters per horse hour and exceeded with difficulty an effective power of
from 8 to 10 horses, has become less and less certain, when the
consumption has successively descended to 1,200, 1,000, 800 and even to
600 liters of gas per horse hour, the power of the motors rising
gradually to 25, 50 and 100 horses with a motor having a single cylinder
of a diameter of 57 centimeters.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--CORLISS ENGINE AND BOILER OF 100 INDICATED
H.P.--ELEVATION AND PLAN.

A, cylinder; B, condenser; C, boiler; R, feed water heater; D, chimney.]

But these results did not suffice, and it was desired to do better still
by dispensing with the use of high priced illuminating gas. An endeavor
was made to obviate the difficulty by manufacturing a special gas for
the motive power, as steam is produced for the same object, by
distilling coal, carbureting air, producing water gas by the Dowson
process, and by other equivalent processes.

The strides made in this direction were finally crowned with success,
and the results obtained in the recent experiments due to Mr. Aime Witz,
an undoubted authority in the matter, permit of affirming that now and
hereafter, in many circumstances, a gas generator supplying a gas motor
will be able to advantageously dethrone a steam boiler supplying a steam
engine of the same power.

These conclusions, which tend to nothing less than to limit the reign of
the steam engine, are confirmed on the one hand by an experiment carried
on for the last two years in the Barataud flour mill of Marseilles,
where a 50 h.p. "Simplex" motor has been running day and night for
several months without stopping, and consuming but about 500 grammes of
English anthracite per effective horse hour, and, on another hand, by
some personal experiments of Mr. Witz's, to which we shall shortly
advert, and whence there results a sensibly equivalent production for a
motor of 100 indicated h.p., corresponding to a power of 75 effective
horses.

Before establishing, with Mr. Witz, a comparison of the two systems in
pressure, steam or gas, let us state in a few words in what the latter
consists, the steam engine and the boiler that supplies it being so well
known that no description is necessary.

The Dowson gas generator does not differ essentially from the numerous
generators devised during recent years for the manufacture of gaseous
combustibles, the use of which is so often convenient. The motor that it
supplies is the most powerful single cylinder one that has hitherto been
constructed. It is of 100 indicated h.p., and its normal angular
velocity is 100 revolutions per minute. On trial it has yielded 112
indicated h.p., and 76.8 effective h.p., corresponding to an organic
rendering of 69 per cent. This motor, elaborated by Messrs.
Delamare-Bouteville & Malandin, of Rouen, operates by compression and in
four periods, according to the Beau de Rochas cycle. We give the aspect
of it in Fig. 3. In the first period the mixture of air and gas is
sucked in, in the second it is compressed, in the third it is ignited,
and in the fourth the products of combustion are expelled.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--SIMPLEX MOTOR, DOWSON GENERATOR OF 100 INDICATED
H.P.--ELEVATION AND PLAN.

A, cylinder; B, gas conduit; C, rubber pockets; D. gasometer; E,
purifier; F, scrubber; G, hydraulic main; H, cooling pipe; I steam
injector; K, steam boiler and superheater; L, gas generator; M, charger;
N, discharge of the motor.]

Ignition is effected electrically by a series of sparks playing between
two platinum points in the slide valve, and this permits of regulating
the instant of ignition through the edges of the orifices. The angular
velocity is regulated by a Watt's governor, which secures an isochronism
of the motion independently of the charge.

The setting in motion of so powerful an engine is effected very easily
by means of an arrangement that permits of introducing into the
cylinder, while the piston is in the center of the stroke, a mixture of
air and gas whose pressure is sufficient at the arrival to expel the
inert products. After this the ignition takes place, and the explosion
is sufficient to set the motor in motion.

The trials made by Mr. Witz with the motor represented in Fig. 3 gave
the following results, deduced from an experiment of 68 hours. The
figures relate to one effective horse power, measured with the brake
upon the shaft of the motor.

  Consumption of anthracite.              516 grammes.
       "       " coke.                     96    "
  Consumption of water for the injection
    of steam.                               0.487 liters.
  Consumption of water for cooling
    the cylinder.                          50.0     "
  Consumption of oil for lubricating
    the cylinder.                           3.74 grammes.
  Consumption of grease.                    0.45    "
  Consumption of gas reduced to
    0 deg. C. and to 760 mm.                2,370    liters.

This last figure will appear very high, but the fact must not be lost
sight of that it is a question of poor gas, the net cost of which varies
between one and two centimes per cubic meter, and the calorific power of
which is but 1,487 heat units per cubic meter of constant volume, and
supposing the steam condensed. This combustion of 612 grammes of
combustible per effective horse hour is remarkable, and fully shows what
may be expected of the gas motor supplied by a gas generator in putting
to profit certain improvements that will hereafter be possible, such,
for example, as the lightening of the movable parts of the motor, the
bettering of its organic rendering (now quite feeble), the use of better
oils, the reduction of the consumption of water, the superheating of the
steam injected into the gas generator, etc.

A well constructed steam engine, carefully kept in repair and as much
improved as it is possible to make it, would certainly consume twice as
much coal to produce the same quantity of effective work, say at least
1,200 grammes per horse hour. But, as has been objected with reason, it
does not suffice to compare the figures as to the consumption of fuel in
order to institute a serious comparison between the steam engine and the
motor using poor gas.

The gas generator requires the use of English anthracite, while a steam
boiler is heated with any kind of coal. The prices of unity of weight
are therefore very different. Moreover, the gas motor necessitates an
immense amount of water for the washing of the gas and the cooling of
the cylinder, through circulation in the jacket. It is well to keep this
fact in view. On another hand, the lubrification of the cylinders
requires a profusion of oil whose flashing point must be at a very high
temperature, else it would burn at every explosion and fill the cylinder
with coom. Such oil is very costly.

Does not the expenditure of oil in large motors largely offset the
saving in coal? And then, gas motors are sold at high prices, as are gas
generators, and this installation necessarily requires the addition of a
large gasometer, scrubbers, etc. The wear of these apparatus is rapid,
and if we take into account the interest and amortization of the capital
engaged, we shall find that the use of steam is still more economical.
The obstruction caused by bulky apparatus is another inconvenience, upon
which it is unnecessary to dwell. In a word, the question is a very
complex one. We look at but one side of it in occupying ourselves only
with the coal consumed, and we shall certainly expose those who allowed
themselves to be influenced by the seductive figures of consumption to
bitter disappointment.

To answer such objections Mr. Aime Witz has established a complete
parallel between the two systems, in which he looks at the question from
a theoretical and practical and scientific and financial point of view.
Considered as a transformation apparatus, a steam motor burning good
Cardiff coal in a Galloway boiler with feed water heaters will consume
(with a good condensing engine utilizing an expansion of a sixth) from
1,100 to 1,250 grammes of coal per effective horse hour, which
corresponds to a rough coefficient of utilization of 9.7 per cent. A gas
generator supplying a gas motor burning Swansea anthracite and Noeux
coke, medium quality, will consume 516 grammes of anthracite and 90 of
coke to produce 2,370 liters of gas giving 1,487 heat units per cubic
meter. Of the 3,524 heat units furnished to the motor by the 2,370
liters of gas, the motor will convert 18 per cent. into disposable
mechanical work.

With the boiler, the gross rendering of the whole is 7 per cent. With
the gas generator it reaches 12.7 per cent. From a theoretical point of
view the advantage therefore rests with the gas generator and gas motor.
In order to compare the net cost of the units of work, from an
industrial point of view, it is necessary to form estimates of
installation, costs of keeping in repair, interest and amortization.

Figs. 1 and 2 represent, on the same scale, the installations necessary
in each of these systems. The legends indicate the names of the
different apparatus in each installation. The following table shows
that, as regards the surface occupied, the advantage is again with the
gas generator and gas motor:

                     Steam Engine.      Gas Motor.
  Surface covered.       85 sq. m.       72 sq. m.
  Surface exposed.       33    "         43    "
                        ---             ---
  Total surface.        118    "        115    "

The estimates of installation formed by Mr. Witz set forth the expense
relative to the capital engaged exactly at the same figure of 32,000
francs for a motive power of 75 effective horses. The expenses of
keeping in repair, interest, etc., summed up, show that the cost per day
of 10 hours is 47.9 francs for the steam engine and 39.6 for the gas
motor, say a saving of 8.3 francs per day, or about 2,500 francs for a
year of 300 days' work.

The gas motor, therefore, effects a great saving, while at the same time
occupying less space, consuming less water and operating just as well.

With Mr. Witz we cheerfully admit all the advantages that he so clearly
establishes with his perfect competency in such matters, but there still
remain two points upon which we wish to be enlightened. Are not the
starting up, the operation and the keeping in repair of a gas generator
actually more complicated and more delicate than the same elements of a
steam engine? Does not the poor gas manufactured in a gas generator
present, from a hygienic point of view, danger sufficiently great to
proscribe the use of such apparatus in many circumstances?

Such are the points upon which we should like to be enlightened before
unreservedly sharing Mr. Witz's enthusiasm, which, however, is
justified, economically speaking, by the magnificent results of the
experiments made by the learned engineer.--_La Nature_.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--GAS MOTOR OF 100 INDICATED HORSE POWER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED PNEUMATIC HAMMER.


We publish illustrations of a Thwaites suspension pneumatic power 1/2 cwt.
hammer of a new design, for planishing pipes and plates, for which we
are indebted to _Engineering_. As indicated in the perspective view
(Fig. 1) the mechanism is supported at the center of a cross girder
resting on two cast iron square pillars, box section, each bolted down
to the foundations by four 11/4 in. diameter bolts. The measurements of
these columns and girders are given in Figs. 2 and 3, the former an
elevation of the hammer and the latter a plan, partly in section, of the
cross girder, while Fig. 4 is a cross section showing the arrangements
for operating the hammer. In the center is a cast iron guide for working
the ram, the guide being extended on two sides to receive the disk crank
journals, 2 in. in diameter by 31/2 in. long. The disk cranks are
connected to a hollow steel ram by a connecting rod. The ram is divided
inside into two compartments, each having a phosphor bronze air piston.
These are connected together by a steel piston rod, the top air piston
forming a connection for the small end of the connecting rod. The
outside diameter of the ram is 33/4 in., and the diameter of the air
pistons 23/4 in. and 2-7/8 in. respectively. Cottered into the bottom of
the ram is a steel pallet holder with a dovetail, so that the pallet can
be renewed or exchanged for one of another shape when required. Keyed on
to the crankshaft is a flanged pulley 10 in. in diameter by 31/4 in.
between flanges. There is also an overhead countershaft with strap
shifting arrangement. At the side of one of the columns a hand lever and
quadrant are provided, as shown in the perspective view and in Fig. 2,
for working an arrangement for tightening the belt when the machine is
working. To this arrangement is connected a powerful brake which stops
the machine in a few revolutions. It will be seen that the brake is
applied as the belt is slackened for stopping the machine. For
planishing pipes or tubes a long wrought iron mandrel is provided
mounted on two cast iron carriages, each having four flanged wheels for
running on rails. The hammer is arranged so that tubes 4 feet in
diameter can be worked for planishing plates. A pallet is fastened on
the top of one of the mandrel carriages, Figs. 5 to 8 showing the
details of the carriages. The general dimensions are: Distance between
pillars, 6 feet; height under girder, 5 feet; height from ground to top
of mandrel, 4 feet 13/4 in.; and length of stroke, 5 in. This machine is
capable of delivering 500 blows per minute. The constructors are Messrs.
Thwaites Brothers, Limited, Bradford, Yorkshire.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: SUSPENSION PNEUMATIC POWER HAMMER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SIBLEY COLLEGE LECTURES.--1890-91.

BY THE CORNELL UNIVERSITY NON-RESIDENT LECTURERS IN MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING.

COMPRESSED AIR PRODUCTION.

By WM. L. SAUNDERS, C.E., of New York.


I cannot but realize as I stand before you that I would be very much
more at home were I in your midst. I feel but little older and so very
much less wise than when I sat in the class room an undergraduate of the
University of Pennsylvania, that I trust I may expect you to give me
this afternoon, not only your attention, but your sympathy.

The present situation is not without suggestions of my own experience. I
recall a lecture in the ordinary course, given by our professor of
mining, whose struggles with the English language were quite as
conspicuous as were our efforts to tell what he was driving at. He was
describing an ordinary windlass hoist used at the shaft of a mine. He
said "There is a windlass at de top of de shaft around which is coiled a
rope, on de two ends of which is fastened two er--er--_pans_, one of
which is a _bucket_ and de oder a _platform_." I mention this because I
shall ask you to attribute my shortcomings in this lecture, not so much
to my lack of familiarity with my native tongue, as to--well, because I
was not educated at Cornell University.

We all know what free air is. You who are privileged to live upon these
beautiful hills overlooking Ithaca and the lake, doubtless know more
about free air than we do who are choked in the dusty confines of New
York City. Compressed air is simply air under pressure. That pressure
may be an active one, as in the case of the piston of an air compressor;
or passive, as with the walls of a receiver or transmission pipe. It is
usual to define compressed air as air increased in density by pressure,
but we know that we may produce compressed air by heat alone. A simple
illustration of this is the pressure which will blow a cork from an
empty bottle when that bottle has been placed near the fire. Here we
have pressure, or compressed air, in the bottle produced by heat alone.

Having defined compressed air, we must next define heat; for in dealing
with compressed air, we are brought face to face with the complex laws
of Thermodynamics. We cannot produce compressed air without also
producing heat, and we cannot use compressed air as a power without
producing cold. Based on the material theory of heat, we would say that
when we take a certain volume of free air and compress it into a smaller
space, we get an increase in temperature because we have the heat of one
volume occupying less space, but no one at this date accepts the
material theory of heat. Your distinguished director, Professor
Thurston, in discussing "Steam and its Rivals," in the _Forum_, said:
"The science of Thermodynamics teaches that heat and mechanical energy
are only different phases of the same thing, the one being the motion of
molecules, and the other that of masses." This is the accepted theory of
heat. In other words, we do not believe that there is any such _thing_
as heat, but that what we call heat is only the sensible effect of
motion. In the cylinder of an air compressor the energy of the piston is
converted into molecular motion in the air and the result, or the
equivalent, is heat. A higher temperature means an increased speed of
vibration, and a lower temperature means that this speed of vibration is
reduced. If I hold an open cylinder in my left hand and a piston in my
right, and place the piston within the cylinder, I here have a confined
volume of air at the temperature and the pressure of this room. These
particles of air are in motion and produce heat and pressure in
proportion to that motion. Now if I press the piston to a point in the
center of the cylinder, that is, to one-half the stroke, I here decrease
the distance between the cylinder head and the piston just one-half,
hence each molecule of air strikes twice as many blows upon the piston
and head in traveling the same distance and the pressure is doubled. We
have also produced about 116 degrees of heat, because we have expended a
certain amount of work upon the air; the air has done no work in return,
but we have increased the energy of molecular vibration in the air and
the result is heat.

But what of this heat? What harm does it do? If I instantly release the
piston which I hold at one-half stroke it will return to its original
position, less only a little friction. I have, therefore, recovered all,
or nearly all, the power spent in compressing the air. I have simply
pressed a spring, and have let it recover. We see what a perfect spring
compressed air is. We see the possibility of expending one horse power
of energy upon air and getting almost exactly one horse power in return.
Such would be the case provided we used the compressed air power
_immediately and at the point where the compression takes place_. This
is never done, but the heat which has been boxed up[1] in the air is
lost by radiation, and we have lost power. Let us see to what extent
this takes place.

[Footnote 1: I use material terms because they add to simplicity of
expression and notwithstanding the fact that heat is vibration.]

Thirteen cubic feet of free air at normal temperature and barometric
pressure weigh about one pound. We have seen that 116 degrees of heat
have been liberated at half stroke. The gauge pressure at this point
reaches 24 pounds. According to Mariotte's law, "The temperature
remaining constant, the volume varies inversely as the pressure," we
should have 15 pounds gauge pressure. The difference, 9 pounds,
represents the effect of the heat of compression in increasing the
relative volume of the air.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.: CURVES OF COMPRESSION ILLUSTRATEDIN VOLUMES,
PRESSURES, AND TEMPERATURES.]

The specific heat of air under constant pressure being 0.238, we have
0.238 x 116 = 27.6 heat units produced by compressing one pound or
thirteen cubic feet of free air into one-half its volume. 27.6 x 772
(Joule's equivalent) = 21,307 foot pounds. We know that 33,000 foot
pounds is one horse power, and we see how easily about two-thirds of a
horse power in heat units may be produced and lost in compressing one
pound of air. I would mention here that exactly this same loss is
suffered when compressed air does work in an engine and is expanded down
to its original pressure. In other words, _the heat of compression and
the cold of expansion are in degree equal_.

Experiments made by M. Regnault and others on the influence of heat on
pressures and volumes of gases have enabled us to fix the absolute zero
of temperature as -461 degrees Fahrenheit. This point, 461 degrees below
zero, is the theoretical point at which a volume of air is reduced to
nothing. The volume of air at different temperatures is in proportion to
the absolute temperature, and on this basis Box gives us the following
table:

TABLE l.--OF THE VOLUME AND WEIGHT OF DRY AIR AT DIFFERENT TEMPERATURES
UNDER A CONSTANT ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE OF 29.92 INCHES OF MERCURY IN THE
BAROMETER (ONE ATMOSPHERE), THE VOLUME AT 32 deg. FAHRENHEIT BEING 1.
