a sigh, although I deemed it lost amid the puffs and groans of the
broken-winded brute, matchless in the complication of her complaints by
any save she, the poor man's mare, renowned in song, that died

  A mile aboon Dundee.

 [Alluding, as all Scotsmen know, to the humorous old song:--

 'The auld man's mare's dead,
  The puir man's mare's dead,
  The auld man's mare's dead,
  A mile aboon Dundee.']

But credit me, Darsie, the sigh which escaped me, concerned thee more
than myself, and regarded neither the superior mettle of your cavalry,
nor your greater command of the means of travelling. I could certainly
have cheerfully ridden with you for a few days; and assure yourself I
would not have hesitated to tax your better filled purse for our joint
expenses. But you know my father considers every moment taken from the
law as a step down hill; and I owe much to his anxiety on my account,
although its effects are sometimes troublesome. For example:

I found, on my arrival at the shop in Brown's Square, that the old
gentleman had returned that very evening, impatient, it seems, of
remaining a night out of the guardianship of the domestic Lares. Having
this information from James, whose brow wore rather an anxious look on
the occasion, I dispatched a Highland chairman to the livery stable with
my Bucephalus, and slunk, with as little noise as might be, into my own
den, where I began to mumble certain half-gnawed and not half-digested
doctrines of our municipal code. I was not long seated, when my father's
visage was thrust, in a peering sort of way, through the half-opened
door; and withdrawn, on seeing my occupation, with a half-articulated
HUMPH! which seemed to convey a doubt of the seriousness of my
application. If it were so, I cannot condemn him; for recollection of
thee occupied me so entirely during an hour's reading, that although
Stair lay before me, and notwithstanding that I turned over three or
four pages, the sense of his lordship's clear and perspicuous style
so far escaped me, that I had the mortification to find my labour was
utterly in vain.

Ere I had brought up my lee-way, James appeared with his summons to our
frugal supper--radishes, cheese, and a bottle of the old ale-only two
plates though--and no chair set for Mr. Darsie, by the attentive James
Wilkinson. Said James, with his long face, lank hair, and very long
pig-tail in its leathern strap, was placed, as usual, at the back of
my father's chair, upright as a wooden sentinel at the door of a
puppet-show. 'You may go down, James,' said my father; and exit
Wilkinson.--What is to come next? thought I; for the weather is not
clear on the paternal brow.

My boots encountered his first glance of displeasure, and he asked me,
with a sneer, which way I had been riding. He expected me to answer,
'Nowhere,' and would then have been at me with his usual sarcasm,
touching the humour of walking in shoes at twenty shillings a pair. But
I answered with composure, that I had ridden out to dinner as far as
Noble House. He started (you know his way) as if I had said that I
had dined at Jericho; and as I did not choose to seem to observe his
surprise, but continued munching my radishes in tranquillity, he broke
forth in ire.

'To Noble House, sir! and what had you to do at Noble House, sir? Do
you remember you are studying law, sir?--that your Scots law trials are
coming on, sir?--that every moment of your time just now is worth hours
at another time?--and have you leisure to go to Noble House, sir?--and
to throw your books behind you for so many hours?--Had it been a turn in
the meadows, or even a game at golf--but Noble House, sir!'

'I went so far with Darsie Latimer, sir, to see him begin his journey.'

'Darsie Latimer?' he replied in a softened tone--'Humph!--Well, I do not
blame you for being kind to Darsie Latimer; but it would have done as
much good if you had walked with him as far as the toll-bar, and then
made your farewells--it would have saved horse-hire--and your reckoning,
too, at dinner.'

'Latimer paid that, sir,' I replied, thinking to soften the matter; but
I had much better have left it unspoken.

'The reckoning, sir!' replied my father. 'And did you sponge upon any
man for a reckoning? Sir, no man should enter the door of a public-house
without paying his lawing.'

'I admit the general rule, sir,' I replied; 'but this was a parting-cup
between Darsie and me; and I should conceive it fell under the exception
of DOCH AN DORROCH.'

'You think yourself a wit,' said my father, with as near an approach to
a smile as ever he permits to gild the solemnity of his features; 'but
I reckon you did not eat your dinner standing, like the Jews at their
Passover? and it was decided in a case before the town-bailies of
Cupar-Angus, when Luckie Simpson's cow had drunk up Luckie Jamieson's
browst of ale while it stood in the door to cool, that there was no
damage to pay, because the crummie drank without sitting down; such
being the very circumstance constituting DOCH AN DORROCH, which is a
standing drink, for which no reckoning is paid. Ha, sir! what says your
advocateship (FIERI) to that? EXEPTIO FIRMAT REGULAM--But come, fill
your glass, Alan; I am not sorry ye have shown this attention to Darsie
Latimer, who is a good lad, as times go; and having now lived under my
roof since he left the school, why, there is really no great matter in
coming under this small obligation to him.'

As I saw my father's scruples were much softened by the consciousness of
his superiority in the legal argument, I took care to accept my pardon
as a matter of grace, rather than of justice; and only replied, we
should feel ourselves duller of an evening, now that you were absent. I
will give you my father's exact words in reply, Darsie. You know him so
well, that they will not offend you; and you are also aware, that there
mingles with the good man's preciseness and formality, a fund of shrewd
observation and practical good sense.

'It is very true,' he said; 'Darsie was a pleasant companion-but over
waggish, over waggish, Alan, and somewhat scatter-brained.--By the way,
Wilkinson must get our ale bottled in English pints now, for a quart
bottle is too much, night after night, for you and me, without his
assistance.--But Darsie, as I was saying, is an arch lad, and somewhat
light in the upper story--I wish him well through the world; but he has
little solidity, Alan, little solidity.'

I scorn to desert an absent friend, Darsie, so I said for you a little
more than my conscience warranted: but your defection from your legal
studies had driven you far to leeward in my father's good opinion.

'Unstable as water, he shall not excel,' said my father; 'or, as the
Septuagint hath it, EFUSA EST SICUT AQUA--NON CRESCAT. He goeth to
dancing-houses, and readeth novels--SAT EST.'

I endeavoured to parry these texts by observing, that the dancing-houses
amounted only to one night at La Pique's ball--the novels (so far as
matter of notoriety, Darsie) to an odd volume of TOM JONES.

'But he danced from night to morning,' replied my father, 'and he read
the idle trash, which the author should have been scourged for, at least
twenty times over. It was never out of his hand.'

I then hinted, that in all probability your fortune was now so easy as
to dispense with your prosecuting the law any further than you had done;
and therefore you might think you had some title to amuse yourself. This
was the least palatable argument of all.

'If he cannot amuse himself with the law,' said my father, snappishly
'it is the worse for him. If he needs not law to teach him to make a
fortune, I am sure he needs it to teach him how to keep one; and it
would better become him to be learning this, than to be scouring the
country like a land-louper, going he knows not where, to see he knows
not what, and giving treats at Noble House to fools like himself' (an
angry glance at poor me), 'Noble House, indeed!' he repeated, with
elevated voice and sneering tone, as if there were something offensive
to him in the name, though I will venture to say that any place in which
you had been extravagant enough to spend five shillings, would have
stood as deep in his reprobation.

Mindful of your idea, that my father knows more of your real situation
than he thinks proper to mention, I thought I would hazard a fishing
observation. 'I did not see,' I said, 'how the Scottish law would be
useful to a young gentleman whose fortune would seem to be vested in
England.'--I really thought my father would have beat me.

'D'ye mean to come round me, sir, PER AMBAGES, as Counsellor Pest says?
What is it to you where Darsie Latimer's fortune is vested, or whether
he hath any fortune, aye or no? And what ill would the Scottish law do
to him, though he had as much of it as either Stair or Bankton, sir? Is
not the foundation of our municipal law the ancient code of the Roman
Empire, devised at a time when it was so much renowned for its civil
polity, sir, and wisdom? Go to your bed, sir, after your expedition to
Noble House, and see that your lamp be burning and your book before you
ere the sun peeps. ARS LONGA, VITA BREVIS--were it not a sin to call the
divine science of the law by the inferior name of art.'

So my lamp did burn, dear Darsie, the next morning, though the owner
took the risk of a domiciliary visitation, and lay snug in bed, trusting
its glimmer might, without further inquiry, be received as sufficient
evidence of his vigilance. And now, upon this the third morning after
your departure, things are but little better; for though the lamp burns
in my den, and VOET ON THE PANDECTS hath his wisdom spread open before
me, yet as I only use him as a reading-desk on which to scribble this
sheet of nonsense to Darsie Latimer, it is probable the vicinity will be
of little furtherance to my studies.

And now, methinks, I hear thee call me an affected hypocritical varlet,
who, living under such a system of distrust and restraint as my father
chooses to govern by, nevertheless pretends not to envy you your freedom
and independence.

Latimer, I will tell you no lies. I wish my father would allow me a
little more exercise of my free will, were it but that I might feel the
pleasure of doing what would please him of my own accord. A little more
spare time, and a little more money to enjoy it, would, besides, neither
misbecome my age nor my condition; and it is, I own, provoking to see so
many in the same situation winging the air at freedom, while I sit here,
caged up like a cobbler's linnet, to chant the same unvaried lesson
from sunrise to sunset, not to mention the listening to so many lectures
against idleness, as if I enjoyed or was making use of the means of
amusement! But then I cannot at heart blame either the motive or the
object of this severity. For the motive, it is and can only be my
father's anxious, devoted, and unremitting affection and zeal for my
improvement, with a laudable sense of the honour of the profession to
which he has trained me.

As we have no near relations, the tie betwixt us is of even unusual
closeness, though in itself one of the strongest which nature can form.
I am, and have all along been, the exclusive object of my father's
anxious hopes, and his still more anxious and engrossing fears; so what
title have I to complain, although now and then these fears and hopes
lead him to take a troublesome and incessant charge of all my motions?
Besides, I ought to recollect, and, Darsie, I do recollect, that my
father upon various occasions, has shown that he can be indulgent as
well as strict. The leaving his old apartments in the Luckenbooths was
to him like divorcing the soul from the body; yet Dr. R---- did but
hint that the better air of this new district was more favourable to
my health, as I was then suffering under the penalties of too rapid a
growth, when he exchanged his old and beloved quarters, adjacent to the
very Heart of Midlothian, for one of those new tenements (entire within
themselves) which modern taste has so lately introduced. Instance also
the inestimable favour which he conferred on me by receiving you into
his house, when you had only the unpleasant alternative of remaining,
though a grown-up lad, in the society of mere boys. [The diminutive and
obscure place called Brown's Square, was hailed about the time of its
erection as an extremely elegant improvement upon the style of designing
and erecting Edinburgh residences. Each house was, in the phrase used
by appraisers, 'finished within itself,' or, in the still newer
phraseology, 'self-contained.' It was built about the year 1763-4; and
the old part of the city being near and accessible, this square soon
received many inhabitants, who ventured to remove to so moderate a
distance from the High Street.] This was a thing so contrary to all my
father's ideas of seclusion, of economy, and of the safety to my morals
and industry, which he wished to attain, by preserving me from the
society of other young people, that, upon my word, I am always rather
astonished how I should have had the impudence to make the request, than
that he should have complied with it.

Then for the object of his solicitude--Do not laugh, or hold up your
hands, my good Darsie; but upon my word I like the profession to which
I am in the course of being educated, and am serious in prosecuting the
preliminary studies. The law is my vocation--in an especial, and, I
may say, in an hereditary way, my vocation; for although I have not the
honour to belong to any of the great families who form in Scotland, as
in France, the noblesse of the robe, and with us, at least, carry their
heads as high, or rather higher, than the noblesse of the sword,--for
the former consist more frequently of the 'first-born of Egypt,'--yet
my grandfather, who, I dare say, was a most excellent person, had the
honour to sign a bitter protest against the Union, in the respectable
character of town-clerk to the ancient Borough of Birlthegroat; and
there is some reason--shall I say to hope, or to suspect?--that he may
have been a natural son of a first cousin of the then Fairford of that
Ilk, who had been long numbered among the minor barons. Now my father
mounted a step higher on the ladder of legal promotion, being, as you
know as well as I do, an eminent and respected Writer to his Majesty's
Signet; and I myself am destined to mount a round higher still, and wear
the honoured robe which is sometimes supposed, like Charity, to cover
a multitude of sins. I have, therefore, no choice but to climb upwards;
since we have mounted thus high, or else to fall down at the imminent
risk of my neck. So that I reconcile myself to my destiny; and while
you, are looking from mountain peaks, at distant lakes and firths, I am,
DE APICIBUS JURIS, consoling myself with visions of crimson and scarlet
gowns--with the appendages of handsome cowls, well lined with salary.

You smile, Darsie, MORE TUO, and seem to say it is little worth while to
cozen one's self with such vulgar dreams; yours being, on the contrary,
of a high and heroic character, bearing the same resemblance to mine,
that a bench, covered with purple cloth and plentifully loaded with
session papers, does to some Gothic throne, rough with barbaric pearl
and gold. But what would you have?--SUA QUEMQUE TRAHIT VOLUPTAS. And my
visions of preferment, though they may be as unsubstantial at present,
are nevertheless more capable of being realized, than your aspirations
after the Lord knows what. What says my father's proverb? 'Look to a
gown of gold, and you will at least get a sleeve of it.' Such is my
pursuit; but what dost thou look to? The chance that the mystery, as
you call it, which at present overclouds your birth and connexions, will
clear up into something inexpressibly and inconceivably brilliant;
and this without any effort or exertion of your own, but purely by the
goodwill of Fortune. I know the pride and naughtiness of thy heart, and
sincerely do I wish that thou hadst more beatings to thank me for, than
those which thou dost acknowledge so gratefully. Then had I thumped
these Quixotical expectations out of thee, and thou hadst not, as
now, conceived thyself to be the hero of some romantic history, and
converted, in thy vain imaginations, honest Griffiths, citizen and
broker, who never bestows more than the needful upon his quarterly
epistles, into some wise Alexander or sage Alquife, the mystical and
magical protector of thy peerless destiny. But I know not how it was,
thy skull got harder, I think, and my knuckles became softer; not to
mention that at length thou didst begin to show about thee a spark of
something dangerous, which I was bound to respect at least, if I did not
fear it.

And while I speak of this, it is not much amiss to advise thee to
correct a little this cock-a-hoop courage of thine. I fear much that,
like a hot-mettled horse, it will carry the owner into some scrape, out
of which he will find it difficult to extricate himself, especially if
the daring spirit which bore thee thither should chance to fail thee
at a pinch. Remember, Darsie, thou art not naturally courageous; on
the contrary, we have long since agreed that, quiet as I am, I have the
advantage in this important particular. My courage consists, I think,
in strength of nerves and constitutional indifference to danger; which,
though it never pushes me on adventure, secures me in full use of
my recollection, and tolerably complete self-possession, when danger
actually arrives. Now, thine seems more what may be called intellectual
courage; highness of spirit, and desire of distinction; impulses which
render thee alive to the love of fame, and deaf to the apprehension of
danger, until it forces itself suddenly upon thee. I own that, whether
it is from my having caught my father's apprehensions, or that I have
reason to entertain doubts of my own, I often think that this wildfire
chase of romantic situation and adventure may lead thee into some
mischief; and then what would become of Alan Fairford? They might make
whom they pleased Lord Advocate or Solicitor-General, I should never
have the heart to strive for it. All my exertions are intended to
Vindicate myself one day in your eyes; and I think I should not care
a farthing for the embroidered silk gown, more than for an old woman's
apron, unless I had hopes that thou shouldst be walking the boards to
admire, and perhaps to envy me.

That this may be the case, I prithee--beware! See not a Dulcinea, in
every slipshod girl, who, with blue eyes, fair hair, a tattered plaid,
and a willow-wand in her grip, drives out the village cows to the
loaning. Do not think you will meet a gallant Valentine in every English
rider, or an Orson in every Highland drover. View things as they are,
and not as they may be magnified through thy teeming fancy. I have seen
thee look at an old gravel pit, till thou madest out capes, and bays,
and inlets, crags and precipices, and the whole stupendous scenery of
the Isle of Feroe, in what was, to all ordinary eyes, a mere horse-pond.
Besides, did I not once find thee gazing with respect at a lizard, in
the attitude of one who looks upon a crocodile? Now this is, doubtless,
so far a harmless exercise of your imagination; for the puddle cannot
drown you, nor the Lilliputian alligator eat you up. But it is different
in society, where you cannot mistake the character of those you converse
with, or suffer your fancy to exaggerate their qualities, good or bad,
without exposing yourself not only to ridicule, but to great and serious
inconveniences. Keep guard, therefore, on your imagination, my dear
Darsie; and let your old friend assure you, it is the point of your
character most pregnant with peril to its good and generous owner.
Adieu! let not the franks of the worthy peer remain unemployed; above
all, SIS MEMOR MEI. A. F.




LETTER III

DARSIE LATIMER TO ALAN FAIRFORD

SHEPHERD'S BUSH.

I have received thine absurd and most conceited epistle. It is well
for thee that, Lovelace and Belford-like, we came under a convention
to pardon every species of liberty which we may take with each other;
since, upon my word, there are some reflections in your last which would
otherwise have obliged me to return forthwith to Edinburgh, merely to
show you I was not what you took me for.

Why, what a pair of prigs hast thou made of us! I plunging into scrapes,
without having courage to get out of them--thy sagacious self, afraid
to put one foot before the other, lest it should run away from its
companion; and so standing still like a post, out of mere faintness
and coldness of heart, while all the world were driving full speed past
thee. Thou a portrait-painter! I tell thee, Alan, I have seen a better
seated on the fourth round of a ladder, and painting a bare-breeched
Highlander, holding a pint-stoup as big as himself, and a booted
Lowlander, in a bobwig, supporting a glass of like dimensions; the whole
being designed to represent the sign of the Salutation.

How hadst thou the heart to represent thine own individual self, with
all thy motions, like those of a great Dutch doll, depending on the
pressure of certain springs, as duty, reflection, and the like; without
the impulse of which, thou wouldst doubtless have me believe thou
wouldst not budge an inch! But have I not seen Gravity out of his bed at
midnight? and must I, in plain terms, remind thee of certain mad pranks?
Thou hadst ever, with the gravest sentiments in thy mouth and the most
starched reserve in thy manner, a kind of lumbering proclivity towards
mischief, although with more inclination to set it a-going than address
to carry it through; and I cannot but chuckle internally, when I think
of having seen my most venerable monitor, the future president of some
high Scottish court, puffing, blowing, and floundering, like a clumsy
cart-horse in a bog where his efforts to extricate himself only plunged
him deeper at every awkward struggle, till some one--I myself, for
example--took compassion on the moaning monster, and dragged him out by
mane and tail.

As for me, my portrait is, if possible, even more scandalously
caricatured, I fail or quail in spirit at the upcome! Where canst thou
show me the least symptom of the recreant temper, with which thou hast
invested me (as I trust) merely to set off the solid and impassible
dignity of thine own stupid indifference? If you ever saw me tremble, be
assured that my flesh, like that of the old Spanish general, only quaked
at the dangers into which my spirit was about to lead it. Seriously,
Alan, this imputed poverty of spirit is a shabby charge to bring against
your friend. I have examined myself as closely as I can, being, in very
truth, a little hurt at your having such hard thoughts of me, and on
my life I can see no reason for them. I allow you have, perhaps, some
advantage of me in the steadiness and indifference of your temper; but I
should despise myself, if I were conscious of the deficiency in courage
which you seem willing enough to impute to me. However, I suppose, this
ungracious hint proceeds from sincere anxiety for my safety; and so
viewing it, I swallow it as I would do medicine from a friendly doctor,
although I believed in my heart he had mistaken my complaint.

This offensive insinuation disposed of, I thank thee, Alan, for the rest
of thy epistle. I thought I heard your good father pronouncing the word
Noble House, with a mixture of contempt and displeasure, as if the very
name of the poor little hamlet were odious to him, or as if you had
selected, out of all Scotland, the very place at which you had no call
to dine. But if he had had any particular aversion to that blameless
village and very sorry inn, is it not his own fault that I did not
accept the invitation of the Laird of Glengallacher, to shoot a buck
in what he emphatically calls 'his country'? Truth is, I had a strong
desire to have complied with his lairdship's invitation. To shoot a
buck! Think how magnificent an idea to one who never shot anything but
hedge-sparrows, and that with a horse-pistol purchased at a broker's
stand in the Cowgate! You, who stand upon your courage, may remember
that I took the risk of firing the said pistol for the first time, while
you stood at twenty yards' distance; and that, when you were persuaded
it would go off without bursting, forgetting all law but that of the
biggest and strongest, you possessed yourself of it exclusively for the
rest of the holidays. Such a day's sport was no complete introduction to
the noble art of deer-stalking, as it is practised in the Highlands; but
I should not have scrupled to accept honest Glengallacher's invitation,
at the risk of firing a rifle for the first time, had it not been for
the outcry which your father made at my proposal, in the full ardour of
his zeal for King George, the Hanover succession, and the Presbyterian
faith. I wish I had stood out, since I have gained so little upon
his good opinion by submission. All his impressions concerning the
Highlanders are taken from the recollections of the Forty-five, when he
retreated from the West Port with his brother volunteers, each to
the fortalice of his own separate dwelling, so soon as they heard the
Adventurer was arrived with his clans as near them as Kirkliston. The
flight of Falkirk--PARMA NON BENE SELECTA--in which I think your sire
had his share with the undaunted western regiment, does not seem to have
improved his taste for the company of the Highlanders; (quaere,
Alan, dost thou derive the courage thou makest such boast of from an
hereditary source?) and stories of Rob Roy Macgregor, and Sergeant Alan
Mhor Cameron, have served to paint them in still more sable colours to
his imagination. [Of Rob Roy we have had more than enough. Alan Cameron,
commonly called Sergeant Mhor, a freebooter of the same period, was
equally remarkable for strength, courage, and generosity.]

Now, from all I can understand, these ideas, as applied to the present
state of the country, are absolutely chimerical. The Pretender is
no more remembered in the Highlands than if the poor gentleman were
gathered to his hundred and eight fathers, whose portraits adorn the
ancient walls of Holyrood; the broadswords have passed into other hands;
the targets are used to cover the butter churns; and the race has sunk,
or is fast sinking, from ruffling bullies into tame cheaters. Indeed, it
was partly my conviction that there is little to be seen in the north,
which, arriving at your father's conclusions, though from different
premisses, inclined my course in this direction, where perhaps I shall
see as little.

One thing, however, I HAVE seen; and it was with pleasure the more
indescribable, that I was debarred from treading the land which my eyes
were permitted to gaze upon, like those of the dying prophet from top
of Mount Pisgah,--I have seen, in a word, the fruitful shores of merry
England; merry England! of which I boast myself a native, and on which
I gaze, even while raging floods and unstable quicksands divide us, with
the filial affection of a dutiful son.

Thou canst not have forgotten, Alan--for when didst thou ever forget
what was interesting to thy friend?--that the same letter from my friend
Griffiths, which doubled my income, and placed my motions at my own
free disposal, contained a prohibitory clause, by which, reason none
assigned, I was prohibited, as I respected my present safety and
future fortunes, from visiting England; every other part of the British
dominions, and a tour, if I pleased, on the Continent, being left to my
own choice.--Where is the tale, Alan, of a covered dish in the midst
of a royal banquet, upon which the eyes of every guest were immediately
fixed, neglecting all the dainties with which the table was loaded? This
cause of banishment from England--from my native country--from the land
of the brave, and the wise, and the free--affects me more than I am
rejoiced by the freedom and independence assigned to me in all other
respects. Thus, in seeking this extreme boundary of the country which
I am forbidden to tread, I resemble the poor tethered horse, which, you
may have observed, is always grazing on the very verge of the circle to
which it is limited by its halter.

Do not accuse me of romance for obeying this impulse towards the South;
nor suppose that, to satisfy the imaginary longing of an idle curiosity,
I am in any danger of risking the solid comforts of my present
condition. Whoever has hitherto taken charge of my motions has shown me,
by convincing proofs more weighty than the assurances which they have
witheld, that my real advantage is their principal object. I should be,
therefore, worse than a fool did I object to their authority, even when
it seems somewhat capriciously exercised; for assuredly, at my age, I
might--intrusted as I am with the care and management of myself in every
other particular--expect that the cause of excluding me from England
should be frankly and fairly stated for my own consideration and
guidance. However, I will not grumble about the matter. I shall know the
whole story one day, I suppose; and perhaps, as you sometimes surmise, I
shall not find there is any mighty matter in it after all.

Yet one cannot help wondering--but plague on it, if I wonder any
longer, my letter will be as full of wonders as one of Katterfelto's
advertisements. I have a month's mind, instead of this damnable
iteration of guesses and forebodings, to give thee the history of a
little adventure which befell me yesterday; though I am sure you will,
as usual, turn the opposite side of the spyglass on my poor narrative,
and reduce, MORE TUO, to the most petty trivialities, the circumstance
to which thou accusest me of giving undue consequence. Hang thee, Alan,
thou art as unfit a confidant for a youthful gallant with some spice
of imagination, as the old taciturn secretary of Facardin of Trebizond.
Nevertheless, we must each perform our separate destinies. I am doomed
to see, act, and tell; thou, like a Dutchman enclosed in the same
diligence with a Gascon, to hear, and shrug thy shoulders.

Of Dumfries, the capital town of this county, I have but little to say,
and will not abuse your patience by reminding you that it is built on
the gallant river Nith, and that its churchyard, the highest place of
the old town, commands an extensive and fine prospect. Neither will I
take the traveller's privilege of inflicting upon you the whole history
of Bruce poniarding the Red Comyn in the Church of the Dominicans
at this place, and becoming a king and patriot because he had been a
church-breaker and a murderer. The present Dumfriezers remember and
justify the deed, observing it was only a papist church--in evidence
whereof, its walls have been so completely demolished that no vestiges
of them remain. They are a sturdy set of true-blue Presbyterians, these
burghers of Dumfries; men after your father's own heart, zealous for the
Protestant succession--the rather that many of the great families around
are suspected to be of a different way of thinking, and shared, a great
many of them, in the insurrection of the Fifteen, and some in the more
recent business of the Forty-five. The town itself suffered in the
latter era; for Lord Elcho, with a large party of the rebels, levied
a severe contribution upon Dumfries, on account of the citizens having
annoyed the rear of the Chevalier during his march into England.

Many of these particulars I learned from Provost C--, who, happening to
see me in the market-place, remembered that I was an intimate of your
father's, and very kindly asked me to dinner. Pray tell your father that
the effects of his kindness to me follow me everywhere. I became tired,
however, of this pretty town in the course of twenty-four hours, and
crept along the coast eastwards, amusing myself with looking out for
objects of antiquity, and sometimes making, or attempting to make, use
of my new angling-rod. By the way, old Cotton's instructions, by which
I hoped to qualify myself for one of the gentle society of anglers, are
not worth a farthing for this meridian. I learned this by mere accident,
after I had waited four mortal hours. I shall never forget an impudent
urchin, a cowherd, about twelve years old, without either brogue or
bonnet, barelegged, and with a very indifferent pair of breeches--how
the villain grinned in scorn at my landing-net, my plummet, and the
gorgeous jury of flies which I had assembled to destroy all the fish
in the river. I was induced at last to lend the rod to the sneering
scoundrel, to see what he would make of it; and he had not only half
filled my basket in an hour, but literally taught me to kill two trouts
with my own hand. This, and Sam having found the hay and oats, not
forgetting the ale, very good at this small inn, first made me take
the fancy of resting here for a day or two; and I have got my grinning
blackguard of a piscator leave to attend on me, by paying sixpence a day
for a herd-boy in his stead.

A notably clean Englishwoman keeps this small house, and my bedroom is
sweetened with lavender, has a clean sash-window, and the walls are,
moreover, adorned with ballads of Fair Rosamond and Cruel Barbara Allan.
The woman's accent, though uncouth enough, sounds yet kindly in my ear;
for I have never yet forgotten the desolate effect produced on my
infant organs, when I heard on all sides your slow and broad northern
pronunciation, which was to me the tone of a foreign land. I am sensible
I myself have since that time acquired Scotch in perfection, and many a
Scotticism withal. Still the sound of the English accentuation comes to
my ears as the tones of a friend; and even when heard from the mouth of
some wandering beggar, it has seldom failed to charm forth my mite.
You Scotch, who are so proud of your own nationality, must make due
allowance for that of other folks.

On the next morning I was about to set forth to the stream where I had
commenced angler the night before, but was prevented by a heavy shower
of rain from stirring abroad the whole forenoon; during all which time,
I heard my varlet of a guide as loud with his blackguard jokes in the
kitchen, as a footman in the shilling gallery; so little are modesty and
innocence the inseparable companions of rusticity and seclusion.

When after dinner the day cleared, and we at length sallied out to the
river side, I found myself subjected to a new trick on the part of my
accomplished preceptor. Apparently, he liked fishing himself better than
the trouble of instructing an awkward novice such as I; and in hopes of
exhausting my patience, and inducing me to resign the rod, as I had done
the preceding day, my friend contrived to keep me thrashing the water
more than an hour with a pointless hook. I detected this trick at last,
by observing the rogue grinning with delight when he saw a large trout
rise and dash harmless away from the angle. I gave him a sound cuff,
Alan; but the next moment was sorry, and, to make amends, yielded
possession of the fishing-rod for the rest of the evening, he
undertaking to bring me home a dish of trouts for my supper, in
atonement for his offences.

Having thus got honourably rid of the trouble of amusing myself in a way
I cared not for, I turned my steps towards the sea, or rather the Solway
Firth which here separates the two sister kingdoms, and which lay at
about a mile's distance, by a pleasant walk over sandy knells, covered
with short herbage, which you call Links, and we English, Downs.

But the rest of my adventure would weary out my fingers, and must
be deferred until to-morrow, when you shall hear from me, by way of
continuation; and, in the meanwhile, to prevent over-hasty conclusions,
I must just hint to you, we are but yet on the verge of the adventure
which it is my purpose to communicate.




LETTER IV

THE SAME TO THE SAME

SHEPHERD'S BUSH.

I mentioned in my last, that having abandoned my fishing-rod as an
unprofitable implement, I crossed over the open downs which divided me
from the margin of the Solway. When I reached the banks of the great
estuary, which are here very bare and exposed, the waters had receded
from the large and level space of sand, through which a stream,
now feeble and fordable, found its way to the ocean. The whole was
illuminated by the beams of the low and setting sun, who showed
his ruddy front, like a warrior prepared for defence, over a huge
battlemented and turreted wall of crimson and black clouds, which
appeared like an immense Gothic fortress, into which the lord of day was
descending. His setting rays glimmered bright upon the wet surface of
the sands, and the numberless pools of water by which it was covered,
where the inequality of the ground had occasioned their being left by
the tide.

The scene was animated by the exertions of a number of horsemen, who
were actually employed in hunting salmon. Aye, Alan, lift up your
hands and eyes as you will, I can give their mode of fishing no name so
appropriate; for they chased the fish at full gallop, and struck them
with their barbed spears, as you see hunters spearing boars in the old
tapestry. The salmon, to be sure, take the thing more quietly than the
boars; but they are so swift in their own element, that to pursue
and strike them is the task of a good horseman, with a quick eye, a
determined hand, and full command both of his horse and weapon. The
shouts of the fellows as they galloped up and down in the animating
exercise--their loud bursts of laughter when any of their number caught
a fall--and still louder acclamations when any of the party made a
capital stroke with his lance--gave so much animation to the whole
scene, that I caught the enthusiasm of the sport, and ventured forward
a considerable space on the sands. The feats of one horseman, in
particular, called forth so repeatedly the clamorous applause of his
companions, that the very banks rang again with their shouts. He was a
tall man, well mounted on a strong black horse, which he caused to turn
and wind like a bird in the air, carried a longer spear than the others,
and wore a sort of fur cap or bonnet, with a short feather in it,
which gave him on the whole rather a superior appearance to the other
fishermen. He seemed to hold some sort of authority among them, and
occasionally directed their motions both by voice and hand: at which
times I thought his gestures were striking, and his voice uncommonly
sonorous and commanding.

The riders began to make for the shore, and the interest of the scene
was almost over, while I lingered on the sands, with my looks turned to
the shores of England, still gilded by the sun's last rays, and, as it
seemed, scarce distant a mile from me. The anxious thoughts which
haunt me began to muster in my bosom, and my feet slowly and insensibly
approached the river which divided me from the forbidden precincts,
though without any formed intention, when my steps were arrested by
the sound of a horse galloping; and as I turned, the rider (the same
fisherman whom I had formerly distinguished) called out to me, in
an abrupt manner, 'Soho, brother! you are too late for Bowness
to-night--the tide will make presently.'

I turned my head and looked at him without answering; for, to my
thinking, his sudden appearance (or rather, I should say, his unexpected
approach) had, amidst the gathering shadows and lingering light,
something in it which was wild and ominous.

'Are you deaf?' he added--'or are you mad?--or have you a mind for the
