the journey. We had a thrilling start; for it chanced to be a fair day
in Ballycastle, and we wheeled through a sea of squealing, bolting
pigs, stupid sheep, and unruly cows, all pursued on every side by their
drivers. To alight from a bicycle in such a whirl of beasts always seems
certain death; to remain seated diminishes, I believe, the number of
one's days of life to an appreciable extent. Francesca chose the first
course, and, standing still in the middle of the street, called upon
everybody within hearing to save her, and that right speedily. A crowd
of 'jibbing' heifers encircled her on all sides, while a fat porker,
'who (his driver said) might be a prize pig by his impidence,' and a
donkey that was feelin' blue-mouldy for want of a batin', tried to
poke their noses into the group. Salemina's only weapon was her scarlet
parasol, and, standing on the step of her side-car, she brandished this
with such terrible effect that the only bull in the cavalcade put up
his head and roared. "Have conduct, woman dear!" cried his owner to
Salemina. "Sure if you kape on moidherin' him wid that ombrelly, you'll
have him ugly on me immajently, and the divil a bit o' me can stop him."
"Don't be cryin' that way, asthore," he went on, going to Francesca's
side, and piloting her tenderly to the hedge. "Sure I'll nourish him wid
the whip whin I get him to a more remoted place."

We had no more adventures, but Francesca was so unhinged by her
unfortunate exit from Ballycastle that, after a few miles, she announced
her intention of putting her machine and herself on the car; whereupon
Benella proclaimed herself a competent cyclist, and climbed down
blithely to mount the discarded wheel. Her ideas of propriety were by
this time so developed that she rode ten or twelve feet behind me, where
she looked quaint enough, in her black dress and little black bonnet
with its white lawn strings.

"Sure it's a quare footman ye have, me lady," said a genial and friendly
person who was sitting by the roadside smoking his old dudeen. An
Irishman, somehow, is always going to his work 'jist,' or coming from
it, or thinking how it shall presently be done, or meditating on the
next step in the process, or resting a bit before taking it up again, or
reflecting whether the weather is on the whole favourable to its proper
performance; but however poor and needy he may be, it is somewhat
difficult to catch him at the precise working moment. Mr. Alfred Austin
says of the Irish peasants that idleness and poverty seem natural to
them. "Life to the Scotsman or Englishman is a business to conduct, to
extend, to render profitable. To the Irishman it is a dream, a little
bit of passing consciousness on a rather hard pillow; the hard part of
it being the occasional necessity for work, which spoils the tenderness
and continuity of the dream."

Presently we passed the Castle, rode along a neat quay with a row of
houses advertising lodgings to let; and here is Lever Cottage, where
Harry Lorrequer was written; for Lever was dispensary doctor in Port
Stewart when his first book was appearing in the Dublin University
Magazine.

We did not fancy Coleraine; it looked like anything but Cuil-rathain, a
ferny corner. Kitty's sweet buttermilk may have watered, but it had
not fertilised the plain, though the town itself seemed painfully
prosperous. Neither the Clothworkers' Inn nor the Corporation Arms
looked a pleasant stopping-place, and the humble inn we finally selected
for a brief rest proved to be about as gay as a family vault, with
a landlady who had all the characteristics of a poker except its
occasional warmth, as the Liberator said of another stiff and formal
person. Whether she was Scot or Saxon I know not; she was certainly not
Celt, and certainly no Barney McCrea of her day would have kissed her
if she had spilled ever so many pitchers of sweet buttermilk over the
plain; so we took the railway, and departed with delight for Limavady,
where Thackeray, fresh from his visit to Charles Lever, laid his
poetical tribute at the stockingless feet of Miss Margaret of that town.

O'Cahan, whose chief seat was at Limavady, was the principal urraght of
O'Neill, and when one of the great clan was 'proclaimed' at Tullaghogue
it was the magnificent privilege of the O'Cahan to toss a shoe over
his head. We slept at O'Cahan's Hotel, and--well, one must sleep; and
wherever we attend to that necessary function without due preparation,
we generally make a mistake in the selection of the particular spot.
Protestantism does not necessarily mean cleanliness, although it may
have natural tendencies in that direction; and we find, to our surprise
( a surprise rooted, probably, in bigotry), that Catholicism can be
as clean as a penny whistle, now and again. There were no special
privileges at O'Cahan's for maids, and Benella, therefore, had a
delightful evening in the coffee-room with a storm-bound commercial
traveller. As for Francesca and me, there was plenty to occupy us in our
regular letters to Ronald and Himself; and Salemina wrote several sheets
of thin paper to somebody,--no one in America, either, for we saw her
put on a penny stamp.

Our pleasant duties over, we looked into the cheerful glow of the turf
sods while I read aloud Thackeray's Peg of Limavady. He spells the town
with two d's, by the way, to insure its being rhymed properly with Paddy
and daddy.

     'Riding from Coleraine
        (Famed for lovely Kitty),
      Came a Cockney bound
        Unto Derry city;
      Weary was his soul,
        Shivering and sad he
      Bumped along the road
        Leads to Limavaddy.

          .  .  .  .

      Limavaddy inn's
        But a humble baithouse,
      Where you may procure
        Whisky and potatoes;
      Landlord at the door
        Gives a smiling welcome
      To the shivering wights
        Who to his hotel come.
      Landlady within
        Sits and knits a stocking,
      With a wary foot
        Baby's cradle rocking.

          .  .  .  .

      Presently a maid
        Enters with the liquor
      (Half a pint of ale
        Frothing in a beaker).
      Gads! I didn't know
        What my beating heart meant:
      Hebe's self I thought
        Entered the apartment.
      As she came she smiled,
        And the smile bewitching,
      On my word and honour,
        Lighted all the kitchen!

          .  .  .  .

      This I do declare,
        Happy is the laddy
      Who the heart can share
        Of Peg of Limavaddy.
      Married if she were,
        Blest would be the daddy
      Of the children fair
        Of Peg of Limavaddy.
      Beauty is not rare
        In the land of Paddy,
      Fair beyond compare
        Is Peg of Limavaddy.'

This cheered us a bit; but the wind sighed in the trees, the rain
dripped on the window panes, and we felt for the first time a
consciousness of home-longing. Francesca sat on a low stool, looking
into the fire, Ronald's last letter in her lap, and it was easy indeed
to see that her heart was in the Highlands. She has been giving us a few
extracts from the communication, an unusual proceeding, as Ronald, in
his ordinary correspondence, is evidently not a quotable person. We
smiled over his account of a visit to his old parish of Inchcaldy in
Fifeshire. There is a certain large orphanage in the vicinity, in which
we had all taken an interest, chiefly because our friends the Macraes of
Pettybaw House were among its guardians.

It seems that Lady Rowardennan of the Castle had promised the orphans,
en bloc, that those who passed through an entire year without once
falling into falsehood should have a treat or festival of their own
choosing. On the eventful day of decision, those orphans, male and
female, who had not for a twelve-month deviated from the truth by a
hair's-breadth, raised their little white hands (emblematic of their
pure hearts and lips), and were solemnly counted. Then came the unhappy
moment when a scattering of small grimy paws was timidly put up, and
their falsifying owners confessed that they had fibbed more than once
during the year. These tearful fibbers were also counted, and sent from
the room, while the non-fibbers chose their reward, which was to sail
around the Bass Rock and the Isle of May in a steam tug.

On the festival day, the matron of the orphanage chanced on the happy
thought that it might have a moral effect on the said fibbers to see the
non-fibbers depart in a blaze of glory; so they were taken to the beach
to watch the tug start on its voyage. The confessed criminals looked
wretched enough, Ronald wrote, when forsaken by their virtuous
playmates, who stepped jauntily on board, holding their sailor hats
on their heads and carrying nice little luncheon baskets; so miserably
unhappy, indeed, did they seem that certain sympathetic and ill-balanced
persons sprang to their relief, providing them with sandwiches,
sweeties, and pennies. It was a lovely day, and when the fibbers' tears
were dried they played merrily on the sand, their games directed and
shared by the aforesaid misguided persons.

Meantime a high wind had sprung up at sea, and the tug was tossed to
and fro upon the foamy deep. So many and so varied were the ills of
the righteous orphans that the matron could not attend to all of them
properly, and they were laid on benches or on the deck, where they
languidly declined luncheon, and wept for a sight of the land. At five
the tug steamed up to the home landing. A few of the voyagers were able
to walk ashore, some were assisted, others were carried; and as the
pale, haggard, truthful company gathered on the beach, they were met by
a boisterous, happy crowd of Ananiases and Sapphiras, sunburned, warm,
full of tea and cakes and high spirits, and with the moral law already
so uncertain in their minds that at the sight of the suffering non-liars
it tottered to its fall.

Ronald hopes that Lady Rowardennan and the matron may perhaps have
gained some useful experience by the incident, though the orphans,
truthful and untruthful, are hopelessly mixed in their views of
right-doing.

He is staying now at the great house of the neighbourhood, while his new
manse is being put in order. Roderick, the piper, he says, has a grand
collection of pipe tunes given him by an officer of the Black Watch.
Francesca, when she and Ronald visit the Castle on their wedding
journey, is to have 'Johnnie Cope' to wake her in the morning, 'Brose
and Butter' just before dinner is served, a reel, a strathspey, and
a march while the meal is going on, and, last of all, the 'Highland
Wedding.' Ronald does not know whether there are any Lowland Scots
or English words to this pipe tune, but it is always played in the
Highlands after the actual marriage, and the words in Gaelic are, 'Alas
for me if the wife I have married is not a good one, for she will eat
the food and not do the work!'

"You don't think Ronald meant anything personal in quoting that?" I
asked Francesca teasingly; but she shot me such a reproachful look that
I hadn't the heart to persist, her face was so full of self-distrust and
love and longing.

What creatures of sense we are, after all; and in certain moods, of what
avail is it if the beloved object is alive, safe, loyal, so long as
he is absent? He may write letters like Horace Walpole or
Chesterfield--better still, like Alfred de Musset, or George Sand, or
the Brownings; but one clasp of the hand that moved the pen is worth an
ocean of words! You believe only in the etherealised, the spiritualised
passion of love; you know that it can exist through years of separation,
can live and grow where a coarser feeling would die for lack of
nourishment; still though your spirit should be strong enough to meet
its spirit mate somewhere in the realms of imagination, and the bodily
presence ought not really to be necessary, your stubborn heart of flesh
craves sight and sound and touch. That is the only pitiless part
of death, it seems to me. We have had the friendship, the love, the
sympathy, and these are things that can never die; they have made us
what we are, and they are by their very nature immortal; yet we would
come near to bartering all these spiritual possessions for the 'touch of
a vanished hand, and the sound of a voice that is still.'

How could I ever think life easy enough to be ventured on alone! It
is so beautiful to feel oneself of infinite value to one other human
creature; to hear beside one's own step the tread of a chosen companion
on the same road. And if the way be dusty or the hills difficult to
climb, each can say to the other, 'I love you, dear; lean on me and walk
in confidence. I can always be counted on, whatever happens.'



Chapter XIX. 'In ould Donegal.'

     'Here's a health to you, Father O'Flynn!
      Slainte, and slainte, and slainte agin;
      Pow'rfulest preacher and tenderest teacher,
      And kindliest creature in ould Donegal.'
                                Alfred Perceval Graves.

                                     Coomnageeha Hotel,
                                       In Ould Donegal.

It is a far cry from the kingdom of Kerry to 'ould Donegal,' where we
have been travelling for a week, chiefly in the hope of meeting Father
O'Flynn. We miss our careless, genial, ragged, southern Paddy just a
bit; for he was a picturesque, likable figure, on the whole, and easier
to know than this Ulster Irishman, the product of a mixed descent.

We did not stop long in Belfast; for if there is anything we detest,
when on our journeys, it is to mix too much with people of industry,
thrift, and business sagacity. Sturdy, prosperous, calculating,
well-to-do Protestants are well enough in their way, and undoubtedly
they make a very good backbone for Ireland; but we crave something more
romantic than the citizen virtues, or we should have remained in our own
country, where they are tolerably common, although we have not as yet
anything approaching over-production.

Belfast, it seems, is, and has always been, a centre of Presbyterianism.
The members of the Presbytery protested against the execution of Charles
I., and received an irate reply from Milton, who said that 'the blockish
presbyters of Clandeboy' were 'egregious liars and impostors,' who meant
to stir up rebellion 'from their unchristian synagogue at Belfast in a
barbarous nook of Ireland.'

Dr. La Touche writes to Salemina that we need not try to understand all
the religious and political complications which surround us. They are
by no means as violent or as many as in Thackeray's day, when the great
English author found nine shades of politico-religious differences in
the Irish Liverpool. As the impartial observer must, in such a case,
necessarily displease eight parties, and probably the whole nine,
Thackeray advised a rigid abstinence from all intellectual curiosity.
Dr. La Touche says, if we wish to know the north better, it will do us
no harm to study the Plantation of Ulster, the United Irish
movement, Orangeism, Irish Jacobitism, the effect of French and Swiss
Republicanism in the evolution of public sentiment, and the close
relation and affection that formerly existed between the north of
Ireland and New England. (This last topic seems to appeal to Salemina
particularly.) He also alludes to Tories and Rapparees, Rousseau and
Thomas Paine and Owen Roe O'Neill, but I have entirely forgotten their
connection with the subject. Francesca and I are thoroughly enjoying
ourselves, as only those people can who never take notes, and never
try, when Pandora's box is opened in their neighbourhood, to seize the
heterogeneous contents and put them back properly, with nice little
labels on them.

Ireland is no longer a battlefield of English parties, neither is it
wholly a laboratory for political experiment; but from having been both
the one and the other, its features are a bit knocked out of shape and
proportion, as it were. We have bought two hideous engravings of the
Battle of the Boyne and the Secret of England's Greatness; and whenever
we stay for a night in any inn where perchance these are not, we pin
them on the wall, and are received into the landlady's heart at once. I
don't know which is the finer study: the picture of his Majesty William
III. crossing the Boyne, or the plump little Queen presenting a huge
family Bible to an apparently uninterested black youth. In the latter
work of art the eye is confused at first as the three principal features
approach each other very nearly in size, and Francesca asked innocently,
"Which IS the secret of England's greatness--the Bible, the Queen, or
the black man?"

This is a thriving town, and we are at a smart hotel which had for two
years an English manager. The scent of the roses hangs round it still,
but it is gradually growing fainter under the stress of small patronage
and other adverse circumstances. The table linen is a trifle ragged,
though clean; but the circle of red and green wineglasses by each plate,
an array not borne out by the number of vintages on the wine-list, the
tiny ferns scattered everywhere in innumerable pots, and the dozens of
minute glass vases, each holding a few blue hyacinths, give an air of
urban elegance to the dining-room. The guests are requested, in printed
placards, to be punctual at meals, especially at the seven-thirty table
d'hote dinner, and the management itself is punctual at this function
about seven forty-five. This is much better than in the south, where
we, and sixty other travellers, were once kept waiting fifteen minutes
between the soup and the fish course. When we were finally served with
half-cooked turbot, a pleasant-spoken waitress went about to each table,
explaining to the irate guests that the cook was 'not at her best.' We
caught a glimpse of her as she was being borne aloft, struggling and
eloquent, and were able to understand the reason of her unachieved
ideals.

There is nothing sacred about dinner to the average Irishman; he is
willing to take anything that comes, as a rule, and cooking is not
regarded as a fine art here. Perhaps occasional flashes of starvation
and seasons of famine have rendered the Irish palate easier to please;
at all events, wherever the national god may be, its pedestal is not
in the stomach. Our breakfast, day after day, week after week, has been
bacon and eggs. One morning we had tomatoes on bacon, and concluded that
the cook had experienced religion or fallen in love, since both these
operations send a flush of blood to the brain and stimulate the mental
processes. But no; we found simply that the eggs had not been brought in
time for breakfast. There is no consciousness of monotony--far from
it; the nobility and gentry can at least eat what they choose, and they
choose bacon and eggs. There is no running of the family gamut, either,
from plain boiled to omelet; poached or fried eggs on bacon it is,
weekdays and Sundays. The luncheon, too, is rarely inspired: they eat
cold joint of beef with pickled beetroot, or mutton and boiled potatoes,
with unfailing regularity, finishing off at most hotels with semolina
pudding, a concoction intended for, and appealing solely to, the taste
of the toothless infant, who, having just graduated from rubber rings,
has not a jaded palate.

How the long breakfast bill at an up-to-date Belfast hostelry awed us,
after weeks of bacon and eggs! The viands on the menu swam together
before our dazed eyes.

     Porridge
     Fillets of Plaice
     Whiting
     Fried Sole
     Savoury Omelet
     Kidneys and Bacon
     Cold Meats.

I looked at this array like one in a dream, realising that I had lost
the power of selection, and remembering the scientific fact that unused
faculties perish for want of exercise. The man who was serving us
rattled his tray, shifted his weight wearily from one foot to the other
and cleared his throat suggestively; until at last I said hastily,
"Bacon and eggs, please," and Salemina, the most critical person in the
party, murmured, "The same."

It is odd to see how soon, if one has a strong sense of humanity, one
feels at home in a foreign country. I, at least, am never impressed by
the differences, but only by the similarities, between English-speaking
peoples. We take part in the life about us here, living each experience
as fully as we can, whether it be a 'hiring fair' in Donegal or a
pilgrimage to the Doon 'Well of Healing.' Not the least part of the
pleasure is to watch its effect upon the Derelict. Where, or in what
way, could three persons hope to gain as much return from a monthly
expenditure of twenty dollars, added to her living and travelling
expenses, as we have had in Miss Benella Dusenberry? We sometimes ask
ourselves what we found to do with our time before she came into the
family, and yet she is as busy as possible herself.

Having twice singed Francesca's beautiful locks, she no longer attempts
hair-dressing; while she never accomplishes the lacing of an evening
dress without putting her knee in the centre of your back once, at
least, during the operation. She can button shoes, and she can mend
and patch and darn to perfection; she has a frenzy for small laundry
operations, and, after washing the windows of her room, she adorns every
