Vaisampayana continued,--"Then Sakuni, well-skilled at dice, took up
the dice and (casting them) said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'


SECTION LX

"Yudhishthira said,--'Thou hast won this stake of me by unfair means.
But be not so proud, O Sakuni. Let us play staking thousands upon
thousands. I have many beautiful jars each full of a thousand Nishkas
in my treasury, inexhaustible gold, and much silver and other minerals.
This, O king, is the wealth with which I will stake with thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Thus addressed, Sakuni said unto the chief of
the perpetuators of the Kuru race, the eldest of the sons of Pandu,
king Yudhishthira, of glory incapable of sustaining any diminution.
'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'This my sacred and victorious and royal car which
gladdeneth the heart and hath carried us hither, which is equal unto a
thousand cars, which is of symmetrical proportions and covered with
tiger-skin, and furnished with excellent wheels and flag-staffs which
is handsome, and decked with strings of little bells, whose clatter is
even like the roar of the clouds or of the ocean, and which is drawn by
eight noble steeds known all over the kingdom and which are white as
the moon-beam and from whose hoofs no terrestrial creature can
escape--this, O king, is my wealth with which I will stake with thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, Sakuni ready with the
dice, and adopting unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have
won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have a hundred thousand serving-girls, all
young, and decked with golden bracelets on their wrists and upper arms,
and with nishkas round their necks and other ornaments, adorned with
costly garlands and attired in rich robes, daubed with the sandal
paste, wearing jewels and gold, and well-skilled in the four and sixty
elegant arts, especially versed in dancing and singing, and who wait
upon and serve at my command the celestials, the Snataka Brahmanas, and
kings. With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, Sakuni ready with the
dice, adopting unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira. 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have thousands of serving-men, skilled in
waiting upon guests, always attired in silken robes, endued with wisdom
and intelligence, their senses under control though young, and decked
with ear-rings, and who serve all guests night and day with plates and
dishes in hand. With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, Sakuni, ready with the
dice, adopting unfair means said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have, O son of Suvala, one thousand musty
elephants with golden girdles, decked with ornaments, with the mark of
the lotus on their temples and necks and other parts, adorned with
golden garlands, with fine white tusks long and thick as plough-shafts,
worthy of carrying kings on their backs, capable of bearing every kind
of noise on the field of battle, with huge bodies, capable of battering
down the walls of hostile towns, of the colour of new-formed clouds,
and each possessing eight she-elephants. With this wealth, O king, I
will stake with thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Unto Yudhishthira who had said so, Sakuni,
the son of Suvala, laughingly said, 'Lo, I have won it!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have as many cars as elephants, all furnished
with golden poles and flag-staffs and well-trained horses and warriors
that fight wonderfully and each of whom receiveth a thousand coins as
his monthly pay whether he fighteth or not. With this wealth, O king, I
will stake with thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"When these words had been spoken, the wretch
Sakuni, pledged to enmity, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won it.'

"Yudhishthira said.--'The steeds of the Tittiri, Kalmasha, and
Gandharva breeds, decked with ornaments, which Chitraratha having been
vanquished in battle and subdued cheerfully gave unto Arjuna, the
wielder of the Gandiva. With this wealth, O king, I will stake with
thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing this, Sakuni, ready at dice, adopting
unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira: 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have ten thousand cars and vehicles unto which
are yoked draught animals of the foremost breed. And I have also sixty
thousand warriors picked from each order by thousands, who are all
brave and endued with prowess like heroes, who drink milk and eat good
rice, and all of whom have broad chests. With this wealth, O king, I
will stake with thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing this, Sakuni ready at dice, adopting
unfair means said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have four hundred Nidis (jewels of great value)
encased in sheets of copper and iron. Each one of them is equal to five
draunikas of the costliest and purest leaf gold of the Jatarupa kind.
With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing this, Sakuni ready at dice, adopting
foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won it!'"


SECTION LXI

Vaisampayana said,--"During the course of this gambling, certain to
bring about utter ruin (on Yudhishthira), Vidura, that dispeller of all
doubts, (addressing Dhritarashtra) said, 'O great king, O thou of the
Bharata race, attend to what I say, although my words may not be
agreeable to thee, like medicine to one that is ill and about to
breathe his last. When this Duryodhana of sinful mind had, immediately
after his birth, cried discordantly like a jackal, it was well known
that he had been ordained to bring about the destruction of the Bharata
race. Know, O king, that he will be the cause of death of ye all. A
jackal is living in thy house, O king, in the form of Duryodhana. Thou
knowest it not in consequence of thy folly. Listen now to the words of
the Poet (Sukra) which I will quote. They that collect honey (in
mountains), having received what they seek, do not notice that they are
about to fall. Ascending dangerous heights, abstracted in the pursuit
of what they seek, they fall down and meet with destruction. This
Duryodhana also, maddened with the play at dice, like the collector of
honey, abstracted in what he seeketh, marketh not the consequences.
Making enemies of these great warriors, he beholdeth not the fall that
is before him. It is known to thee, O thou of great wisdom, that
amongst the Bhojas, they abandoned, for the good of the citizens a son
that was unworthy of their race. The Andhakas, the Yadavas, and the
Bhojas uniting together, abandoned Kansa. And afterwards, when at the
command of the whole tribe, the same Kansa had been slain by Krishna
that slayer of foes, all the men of the tribe became exceedingly happy
for a hundred years. So at thy command, let Arjuna slay this Suyodhana.
And in consequence of the slaying of this wretch, let the Kurus be glad
and pass their days in happiness. In exchange of a crow, O great king,
buy these peacocks--the Pandavas; and in exchange of a jackal, buy
these tigers. For the sake of a family a member may be sacrificed; for
the sake of a village a family may be sacrificed, for the sake of a
province a village may be sacrificed and for the sake of one's own soul
the whole earth may be sacrificed. Even this was what the omniscient
Kavya himself, acquainted with the thoughts of every creature, and a
source of terror unto all foes, said unto the great Asuras to induce
them to abandon Jambha at the moment of his birth. It is said that a
certain king, having caused a number of wild birds that vomited gold to
take up their quarters in his own house, afterwards killed them from
temptation. O slayer of foes, blinded by temptation and the desire of
enjoyment, for the sake of gold, the king destroyed at the same time
both his present and future gains. Therefore, O king, prosecute not the
Pandavas from desire of profit, even like the king in story. For then,
blinded by folly thou wilt have to repent afterwards, even like the
person that killed the birds. Like a flower-seller that plucketh (many
flowers) in the garden from trees that he cherisheth with affection
from day to day, continue, O Bharata, to pluck flowers day by day from
the Pandavas. Do not scorch them to their roots like a fire-producing
breeze that reduceth everything to black charcoal. Go not, O king, unto
the region of Yama, with thy sons and troops, for who is there that is
capable of fighting with the sons of Pritha, together? Not to speak of
others, is the chief of the celestials at the head of the celestials
themselves, capable of doing so?'


SECTION LXII

"Vidura said,--'Gambling is the root of dissensions. It bringeth about
disunion. Its consequences are frightful. Yet having recourse to this,
Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana createth for himself fierce enmity. The
descendants of Pratipa and Santanu, with their fierce troops and their
allies the Vahlikas, will, for the sins of Duryodhana meet with
destruction. Duryodhana, in consequence of this intoxication, forcibly
driveth away luck and prosperity from his kingdom, even like an
infuriate bull breaking his own horns himself. That brave and learned
person who disregarding his own foresight, followeth, O king, (the bent
of) another man's heart, sinketh in terrible affliction even like one
that goeth into the sea in a boat guided by a child. Duryodhana is
gambling with the son of Pandu, and thou art in raptures that he is
winning. And it is such success that begeteth war, which endeth in the
destruction of men. This fascination (of gambling) that thou has
well-devised only leadeth to dire results. Thus hast thou simply
brought on by these counsels great affliction to thy heart. And this
thy quarrel with Yudhishthira, who is so closely related to thee, even
if thou hadst not foreseen it, is still approved by thee. Listen, ye
sons of Santanu, ye descendants of Pratipa, who are now in this
assembly of the Kauravas, to these words of wisdom. Enter ye not into
the terrible fire that hath blazed forth following the wretch. When
Ajatasatru, the son of Pandu, intoxicated with dice, giveth way to his
wrath, and Vrikodara and Arjuna and the twins (do the same), who, in
that hour of confusion, will prove your refuge? O great king, thou art
thyself a mine of wealth. Thou canst earn (by other means) as much
wealth as thou seekest to earn by gambling. What dost thou gain by
winning from the Pandavas their vast wealth? Win the Pandavas
themselves, who will be to thee more than all the wealth they have. We
all know the skill of Suvala in play. This hill-king knoweth many
nefarious methods in gambling. Let Sakuni return whence he came. War
not, O Bharata, with the sons of Pandu!'


SECTION LXIII

"Duryodhana said,--'O Kshatta, thou art always boasting of the fame of
our enemies, deprecating the sons of Dhritarashtra. We know, O Vidura,
of whom thou art really fond. Thou always disregardest us as children.
That man standeth contest, who wisheth for success unto those that are
near to him and defeat unto those that are not his favourites. His
praise and blame are applied accordingly. Thy tongue and mind betray
thy heart. But the hostility thou showeth in speech is even greater
than what is in thy heart. Thou hast been cherished by us like a
serpent on our lap. Like a cat thou wishest evil unto him that
cherisheth thee. The wise have said that there is no sin graver than
that of injuring one's master. How is it, O Kshatta, that thou dost not
fear this sin? Having vanquished our enemies we have obtained great
advantages. Use not harsh words in respect of us. Thou art always
willing to make peace with the foes. And it is for this reason that
thou hatest us always. A man becometh a foe by speaking words that are
unpardonable. Then again in praising the enemy, the secrets of one's
own party should not be divulged. (Thou however, transgressest this
rule). Therefore, O thou parasite, why dost thou obstruct us so? Thou
sayest whatever thou wishest. Insult us not. We know thy mind. Go and
learn sitting at the feet of the old. Keen up the reputation that thou
hast won. Meddle not with the affairs of other men. Do not imagine that
thou art our chief. Tell us not harsh words always, O Vidura. We do not
ask thee what is for our good. Cease, irritate not those that have
already borne too much at thy hands. There is only one Controller, no
second. He controlleth even the child that is in the mother's womb. I
am controlled by Him. Like water that always floweth in a downward
course, I am acting precisely in the way in which He is directing me.
He that breaketh his head against a stone-wall, and he that feedeth a
serpent, are guided in those acts of theirs by their own intellect.
(Therefore, in this matter I am guided by my own intelligence). He
becometh a foe who seeketh to control others by force. When advice,
however, is offered in a friendly spirit, the learned bear with it. He
again that hath set fire to such a highly inflammable object as
camphor, beholdeth not its ashes, if he runneth immediately to
extinguish it. One should not give shelter to another who is the friend
of his foes, or to another who is ever jealous of his protector or to
another who is evil-minded. Therefore, O Vidura, go whither-so-ever
thou pleasest. A wife that is unchaste, however well-treated, forsaketh
her husband yet.'

"Vidura addressing Dhritarashtra, said, 'O monarch, tell us
(impartially) like a witness what thou thinkest of the conduct of those
who abandon their serving-men thus for giving instruction to them. The
hearts of kings are, indeed, very fickle. Granting protection at first,
they strike with clubs at last. O prince (Duryodhana), thou regardest
thyself as mature in intellect, and, O thou of bad heart, thou
regardest me as a child. But consider that he is a child who having
first accepted one for a friend, subsequently findeth fault with him.
An evil-hearted man can never be brought to the path of rectitude, like
an unchaste wife in the house of a well-born person. Assuredly,
instruction is not agreeable to this bull of the Bharata race like a
husband of sixty years to a damsel that is young. After this, O king,
if thou wishest to hear words that are agreeable to thee, in respect of
all acts good or bad, ask thou women and idiots and cripples or persons
of that description. A sinful man speaking words that are agreeable may
be had in this world. But a speaker of words that are disagreeable
though sound as regimen, or a hearer of the same, is very rare. He
indeed, is a king's true ally who disregarding what is agreeable or
disagreeable to his master beareth himself virtuously and uttereth what
may be disagreeable but necessary as regimen. O great king, drink thou
that which the honest drink and the dishonest shun, even humility,
which is like a medicine that is bitter, pungent, burning,
unintoxicating, disagreeable, and revolting. And drinking it, O king,
regain thou thy sobriety. I always wish Dhritarashtra and his sons
affluence and fame. Happen what may unto thee, here I bow to thee (and
take my leave). Let the Brahmanas wish me well. O son of Kuru, this is
the lesson I carefully inculcate, that the wise should never enrage
such as adders as have venom in their very glances!'


SECTION LXIV

"Sakuni said,--'Thou hast, O Yudhishthira, lost much wealth of the
Pandavas. If thou hast still anything that thou hast not yet lost to
us, O son of Kunti, tell us what it is!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'O son of Suvala, I know that I have untold
wealth. But why is it, O Sakuni, that thou askest me of my wealth? Let
tens of thousands and millions and millions and tens of millions and
hundreds of millions and tens of billions and hundreds of billions and
trillions and tens of trillions and hundreds of trillions and tens of
quadrillions and hundreds of quadrillions and even more wealth be
staked by thee. I have as much. With that wealth, O king, I will play
with thee.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with the dice,
adopting unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have, O son of Suvala, immeasurable kine and
horses and milch cows with calves and goats and sheep in the country
extending from the Parnasa to the eastern bank of the Sindu. With this
wealth, O king, I will play with thee.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this Sakuni, ready with the dice, adopting
unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have my city, the country, land, the wealth of
all dwelling therein except of the Brahmanas, and all those persons
themselves except Brahmanas still remaining to me. With this wealth, O
king, I will play with thee.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with the dice,
adopting foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo! I have won.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'These princes here, O king, who look resplendent
in their ornaments and their ear-rings and Nishkas and all the royal
ornaments on their persons are now my wealth. With this wealth, O king,
I play with thee.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with his dice,
adopting foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo! I have won them.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'This Nakula here, of mighty arms and leonine
neck, of red eyes and endued with youth, is now my one stake. Know that
he is my wealth.'

"Sakuni said,--'O king Yudhishthira, prince Nakula is dear to thee. He
is already under our subjection. With whom (as stake) wilt thou now
play?'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Saying this, Sakuni cast those dice, and said unto
Yudhishthira, 'Lo! He hath been won by us.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'This Sahadeva administereth justice. He hath also
acquired a reputation for learning in this world. However undeserving
he may be to be staked in play, with him as stake I will play, with
such a dear object as it, indeed, he were not so!'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with the dice,
adopting foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo! I have won.'

"Sakuni continued,--'O king, the sons of Madri, dear unto thee, have
both been won by me. It would seem, however, that Bhimasena and
Dhananjaya are regarded very much by thee.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'Wretch! thou actest sinfully in thus seeking to
create disunion amongst us who are all of one heart, disregarding
morality.'

"Sakuni said,--'One that is intoxicated falleth into a pit (hell) and
stayeth there deprived of the power of motion. Thou art, O king, senior
to us in age, and possessed of the highest accomplishments. O bull of
the Bharata race, I (beg my pardon and) bow to thee. Thou knowest, O
Yudhishthira, that gamesters, while excited with play, utter such
ravings that they never indulge in the like of them in their waking
moments nor even in dream.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'He that taketh us like a boat to the other shore
of the sea of battle, he that is ever victorious over foes, the prince
who is endued with great activity, he who is the one hero in this
world, (is here). With that Falguna as stake, however, undeserving of
being made so, I will now play with thee.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with the dice,
adopting foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo! I have won.'

"Sakuni continued,--'This foremost of all wielders of the bow, this son
of Pandu capable of using both his hands with equal activity hath now
been won by me. O play now with the wealth that is still left unto
thee, even with Bhima thy dear brother, as thy stake, O son of Pandu.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'O king, however undeserving he may be of being
made a stake, I will now play with thee by staking Bhimasena, that
prince who is our leader, who is the foremost in fight,--even like the
wielder of the thunder-bolt--the one enemy of the Danavas,--the
high-souled one with leonine neck and arched eye-brows and eyes looking
askance, who is incapable of putting up with an insult, who hath no
equal in might in the world, who is the foremost of all wielders of the
mace, and who grindeth all foes,'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this, Sakuni, ready with the dice adopting
foul means, said unto Yudhishthira. 'Lo! I have won.'

"Sakuni continued,--'Thou hast, O son of Kunti, lost much wealth,
horses and elephants and thy brothers as well. Say, if thou hast
anything which thou hast not lost.'

"Yudhishthira, said--'I alone, the eldest of all my brothers and dear
unto them, am still unwon. Won by thee, I will do what he that is won
will have to do.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing this Sakuni, ready with the dice, adopting
foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo! I have won.'

"Sakuni continued,--'Thou hast permitted thyself to be won. This is
