have nothing more important to do than nurse this baby. It's my first
job. So don't be worrying about my work. Luckily it is Saturday and
Mary, Carl, and Timmie will look after the little tots and get the
dinner. I told 'em to when I was there just now. Martin and Nell seldom
give any trouble, and should James Frederick wake up, one of the boys
is to run down and tell me."

Julie placed a hand impulsively on that of the other woman.

"I can never thank you," murmured she brokenly.

"Oh, don't be talking of thanks," Mrs. McGregor interrupted, cutting
her short. "My dosing may do no good and before the day is out you may
be calling me a meddlesome old harridan. Wait and see what happens. I'm
not one that sets much store by thanks, anyhow. After all, what does it
amount to but a string of words? If we can cure the baby it will be all
the thanks I want."

If the sentiment the final phrase so modestly expressed was genuine
Mrs. McGregor at least received the boon she craved, for as if by magic
the baby began to mend that very night and before the week passed was
out of danger and on the high road to recovery. Julie's gratitude was
touching to see.

"'Twas Mrs. McGregor saved Joey," declared she to every person she met.
"She's as good as any doctor--better, for Joey might have died but for
her. Should I go through life kneeling to her on my bended knees I
never could thank her enough."

Julie O'Dowd did not go through life, however, kneeling before Mrs.
McGregor on her bended knees; but she did a more practical and
efficacious thing. Everywhere she went she sounded the praise of her
neighbor; talked of her kindness, her wisdom, her unselfishness, until
not only Mulberry Court, but the area adjoining it began to view the
gaunt, austere figure from quite a different angle. Shyly the women
began to nod a greeting to the stranger.

"It's just her way to be curt and quick," explained they to one
another. "She doesn't mean a thing in the world by it. Julie says she's
sharp and prickly as a chestnut burr, but with the sweetest of hearts
inside."

Indeed it was not long before Mrs. McGregor proved her right to this
generous summary of her character. Other neighbors gained courage to
consult her about their children and in time about their troubles in
general.

"Ask Mrs. McGregor," became the slogan of Mulberry Court. "She'll
know."

And she unfailingly did. She it was who prescribed medicines; gave
advice; suggested plain, common-sense remedies for every variety of
dilemma. Nevertheless she wasted no words about it. She had no time to
fool away, she let it be known. Whatever she did had to be done with
pitiless directness. Often her council was delivered through a crack in
the door or even given through the door itself; and there were
instances when it was shouted through the keyhole. But no matter where
the words came from they were always helpful and friendly and the
neighbors came to understand the manner accompanying them and did not
resent it.

Her children understood it too. Mary, Carl, Timmie, Martin,
four-year-old Nell, and even wee James Frederick (whom Mrs. McGregor
unfailingly addressed by his full name) all understood and worshipped
their quick-tongued mother. Together with the rest of Mulberry Court
they also had supreme faith in whatever she did and said, and were
certain that every calamity under the sun could be set right if only
she were consulted and her advice followed.

And yet loyal as they were, there was one point on which neither Carl
nor Mary agreed with their mother. Of course she was right--she must be
right; wasn't she always so? Yet notwithstanding this belief they could
not but feel that it would be a far better arrangement for them to
leave school and go into the cotton mills where their father had worked
for so many years. Ever so many of the boys and girls they knew worked
there. Why should they remain in the High School struggling with
algebra, geometry, history, Latin, English and bookkeeping when they
might be earning money? It seemed senseless. Certainly the family
needed money badly enough. Were there not always endless pairs of shoes
to be bought? Caps, mittens, suits, stockings, and underclothing to
purchase; not to mention food and groceries? And then there was the
rent.

Ah, Mary and Carl knew very well about the rent, the bills, and all the
other worrisome things. Even Timmie, who was only nine, knew about
them; and once Martin, aged six, had startled his elders by proclaiming
on a sunny May morning, "This is rent day, isn't it, Ma?" in a tone of
awe, as if the date marked some gruesome ceremony.

You came to understand about rent day when toward the end of the month
there were no pennies to be had, and you were forced to wait for the
shoes or rubbers you needed.

That rent day was a milestone to be dreaded even Nell vaguely guessed
and when it had passed in safety all the McGregors, both big and
little, joined in a general rejoicing.

Ma was the magician who accomplished that happy miracle. Ma always
contrived to accomplish everything, so of course she managed rent day
along with the rest of the wonders she performed. She made no secret,
either, of how she did it. She sewed! Yes, she sewed for a dressmaker
who sent her marvelous dresses to embroider. For Ma was very clever
with her needle and right out of the blue sky could make the most
beautiful flowers and figures with colored silks. She could also do
beading and she was teaching Mary how to do it. Already Mary could do
quite nice embroidery and exquisite plain sewing.

Ma was very proud of this.

But what Mary did chiefly when she was not at school was to help with
the housework so her mother would be free to sew. That was the
important thing. Ma must not roughen her hands or the silks she worked
with would be spoiled. So Mary cooked and scrubbed like a real little
housewife; took care of the younger children and kept them quiet so
they would not interrupt their mother.

And between school hours Carl and Tim helped also. They built the
fires, wiped the dishes, ran errands, and brought home any bits of
discarded wood they found in the streets. In fact, there was not one
drone in the McGregor hive. Even James Frederick had learned to lie in
his crib and play by himself when everybody was busy.

It was a happy family, the McGregors. Its members, it is true, did not
have everything they wanted. They never expected that. Those who had
mittens lacked new caps, and those who had caps were often forced to
wear patched shoes and made-over stockings. Martin's reefer frequently
did duty for Nell, and Mrs. McGregor's cape for Mary. However, all that
did not matter. They were happy and that was the chief thing, happy in
spite of patched clothing, coats that were outgrown, rubbers that were
either sizes too small or dropped off at every step, and shoes that
were common property. The little flat was sometimes hot in summer and
cold in winter but it took more than that to dampen the McGregors'
spirits.

When they had lentil soup, how steaming and delicious it was! When meat
stew, what a dish for the gods! And who could have asked for a greater
treat than a thick slice of Mary's fresh bread coated over with
molasses or peanut butter?

Every month a long blue envelope containing a check from Uncle
Frederick arrived and that, together with what Mary and her mother
earned, kept the household going. But they seldom saw Uncle James
Frederick Dillingham. He was always sailing to India, China, or South
America. Sometimes letters came from him and picture postcards showing
strange countries and people in foreign dress. But the check never
failed to make its appearance and as it was highly important that it
should, everybody agreed that since Uncle Frederick could not come
himself he was almost as satisfactorily represented by this magic bit
of blue paper. The check brought things and perhaps if Uncle Frederick
himself had come he wouldn't. You could not tell about uncles you had
never seen.

In the meantime the blue paper kept stew in the kettle and the shelter
of Mulberry Court above their heads, and what better service could an
uncle render his relatives?

Hence Uncle Frederick's name came to be mentioned constantly in the
household.

"Remember, Timmie, those are your Uncle Frederick Dillingham's rubber
boots and be thankful to him for them," the boy's mother would observe
when she brought home the purchase. Or "Uncle Frederick is presenting
you with those stockings, Carl. See you don't forget it."

And the children did not forget. Gradually their unknown uncle came to
assume in their imagination a form that would have surprised him had he
been suddenly confronted by it. It was that of a benevolent-faced fairy
clad in robes of purple and ermine, and wearing on his head a crown
resplendent with gems of myriad colors. In his hand he carried a
scepter terminating in a star that far outshone the jewels he wore, a
scepter all powerful to work miracles. He was the good angel of the
McGregor home, the Aladdin to whom they owed all sorts of blessings.

And yet withal Uncle James Frederick Dillingham was one and the same
person who sailed the _Charlotte_ to India, China, South America, or
some other ephemeral port. How paradoxical was this dual role, how
alluring and how ridiculous!




CHAPTER II

CARL TELLS A STORY


It was April. Already spring was in the air. The grass in the parks was
turning green, forsythia bloomed golden, and boys were playing marbles
on the streets and sidewalks. Even Mulberry Court, shut in as it was,
felt the impulse of the awakening season. The landlord came, looked
over the premises, and after viewing the general shabbiness became
reckless enough to order a broken windowpane to be reset, some of the
tumble-down ceilings to be repaired, and the fire escapes and window
frames to be repainted.

Painting at Mulberry Court was a terrible ordeal. As there was not an
inch of the place that was not crowded to the limit of its capacity,
painting meant that milk bottles, improvised ice chests, and woodpiles
must be put somewhere else; and where that somewhere could be was an
enigma. Furthermore, to add to this difficulty there were the
children--dozens of them tumbling over one another and surging in and
out the doors, a fact that rendered painting a precarious undertaking.
Youthful investigators examined the moist pigment; chubby fingers drew
hieroglyphics in it; while the less curious forgot it altogether and
carried away on their garments imprints of vermilion and black that
transformed their otherwise dingy garments into robes of oriental
splendor.

Carl McGregor was no exception to the rule for wherever calamity lurked
he was sure to be in its vicinity.

"I'd know you'd never rest until you got a patch of red paint on
yourself," announced his mother, surveying him as he started toward the
door. "As, if buying you sweaters ain't enough without your leaning
plumb up against the fire escape and stamping a whole decalcomania of
red stripes on your back like as if you were a convict."

"Is there paint on me, Ma?"

"Is there? I suppose you had no notion of it."

"I hadn't--honest Injun."

"Well, aside from the fact that you're barred up and down neat as if
the lines were ruled there's nothing the matter with you," returned his
mother with a faint smile.

"Oh, I'm awfully sorry, Ma. Truly I am."

"Sorry? I'll be bound you are. You are always a bundle of regrets when
it is too late to help anything. However, you need weep no tears for
that sweater needed washing anyway. You're that rough on your clothes
that none of 'em keep clean more than a minute. I'll get some gasoline
and soak it out in the shed and it will be like new. Peel it off and
give it to me."

"I'm sorry, Ma," the boy repeated.

"It's no great matter, sonny. Children must be children. I'm past
expecting them to be grown-ups," his mother said kindly. "If you hadn't
been getting into the paint you most likely would have been getting
into something else. You have a genius for such mishaps. I'm glad it
was no worse."

Reassured, Carl grinned.

"I do seem to have a good many--" he hesitated, then added,
"misfortunes."

"Misfortunes, do you call 'em? Sure that's a pretty polite word to
apply to the things that manage to happen to you," sniffed Mrs.
McGregor. "I suppose it was a misfortune when you tumbled underneath
the watering cart; and a misfortune when you sat down in the wet tar! A
misfortune when you sent the snowball through the schoolroom window; to
say nothing of the creamcake you treated Jakie Sullivan to that
well-nigh killed him."

"I didn't know the creamcake was going to make him sick."

"No; 'twas just your misfortune. You seem to attract adventures like
that. Why, if I was to let you go into the cotton mills as you are
always begging to do you'd have every machine there out of order in
less than a week and yourself hashed up into little pieces into the
bargain."

She had touched upon an unlucky subject for instantly, with flaming
face, the lad confronted her.

"No, I wouldn't. I wish you would let me go into the mills, Ma. You
might let me try it. Ever so many boys no older than I are working
there and earning oodles of money. If we had more money we could----"

"We could be having an automobile, no doubt, and going to Palm Beach
winters," was the grim response. "Well, Palm Beach or not, you're not
going into any mill so long as we can keep body and soul together
without your doing it. You are going to get an education--you and Mary
too--if it costs me my life. I'm not going to have you grow up knowing
nothing and being nothing. Some day you'll see I was right and thank me
for it."

"I thank you now, Ma," declared Carl soberly. "But that doesn't make me
relish Latin and history any better."

"No matter if it doesn't. What you like is of no consequence," Mrs.
McGregor announced, with a majestic sweep of her hand. "The chief thing
is that you exercise your mind and learn how to use it. The Latin
itself amounts to nothing. It is like boxing gloves or a punching bag,
a thing that serves its turn to limber up your brain. It is learning to
think that counts."

Carl's face brightened.

"The teacher was saying something like that just the other day,"
asserted he eagerly. "He was telling us about some of the people who
had done great things in the world and explaining how long and how hard
they had to work at them. The inventors, for instance, had to think and
think about the things they invented. It didn't just come to them all
in a minute as I used to believe it did."

Although his mother did not look up from her sewing she nodded
encouragingly.

"There was Eli Whitney," continued Carl, coming nearer. "I remembered
about him because of the mills here. He invented the cotton gin, you
know. Mr. Kimball told us that Whitney went through Yale and then
started down South to be a tutor in somebody's family without any idea
of ever being an inventor. But when he got to where he was going the
people who had hired him had changed their minds and found somebody
else and poor Eli Whitney was out of a job."

"A shabby trick!"

"Yes. Still, it was lucky for him, just the same," responded Carl,
"because on the way down he had met the widow of General Greene and she
was sorry for him and asked him to her house. He'd just been vaccinated
because there was lots of smallpox in the South and he was feeling
rotten. You know how sore your arm gets and how sick you are sometimes.
Remember Martin? Well, anyhow, Mrs. Greene either knew what it meant to
be vaccinated or else she was kind of ashamed of the way her part of
the country had treated Eli Whitney. Or maybe she was just kind-hearted
like you. Anyhow she invited Mr. Whitney to come to Savannah when she
saw how mean he felt and the fit he threw at finding himself so far
from home without money or a job."

"Carl!"

"Well, wouldn't you have thrown a fit? I think Mrs. Greene was a
peach," went on Carl, passing serenely over the reproof. "She was
mighty kind to take a stranger into her house when he had no friends."

"Certainly."

"By this time Mr. Whitney had decided to be a lawyer and while he was
making his home at Mrs. Greene's he began to read all the law books he
could lay hands on. Then one day Mrs. Greene busted her embroidery
frame----"

"Did _what_?"

"Oh, you know, Ma," fretted Carl, at being interrupted. "She smashed
the thing and----"

"What had that to do with it?"

"Everything; because, you see, Eli Whitney mended it so nicely that
Mrs. Greene was pleased into the ground and thought he was the smartest
person ever. His father had had a shop at home where as a boy he had
learned to use tools. But of course Mrs. Greene didn't know that. All
she knew was that he made a corking job of her embroidery frame and so
one day when some Georgia gentlemen were there at dinner and were
telling how hard it was to get the seeds out of cotton she up and said,
'You should ask Mr. Whitney how to do it; he can do anything,' and to
prove it she toted out her embroidery frame to show them."

"Did _what_?"

"Oh, say, Ma, don't keep bothering me when I'm trying to tell you a
story," Carl complained peevishly. "You know what I mean well enough."

"Much as ever," was the grim reply.

The lad grinned.

"Well, anyhow, the Georgia cotton men talked to Eli Whitney, explaining
how the cotton stuck to the seeds and got all broken to bits when you
tried to get them out; and how it took nearly a whole day to separate a
pound of cotton fiber from the seeds. And then the cotton planters went
on to tell how there was lots and lots of land in the South where you
couldn't raise rice but could raise cotton if it wasn't such a chore--"
(a warning glance from his mother caused Carl hastily to amend the
phrase) "such a piece of work to get the seeds out. Eli Whitney
listened to their talk and after the men had gone he thought he'd try
to make some sort of a machine that would clear cotton of the seeds."

"And did he?"

"You betcha! I mean, yes, he did. Whitney was no boob." (This time Mrs.
McGregor failed to protest; perhaps she decided it was useless.) "He
had, as I told you, made wheels and canes and knives and nails in his
father's workshop at home. He had even made a violin. So he wasn't at
all fussed about trying to make a cotton gin. I guess he had a hunch he
could do it."

"A _what_?" gasped Mrs. McGregor involuntarily.

"A hunch means he knew he could turn the trick."

The mother shook her head ruefully.

"And me almost killing myself to give you an education!" she ejaculated
beneath her breath.

"Well, anyway, Ma, slang or no slang, I'd be telling you nothing at all
about Eli Whitney if I hadn't gone to school, so cheer up," asserted
Carl impishly.

He heard his mother laugh. Mrs. McGregor had the good old Scotch sense
of humor and when her flashing smile came it was always a delight to
the beholder.

"You're a good boy, Carl, if you do speak the language of an orang-outang,"
she answered. "Where you pick up such a dialect I cannot imagine."

"Oh, it's easy enough to pick it up, Ma. The stunt is not to. Why, what
I've been saying just now is nothing to what I could say if I let
