were hurrying up the steep hill, pulling their sleds behind them,
turning them about in a flash, jumping upon them, and off again head
foremost, not to lose a second of the precious time until the moon shone
brightly in the crisp sky, and the evening bells were ringing. All the
boys were shouting, "Once more; just once more!" and the girls were as
eager as they. At the top, however, where they all threw themselves upon
their sleds, there was great excitement and uproar. Three boys each
claimed to have reached the top first, and would not yield an inch to
each other, but all must go down at once. And so they pushed this way
and that, until a big boy called Cheppi was hustled quite against the
bank of snow at the side of the coast, and found that his heavily ironed
sled was fast in the snow. He was furious, for he saw that now all the
other fellows would get off before he could extricate himself. He looked
about, and presently espied a little slender girl standing near by in
the snow. She was very pale, and held both arms wrapped in her apron to
keep them warmer, for all that she trembled and shivered with cold from
head to feet. She looked so feeble and miserable, that she seemed to
Cheppi just the proper object upon whom to vent his rage.

"Can't you get out of a fellow's way, you stupid thing? What are you
standing there for? You have not even a sled with you. Just wait a
moment; I'll help you to get along!"

So saying, he thrust his boot into the snow, intending to kick it over
the girl. She sprang back, however, quickly, so that she went quite up
to her knees in the snow, and said timidly, "I was only looking on."

Cheppi was thrusting his boot into the snow again with the same
intention towards the child, when he received such a tremendous box
on the ear from behind, that it almost knocked him off his sled.
"Just you wait a minute," he shouted, beside himself with anger, for
his ear tingled as it had never tingled before; and doubling up his
fists, he turned himself to see who was his hidden foe. A boy stood
behind him, and looked on very quietly, holding his sled in position
for another coast.

"Come on," he said calmly.

It was Otto Ritter, a class-mate of Cheppi, with whom he was always
engaged in some little quarrel. Otto was a tall, slender boy, about
eleven years old, and not nearly of the same strength as Cheppi; but
the latter had learned more than once that with hands and feet Otto was
much the more skilful of the two. He did not strike out, but held his
fists doubled up, and cried out angrily, "Let me alone: I am not
meddling with you."

"But I am with you," replied Otto, in a very warlike tone. "What
business have you to chase Wiseli away like that, and then to kick snow
at her, I should like to know? I have been looking at you, you coward!
teasing a little girl who cannot defend herself."

With these words he turned his back contemptuously towards Cheppi, and
called out to Wiseli, who was standing shivering all this time in the
deep snow,--

"Come out of the snow, Wiseli. Oh, how you are shivering, child! Have
you no sled really, and only been able to look on? Here, take mine, and
go down once quickly. Do you know how?"

The pale, timid girl did not know what to make of this kindness. She had
been looking on for some little time, watching the sleds as they flew
down the hill, and thinking, "Oh, how I should like to go down to the
very bottom just once!" when she saw two, and sometimes three, going
down on the same sled. But now she might go down all alone by herself,
and that, too, on the very handsomest sled on the coast,--the one with a
lion's head, that went faster than any other, because it was light, and
was bound with iron. She was so happy that she stood still, looking
after Cheppi with a half feeling that he might strike her if she dared
to enjoy such a piece of good fortune. But there he stood quite
tranquilly, as if nothing whatever had happened; and by him stood Otto,
with such a protecting air, that she took courage, and seated herself on
the handsome sled; and when Otto called out, "Go on; go on, Wiseli!" she
obeyed, and away she flew as if the wind were behind her. Very soon Otto
heard the coasters all toiling up the hill again, and he called out,
"Stay among the first, Wiseli, and go down again; after that we must go
home." Wiseli was only too happy to do as she was bid, and enjoyed for a
second time the long-wished-for pleasure. Then she brought the sled to
its owner, thanking him shyly for his kindness, but more with her
beaming eyes than with words; and off she scampered as fast as she could
go. Otto felt decidedly happier. "Where is Pussy?" he called out,
peering into the already scattering crowd. "Here she is!" replied a
merry voice; and out of the knot of children appeared a red-cheeked,
plump little girl, who slipped her hand into her big brother's
protecting palm, and went with him towards their father's house as
quickly as possible. It was very late, and they had over-passed the
allotted time for coasting.




CHAPTER II.

AT HOME WHERE ALL ARE HAPPY.


When Otto and his sister came noisily in through the deep stone entrance
of their father's house, the old servant Trine appeared in a doorway
holding a light high above her head to see whence came all the uproar,
and from whom. "So," at last she said, half scoldingly, half pleasantly;
"your mother has been asking for you for a long time, but there was no
trace of you, although it struck eight nobody knows how long ago." Old
Trine had been maid-servant in the family when the children's mother
came into the world, so she was an authority in the household, and felt
that she was one of its members,--to tell the truth, the very head of
the establishment; for surely she was the oldest in age and experience.
The dear old woman was fairly foolish in her fondness for her master's
children, and very proud of all their qualities and acquisitions. She
would not let this be seen, however, but employed an indignant tone when
speaking to them; for she thought it best for their education not to
appear perfectly satisfied with their conduct.

"Off with your shoes, on with your slippers!" she called out at once,
according to rule; but her order was immediately executed by the
commander, for she knelt before Otto while she spoke, to take off his
wet shoes. He had sunk down upon the nearest seat. His little sister
stood perfectly still in the middle of the room without stirring, which
was such an unusual circumstance, that Trine looked over her shoulder
two or three times to see what it could mean. Now that Otto was
equipped, it was Pussy's turn to sit down and be attended to; but she
stood stock still, and did not stir. "Well, well! if we wait there
until summer comes, our shoes will get dry of themselves," said Trine,
still on her knees. "Hsh, hsh, Trine! I hear something. Who is in the
big parlor?" said Pussy, lifting her forefinger up a little
threateningly. "Everybody who has dry shoes: nobody else admitted. Now
make up your mind to sit down," said Trine. But instead of sitting
down, Pussy made a spring upward, and cried, "Now I hear it again;
Uncle Max laughs just like that." "What!" cried Otto, and reached the
parlor-door with one leap.

"Wait, wait!" Pussy called after him, and ran to the door at the same
time; but she was caught and placed on the seat, although old Trine had
hard work to get the shoes off the little kicking feet; but perseverance
at last accomplished the business, and off ran Pussy out of one door and
through the other into the big parlor, where truly sat Uncle Max in the
arm-chair. Now there was a fine jubilee, and a hugging and kissing over
and over. Uncle Max certainly made as much noise as the children, and it
was a long time before they were quieted enough to speak a rational word
to each other. A visit from this uncle was always a time of great
delight for the children, and with good reason, for he was extravagantly
fond of them. He was a great traveller, and only came to see them once
in two years; but then he made up for his long absence by giving himself
entirely to his little friends as if he were no older than they; and the
queer and enchanting presents that he had stuffed into every pocket for
his little niece and nephew would be hard to describe.

Uncle Max was a naturalist, and travelled to every corner of the world,
bringing back something curious and interesting from each place.

At last supper was served, to the immense satisfaction of the whole
party,--for the children always brought home new appetites from the
coasting-ground, and were prepared, both old and young, to do full
justice to the steaming dishes set before them.

"Well," said Colonel Ritter, glancing across the table at his little
daughter, who was seated beside her mother, and already too busily
engaged in satisfying her hunger to look up from her plate. "Well, well;
it seems rather strange to think that Pussy has no hand to spare for her
papa to-day. I have not had one single kiss, and now it is too late."

With a contrite air Pussy pushed back her plate, saying, "O papa, I
forgot! I will give you"--

But her father said, quickly, "No, no; do not make a disturbance now,
child. Give me your hand across the table; we will have the rest later.
That will do now, Pussy."

"What was this child christened, Marie? I was certainly present at the
ceremony, but I have utterly forgotten her name. Not Pussy, I am sure,"
said Uncle Max, laughing.

"You certainly were present, Max," replied his sister, "for you are the
child's godfather. She was named Marie. At this time her father
nicknamed her Pussy, and Otto has multiplied that in the most
nonsensical manner."

"Oh, no, mamma; not nonsensical," cried Otto, quite seriously. "You see,
uncle, it follows in very sensible order. When the little thing is
gentle and good, then I call her 'Pussy.' That is not always the case,
however, and 'Puss' does for some of her moods; but when she is angry,
and looks like a regular cross-patch, then I call her 'Old Cat.'"

"Yes, yes, Otto," answered his sister; and when you are angry, you look
like a--like a"--

"Like a man," said Otto; and as Pussy had no better comparison ready,
she went on busily eating her pudding.

Uncle Max laughed heartily. "Pussy is right," he said. "She does far
better in pursuing her present occupation than in answering back such
slanders. But, children," he began again, after a pause, "it is more
than a year since I was here, and you have not told me about any thing
that has taken place during my absence."

The latest events were those that occurred first to the children; and
they began to tell, generally both speaking together, the story of
Cheppi's rude treatment of Wiseli on the coast, and of how cold the girl
was, and how she stood shivering in the snow, and had no sled of her
own, but got a chance to coast down twice after all.

"That is right, Otto," said his father. "You must honor your name. You
must always be a true knight for the persecuted and unprotected. Who is
this Wiseli?"

"You cannot know any thing about the girl nor her mother," said his
wife. "But Uncle Max knows Wiseli's mother very well. You remember that
thin weaver who was our neighbor, don't you, brother? He had an only
daughter with big brown eyes, who often came to us at the parsonage, and
sang so sweetly. Can't you remember her now?"

While Uncle Max was trying to recall the somewhat fading recollections
of his youth, old Trine put her head into the room, saying,--

"The carpenter Andrew would like to speak to you, Mrs. Ritter, if it
will not disturb you too much."

This apparently innocent message produced a wonderful effect upon the
whole family. Mrs. Ritter put down the tablespoon, with which she was
about to help her brother a second time to fruit, and said hastily, "If
you will excuse me, gentlemen," and left the room. Otto sprang up so
quickly that he knocked his chair over backwards, and then fell over it
himself in his haste to get away. Pussy was about to follow the others;
but her uncle, seeing the movement, put his arms about her, and held her
fast. She struggled, however, and said, entreatingly,--

"Let me go, uncle; let me go. Really, I must go."

"Where do you want to go, Pussy?"

"To see the carpenter Andrew. Let me go quickly. Help, papa; help!"

"If you will tell me what you have to say to the carpenter, I will
let you go."

"The sheep has only two legs left, and no tail at all; and the carpenter
is the only person who can mend him. Now _do_ let me go!" And now Pussy
was off too.

The gentlemen looked at each other, and Max burst out into a merry
laugh. "Who is this carpenter Andrew, pray, who seems to have the power
of attracting your whole family to his feet?"

"You ought to be able to answer that question better than I," replied
the colonel. "He must also be one of the friends of your youth. The fever
of adoration you ought to understand also: it must be one of your family
characteristics; and your sister has introduced it into her family. I
can only tell you this much: this Andrew is the very corner-stone of my
house. Every thing depends upon him, and we should all fall to pieces if
his support were withdrawn from us. Andrew is the counsellor, comforter,
safety, and aid in any trouble. If my wife thinks she wants any utensil
for household use, even if she does not know how it should look, nor
what use to put it too, Andrew the carpenter invents it, and makes it on
the spot. If the kitchen is on fire, or the water gives out there, or in
the laundry, Andrew the carpenter smothers the fire, and procures floods
of water. If my son does some sad piece of mischief, Andrew the
carpenter repairs the damage in a trice. If my daughter smashes all the
crockery, Andrew the carpenter glues it together at once. So you see
that this man is really the very pillar of my edifice; and if any thing
should happen to him, we should straightway go to pieces."

Mrs. Ritter had returned to the room during this account of Andrew the
carpenter's virtues, and her husband had heightened the description for
her benefit. Uncle Max shouted with laughter.

"Yes, laugh away; laugh away!" said she. "For all that, I know very well
what a treasure I possess in Andrew the carpenter."

"So do I, for that matter," said her husband, laughing merrily.

"I do, too," said Pussy, heartily, who was again on her seat at
table.

"So do I," grumbled Otto, while he rubbed his shins, that ached from his
recent fall over the chair.

"Well, now we are all of one mind about it, and the children can go
quietly to bed," said their mother. These words did not tend to restore
quiet, for the children became rebellious; but it was useless. Old Trine
stood on the threshold, and was ready to carry out the family rules and
regulations. Off marched the children, and presently their mother also
disappeared again; for there were the evening prayers to be said, and
she never failed to be at their bedside for that.

When, at last, every thing was in order in the house, Mrs. Ritter joined
the gentlemen once more.

"At last!" said the colonel, with a sigh of relief, as if he had
vanquished the enemy. "Now you see how it is, Max. My wife belongs first
of all to the carpenter Andrew, then to the children, and only to her
husband when there is nothing else for her to do."

"And now you see, Max," said his sister, laughing, "that, although my
husband speaks scornfully of Andrew the carpenter, he does assign him a
very high rank after all. Now acknowledge that, won't you? He has just
given me a message for you. He has brought his yearly savings with him
to-day, and begs for your assistance."

"That is true," said the colonel. "A more orderly, industrious, reliable
man I do not know. I would trust my wife, my children, my goods and
chattels to him rather than to any one else. He is the most honorable,
trustworthy man in this parish, or in any other, I do believe."

"Now you see, Max," said his sister, laughing, "I could not say more
than that." Her brother joined with her in her amusement at the zest
which the colonel showed. Then he said,--

"You have all been so full of the praises of your marvel, that I have
become curious, at last, to know where he comes from, and how he looks.
Have I never seen him when I have visited you?"

"Oh, yes! you used to know him perfectly well," replied his sister. "You
must remember Andrew, with whom we went to school. Don't you recall the
two brothers who were always in the same classes with you? The elder was
even then a perfect good-for-nothing,--he was not stupid, but would not
study, and did not get on, and was put down into one of the lower
classes with his brother and you. You must remember him,--his name was
Jorg, and he had stiff, black hair. He always pelted us with something
whenever he got a chance,--with green apples or pears, and in winter
with snow-balls,--and always called us 'aristocrats.'"

"Oh, that fellow!" cried Max. "Yes; now I do remember all about him.
Certainly he always called us 'aristocrats.' I wonder how he got hold of
that word. He was a disagreeable fellow: I remember that well. I caught
him once thrashing a little fellow most cruelly. I helped the little
one, and he shouted after me at least twelve times in succession,
'Aristocrat, aristocrat!' And now it comes back to me about the other
one, the lean Andrew, his brother. He was your Andrew, was he not,
Marie?--the Andrew with the violets? Oh, now I comprehend this great
friendship," said Max, laughing again.

"What is this about the violets? I want to know all about that," said
the colonel.

"Oh! I can see the whole thing just as it happened as plainly as if it
were only yesterday," said Max, quite animated over his recollections.
"I must tell you all about it, Otto. You have probably heard from your
wife that we had here, in the happy time of our childhood, an old
schoolmaster, whose creed was that all faults could be whipped out of,
and all virtues be whipped into, the children under his care. So he felt
himself constrained to whip a great deal either for one thing or the
other, and very often for both at once. Andrew's turn came one day, and
the master applied his well-meant rule so heartily that poor, thin
Andrew screamed with pain. At this moment my little sister, who had only
entered the school a short time before, and did not understand the rules
very well, stood up from her seat and hastened to the door. The teacher
held his hand for a moment, and shouted after her, 'Where are you
running to?' Marie turned about. The tears were running down her cheeks,
and she said, very decidedly, 'I am going home to tell my father.'
'Wait, I will teach you!' cried the master, in the greatest surprise,
and sprung after the girl. He did not strike her, however, but took her
roughly by the arm, and set her down very hard upon the bench; then he
said again, 'Wait, I will teach you!'

"It was the end of that, however. He did not touch Andrew again, and
every thing passed off quietly that day. But the tears that Marie had
shed for Andrew, and her protest against the whippings, were not
forgotten. From that day forward a big bunch of violets was always
placed on Marie's desk, and the whole room was perfumed with them; and
later a still better scent filled the air, for there were every day
great bunches of dark red strawberries, such as nobody else knew how to
find. And so it went on for the whole year; but how the friendship
reached the height at which it now stands, that I will leave to my
sister to relate, for I do not know myself."

The colonel was much pleased with this story of the tears and the
violets, and begged his wife to tell more about it. She said, "According
to you, Max, violets and strawberries grow all the year round; but, in
truth, it is not exactly the fact. But it is true that the good Andrew
was never tired of bringing in any thing that he thought would give me
