Priscilla hesitated. She had no knowledge of so-called "society." Her
instincts told her it was very wrong to humor Rose. She disliked Miss
Elliot-Smith and felt wild at the trick which had been played on her.
Nevertheless, on an occasion of this kind, she was no match for Rose,
who knew perfectly what she was about, and stood smiling and pretty
before her.

"Just for a few moments," said Rosalind, coming up and whispering to
her. "I really won't keep you long. You will just oblige me for a few
minutes."

"Well, but I'm not fit to be seen in this old dress!" whispered back
poor Prissie.

"Oh, yes, you are; you're not bad at all, and I am sure Meta will find
you a secluded corner if you want it-- won't you, Meta?"

"Yes, of course, if Miss Peel wants it," answered Meta. "But she looks
all right, so deliciously quaint-- I simply adore quaint people! Quite
the sweet girl graduate, I do declare. You don't at all answer to the
role, you naughty Rosalind!"

So Prissie, in her ill-made brown dress, her shabbiest hat and her
muddy boots, had to follow in the wake of Rosalind Merton and her
friend. At first she had been too angry to think much about her
attire, but she was painfully conscious of it when she entered a
crowded drawing-room, where every one else was in a suitable afternoon
toilet. She was glad to shrink away out of sight into the most remote
corner she could find; her muddy boots were pushed far in under her
chair and hidden as much as possible by her rather short dress; her
cheeks burnt unbecomingly; she felt miserable, self-conscious, ill at
ease and very cross with every one. It was in vain for poor Priscilla
to whisper to herself that Greek and Latin were glorious and great and
dress and fashion were things of no moment whatever. At this instant
she knew all too well that dress and fashion were reigning supreme.

Meta Elliot-Smith was elusive, loud and vulgar, but she was also
good-natured. She admired Rosalind, but in her heart of hearts she
thought that her friend had played Prissie a very shabby trick. She
brought Prissie some tea, therefore, and stood for a moment or two by
her side, trying to make things a little more comfortable for her.
Some one soon claimed her attention, however, and poor Prissie found
herself alone.

  CHAPTER XIV

 IN THE ELLIOT-SMITH'S DRAWING-ROOM

THE fun and talk rose fast and furious. More and more guests arrived;
the large drawing-rooms were soon almost as full as they could hold.
Priscilla, from her corner, half-hidden by a sheltering window
curtain, looked in vain for Rosalind. Where had she hidden herself?
When were they going away? Surely Rosalind would come to fetch her
soon? They had to walk home and be ready for dinner.

Dinner at St. Benet's was at half-past six, and Prissie reflected with
a great sensation of thankfulness that Rosalind and she must go back
in good time for this meal, as it was one of the rules of the college
that no girl should absent herself from late dinner without getting
permission from the principal.

Prissie looked in agony at the clock which stood on a mantel-piece not
far from where she had ensconced herself. Presently it struck five; no
one heard its silver note in the babel of sound, but Priscilla watched
its slowly moving hands in an agony.

Rose must come to fetch her presently. Prissie knew-- she reflected to
her horror that she had not the moral courage to walk about those
drawing-rooms hunting for Rose.

Two or three exquisitely dressed but frivolous-looking women stood in
a group not far from the window where Priscilla sat forlorn. They
talked about the cut of their mantles and the price they had given for
their new winter bonnets. Their shrill laughter reached Prissie's
ears, also their words. They complimented one another, but talked
scandal of their neighbors. They called somebody-- who Prissie could
not imagine--" a certain lady," and spoke of how she was angling to
get a footing in society, and how the good set at Kingsdene would
certainly never have anything to do with her or hers.

"She's taking up those wretched girl graduates," said one of these
gossips to her neighbor. Then her eye fell upon Prissie. She said
"Hush!" in an audible tone, and the little party moved away out of
earshot.

The minute hand of the clock on the mantel-piece pointed to nearly
half-past five. Poor Prissie felt her miseries grow almost
intolerable. Tears of mortification and anguish were forcing
themselves to her eyes. She felt that, in addition to having lost so
many hours of study, she would get into a serious scrape at St.
Benet's for breaking one of the known rules of the college.

At this moment a quiet voice said, "How do you do?"

She raised her tearful eyes. Geoffrey Hammond was standing by her
side. He gave her a kind glance, shook hands with her and stood by her
window uttering commonplaces until Priscilla had recovered her
self-possession. Then, dropping into a chair near, he said abruptly:

"I saw you from the other end of the room. I was surprised. I did not
suppose you knew our hostess."

"Nor do I really," said Priscilla with sudden vehemence. "Oh, it's a
shame!" she added, her face reddening up woefully; "I have been
entrapped!"

"You must not let the people who are near us hear you say words of
that kind," said Hammond; "they will crowd around to hear your story.
Now, I want it all to myself. Do you think you can tell it to me in a
low voice?"

To poor Hammond's horror Prissie began to whisper.

"I beg your pardon," he said, interrupting her, "but do you know that
the buzzing noise caused by a whisper carries sound a long way? That
is a well authenticated fact. Now, if you will try to speak low."

"Oh, thank you; yes, I will," said Prissie. She began a garbled
account. Hammond looked at her face and guessed the truth. The
miseries of her present position were depriving the poor girl of the
full use of her intellect. At last he ascertained that Priscilla's
all-absorbing present anxiety was to be in time for the half-past six
dinner at St. Benet's.

"I know we'll be late," she said, "and I'll have broken the rules, and
Miss Heath will be so much annoyed with me."

Hammond volunteered to look for Miss Merton.

"Oh, thank you," said Prissie, the tears springing to her eyes. "How
very, very kind you are."

"Please don't speak of it," said Hammond. "Stay where you are. I'll
soon bring the young truant to your side."

He began to move about the drawing-rooms, and Prissie from her
hiding-place watched him with a world of gratitude in her face. "Talk
of my stirring from this corner," she said to herself, "why, I feel
glued to the spot! Oh, my awful muddy boots. I daren't even think of
them. Now I do hope Mr. Hammond will find Miss Merton quickly. How
kind he is! I wonder Maggie does not care for him as much as he cares
for her. I do not feel half as shy with him as I do with every one
else in this dreadful-- dreadful room. Oh, I do trust he'll soon come
back and bring Miss Merton with him. Then, if we run all the way, we
may, perhaps, be in time for dinner."

Hammond was absent about ten minutes; they seemed like so many hours
to anxious Prissie. To her horror she saw him returning alone, and now
she so far forgot her muddy boots as to run two or three steps to meet
him. She knocked over a footstool as she did so, and one or two people
looked round and shrugged their shoulders at the poor gauche girl.

"Where is she?" exclaimed Prissie, again speaking in a loud voice.
"Oh, haven't you brought her? What shall I do?"

"It's all right, I assure you, Miss Peel. Let me conduct you back to
that snug seat in the window. I have seen Miss Merton, and she says
you are to make yourself happy. She asked Miss Heath's permission for
you both to be absent from dinner to-day."

"She did? I never heard of anything so outrageous. I won't stay. I
shall go away at once."

"Had you not better just think calmly over it? If you return to St.
Benet's without Miss Merton, you will get her into a scrape."

"Do you think I care for that? Oh, she has behaved disgracefully! She
has told Miss Heath a lie. I shall explain matters the very moment I
go back."

Priscilla was not often in a passion, but she felt in one now. She
lost her shyness and her voice rose without constraint.

"I am not supposed to know the ways of society," she said, "but I
don't think I want to know much about this sort of society." And she
got up, prepared to leave the room.

The ladies, who had been gossiping at her side, turned at the sound of
her agitation. They saw a plain, badly dressed girl, with a frock
conveniently short for the muddy streets, but by no means in tone with
her present elegant surroundings, standing up and contradicting, or at
least appearing to contradict, Geoffrey Hammond, one of the best known
men at St. Hilda's, a Senior Wrangler, too. What did this gauche girl
mean? Most people were deferential to Hammond, but she seemed to be
scolding him.

Prissie for the time being became more interesting even than the
winter fashions. The ladies drew a step or two nearer to enjoy the
little comedy.

Priscilla noticed no one, but Hammond felt these good ladies in the
air. His cheeks burned and he wished himself well out of his present
position.

"If you will sit down, Miss Peel," he said in a low, firm voice, "I
think I can give you good reasons for not rushing away in this
headlong fashion."

"Well, what are they?" said Prissie. Hammond's voice had a
sufficiently compelling power to make her sit down once more on her
window-ledge.

"Don't you think," he said, seating himself in front of her, "that we
may as well keep this discussion to ourselves?"

"Oh, yes; was I speaking too loud? I wouldn't vex you for anything."

"Pardon me; you are still speaking a little loud."

"Oh!" Poor Prissie fell back, her face crimson. "Please say anything
you wish," she presently piped in a voice as low as a little mouse
might have used.

"What I have to say is simply this," said Hammond: "You will gain
nothing now by rushing off to St. Benet's. However hard you struggle,
you cannot get there in time for dinner. Would it not be best, then,
to remain here quietly until Miss Merton asks you to accompany her
back to the college? Then, of course, it will remain with you to pay
her out in any way you think well."

"Thank you; perhaps that is best. It is quite hopeless now to think of
getting back in time for dinner. I only hope Miss Merton won't keep me
waiting very long, for it is very, very dull sitting here and seeing
people staring at you."

"I would not look at them if I were you, Miss Peel; and, if you will
permit me, I shall be only too pleased to keep you company."

"Oh, thank you," said Prissie. "Then I sha'n't mind staying at all."

The next half-hour seemed to pass on the wings of the wind.

Priscilla was engaged in an animated discussion with Hammond on the
relative attractions of the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey;" her opinion
differed from his, and she was well able to hold her ground. Her face
was now both eloquent and attractive, her eyes were bright, her words
terse and epigrammatic. She looked so different a girl from the cowed
and miserable little Prissie of an hour ago that Rosalind Merton as
she came up and tapped her on the shoulder, felt a pang of envy.

"I am sorry to interrupt you," she said, "but it is time for us to be
going home. Have you given Mr. Hammond his message?"

"What do you mean?" asked Priscilla. "I have not any message for Mr.
Hammond."

"You must have forgotten. Did not Miss Oliphant give you a letter for
him?"

"Certainly not. What do you mean?"

"I felt sure I saw her," said Rosalind. "I suppose I was mistaken.
Well, sorry as I am to interrupt a pleasant talk, I fear I must ask
you to come home with me now."

She raised her pretty baby eyes to Hammond's face as she spoke. He
absolutely scowled down at her, shook hands warmly with Priscilla and
turned away.

"Come and bid Mrs. Elliot-Smith good-by," said Rosalind, her eyes
still dancing. "She is at the other end of the drawing-room; come, you
can follow me."

"How disgracefully you have behaved, Miss Merton!" began Priscilla at
once. "You cannot expect me ever to speak to you again, and I shall
certainly tell Miss Heath."

They were walking across the crowded drawing-room now. Rosalind turned
and let her laughing eyes look full at Prissie.

"My dear Miss Peel, pray reserve any little scolding you intend to
bestow upon me until we get out into the street, and please do not
tread upon my dress!"

  CHAPTER XV

 POLLY SINGLETON

MISS DAY was having quite a large party for cocoa in her room. She had
invited not only her own chosen friends from Heath Hall, but also two
or three congenial spirits from Katharine Hall. Five or six
merry-looking girls were now assembled in her room. Miss Day's room
was one of the largest in the college; it was showily furnished, with
an intention to produce a Japanese effect. Several paper lanterns hung
from the ceiling and were suspended to wire supports, which were
fastened to different articles of furniture.

In honor of Miss Day's cocoa, the lanterns were all lit now, and the
effect, on fans and pictures and on brilliant bits of color, were
grotesque and almost bizarre.

Miss Day thought her room lovely. It was dazzling, but the reverse of
reposeful.

The girls were lounging about, chatting and laughing; they were having
a good time and were absolutely at their ease. One, a red-haired girl,
with frank, open blue eyes and a freckled face, an inmate of Katharine
Hall, was sending her companions into fits of laughter.

"Yes," she was saying in a high, gay voice, "I'm not a bit ashamed of
it; there's never the least use in not owning the truth. I'm used up,
girls: I haven't a pennypiece to bless myself with, and this letter
came from Spilman to-night. Spilman says he'll see Miss Eccleston if I
didn't pay up. Madame Clarice wrote two nights ago, declaring her
intention of visiting Miss Eccleston if I didn't send her some money.
I shall have no money until next term. There's a state of affairs!"

"What do you mean to do, Polly?" asked Lucy Marsh in a sympathizing
tone.

"Do? My dear creature, there's only one thing to be done. I must have
an auction on the quiet. I shall sell my worldly all. I can buy things
again, you know, after dad sends me his next allowance."
