days plainly circumnutated. Some young leaves of about the same age on a
plant of this Petunia, which had been laid horizontally, and on another
plant which was left upright, both being kept in complete darkness,
diverged in the same manner for 48 h., and apparently were not affected by
apogeotropism; though their stems were in a state of high tension, for when
freed from the sticks to which they had been tied, they instantly curled
upwards.

The leaves, whilst very young, on the leading shoots of the Carnation
(Dianthus caryophyllus) are highly inclined or vertical; and if the plant
is growing vigorously they diverge so quickly that they become almost
horizontal in a day. But they move downwards in a rather oblique line and
continue for some time afterwards to move in the same direction, in
connection, we presume, with their spiral arrangement on the stem. The
course pursued by a young leaf whilst thus obliquely descending was traced,
and the line was distinctly yet not strongly zigzag; the larger angles
formed by the successive lines amounting only to 135o, 154o, and 163o. The
subsequent lateral movement (shown in Fig. 96, p. 231) was strongly zigzag
with occasional circumnutations. The divergence and sinking of the young
leaves of this plant seem to be very little affected by geotropism or
heliotropism; for a plant, the leaves of which were growing rather slowly
(as ascertained by measurement) was laid horizontally, and the opposite
young leaves diverged from one another symmetrically in the usual manner,
without any upturning in the direction of gravitation or towards the light.

The needle-like leaves of Pinus pinaster form a bundle whilst young;
afterwards they slowly diverge, so that those on the upright shoots become
horizontal. The movements of one such
[page 270]
young leaf was traced during 4 ½ days, and the tracing here given (Fig.
121) shows that it descended at first in a nearly straight line, but
afterwards zigzagged, making one or two little loops. The diverging and
descending movements of a rather older leaf were also traced (see former
Fig. 113, p. 251): it descended during the first day and night in a
somewhat zigzag line; it then circumnutated round a small space and again
descended. By this time the leaf had nearly assumed its final position, and
now plainly circumnutated. As in the case of the Carnation, the leaves,
whilst very young, do not seem to be much affected by geotropism or
heliotropism, for those on a young plant laid horizontally, and those on
another plant left upright, both kept in the dark, continued to diverge in
the usual manner without bending to either side.

Fig. 121. Pinus pinaster: epinastic downward movement of a young leaf,
produced by a young plant in a pot, traced on a vertical glass under a
skylight, from 6.45 A.M. June 2nd to 10.40 P.M. 6th.

With Coboea scandens, the young leaves, as they successively diverge from
the leading shoot which is bent to one side, rise up so as to project
vertically, and they retain this position for some time whilst the tendril
is revolving. The diverging and ascending movements of the petiole of one
such a leaf, were traced on a vertical glass under a skylight; and the
course pursued was in most parts nearly straight, but there were two
[page 271]
well-marked zigzags (one of them forming an angle of 112o), and this
indicates circumnutation.

The still closed lobes of a young leaf of Dionaea projected at right angles
to the petiole, and were in the act of slowly rising. A glass filament was
attached to the under side of the midrib, and its movements were traced on
a vertical glass. It circumnutated once in the evening, and on the next day
rose, as already described (see Fig. 106, p. 240), by a number of acutely
zigzag lines, closely approaching in character to ellipses. This movement
no doubt was due to epinasty, aided by apogeotropism, for the closed lobes
of a very young leaf on a plant which had been placed horizontally, moved
into nearly the same line with the petiole, as if the plant had stood
upright; but at the same time the lobes curved laterally upwards, and thus
occupied an unnatural position, obliquely to the plane of the foliaceous
petiole.

As the hypocotyls and epicotyls of some plants protrude from the seed-coats
in an arched form, it is doubtful whether the arching of these parts, which
is invariably present when they break through the ground, ought always to
be attributed to epinasty; but when they are at first straight and
afterwards become arched, as often happens, the arching is certainly due to
epinasty. As long as the arch is surrounded by compact earth it must retain
its form; but as soon as it rises above the surface, or even before this
period if artificially freed from the surrounding pressure, it begins to
straighten itself, and this no doubt is mainly due to hyponasty. The
movement of the upper and lower half of the arch, and of the crown, was
occasionally traced; and the course was more or less zigzag, showing
modified circumnutation.

With not a few plants, especially climbers, the summit of the shoot is
hooked, so that the apex points vertically downwards. In seven genera of
twining plants* the hooking, or as it has been called by Sachs, the
nutation of the tip, is mainly due to an exaggerated form of
circumnutation. That is, the growth is so great along one side that it
bends the shoot completely over to the opposite side, thus forming a hook;
the longitudinal line or zone of growth then travels a little laterally
round the shoot, and the hook points in a slightly different direction, and
so onwards until the hook is completely reversed. Ultimately it

* 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 2nd edit. p. 13.
[page 272]

comes back to the point whence it started. This was ascertained by painting
narrow lines with Indian ink along the convex surface of several hooks, and
the line was found slowly to become at first lateral, then to appear along
the concave surface, and ultimately back again on the convex surface. In
the case of Lonicera brachypoda the hooked terminal part of the revolving
shoot straightens itself periodically, but is never reversed; that is, the
periodically increased growth of the concave side of the hook is sufficient
only to straighten it, and not to bend it over to the opposite side. The
hooking of the tip is of service to twining plants by aiding them to catch
hold of a support, and afterwards by enabling this part to embrace the
support much more closely than it could otherwise have done at first, thus
preventing it, as we often observed, from being blown away by a strong
wind. Whether the advantage thus gained by twining plants accounts for
their summits being so frequently hooked, we do not know, as this structure
is not very rare with plants which do not climb, and with some climbers
(for instance, Vitis, Ampelopsis, Cissus, etc.) to whom it does not afford
any assistance in climbing.

With respect to those cases in which the tip remains always bent or hooked
towards the same side, as in the genera just named, the most obvious
explanation is that the bending is due to continued growth in excess along
the convex side. Wiesner, however, maintains* that in all cases the hooking
of the tip is the result of its plasticity and weight,--a conclusion which
from what we have already seen with several climbing plants is certainly
erroneous. Nevertheless, we fully admit that the weight of the part, as
well as geotropism, etc., sometimes come into play.

Ampelopsis tricuspidata.--This plant climbs by the aid of adhesive
tendrils, and the hooked tips of the shoots do not appear to be of any
service to it. The hooking depends chiefly, as far as we could ascertain,
on the tip being affected by epinasty and geotropism; the lower and older
parts continually straightening themselves through hyponasty and
apogeotropism. We believe that the weight of the apex is an unimportant
element, because on horizontal or inclined shoots the hook is often
extended horizontally or even faces upwards. Moreover shoots frequently
form loops instead of hooks; and in this case the

* 'Sitzb. der k. Akad. der Wissensch.,' Vienna, Jan. 1880, p. 16.
[page 273]

Fig. 122. Ampelopsis tricuspidata: hyponastic movement of hooked tip of
leading shoot, traced from 8.10 A.M. July 13th to 8 A.M. 15th. Apex of
shoot 5 ½ inches from the vertical glass. Plant illuminated through a
skylight. Temp. 17 1/2o - 19o C. Diagram reduced to one-third of original
scale.

extreme part, instead of hanging vertically down as would follow if weight
was the efficient cause, extends horizontally or even points upwards. A
shoot, which terminated in a rather open hook, was fastened in a highly
inclined downward position, so that the concave side faced upwards, and the
result was that the apex at first curved upwards. This apparently was due
to epinasty and not to apogeotropism, for the apex, soon after passing the
perpendicular, curved so rapidly downwards that we could not doubt that the
movement was at least aided by geotropism. In the course of a few hours the
hook was thus converted into a loop with the apex of the shoot pointing
straight downwards. The longer axis of the loop was at first horizontal,
but afterwards became vertical. During this same time the basal part of the
hook (and subsequently of the loop) curved itself slowly upwards; and this
must have been wholly due to apogeotropism in opposition to hyponasty. The
loop was then fastened upside down, so that its basal half would be
simultaneously acted on by hyponasty (if present) and by apogeotropism; and
now it curved itself so greatly upwards in the course of only 4 h. that
there could hardly be a doubt that both forces were acting
[page 274]
together. At the same time the loop became open and was thus reconverted
into a hook, and this apparently was effected by the geotropic movement of
the apex in opposition to epinasty. In the case of Ampelopsis hederacea,
weight plays, as far as we could judge, a more important part in the
hooking of the tip.

In order to ascertain whether the shoots of A. tricuspidata in
straightening themselves under the combined action of hyponasty and
apogeotropism moved in a simple straight course, or whether they
circumnutated, glass filaments were fixed to the crowns of four hooked tips
standing in their natural position; and the movements of the filaments were
traced on a vertical glass. All four tracings resembled each other in a
general manner; but we will give only one (see Fig. 122, p. 273). The
filament rose at first, which shows that the hook was straightening itself;
it then zigzagged, moving a little to the left between 9.25 A.M. and 9 P.M.
From this latter hour on the 13th to 10.50 A.M. on the following morning
(14th) the hook continued to straighten itself, and then zigzagged a short
distance to the right. But from 1 P.M. to 10.40 P.M. on the 14th the
movement

Fig. 123. Smithia Pfundii: hyponastic movement of the curved summit of a
stem, whilst straightening itself, traced from 9 A.M. July 10th to 3 P.M.
13th. Apex 9 ½ inches from the vertical glass. Diagram reduced to one-fifth
of original scale. Plant illuminated through skylight; temp. 17 1/2o - 19o
C.
[page 275]

was reversed and the shoot became more hooked. During the night, after
10.40 P.M. to 8.15 A.M. on the 15th, the hook again opened or straightened
itself. By this time the glass filament had become so highly inclined that
its movements could no longer be traced with accuracy; and by 1.30 P.M. on
this same day, the crown of the former arch or hook had become perfectly
straight and vertical. There can therefore be no doubt that the
straightening of the hooked shoot of this plant is effected by the
circumnutation of the arched portion--that is, by growth alternating
between the upper and lower surface, but preponderant on the lower surface,
with some little lateral movement.

We were enabled to trace the movement of another straightening shoot for a
longer period (owing to its slower growth and to its having been placed
further from the vertical glass), namely, from the early morning on July
13th to late in the evening of the 16th. During the whole daytime of the
14th, the hook straightened itself very little, but zigzagged and plainly
circumnutated about nearly the same spot. By the 16th it had become nearly
straight, and the tracing was no longer accurate, yet it was manifest that
there was still a considerable amount of movement both up and down and
laterally; for the crown whilst continuing to straighten itself
occasionally became for a short time more curved, causing the filament to
descend twice during the day.

Smithia Pfundii.--The stiff terminal shoots of this Leguminous water-plant
from Africa project so as to make a rectangle with the stem below; but this
occurs only when the plants are growing vigorously, for when kept in a cool
place, the summits of the stems become straight, as they likewise did at
the close of the growing season. The direction of the rectangularly bent
part is independent of the chief source of light. But from observing the
effects of placing plants in the dark, in which case several shoots became
in two or three days upright or nearly upright, and when brought back into
the light again became rectangularly curved, we believe that the bending is
in part due to apheliotropism, apparently somewhat opposed by
apogeotropism. On the other hand, from observing the effects of tying a
shoot downwards, so that the rectangle faced upwards, we are led to believe
that the curvature is partly due to epinasty. As the rectangularly bent
portion of an upright stem grows older, the lower part straightens itself;
and this is effected through hyponasty. He who has read Sachs' recent Essay
on the vertical
[page 276]
and inclined positions of the parts of plants* will see how difficult a
subject this is, and will feel no surprise at our expressing ourselves
doubtfully in this and other such cases.

A plant, 20 inches in height, was secured to a stick close beneath the
curved summit, which formed rather less than a rectangle with the stem
below. The shoot pointed away from the observer; and a glass filament
pointing towards the vertical glass on which the tracing was made, was
fixed to the convex surface of the curved portion. Therefore the descending
lines in the figure represent the straightening of the curved portion as it
grew older. The tracing (Fig. 123, p. 274) was begun at 9 A.M. on July
10th; the filament at first moved but little in a zigzag line, but at 2
P.M. it began rising and continued to do so till 9 P.M.; and this proves
that the terminal portion was being more bent downwards. After 9 P.M. on
the 10th an opposite movement commenced, and the curved portion began to
straighten itself, and this continued till 11.10 A.M. on the 12th, but was
interrupted by some small oscillations and zigzags, showing movement in
different directions. After 11.10 A.M. on the 12th this part of the stem,
still considerably curved, circumnutated in a conspicuous manner until
nearly 3 P.M. on the 13th; but during all this time a downward movement of
the filament prevailed, caused by the continued straightening of the stem.
By the afternoon of the 13th, the summit, which had originally been
deflected more than a right angle from the perpendicular, had grown so
nearly straight that the tracing could no longer be continued on the
vertical glass. There can therefore be no doubt that the straightening of
the abruptly curved portion of the growing stem of this plant, which
appears to be wholly due to hyponasty, is the result of modified
circumnutation. We will only add that a filament was fixed in a different
manner across the curved summit of another plant, and the same general kind
of movement was observed.

Trifolium repens.--In many, but not in all the species of Trifolium, as the
separate little flowers wither, the sub-peduncles bend downwards, so as to
depend parallel to the upper part of the main peduncle. In Tr. subterraneum
the main peduncle curves downwards for the sake of burying its capsules,
and in this species the sub-peduncles of the separate flowers bend

* 'Ueber Orthotrope und Plagiotrope Pflanzentheile;' 'Arbeiten des Bot.
Inst., in Würzburg,' Heft ii. 1879, p. 226.
[page 277]

Fig. 124. Trifolium repens: circumnutating and epinastic movements of the
sub-peduncle of a single flower, traced on a vertical glass under a
skylight, in A from 11.30 A.M. Aug. 27th to 7 A.M. 30th; in B from 7 A.M.
Aug. 30th to a little after 6 P.M. Sept. 8th.
[page 278]

upwards, so as to occupy the same position relatively to the upper part of
the main peduncle as in Tr. repens. This fact alone would render it
probable that the movements of the sub-peduncles in Tr. repens were
independent of geotropism. Nevertheless, to make sure, some flower-heads
were tied to little sticks upside down and others in a horizontal position;
their sub-peduncles, however, all quickly curved upwards through the action
of heliotropism. We therefore protected some flower-heads, similarly
secured to sticks, from the light, and although some of them rotted, many
of their sub-peduncles turned very slowly from their reversed or from their
horizontal positions, so as to stand in the normal manner parallel to the
upper part of the main peduncle. These facts show that the movement is
independent of geotropism or apheliotropism; it must there[fore] be
attributed to epinasty, which however is checked, at least as long as the
flowers are young, by heliotropism. Most of the above flowers were never
fertilised owing to the exclusion of bees; they consequently withered very
slowly, and the movements of the sub-peduncles were in like manner much
retarded.

To ascertain the nature of the movement of the sub-peduncle, whilst bending
downwards, a filament was fixed across the summit of the calyx of a not
fully expanded and almost upright flower, nearly in the centre of the head.
The main peduncle was secured to a stick close beneath the head. In order
to see the marks on the glass filament, a few flowers had to be cut away on
the lower side of the head. The flower under observation at first diverged
a little from its upright position, so as to occupy the open space caused
by the removal of the adjoining flowers. This required two days, after
which time a new tracing was begun (Fig. 124). In A we see the complex
circumnutating course pursued from 11.30 A.M. Aug. 26th to 7 A.M. on the
30th. The pot was then moved a very little to the right, and the tracing
(B) was continued without interruption from 7 A.M. Aug. 30th to after 6
P.M. Sept. 8th. It should be observed that on most of these days, only a
single dot was made each morning at the same hour. Whenever the flower was
observed carefully, as on Aug. 30th and Sept. 5th and 6th, it was found to
be circumnutating over a small space. At last, on Sept. 7th, it began to
bend downwards, and continued to do so until after 6 P.M. on the 8th, and
indeed until the morning of the 9th, when its movements could no longer be
traced on the vertical glass. It was carefully observed during the whole of
the 8th, and by
[page 279]
10.30 P.M. it had descended to a point lower down by two-thirds of the
length of the figure as here given; but from want of space the tracing has
been copied in B, only to a little after 6 P.M. On the morning of the 9th
the flower was withered, and the sub-peduncle now stood at an angle of 57o
beneath the horizon. If the flower had been fertilised it would have
withered much sooner, and have moved much more quickly. We thus see that
the sub-peduncle oscillated up and down, or circumnutated, during its whole
downward epinastic course.

The sub-peduncles of the fertilised and withered flowers of Oxalis carnosa
likewise bend downwards through epinasty, as will be shown in a future
chapter; and their downward course is strongly zigzag, indicating
circumnutation.]

The number of instances in which various organs move through epinasty or
hyponasty, often in combination with other forces, for the most diversified
purposes, seems to be inexhaustibly great; and from the several cases which
have been here given, we may safely infer that such movements are due to
modified circumnutation.
[page 280]


CHAPTER VI.

MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION: SLEEP OR NYCTITROPIC MOVEMENTS, THEIR USE: SLEEP
OF COTYLEDONS.

Preliminary sketch of the sleep or nyctitropic movements of leaves--
Presence of pulvini--The lessening of radiation the final cause of
nyctitropic movements--Manner of trying experiments on leaves of Oxalis,
Arachis, Cassia, Melilotus, Lotus and Marsilea and on the cotyledons of
Mimosa--Concluding remarks on radiation from leaves--Small differences in
the conditions make a great difference in the result - Description of the
nyctitropic position and movements of the cotyledons of various plants--
List of species--Concluding remarks--Independence of the nyctitropic
movements of the leaves and cotyledons of the same species--Reasons for
believing that the movements have been acquired for a special purpose.

The so-called sleep of leaves is so conspicuous a phenomenon that it was
observed as early as the time of Pliny;* and since Linnaeus published his
famous Essay, 'Somnus Plantarum,' it has been the subject of several
memoirs. Many flowers close at night, and these are likewise said to sleep;
but we are not here concerned with their movements, for although effected
by the same mechanism as in the case of young leaves, namely, unequal
growth on the opposite sides (as first proved by Pfeffer), yet they differ
essentially in being excited chiefly by changes of temperature instead of
light; and in being effected, as far as we can judge, for a different
purpose. Hardly any one supposes that there is any real analogy

* Pfeffer has given a clear and interesting sketch of the history of this
subject in his 'Die Periodischen Bewegungen der Blattorgane,' 1875, P. 163.
[page 281]

between the sleep of animals and that of plants,* whether of leaves or
flowers. It seems therefore, advisable to give a distinct name to the
so-called sleep-movements of plants. These have also generally been
confounded, under the term "periodic," with the slight daily rise and fall
of leaves, as described in the fourth chapter; and this makes it all the
more desirable to give some distinct name to sleep-movements. Nyctitropism
and nyctitropic, i.e. night-turning, may be applied both to leaves and
flowers, and will be occasionally used by us; but it would be best to
confine the term to leaves. The leaves of some few plants move either
upwards or downwards when the sun shines intensely on them, and this
movement has sometimes been called diurnal sleep; but we believe it to be
of an essentially different nature from the nocturnal movement, and it will
be briefly considered in a future chapter.

The sleep or nyctitropism of leaves is a large subject, and we think that
the most convenient plan will be first to give a brief account of the
position which leaves assume at night, and of the advantages apparently
thus gained. Afterwards the more remarkable cases will be described in
detail, with respect to cotyledons in the present chapter, and to leaves in
the next chapter. Finally, it will be shown that these movements result
from circumnutation, much modified and regulated by the alternations of day
and night, or light and darkness; but that they are also to a certain
extent inherited.

Leaves, when they go to sleep, move either upwards or downwards, or in the
case of the leaflets of com-

* Ch. Royer must, however, be excepted; see 'Annales des Sc. Nat.' (5th
series), Bot. vol. ix. 1868, p. 378.

[page 282]
pound leaves, forwards, that is, towards the apex of the leaf, or
backwards, that is, towards its base; or, again, they may rotate on their
own axes without moving either upwards or downwards. But in almost every
case the plane of the blade is so placed as to stand nearly or quite
vertically at night. Therefore the apex, or the base, or either lateral
edge, may be directed towards the zenith. Moreover, the upper surface of
each leaf, and more especially of each leaflet, is often brought into close
contact with that of the opposite one; and this is sometimes effected by
singularly complicated movements. This fact suggests that the upper surface
requires more protection than the lower one. For instance, the terminal
leaflet in Trifolium, after turning up at night so as to stand vertically,
often continues to bend over until the upper surface is directed downwards
whilst the lower surface is fully exposed to the sky; and an arched roof is
thus formed over the two lateral leaflets, which have their upper surfaces
pressed closely together. Here we have the unusual case of one of the
leaflets not standing vertically, or almost vertically, at night.

Considering that leaves in assuming their nyctitropic positions often move
through an angle of 90o; that the movement is rapid in the evening; that in
some cases, as we shall see in the next chapter, it is extraordinarily
complicated; that with certain seedlings, old enough to bear true leaves,
the cotyledons move vertically upwards at night, whilst at the same time
the leaflets move vertically downwards; and that in the same genus the
leaves or cotyledons of some species move upwards, whilst those of other
species move downwards;--from these and other such facts, it is hardly
possible to doubt that plants must derive some
[page 283]
great advantage from such remarkable powers of movement.

The nyctitropic movements of leaves and cotyledons are effected in two
ways,* firstly, by means of pulvini which become, as Pfeffer has shown,
alternately more turgescent on opposite sides; and secondly, by increased
growth along one side of the petiole or midrib, and then on the opposite
side, as was first proved by Batalin.** But as it has been shown by De
Vries*** that in these latter cases increased growth is preceded by the
increased turgescence of the cells, the difference between the above two
means of movement is much diminished, and consists chiefly in the
turgescence of the cells of a fully developed pulvinus, not being followed
by growth. When the movements of leaves or cotyledons, furnished with a
pulvinus and destitute of one, are compared, they are seen to be closely
similar, and are apparently effected for the same purpose. Therefore, with
our object in view, it does not appear advisable to separate the above two
sets of cases into two distinct classes. There is, however, one important
distinction between them, namely, that movements effected by growth on the
alternate sides, are confined to young growing leaves, whilst those
effected by means of a pulvinus last for a long time. We have already seen
well-marked instances of this latter fact with cotyledons, and so it is
with leaves, as has been observed by Pfeffer and by ourselves. The long
endurance of the nyctitropic movements when effected by the aid of pulvini
indicates, in addition to the evidence already advanced, the functional
import-

* This distinction was first pointed out (according to Pfeffer, 'Die
Periodischen Bewegungen der Blattorgane,' 1875, p. 161) by Dassen in 1837.

** 'Flora,' 1873, p. 433.

*** 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1879, Dec. 19th, p. 830.

[page 284]
ance of such movements to the plant. There is another difference between
the two sets of cases, namely, that there is never, or very rarely, any
torsion of the leaves, excepting when a pulvinus is present;* but this
statement applies only to periodic and nyctitropic movements as may be
inferred from other cases given by Frank.**
The fact that the leaves of many plants place themselves at night in widely
different positions from what they hold during the day, but with the one
point in common, that their upper surfaces avoid facing the zenith, often
with the additional fact that they come into close contact with opposite
leaves or leaflets, clearly indicates, as it seems to us, that the object
gained is the protection of the upper surfaces from being chilled at night
by radiation. There is nothing improbable in the upper surface needing
protection more than the lower, as the two differ in function and
structure. All gardeners know that plants suffer from radiation. It is this
and not cold winds which the peasants of Southern Europe fear for their
olives.*** Seedlings are often protected from radiation by a very thin
covering of straw; and fruit-trees on walls by a few fir-branches, or even
by a fishing-net, suspended over them. There is a variety of the
gooseberry,**** the flowers of which from being produced before the leaves,
are not protected by them from radiation, and consequently often fail to
yield fruit. An excellent observer***** has remarked

* Pfeffer, 'Die Period. Beweg. der Blattorgane.' 1875, p. 159.

** 'Die Nat. Wagerechte Richtung von Pflanzentheilen,' 1870, p. 52

*** Martins in 'Bull. Soc. Bot. de France,' tom. xix. 1872. Wells, in his
famous 'Essay on Dew,' remarks that an exposed thermometer rises as soon as
even a fleecy cloud, high in the sky, passes over the zenith.

**** 'Loudon's Gardener's Mag.,' vol. iv. 1828, p. 112.

***** Mr. Rivers in 'Gardener's Chron.,' 1866, p. 732.
[page 285]

that one variety of the cherry has the petals of its flowers much curled
backwards, and after a severe frost all the stigmas were killed; whilst at
the same time, in another variety with incurved petals, the stigmas were
not in the least injured.

This view that the sleep of leaves saves them from being chilled at night
by radiation, would no doubt have occurred to Linnaeus, had the principle
of radiation been then discovered; for he suggests in many parts of his
'Somnus Plantarum' that the position of the leaves at night protects the
young stems and buds, and often the young inflorescence, against cold
winds. We are far from doubting that an additional advantage may be thus
gained; and we have observed with several plants, for instance, Desmodium
gyrans, that whilst the blade of the leaf sinks vertically down at night,
the petiole rises, so that the blade has to move through a greater angle in
order to assume its vertical position than would otherwise have been
necessary; but with the result that all the leaves on the same plant are
crowded together as if for mutual protection.

We doubted at first whether radiation would affect in any important manner
objects so thin as are many cotyledons and leaves, and more especially
affect differently their upper and lower surfaces; for although the
temperature of their upper surfaces would undoubtedly fall when freely
exposed to a clear sky, yet we thought that they would so quickly acquire
by conduction the temperature of the surrounding air, that it could hardly
make any sensible difference to them, whether they stood horizontally and
radiated into the open sky, or vertically and radiated chiefly in a lateral
direction towards neighbouring plants and other objects. We endeavoured,
therefore, to ascertain something on this head by preventing the leaves
[page 286]
of several plants from going to sleep, and by exposing to a clear sky when
the temperature was beneath the freezing-point, these, as well as the other
leaves on the same plants which had already assumed their nocturnal
vertical position. Our experiments show that leaves thus compelled to
remain horizontal at night, suffered much more injury from frost than those
which were allowed to assume their normal vertical position. It may,
however, be said that conclusions drawn from such observations are not
applicable to sleeping plants, the inhabitants of countries where frosts do
not occur. But in every country, and at all seasons, leaves must be exposed
to nocturnal chills through radiation, which might be in some degree
injurious to them, and which they would escape by assuming a vertical
position.

In our experiments, leaves were prevented from assuming their nyctitropic
position, generally by being fastened with the finest entomological pins
(which did not sensibly injure them) to thin sheets of cork supported on
sticks. But in some instances they were fastened down by narrow strips of
card, and in others by their petioles being passed through slits in the
cork. The leaves were at first fastened close to the cork, for as this is a
bad conductor, and as the leaves were not exposed for long periods, we
thought that the cork, which had been kept in the house, would very
slightly warm them; so that if they were injured by the frost in a greater
degree than the free vertical leaves, the evidence would be so much the
stronger that the horizontal position was injurious. But we found that when
there was any slight difference in the result, which could be detected only
occasionally, the leaves which had been fastened closely down suffered
rather more than those fastened with very long and
[page 287]
thin pins, so as to stand from ½ to 3/4 inch above the cork. This
difference in the result, which is in itself curious as showing what a very
slight difference in the conditions influences the amount of injury
inflicted, may be attributed, as we believe, to the surrounding warmer air
not circulating freely beneath the closely pinned leaves and thus slightly
warming them. This conclusion is supported by some analogous facts
hereafter to be given.

We will now describe in detail the experiments which were tried. These were
troublesome from our not being able to predict how much cold the leaves of
the several species could endure. Many plants had every leaf killed, both
those which were secured in a horizontal position and those which were
allowed to sleep--that is, to rise up or sink down vertically. Others again
had not a single leaf in the least injured, and these had to be re-exposed
either for a longer time or to a lower temperature.

[Oxalis acetosella.--A very large pot, thickly covered with between 300 and
400 leaves, had been kept all winter in the greenhouse. Seven leaves were
pinned horizontally open, and were exposed on March 16th for 2 h. to a
clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding grass being -4o C. (24o to 25o
F.). Next morning all seven leaves were found quite killed, so were many of
the free ones which had previously gone to sleep, and about 100 of them,
either dead or browned and injured were picked off. Some leaves showed that
they had been slightly injured by not expanding during the whole of the
next day, though they afterwards recovered. As all the leaves which were
pinned open were killed, and only about a third or fourth of the others
were either killed or injured, we had some little evidence that those which
were prevented from assuming their vertically dependent position suffered
most.

The following night (17th) was clear and almost equally cold (-3o to -4o C.
on the grass), and the pot was again exposed, but this time for only 30 m.
Eight leaves had been pinned out,
[page 288]
and in the morning two of them were dead, whilst not a single other leaf on
the many plants was even injured.

On the 23rd the pot was exposed for 1 h. 30 m., the temperature on the
grass being only -2o C., and not one leaf was injured: the pinned open
leaves, however, all stood from ½ to 3/4 of an inch above the cork.

On the 24th the pot was again placed on the ground and exposed to a clear
sky for between 35 m. and 40 m. By a mistake the thermometer was left on an
adjoining sun-dial 3 feet high, instead of being placed on the grass; it
recorded 25o to 26o F. (-3.3o to -3.8o C.), but when looked at after 1 h.
had fallen to 22o F. (-5.5o C.); so that the pot was perhaps exposed to
rather a lower temperature than on the two first occasions. Eight leaves
had been pinned out, some close to the cork and some above it, and on the
following morning five of them (i.e. 63 per cent.) were found killed. By
counting a portion of the leaves we estimated that about 250 had been
allowed to go to sleep, and of these about 20 were killed (i.e. only 8 per
cent.), and about 30 injured.

Considering these cases, there can be no doubt that the leaves of this
Oxalis, when allowed to assume their normal vertically dependent position
at night, suffer much less from frost than those (23 in number) which had
their upper surfaces exposed to the zenith.

Oxalis carnosa.--A plant of this Chilian species was exposed for 30 m. to a
clear sky, the thermometer on the grass standing at -2o C., with some of
its leaves pinned open, and not one leaf on the whole bushy plant was in
the least injured. On the 16th of March another plant was similarly exposed
for 30 m., when the temperature on the grass was only a little lower, viz.,
-3o to -4o C. Six of the leaves had been pinned open, and next morning five
of them were found much browned. The plant was a large one, and none of the
free leaves, which were asleep and depended vertically, were browned,
excepting four very young ones. But three other leaves, though not browned,
were in a rather flaccid condition, and retained their nocturnal position
during the whole of the following day. In this case it was obvious that the
leaves which were exposed horizontally to the zenith suffered most. This
same pot was afterwards exposed for 35 - 40 m. on a slightly colder night,
and every leaf, both the pinned open and the free ones, was killed. It may
be added that two pots of O. corniculata (var. Atro-
[page 289]
purpurea) were exposed for 2 h. and 3 h. to a clear sky with the temp. on
grass -2o C., and none of the leaves, whether free or pinned open, were at
all injured.

Arachis hypogoea.--Some plants in a pot were exposed at night for 30 m. to
a clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding grass being -2o C., and on
two nights afterwards they were again exposed to the same temperature, but
this time during 1 h. 30 m. On neither occasion was a single leaf, whether
pinned open or free, injured; and this surprised us much, considering its
native tropical African home. Two plants were next exposed (March 16th) for
30 m. to a clear sky, the temperature of the surrounding grass being now
lower, viz., between -3o and -4o C., and all four pinned-open leaves were
killed and blackened. These two plants bore 22 other and free leaves
(excluding some very young bud-like ones) and only two of these were killed
and three somewhat injured; that is, 23 per cent. were either killed or
injured, whereas all four pinned-open leaves were utterly killed.

On another night two pots with several plants were exposed for between 35
m. and 40 m. to a clear sky, and perhaps to a rather lower temperature, for
a thermometer on a dial, 3 feet high, close by stood at -3.3o to -3.8o C.
In one pot three leaves were pinned open, and all were badly injured; of
the 44 free leaves, 26 were injured, that is, 59 per cent. In the other pot
3 leaves were pinned open and all were killed; four other leaves were
prevented from sleeping by narrow strips of stiff paper gummed across them,
and all were killed; of 24 free leaves, 10 were killed, 2 much injured, and
12 unhurt; that is, 50 per cent. of the free leaves were either killed or
much injured. Taking the two pots together, we may say that rather more
than half of the free leaves, which were asleep, were either killed or
injured, whilst all the ten horizontally extended leaves, which had been
prevented from going to sleep, were either killed or much injured.

Cassia floribunda.--A bush was exposed at night for 40 m. to a clear sky,
the temperature on the surrounding grass being -2o C., and not a leaf was
injured.* It was again exposed on

* Cassia laevigata was exposed to a clear sky for 35 m., and C. calliantha
