The big man's face flushed crimson. "I don't think that's funny,
Professor."

Bernardi quickly changed the subject, for he realized that the captain,
being by far the most muscular of the party, was not a man to trifle
with. "Tell me, Greenfield, did you succeed in finding a better spot for
the ship? I must admit I'm worried about that mud myself."

"Only remotely dry spot around is an outcropping 'bout two kilometers
away," Greenfield said grudgingly. He shifted his camp stool in a futile
search for shade. Even though the sun never penetrated the thick layer
of clouds, the yellow light diffused through them was blinding. "Might
be big enough, but it's not level. Could blast it smooth, but that'd
take at least a week--Earth time."

Bernardi pulled his damp shirt away from his body. "Well, I daresay
we'll be all right where we are, if we're not assailed by any violent
forces of nature. On Earth, this might be a monsoon climate."

"If you ask me, that monster is more of a danger than any monsoon."

Bernardi sighed. Although by far the most competent officer available
for the job of spaceship captain, Greenfield was not quite the man he
would have chosen to be his associate for months on end. Still,
beggars--as Miss Anspacher might have eloquently put it--could not be
choosers. "What makes you say that?" he asked, trying to set an example
of tolerance.

"Don't like the idea of him cooking for us," the captain said
stubbornly. "Might poison us all in our beds."

"Well, don't eat in your bed," suggested Mortland, strolling out of the
airlock in the company of the cat. Algol, however, finding that the spot
beside the captain's camp stool was as dry as anything could be on
Venus, decided to turn back.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The difficulty is easily overcome, Captain," the professor said, still
holding on to his patience. "You can continue to cook your own meals
from the tinned and packaged foods on board ship. The rest of us will
eat fresh native foods prepared by Jrann-Pttt."

"But why," Miss Anspacher interrupted as she emerged from the airlock
with a large cast-iron skillet, "should you think Jrann-Pttt wants to
poison us?"

Both men rose from their stools. "Stands to reason he'd consider us his
enemies, Miss Anspacher," the captain said. "After all, we--as a group,
that is--captured him."

"Hired him," Professor Bernardi contradicted. "I've telepathically
arranged to pay him an adequate salary. In goods, of course; I don't
suppose our money would be of much use to him. And I think he's rather
glad of the chance to hang around and observe us conveniently."

"Observe us!" Greenfield exclaimed. "You mean he's spying out the land
for an attack? Let's prepare our defenses at once!"

"I doubt if that's what he has in mind," Professor Bernardi said
judiciously.

"He may be staying because he wants to be near me," Miss Anspacher
blurted. Overcome by this unmaidenly admission, she reddened and rushed
from them, calling, "Yoo-hoo, Jrann-Pttt! Here is the frying pan!" Algol
woke up instantly and followed her. "Frying" was one of the more
important words in his vocabulary.

Captain Greenfield stared across the clearing after them, then turned
back to Bernardi with a frown. "I don't like to see one of our girls
mixed up with a lizard--and a foreign lizard at that." But his face too
clearly betrayed a personal resentment.

"Don't tell me you have a--a fondness for Miss Anspacher, Captain,"
Professor Bernardi exclaimed, genuinely surprised. Undeniably Miss
Anspacher--although no longer in her first youth--was a handsome woman,
but he would not have expected her somewhat cerebral type to appeal to
the captain. On the other hand, she was the only unattached woman in the
party and they were a long way from home.

Greenfield picked a fleck of dried violet mud from the side of the ship
and avoided Bernardi's eye. "One of the reasons I came along," he said
almost bashfully. "Thought I'd have the chance to be alone with her now
and again and impress her with, with...."

"Your sterling qualities?" Bernardi suggested.

The captain flashed him a glance of mingled gratitude and resentment.
"And now this damned lizard has to come along!"

"Cheer up, Captain," said the professor. "I'll back you against a lizard
any time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the long twilight of Venus had deepened into night and it could
never really be cool there by terrestrial standards, the temperature was
almost comfortable. Everything was quite black, except for the pallid
purple campfire glowing through the darkness; the clouds that
perpetually covered the surface of the planet prevented even the light
of the stars from reaching it.

"Tell me more about the cross-versus the parallel-cousin relationships
in your culture, Jrann-Pttt," Miss Anspacher breathed, wriggling her
camp stool closer to the saurian's. "Anthropology is a great hobby of
mine, you know. How do your people feel about exogamy?"

"I'm afraid I'm rather exhausted, dear lady," he said, using one arm to
mask a yawn, and one to surreptitiously wave away the saurian head that
was peering out of the underbrush. "I shouldn't like to give a scientist
like yourself any misinformation that might become a matter of record."

"Of course not," she murmured. "You're so considerate."

       *       *       *       *       *

A pale face appeared in the firelight like some weird creature of
darkness. Terrestrial and extraterrestrial both started. "Miss
Anspacher," the captain growled, "I'd like to lock up the ship, so if
you wouldn't mind turning in--"

Miss Anspacher pouted. "You've interrupted such an interesting
conversation. And I don't see why you have to lock up the ship. After
all, the night is three hundred and eighty-five hours long. We don't
sleep all that time and it would be a shame to be cooped up."

"I'm going to try to rig up some floodlights," Greenfield explained
stiffly, "so we won't be caught like this again. Nobody bothered to tell
me the day equals thirty-two of ours, so that half of it would be
night."

"Then I won't see you for almost two weeks of our time, Jrann-Pttt? Are
you sure you wouldn't like to spend the rest of the night in our ship?
Plenty of room, you know."

"No, thank you, dear lady. The jungle is my natural habitat. I should
feel stultified by walls and a ceiling. Don't worry--I shan't run away."

"Oh, I'm not worried," Miss Anspacher said coyly, throwing a stick of
wood on the fire.

"Small riddance if he does."

"Captain Greenfield!"

That part of the captain's face not concealed by his piratical black
beard turned red. "Well, if he can read our minds, he knows damn well
what I'm thinking, anyway, so why be hypocritical about it?"

"That's right--he is a telepath, isn't he?" Miss Anspacher's face grew
even redder than the captain's. "I forgot he.... It _is_ getting late. I
really must go. Good night, Jrann-Pttt."

"Good night, dear lady." The saurian bowed low over her hand.

Leaning on the captain's brawny arm, Miss Anspacher ploughed through the
mud to the ship, followed by the mosquito-bat and Algol, who had been
toasting themselves more or less companionably at the fire. The door to
the airlock clanged behind all four of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other saurian's head appeared again from the bush. _Jrann-Pttt_, the
insistent thought came, _shall I rescue you now_?

_Why, Dfar-Lll? I am not a prisoner. I'm quite free to come and go
as I please. But let's get away from the strangers' ship while we
communicate. They do have a certain amount of low-grade perception and
might be able to sense the presence of another personality. At any rate,
they might look out of a port and see you._

Keeping the illuminator on low beam, Dfar-Lll led the way through the
bushes. _Seems to me you're going to an awful lot of trouble just to get
zoo specimens_, the youngster protested, disentangling its arms from the
embrace of an amorous vine. _There's really no reason for carrying on
the work since Lieutenant Merglyt-Ruuu ... passed on._

Jrann-Pttt sat down on a fallen log and, tucking up his graceful tail,
signaled his junior to join him. _In the event that we do decide to
return to base, some handsome specimens might serve to offset the
lieutenant's demise._

_Return to base? But I thought we were...._

_We haven't found swamp life pleasant, have we? After all, there's no
real reason why we shouldn't go back. Is it our fault that Merglyt-Ruuu
happened to meet with a fatal accident?_

_We-ell ... but will the commandant see it that way?_

_On the other hand, if we don't go back, wouldn't it be a good idea to
attach ourselves to an expedition that, no matter how alien, is better
equipped for survival than we? And carrying out our original purpose
seemed the best way of getting to meet these strangers informally, as it
were._

_They are unquestionably intelligent life-forms then?_

_After a fashion._ Jrann-Pttt yawned and rose. _But why are we sitting
here? Let's start back to our camp. We will be able to converse more
comfortably._

They made their way through the jungle--now walking, now wading where
the mud became water. Small creatures with hardly any thoughts scurried
before them as they went.

_The commandant may have already made contact with their rulers_,
Dfar-Lll suggested, springing forward to illuminate the way. _In that
case, we couldn't hope to remain undiscovered for long._

_Oh, these creatures are not Venusians. There's no intelligent life
here. They hail from the third planet of this system and, according to
their thoughts, this is the only vessel that was capable of traversing
interplanetary space. So we needn't worry about extradition treaties or
any other official annoyances._

_If they're friendly, why didn't you spend the night in their ship? It
certainly looks more comfortable than our collapsible moslak--which, by
the way, collapsed while you were gone. I hope we'll be able to put it
up again ourselves. I must say this for the lieutenant--he was good at
that sort of thing._

