
Unfortunately they believed only what _experience_ taught them; they
kept the Sabbath according to the letter, not according to the spirit;
and although they did not work, they did not refrain from "thinking
their own thoughts and finding their own pleasure," on God's holy day.
Early in the morning they began to wander idly about from hut to hut,
visited frequently the grog-shops, and devoted themselves to gambling,
which occupation materially marred even the physical rest they might
otherwise have enjoyed.

"Comrades," said Ned Sinton, as the party sat inside their tent, round
the napkin on which breakfast was spread, "it is long since we have made
any difference between Saturday and Sunday, and I think it would be good
for us all if we were to begin now.  Since quitting San Francisco, the
necessity of pushing forward on our journey has prevented our doing so
hitherto.  How far we were right in regarding rapid travelling as being
_necessary_, I won't stop to inquire; but I think it would be well if we
should do a little more than merely rest from work on the Sabbath.  I
propose that, besides doing this, we should read a chapter of the Bible
together as a family, morning and evening on Sundays.  What say you?"

There was a pause.  It was evident that conflicting feelings were at
work among the party.

"Perhaps you're right," said Maxton; "I confess that I have troubled
myself very little about religion since I came out here, but my
conscience has often reproached me for it."

"Don't you think, messmates," said Captain Bunting, lighting his pipe,
"that if it gets wind the whole colony will be laughin' at us?"

"Sure they may laugh," said Larry O'Neil, "an' after that they may cry,
av it'll do them good.  Wot's the differ to us?"

"I don't agree with you, Ned," said Tom Collins, somewhat testily; "for
my part I like to see men straightforward, all fair and above-board, as
the captain would say.  Hypocrisy is an abominable vice, whether it is
well meaning or ill meaning, and I don't see the use of pretending to be
religious when we are not."

"Tom," replied Ned, in an earnest voice, "don't talk lightly of serious
things.  I don't _pretend_ to be religious, but I do _desire_ to be so:
and I think it would be good for all of us to read a portion of God's
Word on His own day, both for the purpose of obeying and honouring Him,
and of getting our minds filled, for a short time at least, with other
thoughts than those of gold-hunting.  In doing this there is no
hypocrisy."

"Well, well," rejoined Tom, "I'll not object if the rest are agreed."

"Agreed," was the unanimous reply.  So Ned rose, and, opening his
portmanteau, drew forth the little Bible that had been presented to him
by old Mr Shirley on the day of his departure from home.

From that day forward, every Sabbath morning and evening, Ned Sinton
read a portion of the Word of God to his companions, as long as they
were together; and each of the party afterwards, at different times,
confessed that, from the time the reading of the Bible was begun, he
felt happier than he did before.

After breakfast they broke up, and went out to stroll for an hour or two
upon the wooded slopes of the mountains.  Ned and Tom Collins went off
by themselves, the others, with the exception of Larry, walked out
together.

That morning Larry O'Neil felt less sociable than was his wont, so he
sallied forth alone.  For some time he sauntered about with his hands in
his pockets, his black pipe in his mouth, a thick oak cudgel, of his own
making, under his arm, and his hat set jauntily on one side of his head.
He went along with an easy swagger, and looked particularly reckless,
but no man ever belied his looks more thoroughly.  The swagger was
unintentional, and the recklessness did not exist.  On the contrary, the
reading of the Bible had brought back to his mind a flood of home
memories, which forced more than one tear from his susceptible heart
into his light-blue eye, as he wandered in memory over the green hills
of Erin.

But the scenes that passed before him as he roamed about among the huts
and tents of the miners soon drew his thoughts to subjects less
agreeable to contemplate.  On week-days the village, if we may thus
designate the scattered groups of huts and tents, was comparatively
quiet, but on Sundays it became a scene of riot and confusion.  Not only
was it filled with its own idle population of diggers, but miners from
all the country round, within a circuit of eight or ten miles, flocked
into it for the purpose of buying provisions for the week, as well as
for the purpose of gambling and drinking, this being the only day in all
the week, in which they indulged in what they termed "a spree."

Consequently the gamblers and store-keepers did more business on Sunday
than on any other day.  The place was crowded with men in their rough,
though picturesque, bandit-like costumes, rambling about from store to
store, drinking and inviting friends to drink, or losing in the
gaming-saloons all the earnings of a week of hard, steady toil--toil
more severe than is that of navvies or coal-heavers.  There seemed to be
an irresistible attraction in these gambling-houses.  Some men seemed
unable to withstand the temptation, and they seldom escaped being
fleeced.  Yet they returned, week after week, to waste in these dens of
iniquity the golden treasure gathered with so much labour during their
six working days.

Larry O'Neil looked through the doorway of one of the gambling-houses as
he passed, and saw men standing and sitting round the tables, watching
with eager faces the progress of the play, while ever and anon one of
them would reel out, more than half-drunk with excitement and brandy.
Passing on through the crowded part of the village, which looked as if a
fair were being held there, he entered the narrow footpath that led
towards the deeper recesses at the head of the valley.  O'Neil had not
yet, since his arrival, found time to wander far from his own tent.  It
was therefore with a feeling of great delight that he left the scene of
riot behind him, and, turning into a bypath that led up one of the
narrow ravines, opening into the larger valley, strolled several miles
into deep solitudes that were in harmony with his feelings.

The sun streamed through the entrance to this ravine, bathing with a
flood of light crags and caves and bush-encompassed hollows, that at
other times were shrouded in gloom.  As the Irishman stood gazing in awe
and admiration at the wild, beautiful scene, beyond which were seen the
snowy peaks of the Sierra Nevada, he observed a small solitary tent
pitched on a level patch of earth at the brow of a low cliff.  Curiosity
prompted him to advance and ascertain what unsociable creature dwelt in
it.  A few minutes sufficed to bring him close upon it, and he was about
to step forward, when the sound of a female voice arrested him.  It was
soft and low, and the accents fell upon his ear with the power of an old
familiar song.  Being at the back of the tent, he could not see who
spoke, but, from the monotonous regularity of the tone, he knew that the
woman was reading.  He passed noiselessly round to the front, and
peeping over the tops of bushes, obtained a view of the interior.

The reader was a young woman, whose face, which was partially concealed
by a mass of light-brown hair as she bent over her book, seemed
emaciated and pale.  Looking up just as Larry's eye fell upon her, she
turned towards a man whose gaunt, attenuated form lay motionless on a
pile of brushwood beside her, and said, tenderly:

"Are ye tired, Patrick, dear, or would you like me to go on?"

Larry's heart gave his ribs such a thump at that moment that he felt
surprised the girl did not hear it.  But he could not approach; he was
rooted to the earth as firmly, though not as permanently, as the bush
behind which he stood.  An Irish voice, and an Irish girl, heard and
seen so unexpectedly, quite took away his breath.

The sick man made some reply which was not audible, and the girl,
shutting the book, looked up for a few moments, as if in silent prayer,
then she clasped her hands upon her knees, and laying her head upon
them, remained for some time motionless.  The hands were painfully thin,
as was her whole frame.  The face was what might have been pretty at one
time, although it was haggard enough now, but the expression was
peculiarly sorrowful.

In a few minutes she looked up again, and spread the ragged blanket more
carefully over the shoulders of the sick man, and Larry, feeling that he
was at that time in the questionable position of an eavesdropper, left
his place of concealment, and stood before the tent.

The sick man saw him instantly, and, raising himself slightly,
exclaimed, "Who goes there?  Sure I can't git lave to die in pace!"

The familiar tones of a countryman's voice fell pleasantly on Larry's
ear as he sprang into the tent, and, seizing the sick man's hand, cried,
"A blissin' on the mouth that said that same.  O Pat, darlint!  I'm glad
to mate with ye.  What's the matter with ye?  Tell me now, an' don't be
lookin' as if ye'd seen a ghost."

"Kape back," said the girl, pushing Larry aside, with a half-pleased,
half-angry expression.  "Don't ye see that ye've a'most made him faint?
He's too wake intirely to be--"

"Ah! then, cushla, forgive me; I wint and forgot meself.  Blissin's on
yer pale face! sure yer Irish too."

Before the girl could reply to this speech, which was uttered in a tone
of the deepest sympathy, the sick man recovered sufficiently to say--

"Sit down, friend.  How comed ye to larn me name?  I guess I never saw
ye before."

"Sure, didn't I hear yer wife say it as I come for'ard to the tint,"
answered Larry, somewhat staggered at the un-Irish word "guess."

"He is my brother," remarked the girl.

"Troth, ye've got a dash o' the Yankee brogue," said Larry, with a
puzzled look; "did ye not come from the owld country?"

The sick man seemed too much exhausted to reply, so the girl said--

"Our father and mother were Irish, and left their own country to sittle
in America.  We have never seen Ireland, my brother nor I, but we think
of it as almost our own land.  Havin' been brought up in the woods, and
seein' a'most no one but father and mother for days an' weeks at a time,
we've got a good deal o' the Irish tone."

"Ah! thin, ye have reason to be thankful for that same," remarked Larry,
who was a little disappointed that his new friends were not altogether
Irish; but, after a few minutes' consideration, he came to the
conclusion, that people whose father and mother were natives of the
Emerald Isle could no more be Americans, simply because they happened to
be born in America, than they could be fish if they chanced to be born
at sea.  Having settled this point to his satisfaction, he proceeded to
question the girl as to their past history and the cause of their
present sad condition, and gradually obtained from her the information
that their father and mother were dead, and that, having heard of the
mines of California, her brother had sold off his farm in the backwoods,
and proceeded by the overland route to the new land of gold, in company
with many other western hunters and farmers.  They reached it, after the
most inconceivable sufferings, in the beginning of winter, and took up
their abode at Little Creek.

The rush of emigration from the western states to California, by the
overland route, that took place at this time, was attended with the most
appalling sufferings and loss of life.  Men sold off their snug farms,
packed their heavy waggons with the necessaries for a journey, with
their wives and little ones, over a wilderness more than two thousand
miles in extent, and set off by scores over the prairies towards the
Ultima Thule of the far west.  The first part of their journey was
prosperous enough, but the weight of their waggons rendered the pace
slow, and it was late in the season ere they reached the great barrier
of the Rocky Mountains.  But severe although the sufferings of those
first emigrants were, they were as nothing compared with the dire
calamities that befell those who started from home later in the season.
All along the route the herbage was cropped bare by those who had gone
before; their oxen broke down; burning sandy deserts presented
themselves when the wretched travellers were well-nigh exhausted; and
when at length they succeeded in reaching the great mountain-chain, its
dark passes were filled with the ice and snow of early winter.

Hundreds of men, women, and children, fell down and died on the burning
plain, or clambered up the rugged heights to pillow their dying heads at
last on wreaths of snow.  To add to the unheard-of miseries of these
poor people, scurvy in its worst forms attacked them; and the air of
many of their camping places was heavy with the stench arising from the
dead bodies of men and animals that had perished by the way.

"It was late in the season," said Kate Morgan, as Larry's new friend was
named, "when me brother Patrick an' I set off with our waggon and oxen,
an' my little sister Nelly, who was just able to run about, with her
curly yellow hair streamin' over her purty shoulders, an' her laughin'
blue eyes, almost spakin' when they looked at ye."

The poor girl spoke with deep pathos as she mentioned Nelly's name,
while Larry O'Neil sat with his hands clasped, gazing at her with an
expression of the deepest commiseration.

"We got pretty well on at first," she continued, after a pause, "because
our waggon was lighter than most o' the others; but it was near winter
before we got to the mountains, an' then our troubles begood.  First of
all, one o' the oxen fell, and broke its leg.  Then darlin' Nelly fell
sick, and Patrick had to carry her on his back up the mountains, for I
had got so weak meself that I wasn't fit to take her up.  All the way
over I was troubled with one o' the emigrants that kep' us company--
there was thirty o' us altogether--he was a very bad man, and none o' us
liked him.  He took a fancy to me, an' asked me to be his wife so often
that I had to make Patrick order him to kape away from us altogether.
He wint off in a black rage, swearin' he'd be revenged,--an' oh!"
continued Kate, wringing her hands, "he kept his word.  One day there
was a dispute between our leaders which way we should go, for we had got
to two passes in the mountains; so one party went one way, and we went
another.  Through the night, my--my lover came into our camp to wish me
good-bye, he said, for the last time, as he was goin' with the other
party.  After he was gone, I missed Nelly, and went out to seek for her
among the tents o' my neighbours, but she was nowhere to be found.  At
once I guessed he had taken her away, for well did he know I would
sooner have lost my life than my own darlin' Nell."

Again the girl paused a few moments; then she resumed, in a low voice--

"We never saw him or Nelly again.  It is said the whole party perished,
an' I believe it, for they were far spent, and the road they took, I've
been towld, is worse than the one we took.  It was dead winter when we
arrived, and Patrick and me came to live here.  We made a good deal at
first by diggin', but we both fell sick o' the ague, and we've been
scarce able to kape us alive till now.  But it won't last long.  Dear
Patrick is broken down entirely, as ye see, and I haven't strength
a'most to go down to the diggin's for food.  I haven't been there for a
month, for it's four miles away, as I dare say ye know.  We'll both be
at rest soon."

"Ah! now, don't say that again, avic," cried Larry, smiting his thigh
with energy; "ye'll be nothin' o' the sort, that ye won't; sure yer
brother Pat is slaipin' now like an infant, he is, an' I'll go down
meself to the stores and git ye medicines an' a doctor, an' what not.
Cheer up, now--"

Larry's enthusiastic efforts to console his new friend were interrupted
by the sick man, who awoke at the moment, and whispered the word "food."

His sister rose, and taking up a small tin pan that simmered on the fire
in front of the tent, poured some of its contents into a dish.

"What is it ye give him?" inquired Larry, taking the dish from the
girl's hands and putting it to his lips.  He instantly spat out the
mouthful, for it was soup made of rancid pork, without vegetables of any
kind.

"'Tis all I've got left," said the girl.  "Even if I was able to go down
for more, he wouldn't let me; but I couldn't, for I've tried more than
once, and near died on the road.  Besides, I haven't a grain o' goold in
the tent."

"O morther!  Tare an' ages!" cried Larry, staring first at the girl and
then at her brother, while he slapped his thighs and twisted his fingers
together as if he wished to wrench them out of joint.

"Howld on, faix I'll do it.  Don't give it him, plaze; howld on, _do_!"

Larry O'Neil turned round as he spoke, seized his cudgel, sprang right
over the bushes in front of the tent, and in two minutes more was seen
far down the ravine, spurning the ground beneath him as if life and
death depended on the race.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

KINDNESS TO STRANGERS IN DISTRESS--REMARKS IN REFERENCE TO EARLY
RISING--DIGGINGS WAX UNPRODUCTIVE--NED TAKES A RAMBLE, AND HAS A SMALL
ADVENTURE--PLANS FORMED AND PARTLY DEVELOPED--REMARKABLE HUMAN CREATURES
DISCOVERED, AND STILL MORE REMARKABLE CONVERSE HELD WITH THEM.

"I'll throuble ye for two pounds of flour," cried Larry O'Neil, dashing
into one of the stores, which was thronged with purchasers, whom he
thrust aside rather unceremoniously.

"You'll have to take your turn, stranger, I calculate," answered the
store-keeper, somewhat sharply.

"Ah thin, avic, plaze do attind to me at wance; for sure I've run four
miles to git stuff for a dyin' family--won't ye now?"

The earnest manner in which Larry made this appeal was received with a
laugh by the bystanders, and a recommendation to the store-keeper to
give him what he wanted.

"What's the price?" inquired Larry, as the man measured it out.

"Two dollars a pound," answered the man.

"Musha!  I've seed it chaiper."

"I guess so have I; but provisions are gittin' up, for nothin' has come
from Sacramento for a fortnight."

"Tay an' sugar'll be as bad, no doubt!"

"Wuss, they are; for there's next to none at all, I opine, in this here
location."

"Faix, I'll have a pound o' both, av they wos two dollars the
half-ounce.  Have ye got raisins an' sago?"

"Yes."

"Give me a pound o' that, aich."

These articles having been delivered and paid for, Larry continued--

"Ye'll have brandy, av coorse?"

"I guess I have; plenty at twenty dollars a bottle."

"Och, morther, it'll brake the bank intirely; but it's little I care.
Hand me wan bottle, plaze."

The bottle of brandy was added to his store, and then the Irishman,
shouldering his bundle of good things, left the shop, and directed his
steps once more towards the ravine in which dwelt Kate Morgan and her
brother Pat.

It was late when the Irishman returned from his mission of kindness, and
he found the fire nearly out, the tent closed, and all his comrades
sound asleep, so, gently lifting the curtain that covered the entrance,
he crept quietly in, lay down beside Bill Jones, whose nasal organ was
performing a trombone solo, and in five minutes was sound asleep.

It seemed to him as if he had barely closed his eyes, when he was roused
by his comrades making preparations to resume work; nevertheless, he had
