"I know that, Doctor," the young man said. "Nobody's perfect, and I
don't expect perfection. Can you give me a--an estimate on the
chances?"

"I can't even give you any kind of guess," said Farnsworth. He smiled
rather grimly. "So far, we have had no failures. Our mortality rate is a
flat zero. We have never lost a patient because we've never had one. As
I told you, this will be the first time the operation has ever been
performed on a human being. Or, rather," he corrected himself, "I should
say series of operations. This is not one single--er--cut-and-suture
job, like an appendectomy."

"All right, then, call it a series of operations," the young man said.
"I assume each of them has been performed individually?"

"Not exactly. Some of them have never been performed on any human being
simply because they require not only special conditions, but they
require that the steps leading up to them have already been performed."

"You don't make things sound very rosy, Doctor."

"I'm not trying to. I'm trying to give you the facts. Personally, I
think we have a better than ninety percent chance of success. I wouldn't
try it if I thought otherwise. With modern mathematical methods of
analyzing medical theory, we can predict success for such an intricate
series of operations. We can predict what will happen when massive doses
of hormones and enzymes and such are used. But medicine still remains
largely an art in spite of all that.

"In parallel operations, performed on primates, our results were largely
successful. But remember that not even every human being has the genetic
structure necessary to undergo this particular treatment, and a monkey's
gene structure is quite different from yours or mine."

"I'll just ask you one question," the young man said firmly. "If _you_
were being asked to undergo this treatment, would you do it?"

Dr. Farnsworth didn't hesitate. "All things considered, yes, I would."

"What do you mean, 'All things considered'?"

"The very fact that the Nipe exists, and that this is the only method of
dealing with him that is even remotely possible would certainly
influence my opinion," Farnsworth said. "I might not be so quick to go
through it, frankly, if it were not for the fact that the future of the
entire human race would depend upon my decision." He paused, then added:
"I would hesitate to go through with it if there were no Nipe threat,
not because I would be afraid that the operations might fail, but
because of what I would be afterward."

"Um. Yes." The young man caught his lower lip between his teeth and
thought for a moment. "Yes, I see what you mean. Being a lone superman
in a world of ordinary people mightn't be so pleasant."

Colonel Mannheim, who had been sitting silently during the discussion
between the two men, said: "Look, Stanton, I know this is tough.
Actually, it's a lot tougher on you than it is on your brother, because
_you_ have to make the decision. _He_ can't. But I want you to keep it
in mind that there's nothing compulsory in this. Nobody's trying to
force you to do anything."

There was a touch of bitterness in the young man's smile as he looked at
the colonel. "No. You merely remind me of the fact and leave the rest to
my sense of duty."

Colonel Mannheim, recognizing the slightly altered quotation, returned
his smile and gave him the next line. "'Your sense of duty!'"

The bitterness vanished, and the young man's smile became a grin.
"'Don't put it on that footing!'" he quoted back in a melodramatic
voice. "'As I was merciful to you just now, be merciful to me! I implore
you not to insist on the letter of your bond just as the cup of
happiness is at my lips!'"

"'We insist on nothing,'" returned the colonel; "'we content ourselves
with pointing out _your duty_.'"

Dr. Farnsworth had no notion of what the two of them were talking about,
but he kept silent as he noticed the tension fading.

"'Well, you have appealed to my sense of duty,'" the young man
continued, "'and my duty is all too clear. I abhor your infamous
calling; I shudder at the thought that I have ever been mixed up with
it; but duty is before all--at any price I will do my duty.'"

"'Bravely spoken!'" said the colonel. "'Come, you are one of us once
more.'"

"'Lead on. I follow.'"

And the two of them broke out in laughter while Farnsworth looked on in
total incomprehension. His was not the kind of mind that could face a
grim situation with a laugh.

Even after he quit laughing, the smile remained on the young man's face.
"All right, Colonel, you win. We'll go through with it, Martin and I."

"Good!" Mannheim said warmly. "Do you have the papers, Dr. Farnsworth?"

"Right here," Farnsworth said, opening a briefcase that was lying on the
table. He was glad to be back in the conversation again. He took out a
thick sheaf of papers and spread them on the table. Then he handed the
young man a pen. "You'll have to sign at the bottom of each sheet," he
said.

The young man picked up the papers and read through them carefully. Then
he looked up at Farnsworth. "They seem to be in order. Uh--about Martin.
You know what's the matter with him--I mean, aside from the radiation.
Do you think he'll be able to handle his part of the job after--after
the operations?"

"I'm quite sure he will. The operations, plus the therapy we'll give
him afterward should put him in fine shape."

"Well." He looked thoughtful. "Five more years. And then I'll have the
twin brother that I never really had at all. Somehow that part of it
just doesn't really register, I guess."

"Don't worry about it, Stanton," said Dr. Farnsworth. "We have a complex
enough job ahead of us without your worrying in the bargain. We'll want
your mind perfectly relaxed. You have your own ordeal to undergo."

"Thanks for reminding me," the young man said, but there was a smile on
his face when he said it. He looked at the release forms again. "All
nice and legal, huh? Well ..." He hesitated for a moment, then he took
the pen and wrote _Bartholomew Stanton_ in a firm, clear hand.




_[21]_


Captain Davidson Greer sat in a chair before an array of TV screens, his
gray-green eyes watchful. In the center of one of the screens, the
Nipe's image sat immobile, surrounded by the paraphernalia in his hidden
nest. Other screens showed various sections of the long tunnel that led
south from the opening in the northern end of the island. At the
captain's fingertips was a bank of controls that would allow him to
switch from one pickup to another if necessary, so that he could see
anything anywhere in the tunnels. He hoped that wouldn't be necessary.
He did not want any of the action to take place anywhere but in the
places where it was expected--but he was prepared for alterations in the
plan. In other rooms, nearly a hundred other men were linked into the
special controls that allowed them to operate the little rat spies that
scuttled through the underground darkness, and the captain's system
would allow him to see through the eyes of any one of those rats at an
instant's notice.

The screen which he was watching at the moment, however, was not
connected with an underground pickup. It was linked with a pickup in the
bottom of a basketball-sized sphere driven by a small inertial engine
that held the sphere hovering in the air above the game sanctuary on the
northern tip of Manhattan Island. In the screen, he had an aerial view
of the grassy, rocky mounds where the earth hid the shattered and
partially melted ruins of long-collapsed buildings. In the center of the
screen was a bird's-eye view of a man holding a rifle. He was walking
slowly, picking his way carefully along the bottom of the shallow gully
that had once been upper Broadway.

"Barbell," the captain said. A throat microphone picked up the words and
transmitted them to the ears of the man in the screen. "Barbell, this is
Barhop. There are no wild animals within sight, but remember, we can't
see everything from up here, so keep your eyes open."

"Right, Barhop," said a rather muffled voice in the captain's ear.

"Fine. And if you do meet up with anything, shoot to kill." There were
plenty of wild animals in the game sanctuary--some of them dangerous.
Not all of the inhabitants of the Bronx Zoological Gardens had been
killed on that day when the sun bomb fell. Being farther north, they had
had better protection, and some of them, later, had wandered southward
to the island. Captain Greer knew perfectly well that Stanton,
bare-handed, was more than a match for a leopard or a lion, but he
didn't want Stanton to tire himself fighting with an animal. The rifle
would most likely never be used; it was merely another precaution.

It would have been possible, and perhaps simpler, to have taken Stanton
to the opening by flyer, but that would have created other
complications. Traffic rules forbade flyers to go over the game
sanctuary at any altitude less than one thousand feet. One flyer, going
in low, would have attracted the attention of the traffic police, and
Stanley Martin wanted no attention whatever drawn to this area. Even the
procedure of instructing the traffic officers to ignore one flyer would
have attracted more attention than he wanted. They would have remembered
those instructions afterward.

Stanton walked.

Captain Greer's eye caught something at the edge of the screen. It moved
toward the center as the floating eye moved with Stanton.

"Barbell," the captain said, "there's a deer ahead of you. Just keep
moving."

Stanton rounded the corner of a pile of masonry. He could see the animal
now himself. The deer stared at the intruder for a few seconds, then
bounded away with long, graceful leaps.

"Magnificent animal." It was Stanton's voice, very low. The remark
wasn't directed toward anyone in particular. Captain Greer didn't
answer.

The captain lit a cigarette and leaned back in his chair, his eyes on
the screens. The Nipe still sat, unmoving. He was apparently in one of
his "sleep" states. The captain wasn't sure that that was the blessing
that it might have seemed. He had no way of knowing how much external
disturbance it would take to "wake" the Nipe, and as long as he was
sitting quietly, the chances were greater that he would hear movement in
the tunnel. If he were active, his senses might be more alert, but he
would also be distracted by his own actions and the noises he made
himself.

It didn't matter, the captain decided. One way was as good as another in
this case. The point was to get Stanton into an advantageous position
before the Nipe knew he was anywhere around.

He looked back at the image of Stanton, a black-clad figure in a
flexible, tough, skin-tight suit. The Nipe would have a hard time biting
through that artificial hide, but it gave Stanton as much freedom as if
he'd been naked.

Stanton knew where he was going. He had studied maps of the area, and
had been taken on a vicarious tour of the route by means of the very
flying eye that was watching him now. But things look different from the
ground than from the air, and no amount of map study will familiarize a
person with terrain as completely as an actual personal survey.

Stanton paused, and Captain Greer heard his voice. "Barhop, this is
Barbell. Those are the cliffs up ahead, aren't they?"

"That's right, Barbell. You go up that slope to your left. The opening
is in that pile of rock at the base of the cliff."

"They're higher than I'd thought," Stanton commented. Then he started
walking again.

The tunnel entrance he was heading for had once been a wide opening,
drilled laterally into the side of the cliff, and big enough to allow
easy access to the tunnels, so that the passengers of those old
underground trains could get to the platforms where they stopped. But
the sun bomb had changed all that. The concussion had shaken loose rock
at the top of the cliff and a minor avalanche had obliterated all
indications of the tunnel's existence, except for one small, narrow
opening near the top of what had once been a wide hole in the face of
the cliff.

Stanton walked slowly toward the spot until he was finally at the base
of the slope of rock created by that long-ago avalanche. "Up there?" he
asked.

"That's right," said Captain Greer.

"I think I'll leave the rifle here, Barhop," Stanton said. "No point in
carrying it up the slope."

"Right. Put it in those bushes to your left. They'll conceal it, won't
they?"

"I think so. Yeah." Stanton hid the rifle and then began making his way
up the talus slope.

Captain Greer flipped a switch. "Team One! He's coming in. Are those
alarms deactivated?"

"All okay, Barhop," said a voice. "This is Leader One. I'll meet him at
the hole."

"Right." Captain Greer reversed the switch again. "Are you ready,
Barbell?"

Stanton looked into the dark hole. It was hardly big enough to crawl
through, and ended in a seeming infinity of blackness. He took the
special goggles from the case at his belt and put them on. Inside the
hole, he saw a single rat, staring at him with beady eyes.

"I'm ready to go in, Barhop," Stanton said.

He got down on his hands and knees and began to crawl through the narrow
tunnel. Ahead of him, the rat turned and began to lead the way.




_[22]_


The big tunnel inside the cliff was long and black, and the air was
stale and thick with the stench of rodents. Stanton stood still for a
minute, stretching his muscles. Crawling through that cramped little
opening had not been easy. He looked around him, trying to probe the
luminescent gloom that the goggles he wore brought to his eyes.

The tunnel stretched out before him--on and on. Around him was the
smell of viciousness and death. Ahead ...

_It goes on to infinity_, Stanton thought, _ending at last at zero_.

The rat paused and looked back, waiting for him to follow.

"Okay," Stanton muttered. "Let's go."

The rat led him down the long tunnel, deep into the cliffside, until at
last they came to a stairway that led downward into the long tunnels
where the trains had once run. They came to the platform where
passengers had once waited for those trains. Four feet below the edge of
the platform were the rusted tracks that had once borne those trains.

He lowered himself over the edge to stand on the rail.

"Barbell," said a voice in his ear, "Barhop here. Do you read?"

It was the barest whisper, picked up by the antennas in his shoes from
the steel rail that ran along the floor of the dark tunnel.

"Read you, Barhop."

"Move out, then. You've got a long stroll to go."

Stanton started walking, keeping his feet near the rail, in case Greer
wanted to call again. As he walked, he could feel the slight motion of
the skin-tight woven suit that he wore rubbing gently against his skin.

And he could hear the scratching patter of the rats.

Mostly they stayed away from him, avoiding the strange being that had
invaded their underground realm, but he could see them hiding in corners
and scurrying along the sides of the tunnels, going about their
unfathomable rodent business.

Around him, six rat-like remote-control robots moved with him, shifting
their pattern constantly as they patrolled his moving figure.

Far ahead, he knew, other rat robots were stationed, watching and
waiting, ready to deactivate the Nipe's detection devices at just the
right moment. Behind him, another horde moved forward to turn the
devices on again.

It had, he knew, taken the technicians a long time to learn how to shut
off those detectors without giving the alarm to the Nipe's instruments.

There were nearly a hundred men in on the operation, controlling the
robot rats or watching the hidden cameras that spied upon the Nipe.
Nearly a hundred. And every single one of them was safe.

They were all outside the tunnel and far away. They were with Stanton
only by proxy. They could not die here in this stinking hole, no matter
what happened. But Stanton could.

There was no help for it, no other way it could be done. Stanton had to
go in person. A full-sized robot proxy might be stronger, although not
