
"Perhaps he has not told the truth."

"He wouldn't tell a lie--that is, about that," said James, modifying
his first assertion lest it might be a compliment. In reality he had
implicit confidence in Herbert's word.

"You wouldn't want me to be rowing around in a poor boat, while that
beggar has a new one," said James, artfully appealing to his father's
pride.

"Well, the fact is, my son," said the squire, rather embarrassed, "it
would not be convenient for me to buy you a new boat just now."

"Why not, father? I thought you had plenty of money."

"So I have; but I have made some investments under the advice of Mr.
Temple. If you can arrange to exchange boats by paying a little to boot,
you may do so."

"I have proposed it, but Herbert is very stiff about it."

"Humph!" said the squire, clearing his throat; "I think you will have to
wait a while."

"How long?" asked James, dissatisfied.

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said his father, "If things go well, I
expect to make a good deal of money within twelve months. Instead of a
rowboat, I'll buy you a beautiful little sailboat next season."

"Will you?" exclaimed James, delighted.

"Yes; won't that be much better?"

"You are right, father."

Certainly a sailboat would be far better and there was very little
chance of Herbert's having one given him. So James went cut rowing
contentedly the next afternoon, although Herbert was out also in the new
boat.

"Your boat is better than mine," said James. "However, I am to have an
elegant yacht next year."

"Are you?" said Herbert, interested.

"Father has promised to get me one. He would get me one this season but
it would be some time before it could be got ready and I can have it the
first thing next spring."

"I congratulate you," said Herbert. "I should like a sailboat myself."

"I dare say you would," said James, pompously, "but of course you cannot
expect to have one."

"I don't think there is much chance myself, unless somebody leaves me a
fortune," said Herbert, good-naturedly. "I am satisfied with this boat."

"Of course it is more than a boy in your circumstances could expect."

Herbert smiled. He was used to references to his circumstances. James
never allowed him to forget that he was a poor boy. He thought it hardly
worth noticing.

"Shall we have a race?" he asked.

"Just as you say," said James.

James thought himself the better rower or he would not have consented to
row across the pond.

"Are you ready?" asked Herbert.

"Yes."

"Give way, then."

Both bent to their oars and rowed their best. But it was not long before
Herbert began to draw away from his antagonist. He had not had as much
practice as James, but he was stronger in the arms, and had paid more
attention to Cameron's instructions. He came in more than a dozen
lengths ahead of his competitor.

"I've won the race, James," he said, with a smile.

"You ought to," said James, in a surly tone.

"I haven't had as much practice as you."

"What if you haven't? You've got a new boat, while mine is old and
clumsy."

"If you think that makes any difference I'll row back with you, changing
boats."

"Agreed," said James. But James brought up the rear at about the same
distance.

"Beaten again," said Herbert, pleased with his success.

"There's nothing to crow about," said James, crossly. "Your boat is a
good one but I'm not used to it."

"I am not much used to it myself. I only rowed in it yesterday for the
first time."

"That's long enough to get the hang of it. There isn't much fun in
rowing. I'd a good deal rather sail."

"I like both. There's more exercise in rowing."

"Don't you get exercise enough in hoeing potatoes?" asked James, with a
sneer. "I shouldn't think laborers would need any extra exercise."

"There's some advantage in varying your exercise. There isn't much fun
in hoeing."

"No, I should think not."

"Are you going in?" asked Herbert, noticing that James was proceeding to
fasten his boat.

"Yes, I've got tired of the water."

Herbert was not to be alone, however, for just then Mr. Cameron appeared
on the bank.

"I think I'll go out with you," he said.

"All right," said Herbert, with alacrity, as he rowed the boat to shore.

"Mr. Cameron," said our hero, "mother has asked me to invite you to take
tea with us this evening."

"I shall be very glad to come," said Cameron.

"We live in humble style, you know," said Herbert, "but I told mother
you wouldn't mind that."

"Thank you for saying so. I shall be very glad to meet your mother, and
expect to enjoy myself better than at Squire Leech's table. It isn't the
style, but the company. Why is James going away so soon?"

"I have beaten him in two races," said Herbert.

"I am not surprised to hear of your success. You are really gaining very
fast."

"I am glad of it. I want to be a good rower."

"It is a good thing to do well anything you undertake, whether it be
rowing or anything else."

"James thinks I don't need to row for exercise."

"Why not?"

"He thinks I shall get enough exercise in hoeing potatoes," answered
Herbert, with a smile.

"It wouldn't do him any harm to get exercise in the same way."

"The very idea would shock him."




CHAPTER XXVIII

MRS. CARTER'S GUEST


At five o'clock Mr. Cameron knocked at the door of Mrs. Carter's
cottage. It was opened by Herbert himself.

"Walk in, Mr. Cameron," he said, cordially. "My mother is in the next
room."

Mrs. Carter was prepossessed in favor of Cameron. In worldly advantages
he was her superior; yet with the instinct of a gentleman he seemed
unconscious of any such difference and did not exhibit the least trace
of condescension, as many ill-bred persons might have.

"I have wanted to see you, Mrs. Carter," he said. "As the mother of my
professor, the desire was only natural."

"Herbert tells me he has learned a good deal since he has been reading
to you. He has often spoken of his good fortune in meeting you."

"I feel equally fortunate in meeting him. Not every boy of his age would
adapt himself as readily and intelligently as he has."

"I am very glad if you find Herbert of service to you," said Mrs.
Carter. "In all ways the engagement has been of advantage to him."

"Squire Leech was kind enough to offer me the services of his son,
James," said Cameron, smiling.

"James would hardly have been willing to sacrifice so much of his time,"
said Herbert, "though he might be willing to try it for a day or two to
supersede me."

"I think I shall have to worry along with my present professor," said
Cameron, "and allow James to devote his superior talents to some other
business."

The table was already spread in honor of the guest, and both Herbert and
Mrs. Carter were gratified to find that the young collegian did ample
justice to the meal.

"I feel almost ashamed of my appetite," said Cameron; "but the change
from the stereotyped bill of fare at the hotel is pleasant and gives the
food an increased relish."

"I am glad to hear you say so, Mr. Cameron; I could hardly expect to
compete with the hotel in point of variety. Let me give you another cup
of tea."

"Thank you. I don't often venture on a third cup, but I think I will
make an exception to-night."

"Dr. Johnson sometimes got up to a dozen, I believe," said Herbert.

"He exceeded that number at times; but we must remember that the cups
in his day barely contained a third as much as ours, so he was not so
immoderate, after all. His excesses in eating were less pardonable."

"Was he a very large eater?" asked the widow.

"He actually gorged himself, if we are to believe the accounts that have
come down to us," said Cameron. "I am afraid, Mrs. Carter, you would
have found him a very unprofitable boarder."

"But," said Herbert; "there is one of Dr. Johnson's labors I shall not
seek to imitate. I shall never attempt to write a dictionary."

"It must be a monotonous and wearisome labor. Besides, I don't think we
could either of us improve upon Webster or Worcester."

They arose, and Mrs. Carter, who could not afford to keep a servant,
herself cleared away the tea table.

"Herbert," said the young collegian, "you mentioned one day that your
father was an inventor."

"He made one invention, but whether it will amount to anything, I don't
know. He had high hopes of it, but died before he had any opportunity of
testing its value."

"Will you show it to me?"

"With pleasure."

Herbert led Cameron upstairs into his own chamber, where, since his
father's death, the work which had cost his father so many toilsome
hours had been kept. Cameron examined it carefully. Herbert waited
anxiously for his verdict. At length he spoke.

"As far as I am qualified to judge," he said, "your father's invention
seems to embody an improvement. But you must not rely too much upon my
opinion. My knowledge of the details of manufacturing is superficial. I
should like to show it to my father."

"There is nothing that I would like better," said Herbert, "if you think
he would be willing to examine it."

"He would be glad to do so. It is for his interest to examine anything
which will facilitate the details of his business. I am intending to go
home next Friday afternoon, and, with your permission, will carry this
with me."

"I shall feel very much obliged to you if you will," said Herbert. "It
may be worth nothing. I know it would have been my father's wish to have
it examined by one who is qualified to judge."

"It is a pity your father could not have lived to enjoy the benefit of
his invention, if it succeeds."

"He was a great loss to us," said Herbert. "There were but three of us,
and he was at an age when we might hope to have him with us for a good
many years yet. If I had been a few years older, I should have been
better able to make up his loss to my mother."

"She is fortunate in having a son who is so willing to do his best for
her," said Cameron, kindly. "We don't know what the future may have in
store for us, Herbert; but you may rely upon my continued friendship."

Herbert pressed the hand of the young collegian warmly, for he knew
that the offer of service was no empty compliment, but made in earnest
sincerity.

The evening passed pleasantly and at nine o'clock Cameron took his
leave. Herbert accompanied him as far as the hotel. He was walking
leisurely back when he heard his name called and, turning, saw that it
was James Leech who had accosted him.

"Where have you been, Carter?" inquired James; "been to see Mr. Cameron,
I suppose? Doesn't he get enough of your company in the daytime?"

"You must ask him that. He has been taking tea at our house and I
accompanied him home."

"He took supper at your house!"

"Yes."

"He seems very fond of keeping low company."

"What do you mean?" demanded Herbert, his eyes flashing with indignation
at this insolence.

"I mean what I say," answered James, doggedly.

"Then I advise you hereafter to keep your impudence to yourself,"
retorted Herbert; "and for fear you may forget it, I give you this as a
reminder."

An instant later James Leech found himself lying on his back on the
sidewalk with Herbert bending over him.

He kept upon his feet, pale with rage and mortification.

"I'll be revenged upon you yet, you brute!" he shrieked, in his rage
leaving our hero victor of the field.

"I wouldn't have touched him if he hadn't spoken against my mother,"
said Herbert.




CHAPTER XXIX

A BITTER PILL


James Leech was furious at the humiliation. What he, a gentleman's son,
to be knocked down and triumphed over by a boy who was compelled to
work! Why, it was almost a sacrilege and no punishment could be too
severe for such, flagrant outrage. How should he be revenged? First of
all, he would get Herbert discharged from his present employment. Surely
Mr. Cameron would not continue to avail himself of the services of a
common bully. To attain this, he decided to reveal the matter to his
father.

"That boy actually knocked you down!" exclaimed the squire. "But why did
you permit him?"

"He took me by surprise," said James.

"And what did you do? Did you knock him over?"

"I would," said James, "but I didn't care to pursue him. I thought I
would wait and tell you."

"And what do you want me to do?"

"To get Mr. Cameron to turn him off. I want him to starve," said James,
bitterly.

"You express yourself too strongly, James; but, under the circumstances,
I can't blame you much. The boy is evidently a ruffian."

"Yes, he is a ruffian and a brute, and I don't see what Mr. Cameron sees
about him to like, I am sure."

"Probably the boy makes him think he is a model of excellence. Such boys
are apt to be deceitful."

"He's deceitful enough. You'd think butter wouldn't melt in his mouth."

"I shall make such representations to Mr. Cameron as, I flatter myself,
will dispose of the case of this young rascal and make him repent his
brutal and unprovoked assault. I'll go over to-morrow forenoon to the
hotel and speak to him on the subject," said the squire, pompously.

"Thank you, father. Put it as strong as you can."

"I will, you may be assured of that."

"If I can only get him turned off, I won't mind his hitting me," thought
James. "I hope to see him in the penitentiary some day. It would do him
good."

It so happened that Cameron had met Herbert in a walk he took before
breakfast and had been informed of the occurrence of the evening
previous.

"I don't know whether I ought to have struck James," said Herbert, in
conclusion; "but when he called my mother and myself low, I couldn't
help it."

"I am glad you did it," said the young collegian. "The boy is a
disagreeable cub and deserves more than one lesson of that sort. Didn't
he offer to hit you back?"

"No."

"So I supposed. I don't approve of fighting; but if he had shown a
little courage to back his insolence, I should have despised him less.
