The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chapter Ends, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Chapter Ends

Author: Poul William Anderson

Release Date: October 14, 2012 [EBook #41064]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHAPTER ENDS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        THE CHAPTER ENDS

                     Novelet of Latter Years

                        by Poul Anderson

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Dynamic Science
Fiction January 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: Julith clasped the star-man's arm with one hand, while
her other arm gripped his waist. The generator in Jorun's skull
responded to his will ... they rose quietly and went slowly seaward....]


    "Look around you, Jorun of Fulkhis. This is _Earth_. This is the old
    home of all mankind. You cannot go off and forget it. Man cannot do
    so. It is in him, in his blood and bones and soul; he will carry
    Earth within him forever."


"No," said the old man.

"But you don't realize what it means," said Jorun. "You don't know what
you're saying."

The old man, Kormt of Huerdar, Gerlaug's son, and Speaker for Solis
Township, shook his head till the long, grizzled locks swirled around
his wide shoulders. "I have thought it through," he said. His voice was
deep and slow and implacable. "You gave me five years to think about it.
And my answer is no."

Jorun felt a weariness rise within him. It had been like this for days
now, weeks, and it was like trying to knock down a mountain. You beat on
its rocky flanks till your hands were bloody, and still the mountain
stood there, sunlight on its high snow-fields and in the forests that
rustled up its slopes, and it did not really notice you. You were a
brief thin buzz between two long nights, but the mountain was forever.

"You haven't thought at all," he said with a rudeness born of
exhaustion. "You've only reacted unthinkingly to a dead symbol. It's not
a human reaction, even, it's a verbal reflex."

Kormt's eyes, meshed in crow's-feet, were serene and steady under the
thick gray brows. He smiled a little in his long beard, but made no
other reply. Had he simply let the insult glide off him, or had he not
understood it at all? There was no real talking to these peasants; too
many millennia lay between, and you couldn't shout across that gulf.

"Well," said Jorun, "the ships will be here tomorrow or the next day,
and it'll take another day or so to get all your people aboard. You have
that long to decide, but after that it'll be too late. Think about it, I
beg of you. As for me, I'll be too busy to argue further."

"You are a good man," said Kormt, "and a wise one in your fashion. But
you are blind. There is something dead inside you."

He waved one huge gnarled hand. "Look around you, Jorun of Fulkhis. This
is _Earth_. This is the old home of all humankind. You cannot go off and
forget it. Man cannot do so. It is in him, in his blood and bones and
bones and soul; he will carry Earth within him forever."

Jorun's eyes traveled along the arc of the hand. He stood on the edge of
the town. Behind him were its houses--low, white, half-timbered, roofed
with thatch or red tile, smoke rising from the chimneys; carved
galleries overhung the narrow, cobbled, crazily-twisting streets; he
heard the noise of wheels and wooden clogs, the shouts of children at
play. Beyond that were trees and the incredible ruined walls of Sol
City. In front of him, the wooded hills were cleared and a gentle
landscape of neat fields and orchards rolled down toward the distant
glitter of the sea: scattered farm buildings, drowsy cattle, winding
gravel roads, fence-walls of ancient marble and granite, all dreaming
under the sun.

He drew a deep breath. It was pungent in his nostrils. It smelled of
leaf-mould, plowed earth baking in the warmth, summery trees and
gardens, a remote ocean odor of salt and kelp and fish. He thought that
no two planets ever had quite the same smell, and that none was as rich
as Terra's.

"This is a fair world," he said slowly.

"It is the only one," said Kormt. "Man came from here; and to this, in
the end, he must return."

"I wonder--" Jorun sighed. "Take me; not one atom of my body was from
this soil before I landed. My people lived on Fulkhis for ages, and
changed to meet its conditions. They would not be happy on Terra."

"The atoms are nothing," said Kormt. "It is the form which matters, and
that was given to you by Earth."

Jorun studied him for a moment. Kormt was like most of this planet's ten
million or so people--a dark, stocky folk, though there were more blond
and red-haired throwbacks here than in the rest of the Galaxy. He was
old for a primitive untreated by medical science--he must be almost two
hundred years old--but his back was straight, and his stride firm. The
coarse, jut-nosed face held an odd strength. Jorun was nearing his
thousandth birthday, but couldn't help feeling like a child in Kormt's
presence.

That didn't make sense. These few dwellers on Terra were a backward and
impoverished race of peasants and handicraftsmen; they were ignorant and
unadventurous; they had been static for more thousands of years than
anyone knew. What could they have to say to the ancient and mighty
civilization which had almost forgotten their little planet?

