
His lips found no more words to utter, but yet, no doubt they served to
express his gratitude, his affection, his emotion.

He became quite gay presently, and smiled as he put away some of the
trinkets, his presents to Maria, and told her into what danger he had
fallen by selling other goods which he had purchased on credit; and how
a lawyer had insulted him just now upon this very point. He would
not have his dear Maria's money--he had enough, quite enough for the
present: but he valued her twenty guineas as much as if they had been
twenty thousand. He would never forget her love and kindness: no, by
all that was sacred he would not! His mother should know of all her
goodness. It had had cheered him when he was just on the point of
breaking down under his disgrace and misery. Might Heaven bless her for
it! There is no need to pursue beyond this, the cousins' conversation.
The dark day seemed brighter to Harry after Maria's visit: the
imprisonment not so hard to bear. The world was not all selfish and
cold. Here was a fond creature who really and truly loved him. Even
Castlewood was not so bad as he had thought. He had expressed the
deepest grief at not being able to assist his kinsman. He was hopelessly
in debt. Every shilling he had won from Harry he had lost on the next
day to others. Anything that lay in his power he would do. He would come
soon and see Mr. Warrington: he was in waiting to-day, and as much
a prisoner as Harry himself. So the pair talked on cheerfully and
affectionately until the darkness began to close in, when Maria, with a
sigh, bade Harry farewell.

The door scarcely closed upon her, when it opened to admit Draper.

"Your humble servant, sir," says the attorney. His voice jarred upon
Harry's ear, and his presence offended the young man.

"I had expected you some hours ago, sir," he curtly said.

"A lawyer's time is not always his own, sir," said Mr. Draper, who had
just been in consultation with a bottle of port at the Grecian. "Never
mind, I'm at your orders now. Presume it's all right, Mr. Warrington.
Packed your trunk? Why, now there you are in your bedgown still. Let me
go down and settle whilst you call in your black man and titivate a bit.
I've a coach at the door, and we'll be off and dine with the old lady."

"Are you going to dine with the Baroness de Bernstein, pray?"

"Not me--no such honour. Had my dinner already. It's you are a-going to
dine with your aunt, I suppose?"

"Mr. Draper, you suppose a great deal more than you know," says Mr.
Warrington, looking very fierce and tall, as he folds his brocade
dressing-gown round him.

"Great goodness, sir, what do you mean?" asks Draper.

"I mean, sir, that I have considered, and, that having given my word to
a faithful and honourable lady, it does not become me to withdraw it."

"Confound it, sir!" shrieks the lawyer, "I tell you she has lost the
paper. There's nothing to bind you--nothing. Why she's old enough to
be----"

"Enough, sir," says Mr. Warrington, with a stamp of his foot. "You
seem to think you are talking to some other pettifogger. I take it, Mr.
Draper, you are not accustomed to have dealings with men of honour."

"Pettifogger, indeed!" cries Draper in a fury. "Men of honour, indeed!
I'd have you to know, Mr. Warrington, that I'm as good a man of honour
as you. I don't know so many gamblers and horse-jockeys, perhaps. I
haven't gambled away my patrimony, and lived as if I was a nobleman
on two hundred a year. I haven't bought watches on credit, and
pawned--touch me if you dare, sir," and the lawyer sprang to the door.

"That is the way out, sir. You can't go through the window, because it
is barred," says Mr. Warrington.

"And the answer I take to my client is No, then!" screamed out Draper.

Harry stepped forward, with his two hands clenched. "If you utter
another word," he said, "I'll----" The door was shut rapidly--the
sentence was never finished, and Draper went away furious to Madame de
Bernstein, from whom, though he gave her the best version of his story,
he got still fiercer language than he had received from Mr. Warrington
himself.

"What? Shall she trust me, and I desert her?" says Harry, stalking up
and down his room in his flowing, rustling brocade. "Dear, faithful,
generous woman! If I lie in prison for years, I'll be true to her."


Her lawyer dismissed after a stormy interview, the desolate old woman
was fain to sit down to the meal which she had hoped to share with
her nephew. The chair was before her which he was to have filled, the
glasses shining by the silver. One dish after another was laid before
her by the silent major-domo, and tasted and pushed away. The man
pressed his mistress at last. "It is eight o'clock," he said. "You have
had nothing all day. It is good for you to eat." She could not eat. She
would have her coffee. Let Case go get her her coffee. The lacqueys bore
the dishes off the table, leaving their mistress sitting at it before
the vacant chair.

Presently the old servant re-entered the room without his lady's coffee
and with a strange scared face, and said, "Mr. WARRINGTON!"

The old woman uttered an exclamation, got up from her armchair, but sank
back in it trembling very much. "So you are come, sir, are you?" she
said, with a fond shaking voice. "Bring back the----Ah!" here she
screamed, "Gracious God, who is it?" Her eyes stared wildly: her white
face looked ghastly through her rouge. She clung to the arms of her
chair for support, as the visitor approached her.

A gentleman whose face and figure exactly resembled Harry Warrington and
whose voice, when he spoke, had tones strangely similar, had followed
the servant into the room. He bowed towards the Baroness.

"You expected my brother, madam?" he said "I am but now arrived in
London. I went to his house. I met his servant at your door, who was
bearing this letter for you. I thought I would bring it to your ladyship
before going to him,"--and the stranger laid down a letter before Madam
Bernstein.

"Are you"--gasped out the Baroness--"are you my nephew, that we supposed
was----"

"Was killed--and is alive! I am George Warrington, madam and I ask his
kinsfolk what have you done with my brother?"

"Look, George!" said the bewildered old lady "I expected him here
to-night--that chair was set for him--I have been waiting for him, sir,
till now--till I am quite faint--I don't like--I don't like being alone.
Do stay an sup with me!"

"Pardon me, madam. Please God, my supper will be with Harry tonight!"

"Bring him back. Bring him back here on any conditions! It is but five
hundred pounds! Here is the money, sir, if you need it!"

"I have no want, madam. I have money with me that can't be better
employed than in my brother's service."

"And you will bring him to me, sir! Say you will bring him to me!"

Mr. Warrington made a very stately bow for answer, and quitted the room,
passing by the amazed domestics, and calling with an air of authority to
Gumbo to follow him.

Had Mr. Harry received no letters from home? Master Harry had not
opened all his letters the last day or two. Had he received no letter
announcing his brother's escape from the French settlements and return
to Virginia? Oh no! No such letter had come, else Master Harry certainly
tell Gumbo. Quick, horses! Quick by Strand to Temple Bar! Here is the
house of Captivity and the Deliverer come to the rescue!




CHAPTER XLIX. Friends in Need


Quick, hackneycoach steeds, and bear George Warrington through Strand
and Fleet Street to his imprisoned brother's rescue! Any one who
remembers Hogarth's picture of a London hackneycoach and a London street
road at that period, may fancy how weary the quick time was, and how
long seemed the journey:--scarce any lights, save those carried by
link-boys; badly hung coaches; bad pavements; great holes in the road,
and vast quagmires of winter mud. That drive from Piccadilly to Fleet
Street seemed almost as long to our young man, as the journey from
Marlborough to London which he had performed in the morning.

He had written to Harry, announcing his arrival at Bristol. He had
previously written to his brother, giving the great news of his
existence and his return from captivity. There was war between England
and France at that time; the French privateers were for ever on the
look-out for British merchant-ships, and seized them often within sight
of port. The letter bearing the intelligence of George's restoration
must have been on board one of the many American ships of which the
French took possession. The letter telling of George's arrival in
England was never opened by poor Harry; it was lying at the latter's
apartments, which it reached on the third morning after Harry's
captivity, when the angry Mr. Ruff had refused to give up any single
item more of his lodger's property.

To these apartments George first went on his arrival in London,
and asked for his brother. Scared at the likeness between them, the
maid-servant who opened the door screamed, and ran back to her mistress.
The mistress not liking to tell the truth, or to own that poor Harry was
actually a prisoner at her husband's suit, said Mr. Warrington had left
his lodgings; she did not know where Mr. Warrington was. George knew
that Clarges Street was close to Bond Street. Often and often had he
looked over the London map. Aunt Bernstein would tell him where Harry
was. He might be with her at that very moment. George had read in
Harry's letters to Virginia about Aunt Bernstein's kindness to Harry.
Even Madam Esmond was softened by it (and especially touched by a letter
which the Baroness wrote--the letter which caused George to pack off
post-haste for Europe, indeed). She heartily hoped and trusted that
Madam Beatrix had found occasion to repent of her former bad ways. It
was time, indeed, at her age; and Heaven knows that she had plenty
to repent of! I have known a harmless, good old soul of eighty, still
bepommelled and stoned by irreproachable ladies of the straitest sect of
the Pharisees, for a little slip which occurred long before the present
century was born, or she herself was twenty years old. Rachel Esmond
never mentioned her eldest daughter: Madam Esmond Warrington never
mentioned her sister. No. In spite of the order for remission of the
sentence--in spite of the handwriting on the floor of the Temple--there
is a crime which some folks never will pardon, and regarding which
female virtue, especially, is inexorable.

I suppose the Virginians' agent at Bristol had told George fearful
stories of his brother's doings. Gumbo, whom he met at his aunt's door,
as soon as the lad recovered from his terror at the sudden reappearance
of the master whom he supposed dead, had leisure to stammer out a word
or two respecting his young master's whereabouts, and present pitiable
condition; and hence Mr. George's sternness of demeanour when he
presented himself to the old lady. It seemed to him a matter of course
that his brother in difficulty should be rescued by his relations. Oh,
George, how little you know about London and London ways! Whenever you
take your walks abroad how many poor you meet--if a philanthropist were
for rescuing all of them, not all the wealth of all the provinces of
America would suffice him!

But the feeling and agitation displayed by the old lady touched her
nephew's heart when, jolting through the dark streets towards the
house of his brother's captivity, George came to think of his aunt's
behaviour. "She does feel my poor Harry's misfortune," he thought to
himself, "I have been too hasty in judging her." Again and again, in the
course of his life, Mr. George had to rebuke himself with the same crime
of being too hasty. How many of us have not? And, alas, the mischief
done, there's no repentance will mend it. Quick, coachman! We are almost
as slow as you are in getting from Clarges Street to the Temple. Poor
Gumbo knows the way to the bailiff's house well enough. Again the bell
is set ringing. The first door is opened to George and his negro; then
that first door is locked warily upon them, and they find themselves
in a little passage with a little Jewish janitor; then a second door is
unlocked, and they enter into the house. The Jewish janitor stares, as
by his flaring tallow-torch he sees a second Mr. Warrington before
him. Come to see that gentleman? Yes. But wait a moment. This is Mr.
Warrington's brother from America. Gumbo must go and prepare his master
first. Step into this room. There's a gentleman already there about
Mr. W.'s business (the porter says), and another upstairs with him now.
There's no end of people have been about him.

The room into which George was introduced was a small apartment which
went by the name of Mr. Amos's office, and where, by a guttering candle,
and talking to the bailiff, sat a stout gentleman in a cloak and a laced
hat. The young porter carried his candle, too, preceding Mr. George, so
there was a sufficiency of light in the apartment.

"We are not angry any more, Harry!" says the stout gentleman, in a
cheery voice, getting up and advancing with an outstretched hand to
the new-comer. "Thank God, my boy! Mr. Amos here says, there will be
no difficulty about James and me being your bail, and we will do your
business by breakfast-time in the morning. Why... Angels and ministers
of grace! who are you?" And he started back as the other had hold of his
hand.

But the stranger grasped it only the more strongly. "God bless you,
sir!" he said, "I know who you are. You must be Colonel Lambert, of
whose kindness to him my poor Harry wrote. And I am the brother whom you
have heard of, sir; and who was left for dead in Mr. Braddock's action;
and came to life again after eighteen months amongst the French;
and live to thank God and thank you for your kindness to my Harry,"
continued the lad with a faltering voice.

"James! James! Here is news!" cries Mr. Lambert to a gentleman in red,
who now entered the room. "Here are the dead come alive! Here is Harry
Scapegrace's brother come back, and with his scalp on his head, too!"
(George had taken his hat off, and was standing by the light.) "This is
my brother-bail, Mr. Warrington! This is Lieutenant-Colonel James
Wolfe, at your service. You must know there has been a little difference
between Harry and me, Mr. George. He is pacified, is he, James?"

"He is full of gratitude," says Mr. Wolfe, after making his bow to Mr.
Warrington.

"Harry wrote home about Mr. Wolfe, too, sir," said the young man, "and I
hope my brother's friends will be so kind as to be mine."

"I wish he had none other but us, Mr. Warrington. Poor Harry's fine
folks have been too fine for him, and have ended by landing him here."

"Nay, your honours, I have done my best to make the young gentleman
comfortable; and, knowing your honour before, when you came to bail
Captain Watkins, and that your security is perfectly good,--if your
honour wishes, the young gentleman can go out this very night, and I
will make it all right with the lawyer in the morning," says Harry's
landlord, who knew the rank and respectability of the two gentlemen who
had come to offer bail for his young prisoner.

"The debt is five hundred and odd pounds, I think?" said Mr. Warrington.
"With a hundred thanks to these gentlemen, I can pay the amount at this
moment into the officers' hands, taking the usual acknowledgment and
caution. But I can never forget, gentlemen, that you helped my brother
at his need, and, for doing so, I say thank you, and God bless you, in
my mother's name and mine."

Gumbo had, meanwhile, gone upstairs to his master's apartment, where
Harry would probably have scolded the negro for returning that night,
but that the young gentleman was very much soothed and touched by the
conversation he had had with the friend who had just left him. He was
sitting over his pipe of Virginia in a sad mood (for, somehow, even
Maria's goodness and affection, as she had just exhibited them, had not
altogether consoled him; and he had thought, with a little dismay, of
certain consequences to which that very kindness and fidelity bound
him), when Mr. Wolfe's homely features and eager outstretched hand came
to cheer the prisoner, and he heard how Mr. Lambert was below, and
the errand upon which the two officers had come. In spite of himself,
Lambert would be kind to him. In spite of Harry's ill-temper, and
needless suspicion and anger, the good gentleman was determined to help
him if he might--to help him even against Mr. Wolfe's own advice, as the
latter frankly told Harry, "For you were wrong, Mr. Warrington," said
the Colonel, "and you wouldn't be set right; and you, a young man, used
hard words and unkind behaviour to your senior, and what is more, one of
the best gentlemen who walks God's earth. You see, sir, what his answer
hath been to your wayward temper. You will bear with a friend who speaks
frankly with you? Martin Lambert hath acted in this as he always doth,
as the best Christian, the best friend, the most kind and generous of
men. Nay, if you want another proof of his goodness, here it is: He has
converted me, who, as I don't care to disguise, was angry with you for
your treatment of him, and has absolutely brought me down here to be
your bail. Let us both cry Peccavimus! Harry, and shake our friend by
the hand! He is sitting in the room below. He would not come here till
he knew how you would receive him."

"I think he is a good man!" groaned out Harry. "I was very angry and
wild at the time when he and I met last, Colonel Wolfe. Nay, perhaps he
was right in sending back those trinkets, hurt as I was at his doing so.
Go down to him, will you be so kind, sir? and tell him I am sorry, and
ask his pardon, and--and, God bless him for his generous behaviour."
And here the young gentleman turned his head away, and rubbed his hand
across his eyes.

"Tell him all this thyself, Harry!" cries the Colonel, taking the young
fellow's hand. "No deputy will ever say it half so well. Come with me
now."

"You go first, and I'll--I'll follow,--on my word I will. See! I am in
my morning-gown! I will but put on a coat and come to him. Give him my
message first. Just--just prepare him for me!" says poor Harry, who
knew he must do it, but yet did not much like that process of eating of
humble-pie.

Wolfe went out smiling--understanding the lad's scruples well enough,
perhaps. As he opened the door, Mr. Gumbo entered it; almost forgetting
to bow to the gentleman, profusely courteous as he was on ordinary
occasions,--his eyes glaring round, his great mouth grinning--himself in
a state of such high excitement and delight that his master remarked his
condition.

"What, Gum? What has happened to thee? Hast thou got a new sweetheart?"

No, Gum had not got no new sweetheart, master.

"Give me my coat. What has brought thee back?"

Gum grinned prodigiously. "I have seen a ghost, mas'r!" he said.

"A ghost! and whose, and where?"

"Whar? Saw him at Madame Bernstein's house. Come with him here in
the coach! He downstairs now with Colonel Lambert!" Whilst Gumbo is
speaking, as he is putting on his master's coat, his eyes are rolling,
his head is wagging, his hands are trembling, his lips are grinning.

"Ghost--what ghost?" says Harry, in a strange agitation. Is
anybody--is--my mother come?"

"No, sir; no, Master Harry!" Gumbo's head rolls nearly off its violent
convolutions, and his master, looking oddly at him, flings the door
open, and goes rapidly down the stair.

He is at the foot of it, just as a voice within the little office, of
which the door is open, is saying, "and for doing so, I say thank you,
and God bless you, in my mother's name and mine."

"Whose voice is that?" calls out Harry Warrington, with a strange cry in
his own voice.

"It's the ghost's, mas'r!" says Gumbo, from behind; and Harry runs
forward to the room,--where, if you please, we will pause a little
minute before we enter. The two gentlemen who were there, turned their
heads away. The lost was found again. The dead was alive. The
prodigal was on his brother's heart,--his own full of love, gratitude,
repentance.

"Come away, James! I think we are not wanted any more here," says the
Colonel. "Good-night, boys. Some ladies in Hill Street won't be able to
sleep for this strange news. Or will you go home and sup with 'em, and
tell them the story?"

No, with many thanks, the boys would not go and sup to-night. They had
stories of their own to tell. "Quick, Gumbo, with the trunks! Good-bye,
Mr. Amos!" Harry felt almost unhappy when he went away.




CHAPTER L. Contains a Great deal of the Finest Morality


When first we had the honour to be presented to Sir Miles Warrington at
the King's drawing-room, in St. James's Palace, I confess that I, for
one--looking at his jolly round face, his broad round waistcoat, his
hearty country manner,--expected that I had lighted upon a most eligible
and agreeable acquaintance at last, and was about to become intimate
with that noblest specimen of the human race, the bepraised of songs and
men, the good old English country gentleman. In fact, to be a good old
country gentleman is to hold a position nearest the gods, and at the
summit of earthly felicity. To have a large unencumbered rent-roll, and
the rents regularly paid by adoring farmers, who bless their stars at
having such a landlord as his honour; to have no tenant holding back
with his money, excepting just one, perhaps, who does so in order to
give occasion to Good Old Country Gentleman to show his sublime charity
and universal benevolence of soul; to hunt three days a week, love the
sport of all things, and have perfect good health and good appetite in
consequence; to have not only good appetite, but a good dinner; to sit
down at church in the midst of a chorus of blessings from the villagers,
the first man in the parish, the benefactor of the parish, with a
consciousness of consummate desert, saying, "Have mercy upon us,
miserable sinners," to be sure, but only for form's sake, because the
words are written in the book, and to give other folks an example--a G.
O. C. G. a miserable sinner! So healthy, so wealthy, so jolly, so much
respected by the vicar, so much honoured by the tenants, so much beloved
and admired by his family, amongst whom his story of grouse in the
gunroom causes laughter from generation to generation;--this perfect
being a miserable sinner! Allons donc! Give any man good health and
temper, five thousand a year, the adoration of his parish, and the love
and worship of his family, and I'll defy you to make him so heartily
dissatisfied with his spiritual condition as to set himself down a
miserable anything. If you were a Royal Highness, and went to church
in the most perfect health and comfort, the parson waiting to begin the
service until your R. H. came in, would you believe yourself to be a
miserable, etc.? You might when racked with gout, in solitude, the fear
of death before your eyes, the doctor having cut off your bottle of
claret, and ordered arrowroot and a little sherry,--you might then be
humiliated, and acknowledge your own shortcomings, and the vanity of
things in general; but, in high health, sunshine, spirits, that word
miserable is only a form. You can't think in your heart that you are
to be pitied much for the present. If you are to be miserable, what is
Colin Ploughman, with the ague, seven children, two pounds a year rent
to pay for his cottage, and eight shillings a week? No: a healthy, rich,
jolly, country gentleman, if miserable, has a very supportable misery:
if a sinner, has very few people to tell him so.

It may be he becomes somewhat selfish; but at least he is satisfied with
himself. Except my lord at the castle, there is nobody for miles and
miles round so good or so great. His admirable wife ministers to him,
and to the whole parish, indeed: his children bow before him: the vicar
of the parish reverences him: he is respected at quarter-sessions: he
causes poachers to tremble: off go all hats before him at market: and
round about his great coach, in which his spotless daughters and sublime
lady sit, all the country-town tradesmen cringe, bareheaded, and the
farmeers' women drop innumerable curtseys. From their cushions in the
great coach the ladies look down beneficently, and smile on the poorer
folk. They buy a yard of ribbon with affability; they condescend to
purchase an ounce of salts, or a packet of flower-seeds: they deign to
cheapen a goose: their drive is like a royal progress; a happy people
is supposed to press round them and bless them. Tradesmen bow, farmers'
wives bob, town-boys, waving their ragged hats, cheer the red-faced
coachman as he drives the fat bays, and cry, "Sir Miles for ever! Throw
us a halfpenny, my lady!"

But suppose the market-woman should hide her fat goose when Sir Miles's
coach comes, out of terror lest my lady, spying the bird, should insist
on purchasing it a bargain? Suppose no coppers ever were known to come
out of the royal coach window? Suppose Sir Miles regaled his tenants
with notoriously small beer, and his poor with especially thin broth?
This may be our fine old English gentleman's way. There have been not a
few fine English gentlemen and ladies of this sort; who patronised the
poor without ever relieving them, who called out "Amen!" at church
as loud as the clerk; who went through all the forms of piety, and
discharged all the etiquette of old English gentlemanhood; who bought
virtue a bargain, as it were, and had no doubt they were honouring
her by the purchase. Poor Harry in his distress asked help from his
relations: his aunt sent him a tract and her blessing; his uncle had
business out of town, and could not, of course, answer the poor boy's
petition. How much of this behaviour goes on daily in respectable life,
think you? You can fancy Lord and Lady Macbeth concocting a murder,
and coming together with some little awkwardness, perhaps, when the
transaction was done and over; but my Lord and Lady Skinflint, when they
consult in their bedroom about giving their luckless nephew a helping
hand, and determine to refuse, and go down to family prayers, and meet
their children and domestics, and discourse virtuously before them, and
then remain together, and talk nose to nose,--what can they think of one
another? and of the poor kinsman fallen among the thieves, and groaning
for help unheeded? How can they go on with those virtuous airs? How can
they dare look each other in the face?

Dare? Do you suppose they think they have done wrong? Do you suppose
Skinflint is tortured with remorse at the idea of the distress which
called to him in vain, and of the hunger which he sent empty away? Not
he. He is indignant with Prodigal for being a fool: he is not ashamed
of himself for being a curmudgeon. What? a young man with such
opportunities throw them away? A fortune spent amongst gamblers and
spendthrifts? Horrible, horrible! Take warning, my child, by this
unfortunate young man's behaviour, and see the consequences of
extravagance. According to the great and always Established Church of
the Pharisees, here is an admirable opportunity for a moral discourse,
and an assertion of virtue. "And to think of his deceiving us so!" cries
out Lady Warrington.

"Very sad, very sad, my dear!" says Sir Miles, wagging his head.

"To think of so much extravagance in one so young!" cries Lady
Warrington. "Cards, bets, feasts at taverns of the most wicked
profusion, carriage and riding horses, the company of the wealthy and
profligate of his own sex, and, I fear, of the most iniquitous persons
of ours."

"Hush, my Lady Warrington!" cries her husband, glancing towards the
spotless Dora and Flora, who held down their blushing heads, at the
mention of the last naughty persons.

"No wonder my poor children hide their faces!" mamma continues. "My
dears, I wish even the existence of such creatures could be kept from
you!"

"They can't go to an opera, or the park, without seeing 'em, to be
sure," says Sir Miles.

"To think we should have introduced such a young serpent into the
bosom of our family! and have left him in the company of that guileless
darling!" and she points to Master Miles.

"Who's a serpent, mamma?" inquires that youth. "First you said cousin
Harry was bad: then he was good: now he is bad again. Which is he, Sir
Miles?"

"He has faults, like all of us, Miley, my dear. Your cousin has been
wild, and you must take warning by him."

"Was not my elder brother, who died--my naughty brother--was not he wild
too? He was not kind to me when I was quite a little boy. He never gave
me money, nor toys, nor rode with me, nor--why do you cry, mamma? Sure I
remember how Hugh and you were always fight----"

"Silence, sir!" cry out papa and the girls in a breath. "Don't you know
you are never to mention that name?"

"I know I love Harry, and I didn't love Hugh," says the sturdy little
rebel. "And if cousin Harry is in prison, I'll give him my half-guinea
that my godpapa gave me, and anything I have--yes, anything,
except--except my little horse--and my silver waistcoat--and--and
Snowball and Sweetlips at home--and--and, yes, my custard after dinner."
This was in reply to a hint of sister Dora. "But I'd give him some of
it," continues Miles, after a pause.

"Shut thy mouth with it, child, and then go about thy business," says
papa, amused. Sir Miles Warrington had a considerable fund of easy
humour.

"Who would have thought he should ever be so wild?" mamma goes on.

"Nay. Youth is the season for wild oats, my dear."

"That we should be so misled in him!" sighed the girls.

"That he should kiss us both!" cries papa.

"Sir Miles Warrington, I have no patience with that sort of vulgarity!"
says the majestic matron.

"Which of you was the favourite yesterday, girls?" continues the father.

"Favourite, indeed! I told him over and over again of my engagement
to dear Tom--I did, Dora--why do you sneer, if you please?" says the
handsome sister.

"Nay, to do her justice, so did Dora too," said papa.

"Because Flora seemed to wish to forget her engagement with dear Tom
sometimes," remarks the sister.

"I never, never, never wished to break with Tom! It's wicked of you to
say so, Dora! It is you who were for ever sneering at him: it is you who
are always envious because I happen--at least, because gentlemen imagine
that I am not ill-looking, and prefer me to some folks, in spite of
all their learning and wit!" cries Flora, tossing her head over her
shoulder, and looking at the glass.

"Why are you always looking there, sister?" says the artless Miles
junior. "Sure, you must know your face well enough!"

"Some people look at it just as often, child, who haven't near such good
reason," says papa, gallantly.

"If you mean me, Sir Miles, I thank you," cries Dora. "My face is as
Heaven made it, and my father and mother gave it me. 'Tis not my fault
if I resemble my papa's family. If my head is homely, at least I have
got some brains in it. I envious of Flora, indeed, because she has found
favour in the sight of poor Tom Claypool! I should as soon be proud of
captivating a ploughboy!"

"Pray, miss, was your Mr. Harry, of Virginia, much wiser than Tom
Claypool? You would have had him for the asking!" exclaims Flora.

"And so would you, miss, and have dropped Tom Claypool into the sea!"
cries Dora.

"I wouldn't."

"You would."

"I wouldn't;"--and da capo goes the conversation--the shuttlecock of
wrath being briskly battled from one sister to another.

"Oh, my children! Is this the way you dwell together in unity?" exclaims
their excellent female parent, laying down her embroidery. "What an
example you set to this Innocent!"

"Like to see 'em fight, my lady!" cries the Innocent, rubbing his hands.

"At her, Flora! Worry her, Dora! To it again, you little rogues!" says
facetious papa. 'Tis good sport, ain't it, Miley?"

"Oh, Sir Miles! Oh, my children! These disputes are unseemly. They tear
a fond mother's heart," says mamma, with majestic action, though bearing
the laceration of her bosom with much seeming equanimity. "What cause
for thankfulness ought we to have that watchful parents have prevented
any idle engagements between you and your misguided cousin. If we have
been mistaken in him, is it not a mercy that we have found out our error
in time? If either of you had any preference for him, your excellent
good sense, my loves, will teach you to overcome, to eradicate, the vain
feeling. That we cherished and were kind to him can never be a source of
regret. 'Tis a proof of our good-nature. What we have to regret, I fear,
is, that your cousin should have proved unworthy of our kindness, and,
coming away from the society of gamblers, play-actors, and the like,
should have brought contamination--pollution, I had almost said--into
this pure family!"

"Oh, bother mamma's sermons!" says Flora, as my lady pursues a harangue
of which we only give the commencement here, but during which papa,
whistling, gently quits the room on tiptoe, whilst the artless Miles
junior winds his top and pegs it under the robes of his sisters. It has
done humming, and staggered and tumbled over, and expired in its usual
tipsy manner, long ere Lady Warrington has finished her sermon.

"Were you listening to me, my child?" she asks, laying her hand on her
darling's head.

"Yes, mother," says he, with the whipcord in his mouth, and proceeding
to wind up his sportive engine. "You was a-saying that Harry was very
poor now, and that we oughtn't to help him. That's what you was saying;
wasn't it, madam?"

"My poor child, thou wilt understand me better when thou art older!"
says mamma, turning towards that ceiling to which her eyes always have
recourse.

"Get out, you little wretch!" cries one of the sisters. The artless one
has pegged his top at Dora's toes, and laughs with the glee of merry
boyhood at his sister's discomfiture.

But what is this? Who comes here? Why does Sir Miles return to the
drawing-room, and why does Tom Claypool, who strides after the Baronet,
wear a countenance so disturbed?

"Here's a pretty business, my Lady Warrington!" cries Sir Miles. "Here's
a wonderful wonder of wonders, girls!"

"For goodness' sake, gentlemen, what is your intelligence?" asks the
virtuous matron.

"The whole town's talking about it, my lady!" says Tom Claypool puffing
for breath.

"Tom has seen him," continued Sir Miles.

"Seen both of them, my Lady Warrington. They were at Ranelagh last
night, with a regular mob after 'em. And so like, that but for their
different ribbons you would hardly have told one from the other. One was
in blue, the other in brown; but I'm certain he has worn both the suits
here."

"What suits?"

"What one,--what other?" call the girls.

"Why, your fortunate youth, to be sure."

"Our precious Virginian, and heir to the principality!" says Sir Miles.

"Is my nephew, then, released from his incarceration?" asks her
ladyship. "And is he again plunged in the vortex of dissip----"

"Confound him!" roars out the Baronet, with an expression which I fear
was even stronger. "What should you think, my Lady Warrington, if this
precious nephew of mine should turn out to be an impostor; by George! no
better than an adventurer?"

"An inward monitor whispered me as much!" cried the lady; "but I
dashed from me the unworthy suspicion. Speak, Sir Miles, we burn with
impatience to listen to your intelligence."

"I'll--speak, my love, when you've done," says Sir Miles. "Well, what do
you think of my gentleman, who comes into my house, dines at my table,
is treated as one of this family, kisses my--"

"What?" asks Tom Claypool, firing as red as his waistcoat.

"--Hem! Kisses my wife's hand, and is treated in the fondest manner, by
George! What do you think of this fellow, who talks of his property and
his principality, by Jupiter!--turning out to be a beggarly SECOND SON!
A beggar, my Lady Warrington, by----"

"Sir Miles Warrington, no violence of language before these dear ones!
I sink to the earth, confounded by this unutterable hypocrisy. And did
I entrust thee to a pretender, my blessed boy? Did I leave thee with an
impostor, my innocent one?" the matron cries, fondling her son.

"Who's an impostor, my lady?" asks the child.

"That confounded young scamp of a Harry Warrington!" bawls out papa; on
which the little Miles, after wearing a puzzled look for a moment, and
yielding to I know not what hidden emotion, bursts out crying.

His admirable mother proposes to clutch him to her heart, but he rejects
the pure caress, bawling only the louder, and kicking frantically about
the maternal gremium, as the butler announces "Mr. George Warrington,
Mr. Henry Warrington!" Miles is dropped from his mother's lap. Sir
Miles's face emulates Mr. Claypool's waistcoat. The three ladies rise
up, and make three most frigid curtseys, as our two young men enter the
room.

Little Miles runs towards them. He holds out a little hand. "Oh, Harry!
No! which is Harry? You're my Harry," and he chooses rightly this time.
"Oh, you dear Harry! I'm so glad you are come! and they've been abusing
you so!"

"I am come to pay my duty to my uncle," says the dark-haired Mr.
Warrington; "and to thank him for his hospitalities to my brother
Henry."

"What, nephew George? My brother's face and eyes! Boys both, I am
delighted to see you!" cries their uncle, grasping affectionately a hand
of each, as his honest face radiates with pleasure.

"This indeed hath been a most mysterious and a most providential
resuscitation," says Lady Warrington. "Only I wonder that my nephew
Henry concealed the circumstance until now," she adds, with a sidelong
glance at both young gentlemen.

"He knew it no more than your ladyship," says Mr. Warrington. The young
ladies looked at each other with downcast eyes.

"Indeed, sir! a most singular circumstance," says mamma, with another
curtsey. "We had heard of it, sir; and Mr. Claypool, our county
neighbour, had just brought us the intelligence, and it even now formed
the subject of my conversation with my daughters."

"Yes," cries out a little voice, "and do you know, Harry, father and
mother said you was a--a imp----"

"Silence, my child! Screwby, convey Master Warrington to his own
apartment! These, Mr. Warrington--or, I suppose I should say nephew
George--are your cousins." Two curtseys--two cheeses are made--two hands
are held out. Mr. Esmond Warrington makes a profound low bow, which
embraces (and it is the only embrace which the gentleman offers) all
three ladies. He lays his hat to his heart. He says, "It is my duty,
madam, to pay my respects to my uncle and cousins, and to thank your
ladyship for such hospitality as you have been enabled to show to my
brother."

"It was not much, nephew, but it was our best. Ods bobs!" cries the
hearty Sir Miles, "it was our best!"

"And I appreciate it, sir," says Mr. Warrington, looking gravely round
at the family.

"Give us thy hand. Not a word more," says Sir Miles "What? do you think
I'm a cannibal, and won't extend the hand of hospitality to my dear
brother's son? What say you, lads? Will you eat our mutton at three?
This is my neighbour, Tom Claypool, son to Sir Thomas Claypool, Baronet,
and my very good friend. Hey, Tom! Thou wilt be of the party, Tom? Thou
knowest our brew, hey, my boy?"

"Yes, I know it, Sir Miles," replies Tom, with no peculiar expression of
rapture on his face.

"And thou shalt taste it, my boy," thou shalt taste it! What is
there for dinner, my Lady Warrington? Our food is plain, but plenty,
lads--plain, but plenty!"

"We cannot partake of it to-day, sir. We dine with a friend who occupies
my Lord Wrotham's house, your neighbour. Colonel Lambert--Major-General
Lambert he has just been made."

"With two daughters, I think--countrified-looking girls--are they not?"
asks Flora.

"I think I have remarked two little rather dowdy things," says Dora.

"They are as good girls as any in England!" breaks out Harry, to whom no
one had thought of saying a single word. His reign was over, you see. He
was nobody. What wonder, then, that he should not be visible?

"Oh, indeed, cousin!" says Dora, with a glance at the young man, who
sate with burning cheeks, chafing at the humiliation put upon him, but
not knowing how or whether he should notice it. "Oh, indeed, cousin! You
are very charitable--or very lucky, I'm sure! You see angels where we
only see ordinary little persons. I'm sure I could not imagine who were
those odd-looking people in Lord Wrotham's coach, with his handsome
liveries. But if they were three angels, I have nothing to say."

"My brother is an enthusiast," interposes George. "He is often mistaken
about women."

"Oh, really!" says Dora, looking a little uneasy.

"I fear my nephew Henry has indeed met with some unfavourable specimens
of our sex," the matron remarks, with a groan.

"We are so easily taken in, madam--we are both very young yet--we shall
grow older and learn better."

"Most sincerely, nephew George, I trust you may. You have my best
wishes, my prayers, for your brother's welfare and your own. No efforts
of ours have been wanting. At a painful moment, to which I will not
further allude--"

"And when my uncle Sir Miles was out of town," says George, looking
towards the Baronet, who smiles at him with affectionate approval.

"--I sent your brother a work which I thought might comfort him, and I
know might improve him. Nay, do not thank me; I claim no credit; I did
but my duty--a humble woman's duty--for what are this world's goods,
nephew, compared to the welfare of a soul? If I did good, I am thankful;
if I was useful, I rejoice. If, through my means, you have been brought,
Harry, to consider----"

"Oh! the sermon, is it?" breaks in downright Harry. "I hadn't time to
read a single syllable of it, aunt--thank you. You see I don't care much
about that kind of thing--but thank you all the same."

"The intention is everything," says Mr. Warrington, "and we are both
grateful. Our dear friend, General Lambert, intended to give bail for
Harry; but, happily, I had funds of Harry's with me to meet any demands
upon us. But the kindness is the same, and I am grateful to the friend
who hastened to my brother's rescue when he had most need of aid, and
when his own relations happened--so unfortunately--to be out of town."

"Anything I could do, my dear boy, I'm sure--my brother's son--my own
nephew--ods bobs! you know--that is, anything--anything, you know!"
cries Sir Miles, bringing his own hand into George's with a generous
smack. "You can't stay and dine with us? Put off the Colonel--the
General--do, now! Or name a day. My Lady Warrington, make my nephew name
a day when he will sit under his grandfather's picture, and drink some
of his wine!"

"His intellectual faculties seem more developed than those of his
unlucky younger brother," remarked my lady, when the young gentlemen had
taken their leave. "The younger must be reckless and extravagant about
money indeed, for did you remark, Sir Miles, the loss of his
reversion in Virginia--the amount of which has, no doubt, been grossly
exaggerated, but, nevertheless, must be something considerable--did
you, I say, remark that the ruin of Harry's prospects scarcely seemed to
affect him?"

"I shouldn't be at all surprised that the elder turns out to be as poor
as the young one," says Dora, tossing her head.

"He! he! Did you see that cousin George had one of cousin Harry's suits
of clothes on--the brown and gold--that one he wore when he went with
you to the oratorio, Flora?"

"Did he take Flora to an oratorio?" asks Mr. Claypool, fiercely.

"I was ill and couldn't go, and my cousin went with her," says Dora.

"Far be it from me to object to any innocent amusement, much less to the
music of Mr. Handel, dear Mr. Claypool," says mamma. "Music refines the
soul, elevates the understanding, is heard in our churches, and
'tis well known was practised by King David. Your operas I shun as
deleterious; your ballets I would forbid to my children as most
immoral; but music, my dears! May we enjoy it, like everything else in
reason--may we----"

"There's the music of the dinner-bell," says papa, rubbing his hands.
"Come, girls. Screwby, go and fetch Master Miley. Tom take down my
lady."

"Nay, dear Thomas, I walk but slowly. Go you with dearest Flora
downstairs," says Virtue.

But Dora took care to make the evening pleasant by talking of Handel and
oratorios constantly during dinner.




CHAPTER LI. Conticuere Omnes


Across the way, if the gracious reader will please to step over with
us, he will find our young gentlemen at Lord Wrotham's house, which
his lordship has lent to his friend the General, and that little
family party assembled, with which we made acquaintance at Oakhurst and
Tunbridge Wells. James Wolfe has promised to come to dinner; but James
is dancing attendance upon Miss Lowther, and would rather have a glance
from her eyes than the finest kickshaws dressed by Lord Wrotham's cook,
or the dessert which is promised for the entertainment at which you
are just going to sit down. You will make the sixth. You may take Mr.
Wolfe's place. You may be sure he won't come. As for me, I will stand at
the sideboard and report the conversation.

Note first, how happy the women look! When Harry Warrington was taken
by those bailiffs, I had intended to tell you how the good Mrs. Lambert,
hearing of the boy's mishap, had flown to her husband, and had begged,
implored, insisted, that her Martin should help him. "Never mind his
rebeldom of the other day; never mind about his being angry that his
presents were returned--of course anybody would be angry, much more such
a high-spirited lad as Harry! Never mind about our being so poor, and
wanting all our spare money for the boys at college; there must be some
way of getting him out of the scrape. Did you not get Charles Watkins
out of the scrape two years ago; and did he not pay you back every
halfpenny? Yes; and you made a whole family happy, blessed be God! and
Mrs. Watkins prays for you and blesses you to this very day, and I think
everything has prospered with us since. And I have no doubt it has made
you a major-general--no earthly doubt," says the fond wife.

Now, as Martin Lambert requires very little persuasion to do a kind
action, he in this instance lets himself be persuaded easily enough, and
having made up his mind to seek for friend James Wolfe, and give bail
for Harry, he takes his leave and his hat, and squeezes Theo's hand, who
seems to divine his errand (or perhaps that silly mamma has blabbed it),
and kisses little Hetty's flushed cheek, and away he goes out of the
apartment where the girls and their mother are sitting, though he is
followed out of the room by the latter.

When she is alone with him, that enthusiastic matron cannot control
her feelings any longer. She flings her arms round her husband's neck,
kisses him a hundred and twenty-five times in an instant--calls God to
bless him--cries plentifully on his shoulder; and in this sentimental
attitude is discovered by old Mrs. Quiggett, my lord's housekeeper, who
is bustling about the house, and, I suppose, is quite astounded at the
conjugal phenomenon.

"We have had a tiff, and we are making it up! Don't tell tales out of
school, Mrs. Quiggett!" says the gentleman, walking off.

"Well, I never!" says Mrs. Quiggett, with a shrill, strident laugh, like
a venerable old cockatoo--which white, hook-nosed, long-lived bird Mrs.
Quiggett strongly resembles. "Well, I never!" says Quiggett, laughing
and shaking her old sides till all her keys, and, as one may fancy, her
old ribs clatter and jingle.

"Oh, Quiggett!" sobs out Mrs. Lambert, "what a man that is!"

"You've been a-quarrelling, have you, mum, and making it up? That's
right."

"Quarrel with him? He never told a greater story. My General is an
angel, Quiggett. I should like to worship him. I should like to fall
down at his boots and kiss 'em, I should! There never was a man so good
as my General. What have I done to have such a man? How dare I have such
a good husband?"

"My dear, I think there's a pair of you," says the old cockatoo; "and
what would you like for your supper?"

When Lambert comes back very late to that meal, and tells what has
happened, how Harry is free, and how his brother has come to life, and
rescued him, you may fancy what a commotion the whole of those people
are in! If Mrs. Lambert's General was an angel before, what is he now!
If she wanted to embrace his boots in the morning, pray what further
office of wallowing degradation would she prefer in the evening? Little
Hetty comes and nestles up to her father quite silent, and drinks
a little drop out of his glass. Theo's and mamma's faces beam with
happiness, like two moons of brightness.... After supper, those four at
a certain signal fall down on their knees--glad homage paying in awful
mirth-rejoicing, and with such pure joy as angels do, we read, for the
sinner that repents. There comes a great knocking at the door whilst
they are so gathered together. Who can be there? My lord is in the
country miles off. It is past midnight now; so late have they been, so
long have they been talking! I think Mrs. Lambert guesses who is there.

"This is George," says a young gentleman, leading in another. "We have
been to Aunt Bernstein. We couldn't go to bed, Aunt Lambert, without
coming to thank you too. You dear, dear, good----" There is no more
speech audible. Aunt Lambert is kissing Harry, Theo has snatched up
Hetty who is as pale as death, and is hugging her into life again.
George Warrington stands with his hat off, and then (when Harry's
transaction is concluded) goes up and kisses Mrs. Lambert's hand: the
General passes his across his eyes. I protest they are all in a very
tender and happy state. Generous hearts sometimes feel it, when Wrong
is forgiven, when Peace is restored, when Love returns that had been
thought lost.

"We came from Aunt Bernstein's; we saw lights here, you see; we couldn't
go to sleep without saying good-night to you all," says Harry. "Could
we, George?"

"'Tis certainly a famous nightcap you have brought us, boys," says the
General. "When are you to come and dine with us? To-morrow?" No, they
must go to Madame Bernstein's to-morrow.

The next day, then? Yes, they would come the next day--and that is the
very day we are writing about: and this is the very dinner, at which, in
the room of Lieutenant-Colonel James Wolfe, absent on private affairs,
my gracious reader has just been invited to sit down.

To sit down, and why, if you please? Not to a mere Barmecide dinner--no,
no--but to hear MR. GEORGE ESMOND WARRINGTON'S STATEMENT, which of
course he is going to make. Here they all sit--not in my lord's grand
dining-room, you know, but in the snug study or parlour in front. The
cloth has been withdrawn, the General has given the King's health, the
servants have left the room, the guests sit conticent, and so, after a
little hemming and blushing, Mr. George proceeds:--

"I remember, at the table of our General, how the little Philadelphia
agent, whose wit and shrewdness we had remarked at home, made the very
objections to the conduct of the campaign of which its disastrous issue
showed the justice. 'Of course,' says he, 'your Excellency's troops once
before Fort Duquesne, such a weak little place will never be able to
resist such a general, such an army, such artillery, as will there be
found attacking it. But do you calculate, sir, on the difficulty of
reaching the place? Your Excellency's march will be through woods almost
untrodden, over roads which you will have to make yourself, and your
line will be some four miles long. This slender line, having to make its
way through the forest, will be subject to endless attacks in front, in
rear, in flank, by enemies whom you will never see, and whose constant
practice in war is the dexterous laying of ambuscades.'--'Psha, sir!'
says the General, 'the savages may frighten your raw American militia'
(Thank your Excellency for the compliment, Mr. Washington seems to
say, who is sitting at the table), 'but the Indians will never make
any impression on his Majesty's regular troops.'--'I heartily hope not,
sir,' says Mr. Franklin, with a sigh; and of course the gentlemen of the
General's family sneered at the postmaster, as at a pert civilian who
had no call to be giving his opinion on matters entirely beyond his
comprehension.

"We despised the Indians on our own side, and our commander made light
of them and their service. Our officers disgusted the chiefs who were
with us by outrageous behaviour to their women. There were not above
seven or eight who remained with our force. Had we had a couple of
hundred in our front on that fatal 9th of July, the event of the day
must have been very different. They would have flung off the attack of
the French Indians; they would have prevented the surprise and panic
which ensued. 'Tis known now that the French had even got ready to give
up their fort, never dreaming of the possibility of a defence, and
that the French Indians themselves remonstrated against the audacity of
attacking such an overwhelming force as ours.

"I was with our General with the main body of the troops when the
firing began in front of us, and one aide-de-camp after another was sent
forwards. At first the enemy's attack was answered briskly by our own
advanced people, and our men huzzaed and cheered with good heart. But
very soon our fire grew slacker, whilst from behind every tree and bush
round about us came single shots, which laid man after man low. We were
marching in orderly line, the skirmishers in front, the colours and two
of our small guns in the centre, the baggage well guarded bringing up
the rear, and were moving over a ground which was open and clear for a
mile or two, and for some half mile in breadth, a thick tangled covert
of brushwood and trees on either side of us. After the firing had
continued for some brief time in front, it opened from both sides of the
environing wood on our advancing column. The men dropped rapidly, the
officers in greater number than the men. At first, as I said, these
cheered and answered the enemy's fire, our guns even opening on the
wood, and seeming to silence the French in ambuscade there. But the
hidden rifle-firing began again. Our men halted, huddled up together, in
spite of the shouts and orders of the General and officers to advance,
and fired wildly into the brushwood--of course making no impression.
Those in advance came running back on the main body frightened, and many
of them wounded. They reported there were five thousand Frenchmen and a
legion of yelling Indian devils in front, who were scalping our people
as they fell. We could hear their cries from the wood around as our
men dropped under their rifles. There was no inducing the people to go
forward now. One aide-de-camp after another was sent forward, and never
returned. At last it came to be my turn, and I was sent with a message
to Captain Fraser of Halkett's in front, which he was never to receive
nor I to deliver.

"I had not gone thirty yards in advance when a rifle-ball struck my
leg, and I fell straightway to the ground. I recollect a rush forward
of Indians and Frenchmen after that, the former crying their fiendish
war-cries, the latter as fierce as their savage allies. I was amazed and
mortified to see how few of the whitecoats there were. Not above a score
passed me; indeed there were not fifty in the accursed action in which
two of the bravest regiments of the British army were put to rout.

"One of them, who was half Indian half Frenchman, with mocassins and
a white uniform coat and cockade, seeing me prostrate on the ground,
turned back and ran towards me, his musket clubbed over his head to dash
my brains out and plunder me as I lay. I had my little fusil which
my Harry gave me when I went on the campaign; it had fallen by me and
within my reach, luckily: I seized it, and down fell the Frenchman dead
at six yards before me. I was saved for that time, but bleeding from my
wound and very faint. I swooned almost in trying to load my piece,
and it dropped from my hand, and the hand itself sank lifeless to the
ground.

"I was scarcely in my senses, the yells and shots ringing dimly in
my ears, when I saw an Indian before me, busied over the body of the
Frenchman I had just shot, but glancing towards me as I lay on the
ground bleeding. He first rifled the Frenchman, tearing open his coat,
and feeling in his pockets: he then scalped him, and with his bleeding
knife in his mouth advanced towards me. I saw him coming as through a
film, as in a dream--I was powerless to move, or to resist him.

"He put his knee upon my chest: with one bloody hand he seized my long
hair and lifted my head from the ground, and as he lifted it, he enabled
me to see a French officer rapidly advancing behind him.

"Good God! It was young Florac, who was my second in the duel at Quebec.
'A moi, Florac!' I cried out. 'C'est Georges! aide moi!'

"He started; ran up to me at the cry, laid his hand on the Indian's
shoulder, and called him to hold. But the savage did not understand
French, or choose to understand it. He clutched my hair firmer, and
waving his dripping knife round it, motioned to the French lad to leave
him to his prey. I could only cry out again and piteously, 'A moi!'

"'Ah, canaille, tu veux du sang? Prends!' said Florac, with a curse; and
the next moment, and with an ugh, the Indian fell over my chest dead,
with Florac's sword through his body.

"My friend looked round him. 'Eh!' says he, 'la belle affaire! Where art
thou wounded? in the leg?' He bound my leg tight round with his sash.
'The others will kill thee if they find thee here. Ah, tiens! Put me on
this coat, and this hat with the white cockade. Call out in French if
any of our people pass. They will take thee for one of us. Thou art
Brunet of the Quebec Volunteers. God guard thee, Brunet! I must go
forward. 'Tis a general debacle, and the whole of your redcoats are on
the run, my poor boy.' Ah, what a rout it was! What a day of disgrace
for England!

"Florac's rough application stopped the bleeding of my leg, and the kind
creature helped me to rest against a tree, and to load my fusil, which
he placed within reach of me, to protect me in case any other marauder
should have a mind to attack me. And he gave me the gourd of that
unlucky French soldier, who had lost his own life in the deadly game
which he had just played against me, and the drink the gourd contained
served greatly to refresh and invigorate me. Taking a mark of the tree
against which I lay, and noting the various bearings of the country, so
as to be able again to find me, the young lad hastened on to the front.
'Thou seest how much I love thee, George,' he said, 'that I stay behind
in a moment like this.' I forget whether I told thee Harry, that Florac
was under some obligation to me. I had won money of him at cards,
at Quebec--only playing at his repeated entreaty--and there was a
difficulty about paying, and I remitted his debt to me, and lighted
my pipe with his note-of-hand. You see, sir, that you are not the only
gambler in the family.

"At evening, when the dismal pursuit was over, the faithful fellow came
back to me, with a couple of Indians, who had each reeking scalps at
their belts, and whom he informed that I was a Frenchman, his brother,
who had been wounded early in the day, and must be carried back to the
fort. They laid me in one of their blankets, and carried me, groaning,
with the trusty Florac by my side. Had he left me, they would assuredly
have laid me down, plundered me, and added my hair to that of the
wretches whose bleeding spoils hung at their girdles. He promised them
brandy at the fort, if they brought me safely there: I have but a dim
recollection of the journey: the anguish of my wound was extreme: I
fainted more than once. We came to the end of our march at last. I was
taken into the fort, and carried to the officer's log-house, and laid
upon Florac's own bed.

"Happy for me was my insensibility. I had been brought into the fort
as a wounded French soldier of the garrison. I heard afterwards, that
during my delirium the few prisoners who had been made on the day of our
disaster, had been brought under the walls of Duquesne by their savage
captors, and there horribly burned, tortured, and butchered by the
Indians, under the eyes of the garrison."

As George speaks, one may fancy a thrill of horror running through his
sympathising audience. Theo takes Hetty's hand, and looks at George in
a very alarmed manner. Harry strikes his fist upon the table, and cries,
"The bloody, murderous, red-skinned villains! There will never be peace
for us until they are all hunted down!"

"They were offering a hundred and thirty dollars apiece for Indian
scalps in Pennsylvania, when I left home," says George, demurely, "and
fifty for women."

"Fifty for women, my love! Do you hear that, Mrs. Lambert?" cries the
Colonel, lifting up his wife's hair.

"The murderous villains!" says Harry, again. "Hunt 'em down, sir! Hunt
'em down!"

"I know not how long I lay in my fever," George resumed. "When I awoke
to my senses, my dear Florac was gone. He and his company had been
despatched on an enterprise against an English fort on the Pennsylvanian
territory, which the French claimed, too. In Duquesne, when I came to
be able to ask and understand what was said to me, there were not above
thirty Europeans left. The place might have been taken over and over
again, had any of our people had the courage to return after their
disaster.

"My old enemy the ague-fever set in again upon me as I lay here by the
