"Do you know, Joshua, fire-eater as he is, I suspect that he is a
coward."

"You do?"

"Yes, and I have a mind to put him to the test."

"How will you do it?"

"One day an old hunter came into my restaurant, and kept coming for a
week.  He was once taken prisoner by the Indians, and remained in
their hands for three months.  He taught me the Indian war-whoop, and
out of curiosity I practised it till I can do it pretty well."

"What's your plan?"

"To have you fire off your gun so as to wake him up.  Then I will
give a loud war-whoop and see how it affects the gentleman from Pike
County."

"He may shoot us before he finds out the deception."

"It will be well first to remove his revolver to make all safe.  I
wish you could give the war-whoop, too.  It would make a louder
noise."

"How do you do it?"

Joe explained.

"I guess I can do it.  You start it, and I'll j'in in, just as I used
to do in singin' at meetin'.  I never could steer through a tune
straight by myself, but when the choir got to goin', I helped 'em all
I could."

"I guess you can do it.  Now let us make ready."

The Pike County man's revolver was removed while he was unconsciously
sleeping.  Then Joshua and our hero ensconced themselves behind
trees, and the Yankee fired his gun.

The Pike man started up, still half asleep and wholly bewildered,
when within a rod of him he heard the dreadful war-whoop.  Then
another more discordant voice took up the fearful cry.  Joshua did
very well considering that it was his first attempt.

Then the man from Pike County sprang to his feet.  If it had been
daylight, his face would have been seen to wear a pale and scared
expression.  It did not appear to occur to him to make a stand
against the savage foes who he felt convinced were near at hand.  He
stood not on the order of going, but went at once.  He quickly
unloosed his beast, sprang upon his back, and galloped away without
apparently giving a thought to the companions with whom he had camped
out.

When he was out of hearing Joe and Bickford shouted with laughter.

"You see I was right," said Joe.  "The man's a coward."

"He seemed in a hurry to get away," said Joshua dryly.  "He's the
biggest humbug out."

"I thought so as soon as he began to brag so much."

"I believed his yarns at first," admitted Joshua.  "I thought he was
rather a dangerous fellow to travel with."

"He looked like a desperado, certainly," said Joe, "but appearances
are deceitful.  It's all swagger and no real courage."

"Well, what shall we do now, Joe?"

"Lie down again and go to sleep."

"The man's gone off without his revolver."

"He'll be back for it within a day or two.  We shall be sure to fall
in with him again.  I shan't lose my sleep worrying about him."

The two threw themselves once more on the ground, and were soon fast
asleep.

      *      *      *      *      *

Joe proved to be correct in his prediction concerning the
reappearance of their terrified companion.

The next morning, when they were sitting at breakfast--that is,
sitting under a tree with their repast spread out on a paper between
them--the man from Pike County rode up.  He looked haggard, as well
he might, not having ventured to sleep for fear of the Indians, and
his horse seemed weary and dragged out.

"Where have you been?" asked Mr. Bickford innocently.

"Chasin' the Indians," said the Rip-tail Roarer, swinging himself
from his saddle.

"Sho!  Be there any Indians about here?"

"Didn't you hear them last night?" inquired the man from Pike.

"No."

"Nor you?" turning to Joe.

"I heard nothing of any Indians," replied Joe truthfully.

"Then all I can say is, strangers, that you sleep uncommon sound."

"Nothing wakes me up," said Bickford.  "What about them Indians?  Did
you railly see any?"

"I rather think I did," said the man from Pike.  "It couldn't have
been much after midnight when I was aroused by their war-whoop.
Starting up, I saw twenty of the red devils riding through the canon."

"Were you afraid?"

"Afraid!" exclaimed the man from Pike contemptuously.  "The Rip-tail
Roarer knows not fear.  I can whip my weight in wildcats------"

"Yes, I know you can," interrupted Joshua.  "You told us so
yesterday."

The man from Pike seemed rather annoyed at the interruption, but as
Mr. Bickford appeared to credit his statement he had no excuse for
quarreling.

He proceeded.

"Instantly I sprung to the back of my steed and gave them chase."

"Did they see you?"

"They did."

"Why didn't they turn upon you?  You said there were twenty of them."

"Why?" repeated the Pike man boastfully.  "They were afraid.  They
recognized me as the Rip-tail Roarer.  They knew that I had sent more
than fifty Indians to the happy hunting-grounds, and alone as I was
they fled."

"Sho!"

"Did you kill any of them?" asked Joe.

"When I was some distance on my way I found I had left my revolver
behind.  Did you find it, stranger?"

"There it is," said Joshua, who had replaced it on the ground close
to where the Pike man had slept.

He took it with satisfaction and replaced it in his girdle.

"Then you didn't kill any?"

"No, but I drove them away.  They won't trouble you any more."

"That's a comfort," said Joshua.

"Now, strangers, if you've got any breakfast to spare, I think I
could eat some."

"Set up, old man," said Mr. Bickford, with his mouth full.

The man from Pike did full justice to the meal.  Then he asked his
two companions, as a favor, not to start for two hours, during which
he lay down and rested.

The three kept together that day, but did not accomplish as much
distance as usual, chiefly because of the condition of their
companion's horse.

At night they camped out again.  In the morning an unpleasant
surprise awaited them.  Their companion had disappeared, taking with
him Joshua's horse and leaving instead his own sorry nag.  That was
not all.  He had carried off their bag of provisions, and morning
found them destitute of food, with a hearty appetite and many miles
away, as they judged, from any settlement.

"The mean skunk!" said Joshua.  "He's cleaned us out.  What shall we
do?"

"I don't know," said Joe seriously.




CHAPTER XXIX

JOHN CHINAMAN

The two friends felt themselves to be in a serious strait.  The
exchange of horses was annoying, but it would only lengthen their
journey a little.  The loss of their whole stock of provisions could
not so readily be made up.

"I feel holler," said Joshua.  "I never could do much before
breakfast.  I wish I'd eat more supper.  I would have done it, only I
was afraid, by the way that skunk pitched into 'em, we wouldn't have
enough to last."

"You only saved them for him, it seems," said Joe.  "He has certainly
made a poor return for our kindness."

"If I could only wring his neck, I wouldn't feel quite so hungry,"
said Joshua.

"Or cut his head off with a scythe," suggested Joe, smiling faintly.

"Danged if I wouldn't do it," said Mr. Bickford, hunger making him
bloodthirsty.

"We may overtake him, Mr. Bickford."

"You may, Joe, but I can't.  He's left me his horse, which is clean
tuckered out, and never was any great shakes to begin with.  I don't
believe I can get ten miles out of him from now till sunset."

"We must keep together, no matter how slow we go.  It won't do for us
to be parted."

"We shall starve together likely enough," said Joshua mournfully.

"I've heard that the French eat horse-flesh.  If it comes to the
worst, we can kill your horse and try a horse-steak."

"It's all he's fit for, and he ain't fit for that.  We'll move on for
a couple of hours and see if somethin' won't turn up.  I tell you,
Joe, I'd give all the money I've got for some of marm's johnny-cakes.
It makes me feel hungrier whenever I think of 'em."

"I sympathize with you, Joshua," said Joe.  "We may as well be movin'
on, as you suggest.  We may come to some cabin, or party of
travelers."

So they mounted their beasts and started.  Joe went ahead, for his
animal was much better than the sorry nag which Mr. Bickford
bestrode.  The latter walked along with an air of dejection, as if
life were a burden to him.

"If I had this critter at home, Joe, I'll tell you what I'd do with
him," said Mr. Bickford, after a pause.

"Well, what would you do with him?"

"I'd sell him to a sexton.  He'd be a first-class animal to go to
funerals.  No danger of his runnin' away with the hearse."

"You are not so hungry but you can joke, Joshua."

"It's no joke," returned Mr. Bickford.  "If we don't raise a supply
of provisions soon, I shall have to attend my own funeral.  My mind
keeps running on them johnny-cakes."

They rode on rather soberly, for the exercise and the fresh morning
air increased their appetites, which were keen when they started.

Mr. Bickford no longer felt like joking, and Joe at every step looked
anxiously around him, in the hope of espying relief.

On a sudden, Mr. Bickford rose in his Stirrups and exclaimed in a
tone of excitement:

"I see a cabin!"

"Where?"

"Yonder," said the Yankee, pointing to a one-story shanty, perhaps a
quarter of a mile away.

"Is it inhabited, I wonder?"

"I don't know.  Let us go and see."

The two spurred their horses, and at length reached the rude building
which had inspired them with hope.  The door was open, but no one was
visible.

Joshua was off his horse in a twinkling and peered in.

"Hooray!" he shouted in rejoicing accents.  "Breakfast's ready."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I've found something to eat."

On a rude table was an earthen platter full of boiled rice and a
stale loaf beside it.

"Pitch in, Joe," said Joshua.  "I'm as hungry as a wolf."

"This food belongs to somebody.  I suppose we have no right to it."

"Right be hanged.  A starving man has a right to eat whatever he can
find."

"Suppose it belongs to a fire-eater, or a man from Pike County?"

"We'll eat first and fight afterward."

Joe did not feel like arguing the matter.  There was an advocate
within him which forcibly emphasized Joshua's arguments, and he
joined in the banquet.

"This bread is dry as a chip," said Mr. Bickford.  "But no matter.  I
never thought dry bread would taste so good.  I always thought rice
was mean vittles, but it goes to the right place just now."

"I wonder if any one will have to go hungry on our account?" said Joe.

"I hope not, but I can't help it," returned Mr. Bickford.
"Necessity's the fust law of nature, Joe.  I feel twice as strong as
I did twenty minutes ago."

"There's nothing like a full stomach, Joshua.  I wonder to whom we
are indebted for this repast?"

Joe was not long in having his query answered.  An exclamation, as of
one startled, called the attention of the two friends to the doorway,
where, with a terrified face, stood a Chinaman, his broad face
indicating alarm.

"It's a heathen Chinee, by gosh!" exclaimed Joshua.

Even at that time Chinese immigrants had begun to arrive in San
Francisco, and the sight was not wholly new either to Joshua or Joe.

"Good morning, John," said our young hero pleasantly.

"Good morning, heathen," said Mr. Bickford.  "We thought we'd come
round and make you a mornin' call.  Is your family well?"

The Chinaman was reassured by the friendly tone of his visitors, and
ventured to step in.  He at once saw that the food which he had
prepared for himself had disappeared.

"Melican man eat John's dinner," he remarked in a tone of
disappointment.

"So we have, John," said Mr. Bickford.  "The fact is, we were
hungry--hadn't had any breakfast."

"Suppose Melican man eat--he pay," said the Chinaman.

"That's all right," said Joe; "we are willing to pay.  How much do
you want?"

The Chinaman named his price, which was not unreasonable, and it was
cheerfully paid.

"Have you got some more bread and rice, John?" asked Mr. Bickford.
"We'd like to buy some and take it along."

They succeeded in purchasing a small supply--enough with economy to
last a day or two.  This was felt as a decided relief.  In two days
they might fall in with another party of miners or come across a
settlement.

They ascertained on inquiry that the Chinaman and another of his
nationality had come out like themselves to search for gold.  They
had a claim at a short distance from which they had obtained a small
supply of gold.  The cabin they had found in its present condition.
It had been erected and deserted the previous year by a party of
white miners, who were not so easily satisfied as the two Chinamen.

"Well," said Joshua, after they had started on their way, "that's the
first time I ever dined at a Chinee hotel."

"We were lucky in coming across it," said Joe.

"The poor fellow looked frightened when he saw us gobblin' up his
provisions," said Mr. Bickford, laughing at the recollection.

"But we left him pretty well satisfied.  We didn't treat him as the
gentleman from Pike treated us."

"No--I wouldn't be so mean as that darned skunk.  It makes me mad
whenever I look at this consumptive boss he's left behind."

"You didn't make much out of that horse trade, Mr. Bickford."

"I didn't, but I'll get even with him some time if we ever meet
again."

"Do you know where he was bound?"

"No--he didn't say."

"I dare say it'll all come right in the end.  At any rate, we shan't
starve for the next forty-eight hours."

So in better spirits the two companions kept on their way.




CHAPTER XXX

ON THE YUBA RIVER

On the following day Joe and his comrade fell in with a party of men
