Project Gutenberg's Quest of the Golden Ape, by Ivar Jorgensen and Adam Chase

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Quest of the Golden Ape

Author: Ivar Jorgensen
        Adam Chase

Release Date: June 23, 2010 [EBook #32953]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUEST OF THE GOLDEN APE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories January, February, March
    1957. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.

    The Table of Contents is not part of the original magazines


    [Illustration: They were bent upon rapine and slaughter--and what
                   greater prize than the Queen herself?]


                       QUEST OF THE GOLDEN APE


                   By IVAR JORGENSEN and ADAM CHASE


     _How could this man awaken with no past--no childhood--no
      recollection except of a vague world of terror from which
      his mother cried out for vengeance and the slaughter of his
      own people stood as a monument of infamy?_

       *       *       *       *       *




                     CONTENTS

CHAPTER
    I    Mansion of Mystery
   II    The Great Clock of Tarth
  III    The Man in the Cavern
   IV    John Pride's Story
    V    Question Upon Question
   VI    On the Plains of Ofrid
  VII    The White God
 VIII    The Brown Virgin
   IX    In Custody
    X    The Road to Nadia
   XI    On the Ice Fields of Nadia
  XII    Volna the Beautiful
 XIII    The Journey of No Return
  XIV    Land Beyond the Stars
   XV    The Golden Ape
  XVI    The Raging Beast
 XVII    The Prison Without Bars

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

_Mansion of Mystery_


In a secluded section of a certain eastern state which must remain
nameless, one may leave the main highway and travel up a winding road
around tortuous bends and under huge scowling trees, into wooded
country.

Upon a certain night--the date of which must remain vague--there came
a man who faced and was not turned back by a series of psychological
barriers along this road which made it more impregnable than a steel
wall. These barriers, which had kept out a hundred years of
curiosity-seekers until that certain night, were forged by the
scientific magic of a genius on a planet far beyond the sun....

The man who boldly followed his headlights up the road was of middle
age with calm, honest eyes and a firm mouth indicating bargains made
in his name would be kept. He pushed on, feeling the subtle force of
the psychological powers against him but resisting because he vaguely
understood them.

He left his car presently and raised his hand to touch the hard
outline of a small book he carried in his breast pocket and with the
gesture his determination hardened. He set his jaw firmly, snapped on
the flashlight he had taken from the dash of his convertible and moved
on up the road.

His firm, brisk steps soon brought him to its end, a great iron gate,
its lock and hinges rusted tight under the patient hand of Time. It
was high and spiked and too dangerous for climbing. But someone had
smashed the lock with a heavy instrument and had applied force until
the rusted hinges gave and the gate stood partially open. From the
look of the metal, this could have been done recently--even in the
past few minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man entered and found a flagstone pathway. He followed this for a
time with the aid of his flashlight. Then he stopped and raised the
beam.

It revealed the outline of a great stone mansion, its myriad windows
like black, sightless eyes, its silent bulk telling of long solitude,
its tongueless voice whispering: _Go away, stranger. Only peril and
misfortune await you here._

But I am not exactly a stranger, the man told himself, approaching the
door and half hoping to find the scowling panel locked.

But it was not locked. The ponderous knob turned under his hand. The
panel moved back silently. The man gripped his flashlight and stepped
inside.

The knowledge that he was no longer alone came as a shock. It was
brought to him by the sound of labored breathing and he flashed the
light about frantically trying to locate the source of the harsh
sound. Then the bright circle picked out a huddled form on the floor
nearby. The man moved forward instantly and went to his knees.

He was looking into an incredibly ancient face. The skin was so deeply
lined as to hang in folds around the sunken eyes. The mouth was but a
toothless maw and the body so shrunken as to seem incapable of
clinging to life. The voice was a harsh whisper.

"Thank God you have come. I am dying. The opening of the gate took all
my remaining strength."

"You have been waiting for me?"

"I have been waiting out the years--striving to keep life in my body
until the moment of destiny. I wanted to see _him_. I wanted to be
there when the door to his resting place opens and he comes forth to
right the terrible wrongs that have been done our people."

The strength of the ancient one was ebbing fast. The words he spoke
had been an effort. The kneeling man said, "I don't understand all
this."

"That matters not. It is important only that you keep the bargain made
long ago with your sire, and that you are here. Someone must be with
_him_ at the awakening."

The newcomer again touched the book in his pocket. "I came because our
word had been given--"

The dying man picked feebly at his sleeve. "Please! You must go below!
The great clock has measured the years. Soon it tolls the moment. Soon
a thundering on the Plains of Ofrid will herald the new age--the
Fighting Age--and a new day will dawn."

While the visitor held his frail shoulders, the dying man gasped and
said, "Hasten! Hurry to the vault below! Would that I could go with
you, but that is not to be."

And then the visitor realized he was holding a corpse in his arms. He
laid it gently down and did as he had been directed to do.




CHAPTER II

_The Great Clock of Tarth_


The Plains of Ofrid on the planet Tarth stretched flat and monotonous
as far as the eye could reach, a gently waving ocean of soft,
knee-high grass where herds of wild stads grazed and bright-hued birds
vied in brilliance with the flaming sun.

From the dark Abarian Forests to the Ice Fields of Nadia, the plain
stretched unbroken except for the tall, gray tower in its exact center
and it was toward this tower that various groups of Tarthans were now
moving.

Every nation on the planet was represented in greater or lesser
number. The slim, erect Nadians in their flat-bottomed air cars that
could hang motionless in space or skim the surface of the planet at a
thousand jeks an hour. The grim-faced Abarians, tall and finely
muscled on their powerful stads, their jeweled uniforms flashing back
the glory of the heavens. The Utalians, those chameleon men of Tarth,
their skins now the exact color of the grasses across which they rode,
thus causing their stads to appear unmounted and unguided.

All the nations of Tarth were represented, drawn toward the tower by a
century-old legend, a legend which Retoc the Abarian clarified as he
rode at the head of his own proud group.

He waved a hand, indicating the vast plain and spoke to Hultax, his
second in command, saying, "Little would one think that this flat,
empty land was once the site of a vast and powerful nation. One of the
greatest upon all Tarth!" A smile of cruelty and satisfaction played
upon his handsome features as he surveyed the plain.

"Aye," Hultax replied. "The realm of the Ofridians. Truly they were a
great nation."

"But we Abarians were greater," Retoc snapped. "We not only defeated
them but we leveled their land until not one stone stood upon
another."

"All save the tower," Hultax said. "No weapon known could so much as
scratch its surface."

       *       *       *       *       *

A new voice cut in. "Quite true. Portox's scientific skill was too
great for you." Both Abarians turned quickly to scowl at the newcomer,
Bontarc of Nadia, who had swung close in his one-man car and was
hovering by their side.

Retoc's hand moved toward the hilt of his long whip-like sword, driven
there by the look of contempt in Bontarc's eyes. But Retoc hesitated.
A formidable squadron of Bontarc's Nadian fighting men hovered nearby
and the Abarian had no taste for a battle in which the odds were close
to even.

"We defeated the Ofridians fairly," he said.

"And slaughtered them fairly? Cut down the men and women and children
alike until the entire nation was obliterated?"

The systematic annihilation had taken place a century before when
Bontarc had been but a child and Retoc a young man. Karnod, Retoc's
father, now dead, had planned the war that defeated the Ofridians, his
winning card having been spies in the court of Evalla, Queen of Ofrid.
Karnod had been fatally wounded during the last battle and had
delegated to his son the task of annihilating the Ofridians and
levelling their nation. This task, Retoc accepted with relish,
reserving for himself the pleasure of slaying Queen Evalla. Details of
the torture to which Retoc subjected the beautiful Evalla were
whispered over the planet and it was said the sadistic Retoc had taken
photographs of the Queen in her agony to enjoy in later years.

It had been the scientific ability of Portox of Ofrid that had
engendered the Abarian hatred and jealousy in the first place. Portox
used his science for the good of all on the planet Tarth, but when
Karnod, Lord of Abaria, struck, no other nation came to Ofrid's aid.
Then it was too late, because Abaria's military might greatened as a
result of the Ofridian defeat and only an alliance of all other
nations could have conquered them.

Ironically, Portox had never been captured.

Now as the tall gray tower came into view, Bontarc's mind was filled
with thoughts of Portox, the Ofridian wizard. It was said that Portox
had been able to travel through space to other planets that were known
to exist, that he had left Tarth and found safety somewhere across
space, first building his tower which would never be destroyed; that a
great clock within it was measuring off one hundred years--the time on
the planet Tarth of an infant's development into manhood--and that at
the end of that span the clock would toll and there would come forth a
man to avenge the slaughter of the Ofridians.

Bontarc turned suddenly upon the dour Retoc. "Tell me," he said, "is
there any truth to the legend that the clock in the tower will toll
the end of one hundred years?"

"None whatever," the sadistic Abarian snapped. "A rumor passed from
the lips of one old woman to another."

Bontarc smiled. "Then why are you here? The hundred years are up
today."

Retoc's hand moved toward his whip-sword. "Are you calling me a liar?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Bontarc watched alertly as the blade came partly from its scabbard.
"If we fight we may miss the tolling of the clock," he said evenly.

With an oath, Retoc pushed the sword back into its scabbard and put
sharp heels to his stad's flanks. The animal screamed indignantly and
rocketed ahead. Bontarc smiled and turned his car back toward his own
group.

And now they were assembled and waiting, the curious of the planet
Tarth. Would the clock toll as it was rumored Portox had said? Would
an avenger come forth to challenge Retoc and his Abarian hordes?

There was not much time left. Swiftly the clock ticked off the
remaining moments and the end of one hundred years was at hand.
Silence settled over the assembled Tarthans.

Then a great sound boomed over the plains; a single ringing peal that
rose majestically into the air, reverberated across the empty land
that once had been the site of a thriving, prosperous nation. The
first part of the legend had been fulfilled.

Then, suddenly, chaos reigned. With a great thundering that shook the
ground upon which they stood, the gray tower exploded in crimson
glory; a great mushrooming blossom of red fire erupted skyward hurling
the assembled Tarthans to the ground where they lay in numbed stupor.

The thunderous report echoed across the plain ten thousand times
louder than the tolling of the clock. But aside from the initial
dulling shock, no Tarthan was injured because the crushing power rose
upward.

There was an expression of mute wonder on Bontarc's face. And he
thought: We have not seen the end of this. It is only the beginning.
But the beginning of what? Only Portox could have known. And Portox
was--where?

Bontarc started his car and moved across the plain sensing cosmic
events but not knowing....

Not knowing that the sound of the tolling clock had gone with more
than the speed of light across the void, had been flung arrow-straight
to a brooding mansion in the heart of a thick forest upon another
planet; to the door of a cavern deep in the rock beneath the mansion.

That even now the lock of this door had responded to the electronic
impulse and the huge panel was swinging slowly open.




CHAPTER III

_The Man in the Cavern_


As the sound of the tolling clock died out across the Plains of Ofrid,
a man opened his eyes on the planet far away and saw for the first
time the place in which he had spent one hundred years.

He awoke with neither fright nor surprise but rather with a sense of
wonder. He arose slowly from the great bed upon which he had lain and
allowed his attention to roam about the strange place in which he
found himself.

In the wall opposite the bed there was set a full length mirror and as
the man turned he saw himself for the first time; a tall,
broadly-muscled figure of heroic proportions. Completely naked, his
body was reflected as masculine perfection in every detail.

For a few moments, the man stared at the body as though it belonged to
someone else. Then he spoke musingly. "You did your work well, Portox,
my friend."

The sound of his own voice startled him but not so much so as the
content of the words. A baffled expression touched his handsome face.
Who was Portox? And what work had he done? What place was this--and
for that matter, who was he himself, this naked figure which looked
back at him from the glittering mirror?

The questions were annoying because he felt that he knew the answers.
Yet they would not come within reach of his conscious mind.

He had little time to ponder this enigma however because at that
moment he became aware of a second presence in the room. He turned. A
man stood just inside the open door.

The naked one stared at the other with an interest that left no room
for self-consciousness nor shame. "Who are you?" he asked.

"My name is John Pride," the man answered. He was a man of erect
bearing and though there was wonder and surprise in his voice he bore
himself with a quiet dignity. "And now," he added, "may I ask you the
same question?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The naked man looked down at his own body and for the first time
seemed conscious of its nudity. He glanced around the room and saw a
robe of royal purple lying across a chair by the bed. He stepped over
and lifted the robe and put it on. As he was tying the rich purple
cord around his waist he looked frankly back at John Pride and said,
"I do not know. I honestly do not know."

John Pride said, "I have wondered what I would find in this
cavern--wondered through the years. Only in my wildest fancies did I
tell myself that a fellow human--or even a living creature--awaited me
here. But now I find this is true."

The younger man regarded his visitor with a calmness that belied any
wariness between them. John Pride noted this with admiration and
respect. The young man said, "Won't you be seated?" and when his guest
was comfortable, regarded him with a smile. "Perhaps there are some
things we should talk over."

"Perhaps there are. You say you do not know your own name?"

"That only begins to sum up my ignorance. I am not only unaware of my
identity but I haven't the faintest notion of what this place
is--where it is--or how I came here."

It was John Pride's turn to stare. While doing so, he analyzed the
younger man keenly. He saw honesty and an inner warmth that attracted
him. There was something almost godlike in the clean lines of the body
he had seen and in the face. These things coupled with what he already
knew, intrigued him mightily and he resolved to approach this strange
affair with an open mind and not play the role of the unbelieving
cynic. It was time to go ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Pride said, "First, are you aware that there is another in this
mansion--or was?"

"I did not even know this was a mansion. It seems only one room."

"It is an enormous structure set deep in the forest."

"This other one--?"

"A very old man. He died as I arrived here tonight."

"You do not know his name or how came he here?"

"I have a vague idea."

The young man's dazzling blue eyes narrowed in thought. "A while ago
you said you have wondered through the years as to what you would find
in this room. That indicates you were aware of its existence."

"True. Perhaps at this point I had better tell you the complete
story--as much of it as I know."

"I would be in your debt."

"No, I will merely be discharging the last of a very old obligation."

With that, John Pride took from his pocket a small leather covered
book. He handled it gently, almost with affection, and said, "This was
my father's notebook. In it, is an account of this remarkable affair,
put down by my great grandfather and handed down through the line.
When my father died he placed it in my hand saying it entailed an
obligation both business and personal and it was my obligation as well
as his.

"I have read the account of what transpired many times and with your
permission I will put it into my own words. Then, when I am done, I
will give you the book and the affair will be over so far as I and my
family are concerned."

John Pride had settled back in his chair and was just ready to begin
when the young man held up a sudden hand. "Just one moment--please,"
he said, and a look of concentration came upon his face. Then he went
on and his words took the form of a rhyme:

    "An ape, a boar, a stallion,
     A land beyond the stars.
     A virgin's feast, a raging beast,
     A prison without bars."

He flushed and added: "I don't know why I was possessed to recite that
doggerel at just this moment but there is something strange about it.
Strange in that I have a feeling it was taught to me at some long
distant time in the past. I sense that it is very important to
whatever destiny awaits me. Yet I know not who taught me the verse nor
what it means."

"That verse is inscribed in this book and I believe I know how it
entered your mind and memory. I believe too, that I understand how you
are able to converse with me though you know nothing of this land or
even this room," John Pride said quietly.

"Then please tell me!"

"I think it better that I start at the beginning rather than give you
the story piece-meal. That way, your mind will be better able to
assimilate and to judge."

"I await your pleasure," the young man said with impatience he strove
to conceal.

"Very well," John Pride said, his eyes growing vague with a far-away
look.




CHAPTER IV

_John Pride's Story_


"I am a member," John Pride began, "of a firm called Pride, Conroy,
and Wilson. We are a very old firm of private bankers with offices in
Wall Street. Both Conroy and Wilson died before I was born, leaving no
issue, so the company has been controlled by a Pride for many years.

