sits its twin, moving in and out; and that's where the floods of the
body begin. And it's twinned again. The heart?" he suggested. "The
four-chambered human heart? That's where the body's flood begins."

"I think that will do for part of the answer."

"The bright chamber," mused Geo. "The burning dome. The human mind, I
guess. The line of division, running down the lane of memory--I'm not
sure."

"You seem to be doing fairly well."

"Could it refer to something like 'the two sides of every question'?"
Geo asked. "Or something similar?"

"It could," Argo said, "though I must confess I hadn't thought of it in
that way. But it is the last two lines that puzzle me."

"_Fear floods in the turning room_," repeated Geo; "_Love breaks in the
burning dome._ I guess that's the mind and the heart again. You usually
think of love with the heart, and fear with the mind. Maybe she meant
that they both, the heart and the mind, have control over both love and
fear."

"Perhaps she did," Argo smiled. "You must ask her--when you rescue her
from the clutches of Hama."

Before turning back to the room with his companions, he looked once more
out at the fires of the volcano. Light whirled white and red. Blue
tongues licked at black rock siding. He turned away now and went back
into the darkness.




CHAPTER X


Dawn light lay a-slant the crater's ridge. Argo pointed down the
opposite slope. A black temple was visible at the bottom among trees and
lawns. "There is Hama's temple," Argo said. "You have your task. Good
luck."

They started down the incline of cinders. It took them an hour to reach
the first trees that surrounded the dark buildings and the great
gardens. Entering on the first lip of grass, they heard a sudden cluster
of notes from one of the trees.

"A bird," Iimmi said. "I haven't heard one of those since I left
Leptar."

Suddenly, bright blue and the length of a man's forefinger, a lizard ran
halfway down the trunk of the tree. It's sapphire belly heaved in the
early light with indrawn breath; then it opened its red mouth, its
throat warbled, and there was another burst of music.

"Oh well," said Iimmi. "I was close."

They walked further, until Iimmi mused, "I wonder why you always think
things are going to turn out like you expect."

"Because when something sounds like that," declared Urson, "it usually
is a bird!" Suddenly he gave a little shiver. "Lizards," he said.

"It was a pretty lizard," said Iimmi.

"Going around expecting things to be what they seem can get you in
trouble--especially on this island," Geo commented.

The angle at which they walked made one of the clumps of tree before
them seem to fall apart. A man standing in the center raised his hand
and said briskly, "Stop!"

They stopped.

He wore dark robes, and his short white hair made a close helmet above
his brown face.

Urson's hand was on his sword. Snake stood with his feet wide, his hands
out from his sides.

"Who are you?" the dark man declared.

"Who are you?" Urson parried.

"I am Hama Incarnate."

They were silent. Finally Geo said, "We are travelers in Aptor. We don't
mean any harm."

As the man moved forward, splotches of light from the trees slipped
across his robe. "Come with me," Hama said. He turned and proceeded
among the trees. They followed.

They passed into the temple garden. It was early enough in the morning
so that the sunlight lapped pink tongues over the giant black urns that
sat along the edges of the path. Now they passed into the temple.

As they passed, Hama turned, looked at the jewels on Iimmi's and Geo's
necks, and then looked up at the gazing eye of the statue at the end of
the altar. He made no other sign, but turned again and continued. "The
morning rites have not yet started," he said. "They will begin in a half
an hour. By then I hope to have divined your purpose in coming here."

At the other side of the stairway they mounted a stairway, and then
entered a door above which was a black circle dotted with three eyes.
Just as they were about to go in, Geo looked around, frowned, and caught
Iimmi's eye. "Snake?" he mouthed.

Iimmi looked around and shrugged.

The man turned and faced them, apparently unaware of Snake's departure.
As he closed the door, now, he said, "You have come to oppose the forces
of Aptor, am I right? You come to steal the jewel of Hama. You have come
to kidnap the Incarnate Argo. Is that not your purpose. Keep your hand
off your sword, Urson! I can kill you in a moment. You are defenseless."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Damn! I'm sleepy." She rolled over and cuddled the pillow. Then she
opened her eyes, one at a time, and lay watching the nearly completed
motor of metal bars and copper wire that sat on the table beside her
bed. She stood up.

Then she collapsed on the bed and jammed her feet under the covers
again. With thirty feet of one and a half inch brass pipe, she mused
sleepily, I could carry heat from the main hot-water line under the
floor which I would estimate to be about the proper surface area to keep
these stones warm; let me see, thirty feet of one and a half inch pipe
have a surface area of 22/7 times 3/2 times 30 which is 990 divided by 7
which is ... Then she caught herself. Damn, you're thinking this to
avoid thinking about getting up. She opened her eyes once more, put feet
on the stone, and held them there while she scratched vigorously at her
uneven mop of red hair.

She looked at the clock. "Yikes!" she said softly, and ran out the door,
and slammed it behind her--almost. She whirled around, caught it on her
palms before it banged shut, and then closed it with gingerly care the
final centimeter and a half of the arc. Are you trying to get caught?
she asked herself as she tiptoed to the next door.

She opened it and looked in. Dunderhead looks cute when he's asleep, she
thought. There was a cord on the floor that ran from under the table by
the priest's bed, over the stones, carefully following the zigzag of the
crevices between them, and at last the end lay in the corner of the door
sill. You really couldn't see it if you weren't looking for it, which
had more or less been the idea when she had put it there last night
before the priests had come back from vespers. The far end was tied in a
knot of her own invention to the electric plug of his alarm clock.
Dunderhead had an annoying habit of re-setting his clock every evening
making sure that the red second hand was still sweeping away the
minutes. (In her plans for this morning she had catalogued his every
habitual action, and had observed this one for three nights running,
hanging upside down from the bulky stone portcullis above and outside
his window.)

Tugging on the string, she saw it leap from the crevices into a straight
line and then lift from the floor as she drew it tauter, and then go
slack as the plug blipped quietly onto the floor.

Next she pulled the string again until the slack left and raised her end
a few inches from the floor. With her free hand now she gave the string
a small twit and watched the vibration run up and down the string twice.
The knot's invention was an ingenuous one. At the vibration, two opposed
loops shook away from a third, and a four millimeter length of rubber
band that had been sewn in tautened and released a fourth loop from
around a small length of number four gauge wire with a holding tonsure
of three quarters of a gram, and the opposing vibration returning up the
thread loosed a similar apparatus on the other side of the plug. The
knot fell away, and she wound it quickly around her hand. She stood up,
closed the door, and the oiled lock was perfectly silent. The door knob
was just the slightest bit greasy, she noted. Careless.

Back in her room, it was standing on the table. Sunlight from the high
window fell red across the board. It was very early in the morning. She
took the parts of the motor up in her hands. "I guess we try you out
today? No?" She answered herself, "Yes." Finally she put the parts in
the paper bag, strode out of the room, and slammed the ... whirled
around and caught it once more. "Gnnnnnnn," she said. "Do you want to
get caught?" For the second time she answered herself, "Yes. And
remember that too. Or you'll never get through it."

As she walked down the hall, she heard through one of the windows the
chirp of a blue lizard from the garden. "The sound I wanted to hear,"
she smiled to herself. "A good sign."

Turning into the temple, she started down the side aisle. The great
black columns passed before her. Something moved between the columns
along the other side, swift and indistinct as a bird's shadow. At least
she thought she saw something. "Remember," she reminded herself, "you
have guilt feelings about this whole thing, and you could very easily be
manufacturing delusions to scare yourself out of going through with it."
She went on, passed two more columns, and saw it again. "Or," she went
on with her monologue, "you could be purposefully ignoring the very
obvious fact that there is somebody over there who is going to see you.
So watch it." There were mirrors somewhere in the temple, but they
weren't on the opposite wall, so she couldn't be seeing herself. In fact
the mirrors were out in the vestibule through which she had come and
maybe this other person had come, so maybe it was seeing her as a
reflection of ... "Unscramble that syntax," she told herself. "You think
like that and you'll never make it."

But there was somebody, with no clothes on (for all practical purposes)
sneaking between the pillars. And he had four arms. That made her start
to think of something else, but the thought as it arrowed into the past,
suddenly got deflected, turned completely about, and jammed into her
brain again, because he was staring directly at her.

_If he starts walking toward me_, she thought, _I'm going to be scared
out of my ears. So I better start walking toward him. Besides, I want to
see what he looks like._ She started out from the columns. Glancing
quickly both ways, she saw that the temple was deserted save for them.

_He's a kid_, she thought, three quarters of the way across. _My age_,
she added, and again a foreign thought attempted to intrude itself on
her but never made it, because he was coming toward her now. At last he
stopped before her, silent, muscles like tight wire under the brown
skin, black hair massing low on his forehead, his eyes deep beneath the
black shrub of brows.

She gulped and asked him, "What are you doing here? Do you know somebody
could catch you in here and get mad as hell? I know I couldn't possibly
have, but I think I've seen you before some place; if somebody comes
along, they might even think you were trying to steal Hama's eye." _I
shouldn't have said that_, she thought, _because he moved funny._ "You
better get out of here because everybody will be up here in a half an
hour for morning services."

At that news, he suddenly darted forward, passed her, and sprinted down
toward the altar.

"Hey!" she called and ran after him.

Snake vaulted over the brass altar rail.

"Wait a minute," she called, catching up. "Wait, will you!"

Snake turned as she slung her leg across the brass bar. "Look, I realize
I gave away my hand. But that was only guilt feelings. You gave yours
away too, though. And if you don't think you've got guilt feelings, boy,
you're crazy."

Snake frowned, tilted his head, and then grinned.

"So we'll help each other see," she said. "You want it too, don't you."
She pointed up to the head of the statue towering above them. "So let's
co-operate. I'll get it for a little while. Then you can have it." He
was listening, she saw, so she guessed her strategy was working. _Play
it by ear now_, she thought. "We'll help each other. Shake on it, huh?"
She stuck out her hand.

All four hands reached forward.

_Whoops_, she thought, _I hope he's not offended._

But the four hands grasped hers, and she added her second to the
juncture. "All right," she said. "Come on. Now I had all this figured
out last night. And we don't have much time. Let's go around ..." But he
walked over to where the stalks of wheat spired from the altar base up
through Hama's fist, and grabbed a stalk with the three hands, and hand,
over hand, over hand, began to hoist himself up to where the first broad
sheets of metal leaves leaned out to form a small platform. At first his
dirty feet swung out frog-like, but then he caught the stem with his
toes and at last hoisted himself to the front and looked down at her.

"I can't climb up there," she said, "I don't have your elevation power."

Snake looked down and shrugged.

"Oh damn," she said. "I'll do it my way." She ran across the altar to
the great foot of the statue. Sitting cross-legged, Hama's foot was on
his side. Using the ridges made by the toes as steps, she clammered up
to the dark bulge of the deity's godlike bunion. She made her way across
the ankle, up the slanting shin, back down the black thigh, until she
stood at the crevice where the leg and torso met.

Out beyond the great knee, Snake regarded her from his perch in the
groin of yellow leaf. They were about equal height.

"Yoo-hoo," she waved. "Meet you at the clavicle." Then she stuck her
tongue out. The bulges in the belly of the god made a treacherous ledge
along which she inched until she arrived at the cavernous naval, leaving
wet handprints on the black stone.

The god's belly button from this intimate distance revealed itself as a
circular door about five feet in diameter and controlled by a
combination lock. She missed the first number twice, dried her hands
off, and began again. According to the plans in the main safe of the
temple (on which she had first practiced combination breaking) there was
a ladder behind this door which led up into the statue. She remembered
it clearly; and saved her life by doing so.

Because when she caught the second number, reversed the direction and
felt the telltale click of the third, she pulled on the handle and was
almost pushed from the ledge by the swinging circular door. She grabbed
at a handle that she hardly saw on the door's inside, just as the stone
slipped from beneath her feet. Then she was hanging five feet out in the
air over the sacred groin some fifty feet below.

The first thing she tried, after closing her eyes and mumbling a few
laws of motion, was to swing the door to. When she swung out, however,
the door swung closed; and when she swung in, the door swung opened.
After a while, she just hung. She gave small thanks that she had dried
her hands. When her arms began to ache, she wished that she hadn't,
because then it would be over by now. She went over what she knew about
taking judo falls.

Then the door swung closed, and someone grabbed her around the waist.
She didn't open her eyes, but felt her body pressed against the tilting
stone. Her arms fell tingling to her sides. The ligaments flamed with
pain. Then the pain dulled to throbbing, and she opened her eyes. "How
the hell did you get down here?" she asked Snake. With his help she
staggered through the open door and stopped to rub her arms. "How did
you know about the ladder?"

They were standing in the shaft now, with the ladder beside them running
up into the darkness.

He looked at her with a puzzled expression.

"What is it?" she asked. "Oh, I'll be able to climb up there, never you
worry. Hey, can you speak?"

Snake shook his head.

"Oh," she said. Something started at the edge of her mind again, a
picture of something unpleasant. Snake had started up the ladder, which
he had come down so quickly a minute ago. She glanced out the door, saw
that the temple was empty, pulled the door to, and followed.

They ascended into complete darkness. Her arms were beginning to ache
again, just slightly. She reached up for the next rung, and found it in
its proper place. Then the next. And then again the next.

She started counting steps now, and when seventy-four, seventy-five, and
seventy-six dropped below her, there was a missing rung. She reached
above it, but there was none. She ran her hand up the edge of the ladder
and found that it suddenly curved into the wall. "Hey, you," she said in
the darkness.

Something touched her waist. "Gnnnnnggggg," she said. "Don't _do_ that."
It touched her on the leg, took hold of her ankle, and pulled. "Watch
out," she said.

It pulled again. She raised her foot, and it was tugged sideways a good
foot and a half and set on solid flooring. Then a hand (her foot was not
released) took her arm, and another held her waist, and tugged. She
stiffened for one instant before she remembered the number of limbs her
companion had. Then she came off the ladder, sideways into the dark,
afraid to put her other foot down lest she step headlong into the
seventy-five foot plus shaft.

But he tugged again, and in losing her balance, her foot came down on
cool, solid stone. Holding her arm now, he led her along the tunnel.
