San Antonio has fallen into his hands without a struggle. He can take
the Alamo in a day. In a month not a man will be left in Texas able to
dispute his authority."

"These are statements most of which can be disputed," said Major Morris.
"What does General Santa Anna demand of us?"

His quiet manner had its effect upon Urrea.

"He demands your unconditional surrender," he said.

"And does he say nothing about our lives and good treatment?" continued
the Major, in the same quiet tones.

"He does not," replied Urrea emphatically. "If you receive mercy it will
be due solely to the clemency of General Santa Anna toward rebels."

Hot anger again made Ned's heart leap. The tone of Urrea was almost
insufferable, but Major Morris, not he, was spokesman.

"I am not empowered to accept or reject anything," continued Major
Morris. "Colonel Travis is the commander of our force, but I am quite
positive in my belief that he will not surrender."

"We must carry back our answer in either the affirmative or the
negative," said Urrea.

"You can do neither," said Major Morris, "but I promise you that if the
answer is a refusal to surrender--and I know it will be such--a single
cannon shot will be fired from the wall of the church."

"Very well," said Urrea, "and since that is your arrangement I see
nothing more to be said."

"Nor do I," said Major Morris.

The Mexicans saluted in a perfunctory manner and rode toward San
Antonio. The three Texans went slowly back to the Alamo. Ned walked
behind the two men. He hoped that the confidence of Major Morris was
justified. He knew Santa Anna too well. He believed that the Texans had
more to fear from surrender than from defence.

They entered the Alamo and once more the great door was shut and barred
heavily. They climbed upon the wall, and Major Morris and Captain Martin
went toward Travis, Bowie and Crockett, who stood together waiting. Ned
paused a little distance away. He saw them talking together earnestly,
but he could not hear what they said. Far away he saw the three Mexicans
riding slowly toward San Antonio.

Ned's eyes came back to the wall. He saw Bowie detach himself from the
other two and advance toward the cannon. A moment later a flash came
from its muzzle, a heavy report rolled over the plain, and then came
back in faint echoes.

The Alamo had sent its answer. A deep cheer came from the Texans. Ned's
heart thrilled. He had his wish.

The boy looked back toward San Antonio and his eyes were caught by
something red on the tower of the Church of San Fernando. It rose,
expanded swiftly, and then burst out in great folds. It was a blood-red
flag, flying now in the wind, the flag of no quarter. No Texan would be
spared, and Ned knew it. Nevertheless his heart thrilled again.




CHAPTER IX

THE FLAG OF NO QUARTER


Ned gazed long at the great red flag as its folds waved in the wind. A
chill ran down his spine, a strange, throbbing sensation, but not of
fear. They were a tiny islet there amid a Mexican sea which threatened
to roll over them. But the signal of the flag, he realized, merely told
him that which he had expected all the time. He knew Santa Anna. He
would show no quarter to those who had humbled Cos and his forces at San
Antonio.

The boy was not assigned to the watch that night, but he could not sleep
for a long time. Among these borderers there was discipline, but it was
discipline of their own kind, not that of the military martinet. Ned was
free to go about as he chose, and he went to the great plaza into which
they had driven the cattle. Some supplies of hay had been gathered for
them, and having eaten they were now all at rest in a herd, packed close
against the western side of the wall.

Ned passed near them, but they paid no attention to him, and going on he
climbed upon the portion of the wall which ran close to the river. Some
distance to his right and an equal distance to his left were sentinels.
But there was nothing to keep him from leaping down from the wall or the
outside and disappearing. The Mexican investment was not yet complete.
Yet no such thought ever entered Ned's head. His best friends, Will
Allen, the Panther and Obed White, were out there somewhere, if they
were still alive, but his heart was now here in the Alamo with the
Texans.

He listened intently, but he heard no sound of any Mexican advance. It
occurred to him that a formidable attack might be made here,
particularly under the cover of darkness. A dashing leader like the
younger Urrea might attempt a surprise.

He dropped back inside and went to one of the sentinels who was standing
on an abutment with his head just showing above the wall. He was a young
man, not more than two or three years older than Ned, and he was glad to
have company.

"Have you heard or seen anything?" asked Ned.

"No," replied the sentinel, "but I've been looking for 'em down this
way."

They waited a little longer and then Ned was quite sure that he saw a
dim form in the darkness. He pointed toward it, but the sentinel could
not see it at all, as Ned's eyes were much the keener: But the shape
grew clearer and Ned's heart throbbed.

The figure was that of a great horse, and Ned recognized Old Jack.
Nothing could have persuaded him that the faithful beast was not seeking
his master, and he emitted a low soft whistle. The horse raised his
head, listened and then trotted forward.

"He is mine," said Ned, "and he knows me."

"He won't be yours much longer," said the sentinel. "Look, there's a
Mexican creeping along the ground after him."

Ned followed the pointing finger, and he now noticed the Mexican, a
vaquero, who had been crouching so low that his figure blurred with the
earth. Ned saw the coiled lariat hanging over his arm, and he knew that
the man intended to capture Old Jack, a prize worth any effort.

"Do you think I ought to shoot him?" asked the sentinel.

"Not yet, at least," replied Ned. "I brought my horse into this danger,
but I think that he'll take himself out of it."

Old Jack had paused, as if uncertain which way to go. But Ned felt sure
that he was watching the Mexican out of the tail of his eye. The
vaquero, emboldened by the prospect of such a splendid prize, crept
closer and closer, and then suddenly threw the lasso. The horse's head
ducked down swiftly, the coil of rope slipped back over his head, and he
dashed at the Mexican.

The vaquero was barely in time to escape those terrible hoofs. But
howling with terror he sprang clear and raced away in the darkness. The
horse whinnied once or twice gently, waited, and, when no answer came to
his calls, trotted off in the dusk.

"No Mexican will take your horse," said the sentinel.

"You're right when you say that," said Ned. "I don't think another will
ever get so near him, but if he should you see that my horse knows how
to take care of himself."

Ned wandered back toward the convent yard. It was now late, but a clear
moon was shining. He saw the figures of the sentinels clearly on the
walls, but he was confident that no attack would be made by the Mexicans
that night. His great tension and excitement began to relax and he felt
that he could sleep.

He decided that the old hospital would be a good place, and, taking his
blankets, he entered the long room of that building. Only the moonlight
shone there, but a friendly voice hailed him at once.

"It's time you were hunting rest, Ned," said Davy Crockett. "I saw you
wanderin' 'roun' as if you was carryin' the world on your shoulders, but
I didn't say anything. I knew that you would come to if left to
yourself. There's a place over there by the wall where the floor seems
to be a little softer than it is most everywhere else. Take it an' enjoy
it."

Ned laughed and took the place to which Crockett was pointing. The
hardness of a floor was nothing to him, and with one blanket under him
and another over him he went to sleep quickly, sleeping the night
through without a dream. He awoke early, took a breakfast of fresh beef
with the men in the convent yard, and then, rifle in hand, he mounted
the church wall.

All his intensity of feeling returned with the morning. He was eager to
see what was passing beyond the Alamo, and the first object that caught
his eye was the blood-red flag of no quarter hanging from the tower of
the Church of San Fernando. No wind was blowing and it drooped in heavy
scarlet folds like a pall.

Looking from the flag to the earth, he saw great activity in the Mexican
lines. Three or four batteries were being placed in position, and
Mexican officers, evidently messengers, were galloping about. The flat
roofs of the houses in San Antonio were covered with people. Ned knew
that they were there to see Santa Anna win a quick victory and take
immediate vengeance upon the Texans. He recognized Santa Anna himself
riding in his crouched attitude upon a great white horse, passing from
battery to battery and hurrying the work. There was proof that his
presence was effective, as the men always worked faster when he came.

Ned saw all the Texan leaders, Travis, Bowie, Crockett and Bonham,
watching the batteries. The whole Texan force was now manning the walls
and the heavy cedar palisade at many points, but Ned saw that for the
present all their dealings would be with the cannon.

Earthworks had been thrown up to protect the Mexican batteries, and the
Texan cannon were posted for reply, but Ned noticed that his comrades
seemed to think little of the artillery. In this desperate crisis they
fondled their rifles lovingly.

He was still watching the batteries, when a gush of smoke and flame came
from one of the cannon. There was a great shout in the Mexican lines,
but the round shot spent itself against the massive stone walls of the
mission.

"They'll have to send out a stronger call than that," said Davy Crockett
contemptuously, "before this 'coon comes down."

Travis went along the walls, saw that the Texans were sheltering
themselves, and waited. There was another heavy report and a second
round shot struck harmlessly upon the stone. Then the full bombardment
began. A half dozen batteries rained shot and shell upon the Alamo. The
roar was continuous like the steady roll of thunder, and it beat upon
the drums of Ned's ears until he thought he would become deaf.

He was crouched behind the stone parapet, but he looked up often enough
to see what was going on. He saw a vast cloud of smoke gathering over
river and town, rent continually by flashes of fire from the muzzles of
the cannon. The air was full of hissing metal, shot and shell poured in
a storm upon the Alamo. Now and then the Texan cannon replied, but not
often.

The cannon fire was so great that for a time it shook Ned's nerves. It
seemed as if nothing could live under such a rain of missiles, but when
he looked along the parapet and saw all the Texans unharmed his courage
came back.

Many of the balls were falling inside the church, in the convent yard
and in the plazas, but the Texans there were protected also, and as far
as Ned could see not a single man had been wounded.

The cannonade continued for a full hour and then ceased abruptly. The
great cloud of smoke began to lift, and the Alamo, river and town came
again into the brilliant sunlight. The word passed swiftly among the
defenders that their fortress was uninjured and not a man hurt.

As the smoke rose higher Ned saw Mexican officers with glasses examining
the Alamo to see what damage their cannon had done. He hoped they would
feel mortification when they found it was so little. Davy Crockett knelt
near him on the parapet, and ran his hand lovingly along the barrel of
Betsy, as one strokes the head of a child.

"Do you want some more rifles, Davy?" asked Bowie.

"Jest about a half dozen," replied Crockett. "I think I can use that
many before they clear out."

Six of the long-barreled Texan rifles were laid at Crockett's feet. Ned
watched with absorbed interest. Crockett's eye was on the nearest
battery and he was slowly raising Betsy.

"Which is to be first, Davy?" asked Bowie.

"The one with the rammer in his hand."

Crockett took a single brief look down the sights and pulled the
trigger. The man with the rammer dropped to the earth and the rammer
fell beside him. He lay quite still. Crockett seized a second rifle and
fired. A loader fell and he also lay still. A third rifle shot, almost
as quick as a flash, and a gunner went down, a fourth and a man at a
wheel fell, a fifth and the unerring bullet claimed a sponger, a sixth
and a Mexican just springing to cover was wounded in the shoulder. Then
Crockett remained with the seventh rifle still loaded in his hands, as
there was nothing to shoot at, all the Mexicans now being hidden.

But Crockett, kneeling on the parapet, the rifle cocked and his finger
on the trigger, watched in case any of the Mexicans should expose
himself again. He presented to Ned the simile of some powerful animal
about to spring. The lean, muscular figure was poised for instant
action, and all the whimsicality and humor were gone from the eyes of
the sharpshooter.

A mighty shout of triumph burst from the Texans. Many a good marksman
was there, but never before had they seen such shooting. The great
reputation of Davy Crockett, universal in the southwest, was justified
fully. The crew of the gun had been annihilated in less than a minute.

For a while there was silence. Then the Mexicans, protected by the
earthwork that they had thrown up, drew the battery back a hundred
yards. Even in the farther batteries the men were very careful about
exposing themselves. The Texans, seeing no sure target, held their fire.
The Mexicans opened a new cannonade and for another half hour the roar
of the great guns drowned all other sounds. But when it ceased and the
smoke drifted away the Texans were still unharmed.

Ned was now by the side of Bowie, who showed great satisfaction.

"What will they do next?" asked Ned.

"I don't know, but you see now that it's not the biggest noise that
hurts the most. They'll never get us with cannon fire. The only way they
can do it is to attack the lowest part of our wall and make a bridge of
their own bodies."

"They are doing something now," said Ned, whose far-sighted vision
always served him well. "They are pulling down houses in the town next
to the river."

"That's so," said Bowie, "but we won't have to wait long to see what
they're about."

Hundreds of Mexicans with wrecking hooks had assailed three or four of
the houses, which they quickly pulled to pieces. Others ran forward with
the materials and began to build a bridge across the narrow San Antonio.

"They want to cross over on that bridge and get into a position at once
closer and more sheltered," said Bowie, "but unless I make a big mistake
those men at work there are already within range of our rifles. Shall we
open fire, Colonel?"

He asked the question of Travis, who nodded. A picked band of Mexicans
under General Castrillon were gathered in a mass and were rapidly
fitting together the timbers of the houses to make the narrow bridge.
But the reach of the Texan rifles was great, and Davy Crockett was
merely the king among so many sharpshooters.

The rifles began to flash and crack. No man fired until he was sure of
his aim, and no two picked the same target. The Mexicans fell fast. In
five minutes thirty or forty were killed, some of them falling into the
river, and the rest, dropping the timbers, fled with shouts of horror
from the fatal spot. General Castrillon, a brave man, sought to drive
them back, but neither blows nor oaths availed. Santa Anna himself came
and made many threats, but the men would not stir. They preferred
punishment to the sure death that awaited them from the muzzles of the
Texan rifles.

The light puffs of rifle smoke were quickly gone, and once more the town
with the people watching on the flat roofs came into full view. A wind
burst out the folds of the red flag of no quarter on the tower of the
church of San Fernando, but Ned paid no attention to it now. He was
watching for Santa Anna's next move.

"That's a bridge that will never be built," said Davy Crockett. "'Live
an' learn' is a good sayin', I suppose, but a lot of them Mexicans
neither lived nor learned. It's been a great day for 'Betsy' here."

Travis, the commander, showed elation.

"I think Santa Anna will realize now," he said, "that he has neither a
promenade nor a picnic before him. Oh, if we only had six or seven
hundred men, instead of less than a hundred and fifty!"

"We must send for help," said Bowie. "The numbers of Santa Anna
continually increase, but we are not yet entirely surrounded. If the
Texans know that we are beleaguered here they will come to our help."

"I will send messengers to-morrow night," said Travis. "The Texans are
much scattered, but it is likely that some will come."

It was strange, but it was characteristic of them, nevertheless, that no
one made any mention of escape. Many could have stolen away in the night
over the lower walls. Perhaps all could have done so, but not a single
Texan ever spoke of such a thing, and not one ever attempted it.

Santa Anna moved some of his batteries and also erected two new ones.
When the work on the latter was finished all opened in another
tremendous cannonade, lasting for fully an hour. The bank of smoke was
heavier than ever, and the roaring in Ned's ears was incessant, but he
felt no awe now. He was growing used to the cannon fire, and as it did
so little harm he felt no apprehension.

While the fire was at its height he went down in the church and cleaned
his rifle, although he took the precaution to remain in one of the
covered rooms by the doorway. Davy Crockett was also there busy with the
same task. Before they finished a cannon ball dropped on the floor,
bounded against the wall and rebounded several times until it finally
lay at rest.

"Somethin' laid a big egg then," said Crockett. "It's jest as well to
keep a stone roof over your head when you're under fire of a few dozen
cannon. Never take foolish risks, Ned, for the sake of showin' off.
That's the advice of an old man."

Crockett spoke very earnestly, and Ned remembered his words. Bonham
called to them a few minutes later that the Mexicans seemed to be
meditating some movement on the lower wall around the grand plaza.

"Like as not you're right," said Crockett. "It would be the time to try
it while our attention was attracted by the big cannonade."

Crockett himself was detailed to meet the new movement, and he led fifty
sharpshooters. Ned was with him, his brain throbbing with the certainty
that he was going into action once more. Great quantities of smoke hung
over the Alamo and had penetrated every part of it. It crept into Ned's
throat, and it also stung his eyes. It inflamed his brain and increased
his desire for combat. They reached the low wall on a run, and found
that Bonham was right. A large force of Mexicans was approaching from
that side, evidently expecting to make an opening under cover of the
smoke.

The assailants were already within range, and the deadly Texan rifles
began to crack at once from the wall. The whole front line of the
Mexican column was quickly burned away. The return fire of the Mexicans
was hasty and irregular and they soon broke and ran.

"An' that's over," said Crockett, as he sent a parting shot. "It was
easy, an' bein' sheltered not a man of ours was hurt. But, Ned, don't
