consented.

Prince Alphege was at this time fourteen years old, and the handsomest
and most engaging youth imaginable. In his infancy he had been placed
in the charge of one of the great ladies of the Court, who, according
to the prevailing custom, acted first as his head nurse and then as his
governess. When he outgrew her care her husband was appointed as his
tutor and governor, so that he had never been separated from this
excellent couple, who loved him as tenderly as they did their only
daughter Zayda, and were warmly loved by him in return.

When the Prince set forth on his travels it was but natural that this
devoted couple should accompany him, and accordingly he started with
them and attended by a numerous retinue.

For some time he travelled through his father's dominions and all went
well; but soon after passing the frontier they had to cross a desert
plain under a burning sun. They were glad to take shelter under a group
of trees near, and here the Prince complained of burning thirst. Luckily
a tiny stream ran close by and some water was soon procured, but no
sooner had he tasted it than he sprang from his carriage and disappeared
in a moment. In vain did his anxious followers seek for him, he was
nowhere to be found.

As they were hunting and shouting through the trees a black monkey
suddenly appeared on a point of rock and said: 'Poor sorrowing people,
you are seeking your Prince in vain. Return to your own country and know
that he will not be restored to you till you have for some time failed
to recognise him.'

With these words he vanished, leaving the courtiers sadly perplexed; but
as all their efforts to find the Prince were useless they had no choice
but to go home, bringing with them the sad news, which so greatly
distressed the King that he fell ill and died not long after.

The Queen, whose ambition was boundless, was delighted to see the crown
on her son's head and to have the power in her own hands. Her hard rule
made her very unpopular, and it was commonly believed that she had
made away with Prince Alphege. Indeed, had the King her son not been
deservedly beloved a revolution would certainly have arisen.

Meantime the former governess of the unfortunate Alphege, who had lost
her husband soon after the King's death, retired to her own house with
her daughter, who grew up a lovely and most loveable girl, and both
continued to mourn the loss of their dear Prince.

The young King was devoted to hunting, and often indulged in his
favourite pastime, attended by the noblest youths in his kingdom.

One day, after a long morning's chase he stopped to rest near a brook in
the shade of a little wood, where a splendid tent had been prepared
for him. Whilst at luncheon he suddenly spied a little monkey of the
brightest green sitting on a tree and gazing so tenderly at him that
he felt quite moved. He forbade his courtiers to frighten it, and the
monkey, noticing how much attention was being paid him, sprang from
bough to bough, and at length gradually approached the King, who offered
him some food. The monkey took it very daintily and finally came to the
table. The King took him on his knees, and, delighted with his capture,
brought him home with him. He would trust no one else with its care, and
the whole Court soon talked of nothing but the pretty green monkey.

One morning, as Prince Alphege's governess and her daughter were alone
together, the little monkey sprang in through an open window. He had
escaped from the palace, and his manners were so gentle and caressing
that Zayda and her mother soon got over the first fright he had given
them. He had spent some time with them and quite won their hearts by
his insinuating ways, when the King discovered where he was and sent to
fetch him back. But the monkey made such piteous cries, and seemed so
unhappy when anyone attempted to catch him, that the two ladies begged
the King to leave him a little longer with them, to which he consented.

One evening, as they sat by the fountain in the garden, the little
monkey kept gazing at Zayda with such sad and loving eyes that she and
her mother could not think what to make of it, and they were still more
surprised when they saw big tears rolling down his cheeks.

Next day both mother and daughter were sitting in a jessamine bower in
the garden, and they began to talk of the green monkey and his strange
ways. The mother said, 'My dear child, I can no longer hide my feelings
from you. I cannot get the thought out of my mind that the green monkey
is no other than our beloved Prince Alphege, transformed in this strange
fashion. I know the idea sounds wild, but I cannot get it out of my
heart, and it leaves me no peace.'

As she spoke she glanced up, and there sat the little monkey, whose
tears and gestures seemed to confirm her words.

The following night the elder lady dreamt that she saw the Good Queen,
who said, 'Do not weep any longer but follow my directions. Go into
your garden and lift up the little marble slab at the foot of the great
myrtle tree. You will find beneath it a crystal vase filled with a
bright green liquid. Take it with you and place the thing which is at
present most in your thoughts into a bath filled with roses and rub it
well with the green liquid.'

At these words the sleeper awoke, and lost no time in rising and
hurrying to the garden, where she found all as the Good Queen had
described. Then she hastened to rouse her daughter and together they
prepared the bath, for they would not let their women know what they
were about. Zayda gathered quantities of roses, and when all was ready
they put the monkey into a large jasper bath, where the mother rubbed
him all over with the green liquid.

Their suspense was not long, for suddenly the monkey skin dropped off,
and there stood Prince Alphege, the handsomest and most charming of
men. The joy of such a meeting was beyond words. After a time the ladies
begged the Prince to relate his adventures, and he told them of all his
sufferings in the desert when he was first transformed. His only comfort
had been in visits from the Good Queen, who had at length put him in the
way of meeting his brother.

Several days were spent in these interesting conversations, but at
length Zayda's mother began to think of the best means for placing the
Prince on the throne, which was his by right.

The Queen on her side was feeling very anxious. She had felt sure from
the first that her son's pet monkey was no other than Prince Alphege,
and she longed to put an end to him. Her suspicions were confirmed by
the Fairy of the Mountain, and she hastened in tears to the King, her
son.

'I am informed,' she cried, 'that some ill-disposed people have raised
up an impostor in the hopes of dethroning you. You must at once have him
put to death.'

The King, who was very brave, assured the Queen that he would soon
punish the conspirators. He made careful inquiries into the matter, and
thought it hardly probable that a quiet widow and a young girl would
think of attempting anything of the nature of a revolution.

He determined to go and see them, and to find out the truth for himself;
so one night, without saying anything to the Queen or his ministers, he
set out for the palace where the two ladies lived, attended only by a
small band of followers.

The two ladies were at the moment deep in conversation with Prince
Alphege, and hearing a knocking so late at night begged him to keep out
of sight for a time. What was their surprise when the door was opened to
see the King and his suite.

'I know,' said the King, 'that you are plotting against my crown and
person, and I have come to have an explanation with you.'

As she was about to answer Prince Alphege, who had heard all, came
forward and said, 'It is from me you must ask an explanation, brother.'
He spoke with such grace and dignity that everyone gazed at him with
mute surprise.

At length the King, recovering from his astonishment at recognising the
brother who had been lost some years before, exclaimed, 'Yes, you are
indeed my brother, and now that I have found you, take the throne to
which I have no longer a right.' So saying, he respectfully kissed the
Prince's hand.

Alphege threw himself into his arms, and the brothers hastened to the
royal palace, where in the presence of the entire court he received
the crown from his brother's hand. To clear away any possible doubt, he
showed the ruby which the Good Queen had given him in his childhood. As
they were gazing at it, it suddenly split with a loud noise, and at the
same moment the Wicked Queen expired.

King Alphege lost no time in marrying his dear and lovely Zayda, and
his joy was complete when the Good Queen appeared at his wedding. She
assured him that the Fairy of the Mountain had henceforth lost all
power over him, and after spending some time with the young couple,
and bestowing the most costly presents on them, she retired to her own
country.

King Alphege insisted on his brother sharing his throne, and they all
lived to a good old age, universally beloved and admired.




 FAIRER-THAN-A-FAIRY

Once there lived a King who had no children for many years after his
marriage. At length heaven granted him a daughter of such remarkable
beauty that he could think of no name so appropriate for her as
'Fairer-than-a-Fairy.'

It never occurred to the good-natured monarch that such a name was
certain to call down the hatred and jealousy of the fairies in a body on
the child, but this was what happened. No sooner had they heard of this
presumptuous name than they resolved to gain possession of her who bore
it, and either to torment her cruelly, or at least to conceal her from
the eyes of all men.

The eldest of their tribe was entrusted to carry out their revenge. This
Fairy was named Lagree; she was so old that she only had one eye and one
tooth left, and even these poor remains she had to keep all night in a
strengthening liquid. She was also so spiteful that she gladly devoted
all her time to carrying out all the mean or ill-natured tricks of the
whole body of fairies.

With her large experience, added to her native spite, she found but
little difficulty in carrying off Fairer-than-a-Fairy. The poor child,
who was only seven years old, nearly died of fear on finding herself
in the power of this hideous creature. However, when after an hour's
journey underground she found herself in a splendid palace with lovely
gardens, she felt a little reassured, and was further cheered when she
discovered that her pet cat and dog had followed her.

The old Fairy led her to a pretty room which she said should be hers, at
the same time giving her the strictest orders never to let out the fire
which was burning brightly in the grate. She then gave two glass bottles
into the Princess's charge, desiring her to take the greatest care of
them, and having enforced her orders with the most awful threats in case
of disobedience, she vanished, leaving the little girl at liberty to
explore the palace and grounds and a good deal relieved at having only
two apparently easy tasks set her.

Several years passed, during which time the Princess grew accustomed to
her lonely life, obeyed the Fairy's orders, and by degrees forgot all
about the court of the King her father.

One day, whilst passing near a fountain in the garden, she noticed
that the sun's rays fell on the water in such a manner as to produce
a brilliant rainbow. She stood still to admire it, when, to her great
surprise, she heard a voice addressing her which seemed to come from the
centre of its rays. The voice was that of a young man, and its sweetness
of tone and the agreeable things it uttered, led one to infer that its
owner must be equally charming; but this had to be a mere matter of
fancy, for no one was visible.

The beautiful Rainbow informed Fairer-than-a-Fairy that he was young,
the son of a powerful king, and that the Fairy, Lagree, who owed his
parents a grudge, had revenged herself by depriving him of his natural
shape for some years; that she had imprisoned him in the palace, where
he had found his confinement hard to bear for some time, but now, he
owned, he no longer sighed for freedom since he had seen and learned to
love Fairer-than-a-Fairy.

He added many other tender speeches to this declaration, and the
Princess, to whom such remarks were a new experience, could not help
feeling pleased and touched by his attentions.

The Prince could only appear or speak under the form of a Rainbow, and
it was therefore necessary that the sun should shine on water so as to
enable the rays to form themselves.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy lost no moment in which she could meet her lover,
and they enjoyed many long and interesting interviews. One day, however,
their conversation became so absorbing and time passed so quickly that
the Princess forgot to attend to the fire, and it went out. Lagree, on
her return, soon found out the neglect, and seemed only too pleased to
have the opportunity of showing her spite to her lovely prisoner. She
ordered Fairer-than-a-Fairy to start next day at dawn to ask Locrinos
for fire with which to relight the one she had allowed to go out.

Now this Locrinos was a cruel monster who devoured everyone he came
across, and especially enjoyed a chance of catching and eating any young
girls. Our heroine obeyed with great sweetness, and without having been
able to take leave of her lover she set off to go to Locrinos as to
certain death. As she was crossing a wood a bird sang to her to pick up
a shining pebble which she would find in a fountain close by, and to use
it when needed. She took the bird's advice, and in due time arrived at
the house of Locrinos. Luckily she only found his wife at home, who was
much struck by the Princess's youth and beauty and sweet gentle manners,
and still further impressed by the present of the shining pebble.

She readily let Fairer-than-a-Fairy have the fire, and in return for
the stone she gave her another, which, she said, might prove useful some
day. Then she sent her away without doing her any harm.

Lagree was as much surprised as displeased at the happy result of this
expedition, and Fairer-than-a Fairy waited anxiously for an opportunity
of meeting Prince Rainbow and telling him her adventures. She found,
however, that he had already been told all about them by a Fairy who
protected him, and to whom he was related.

The dread of fresh dangers to his beloved Princess made him devise
some more convenient way of meeting than by the garden fountain, and
Fairer-than-a-Fairy carried out his plan daily with entire success.
Every morning she placed a large basin full of water on her window-sill,
and as soon as the sun's rays fell on the water the Rainbow appeared
as clearly as it had ever done in the fountain. By this means they were
able to meet without losing sight of the fire or of the two bottles in
which the old Fairy kept her eye and her tooth at night, and for some
time the lovers enjoyed every hour of sunshine together.

One day Prince Rainbow appeared in the depths of woe. He had just heard
that he was to be banished from this lovely spot, but he had no idea
where he was to go. The poor young couple were in despair, and only
parted with the last ray of sunshine, and in hopes of meeting next
morning. Alas! next day was dark and gloomy, and it was only late in the
afternoon that the sun broke through the clouds for a few minutes.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy eagerly ran to the window, but in her haste she
upset the basin, and spilt all the water with which she had carefully
filled it overnight. No other water was at hand except that in the two
bottles. It was the only chance of seeing her lover before they were
separated, and she did not hesitate to break the bottle and pour their
contents into the basin, when the Rainbow appeared at once. Their
farewells were full of tenderness; the Prince made the most ardent and
sincere protestations, and promised to neglect nothing which might help
to deliver his dear Fairer-than-a-Fairy from her captivity, and implored
her to consent to their marriage as soon as they should both be free.
The Princess, on her side, vowed to have no other husband, and declared
herself willing to brave death itself in order to rejoin him.

They were not allowed much time for their adieus; the Rainbow vanished,
and the Princess, resolved to run all risks, started off at once, taking
nothing with her but her dog, her cat, a sprig of myrtle, and the stone
which the wife of Locrinos gave her.

When Lagree became aware of her prisoner's flight she was furious, and
set off at full speed in pursuit. She overtook her just as the poor
girl, overcome by fatigue, had lain down to rest in a cave which the
stone had formed itself into to shelter her. The little dog who was
watching her mistress promptly flew at Lagree and bit her so severely
that she stumbled against a corner of the cave and broke off her only
tooth. Before she had recovered from the pain and rage this caused her,
the Princess had time to escape, and was some way on her road. Fear gave
her strength for some time, but at last she could go no further, and
sank down to rest. As she did so, the sprig of myrtle she carried
touched the ground, and immediately a green and shady bower sprang up
round her, in which she hoped to sleep in peace.

But Lagree had not given up her pursuit, and arrived just as
Fairer-than-a-Fairy had fallen fast asleep. This time she made sure of
catching her victim, but the cat spied her out, and, springing from one
of the boughs of the arbour she flew at Lagree's face and tore out her
only eye, thus delivering the Princess for ever from her persecutor.

One might have thought that all would now be well, but no sooner had
Lagree been put to fight than our heroine was overwhelmed with hunger
and thirst. She felt as though she should certainly expire, and it was
with some difficulty that she dragged herself as far as a pretty little
green and white house, which stood at no great distance. Here she was
received by a beautiful lady dressed in green and white to match the
house, which apparently belonged to her, and of which she seemed the
only inhabitant.

She greeted the fainting Princess most kindly, gave her an excellent
supper, and after a long night's rest in a delightful bed told her that
after many troubles she should finally attain her desire.

As the green and white lady took leave of the Princess she gave her a
nut, desiring her only to open it in the most urgent need.

After a long and tiring journey Fairer-than-a-Fairy was once more
received in a house, and by a lady exactly like the one she had quitted.
Here again she received a present with the same injunctions, but instead
of a nut this lady gave her a golden pomegranate. The mournful Princess
had to continue her weary way, and after many troubles and hardships she
again found rest and shelter in a third house exactly similar to the two
others.

These houses belonged to three sisters, all endowed with fairy gifts,
and all so alike in mind and person that they wished their houses and
garments to be equally alike. Their occupation consisted in helping
those in misfortune, and they were as gentle and benevolent as Lagree
had been cruel and spiteful.

The third Fairy comforted the poor traveller, begged her not to lose
heart, and assured her that her troubles should be rewarded.

She accompanied her advice by the gift of a crystal smelling-bottle,
with strict orders only to open it in case of urgent need.
Fairer-than-a-Fairy thanked her warmly, and resumed her way cheered by
pleasant thoughts.

After a time her road led through a wood, full of soft airs and sweet
odours, and before she had gone a hundred yards she saw a wonderful
silver Castle suspended by strong silver chains to four of the
largest trees. It was so perfectly hung that a gentle breeze rocked it
sufficiently to send you pleasantly to sleep.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy felt a strong desire to enter this Castle, but
besides being hung a little above the ground there seemed to be neither
doors nor windows. She had no doubt (though really I cannot think why)
that the moment had come in which to use the nut which had been given
her. She opened it, and out came a diminutive hall porter at whose belt
hung a tiny chain, at the end of which was a golden key half as long as
the smallest pin you ever saw.

The Princess climbed up one of the silver chains, holding in her hand
the little porter who, in spite of his minute size, opened a secret door
with his golden key and let her in. She entered a magnificent room which
appeared to occupy the entire Castle, and which was lighted by gold and
jewelled stars in the ceiling. In the midst of this room stood a couch,
draped with curtains of all the colours of the rainbow, and suspended by
golden cords so that it swayed with the Castle in a manner which rocked
its occupant delightfully to sleep.

On this elegant couch lay Prince Rainbow, looking more beautiful than
ever, and sunk in profound slumber, in which he had been held ever since
his disappearance.

