treacherous as a tiger cat, the chief of the band struck at Groseillers
with a dagger.  Jean parried the blow, grabbed the redskin by his
collar of bears' claws strung on thongs, threw the assassin to the
ground almost strangling him, and with one foot on the villain's throat
and the sword point at his chest, demanded of the Indians what they
meant.  The savages would have fled, but French soldiers who had heard
the noise dashed to Groseillers' aid.  The Indians threw down their
weapons and confessed all: the Englishmen of the ship had promised the
band a barrel of powder to massacre the French.  Jean took his foot
from the Indian's throat and kicked him out of the fort.  The English
outnumbered the French; so Jean removed his fort farther from the bay,
among the Indians, where the English could not follow.  To keep the
warriors about him, he offered to house and feed them for the winter.
This protected him from the attacks of the English.  In the spring
Indians came to the French with pelts.  Jean was short of firearms; so
he bribed the Indians to trade their peltries to the English for guns,
and to retrade the guns to him for other goods.  It was a stroke worthy
of Radisson himself, and saved the little French fort.  The English
must have suspected the young trader's straits, for they again paid
warriors to attack the French; but Jean had forestalled assault by
forming an alliance with the Assiniboines, who came down Hayes River
from Lake Winnipeg four hundred strong, and encamped a body-guard
around the fort.  Affairs were at this stage when Radisson arrived with
news that he had transferred his services to the English.

Young Groseillers was amazed.[5]  Letters to his mother show that he
surrendered his charge with a very ill grace.  "Do not forget,"
Radisson urged him, "the injuries that France has inflicted on your
father."  Young Groseillers' mother, Marguerite Hayet, was in want at
Three Rivers.[6]  It was memory of her that now turned the scales with
the young man.  He would turn over the furs to Radisson for the English
Company, if Radisson would take care of the far-away mother at Three
Rivers.  The bargain was made, and the two embraced.  The surrender of
the French furs to the English Company has been represented as
Radisson's crowning treachery.  Under that odium the great discoverer's
name has rested for nearly three centuries; yet the accusation of theft
is without a grain of truth.  Radisson and Groseillers were to obtain
half the proceeds of the voyage in 1682-1683.  Neither the explorers
nor Jean Groseillers, who had privately invested 500 pounds in the
venture, ever received one sou.  The furs at Port Nelson--or Fort
Bourbon--belonged to the Frenchmen, to do what they pleased with them.
The act of the enthusiast is often tainted with folly.  That Radisson
turned over twenty thousand beaver pelts to the English, without the
slightest assurance that he would be given adequate return, was surely
folly; but it was not theft.

The transfer of all possessions to the English was promptly made.
Radisson then arranged a peace treaty between the Indians and the
English.  That peace treaty has endured between the Indians and the
Hudson's Bay Company to this day.  A new fort was built, the furs
stored in the hold of the vessels, and the crews mustered for the
return voyage.  Radisson had been given a solemn promise by the
Hudson's Bay Company that Jean Groseillers and his comrades should be
well treated and reengaged for the English at 100 pounds a year.  Now
he learned that the English intended to ship all the French out of
Hudson Bay and to keep them out.  The enthusiast had played his game
with more zeal than discretion.  The English had what they wanted--furs
and fort.  In return, Radisson had what had misled him like a
will-o'-the-wisp all his life--vague promises.  In vain Radisson
protested that he had given his promise to the French before they
surrendered the fort.  The English distrusted foreigners.  The
Frenchmen had been mustered on the ships to receive last instructions.
They were told that they were to be taken to England.  No chance was
given them to escape.  Some of the French had gone inland with the
Indians.  Of Jean's colony, these alone remained.  When Radisson
realized the conspiracy, he advised his fellow-countrymen to make no
resistance; for he feared that some of the English bitter against him
might seize on the pretext of a scuffle to murder the French.  His
advice proved wise.  He had strong friends at the English court, and
atonement was made for the breach of faith to the French.

The ships set sail on the 4th of September and arrived in England on
the 23d of October.  Without waiting for the coach, Radisson hired a
horse and spurred to London in order to give his version first of the
quarrel on the bay.  The Hudson's Bay Company was delighted with the
success of Radisson.  He was taken before the directors, given a
present of a hundred guineas, and thanked for his services.  He was
once more presented to the King and the Duke of York.  The company
redeemed its promise to Radisson by employing the Frenchmen of the
surrendered fort and offering to engage young Groseillers at 100 pounds
a year.[7]

[Illustration: Hudson Bay Dog Trains laden with Furs arriving at Lower
Fort Garry, Red River.  (Courtesy of C. C. Chipman, Commissioner H. B.
Company.)]

For five years the English kept faith with Radisson, and he made annual
voyages to the bay; but war broke out with France.  New France entered
on a brilliant campaign against the English of Hudson Bay.  The
company's profits fell.  Radisson, the Frenchman, was distrusted.
France had set a price on his head, and one Martiniere went to Port
Nelson to seize him, but was unable to cope with the English.  At no
time did Radisson's salary with the company exceed 100 pounds; and now,
when war stopped dividends on the small amount of stock which had been
given to him, he fell into poverty and debt.  In 1692 Sir William Young
petitioned the company in his favor; but a man with a price on his head
for treason could plainly not return to France.[8]  The French were in
possession of the bay.  Radisson could do no harm to the English.
Therefore the company ignored him till he sued them and received
payment in full for arrears of salary and dividends on stock which he
was not permitted to sell; but 50 pounds a year would not support a man
who paid half that amount for rent, and had a wife, four children, and
servants to support.  In 1700 Radisson applied for the position of
warehouse keeper for the company at London.  Even this was denied.

The dauntless pathfinder was growing old; and the old cannot fight and
lose and begin again as Radisson had done all his life.  State Papers
of Paris contain records of a Radisson with Tonty at Detroit![9]  Was
this his nephew, Francois Radisson's son, who took the name of the
explorer, or Radisson's own son, or the game old warrior himself, come
out to die on the frontier as he had lived?

History is silent.  Until the year 1710 Radisson drew his allowance of
50 pounds a year from the English Company, then the payments stopped.
Did the dauntless life stop too?  Oblivion hides all record of his
death, as it obscured the brilliant achievements of his life.


There is no need to point out Radisson's faults.  They are written on
his life without extenuation or excuse, so that all may read.  There is
less need to eulogize his virtues.  They declare themselves in every
act of his life.  This, only, should be remembered.  Like all
enthusiasts, Radisson could not have been a hero, if he had not been a
bit of a fool.  If he had not had his faults, if he had not been as
impulsive, as daring, as reckless, as inconstant, as improvident of the
morrow, as a savage or a child, he would not have accomplished the
exploration of half a continent.  Men who weigh consequences are not of
the stuff to win empires.  Had Radisson haggled as to the means, he
would have missed or muddled the end.  He went ahead; and when the way
did not open, he went round, or crawled over, or carved his way through.

There was an old saying among retired hunters of Three Rivers that "one
learned more in the woods than was ever found in l' petee
cat-ee-cheesm."  Radisson's training was of the woods, rather than the
cure's catechism; yet who that has been trained to the strictest code
may boast of as dauntless faults and noble virtues?  He was not
faithful to any country, but he was faithful to his wife and children;
and he was "faithful to his highest hope,"--that of becoming a
discoverer,--which is more than common mortals are to their meanest
aspirations.  When statesmen played him a double game, he paid them
back in their own coin with compound interest.  Perhaps that is why
they hated him so heartily and blackened his memory.  But amid all the
mad license of savage life, Radisson remained untainted.  Other
explorers and statesmen, too, have left a trail of blood to perpetuate
their memory; Radisson never once spilled human blood needlessly, and
was beloved by the savages.

Memorial tablets commemorate other discoverers.  Radisson needs none.
The Great Northwest is his monument for all time.


[1] Radisson's petition to the Hudson's Bay Company gives these amounts.

[2] See State Papers quoted in Chapter VI.  I need scarcely add that
Radisson did not steal a march on his patrons by secretly shipping furs
to Europe.  This is only another of the innumerable slanders against
Radisson which State Papers disprove.

[3] It seems impossible that historians with the slightest regard for
truth should have branded this part of _Radisson's Relation_ as a
fabrication, too.  Yet such is the case, and of writers whose books are
supposed to be reputable.  Since parts of Radisson's life appeared in
the magazines, among many letters I received one from a well-known
historian which to put it mildly was furious at the acceptance of
_Radisson's Journal_ as authentic.  In reply, I asked that historian
how many documents contemporaneous with Radisson's life he had
consulted before he branded so great an explorer as Radisson as a liar.
Needless to say, that question was not answered.  In corroboration of
this part of Radisson's life, I have lying before me: (1) Chouart's
letters--see Appendix.  (2) A letter of Frontenac recording Radisson's
first trip by boat for De la Chesnaye and the complications it would be
likely to cause.  (3) A complete official account sent from Quebec to
France of Radisson's doings in the bay, which tallies in every respect
with _Radisson's Journal_.  (4) Report of M. de Meulles to the Minister
on the whole affair with the English and New Englanders.  (5) An
official report on the release of Gillam's boat at Quebec.  (6) The
memorial presented by Groseillers to the French minister.  (7) An
official statement of the first discovery of the bay overland.  (8) A
complete statement (official) of the complications created by
Radisson's wife being English.  (9) A statement through a third
party--presumably an official--by Radisson himself of these
complications dated 1683.  (10) A letter from the king to the governor
at Quebec retailing the English complaints of Radisson at Nelson River.

In the face of this, what is to be said of the historian who calls
Radisson's adventures "a fabrication"?  Such misrepresentation betrays
about equal amounts of impudence and ignorance.

[4] From Charlevoix to modern writers mention is made of the death of
these two explorers.  Different names are given as the places where
they died.  This is all pure supposition.  Therefore I do not quote.
No records exist to prove where Radisson and Groseillers died.

[5] See Appendix.

[6] State Papers record payment of money to her because she was in want.

[7] Dr. George Bryce, who is really the only scholar who has tried to
unravel the mystery of Radisson's last days, supplies new facts about
his dealings with the Company to 1710.

[8] Marquis de Denonville ordered the arrest of Radisson wherever he
might be found.

[9] Appendix; see State Papers.




PART II

THE SEARCH FOR THE WESTERN SEA: BEING AN
  ACCOUNT OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE ROCKY
  MOUNTAINS, THE MISSOURI UPLANDS, AND THE
  VALLEY OF THE SASKATCHEWAN




CHAPTER VIII

1730-1750

THE SEARCH FOR THE WESTERN SEA[1]

M. de la Verendrye continues the Exploration of the Great Northwest by
establishing a Chain of Fur Posts across the Continent--Privations of
the Explorers and the Massacre of Twenty Followers--His Sons visit the
Mandans and discover the Rockies--The Valley of the Saskatchewan is
next explored, but Jealousy thwarts the Explorer, and he dies in Poverty


I

1731-1736

A curious paradox is that the men who have done the most for North
America did not intend to do so.  They set out on the far quest of a
crack-brained idealist's dream.  They pulled up at a foreshortened
purpose; but the unaccomplished aim did more for humanity than the
idealist's dream.

Columbus set out to find Asia.  He discovered America.  Jacques Cartier
sought a mythical passage to the Orient.  He found a northern empire.
La Salle thought to reach China.  He succeeded only in exploring the
valley of the Mississippi, but the new continent so explored has done
more for humanity than Asia from time immemorial.  Of all crack-brained
dreams that led to far-reaching results, none was wilder than the
search for the Western Sea.  Marquette, Jolliet, and La Salle had
followed the trail that Radisson had blazed and explored the valley of
the Mississippi; but like a will-o'-the-wisp beckoning ever westward
was that undiscovered myth, the Western Sea, thought to lie like a
narrow strait between America and Japan.

The search began in earnest one sweltering afternoon on June 8, 1731,
at the little stockaded fort on the banks of the St. Lawrence, where
Montreal stands to-day.  Fifty grizzled adventurers--wood runners,
voyageurs, Indian interpreters--bareheaded, except for the colored
handkerchief binding back the lank hair, dressed in fringed buckskin,
and chattering with the exuberant nonchalance of boys out of school,
had finished gumming the splits of their ninety-foot birch canoes, and
now stood in line awaiting the coming of their captain, Sieur Pierre
Gaultier de Varennes de la Verendrye.  The French soldier with his
three sons, aged respectively eighteen, seventeen, and sixteen, now
essayed to discover the fabled Western Sea, whose narrow waters were
supposed to be between the valley of the "Great Forked River" and the
Empire of China.

[Illustration: Indians and Hunters spurring to the Fight.]

Certainly, if it were worth while for Peter the Great of Russia to send
Vitus Bering coasting the bleak headlands of ice-blocked, misty shores
to find the Western Sea, it would--as one of the French governors
reported--"be nobler than open war" for the little colony of New France
to discover this "sea of the setting sun."  The quest was invested with
all the rainbow tints of "_la gloire_"; but the rainbow hopes were
founded on the practical basis of profits.  Leading merchants of
Montreal had advanced goods for trade with the Indians on the way to
the Western Sea.  Their expectations of profits were probably the same
as the man's who buys a mining share for ten cents and looks for
dividends of several thousand per cent.  And the fur trade at that time
was capable of yielding such profits.  Traders had gone West with less
than $2000 worth of goods in modern money, and returned three years
later with a sheer profit of a quarter of a million.  Hope of such
returns added zest to De la Verendrye's venture for the discovery of
the Western Sea.

Goods done up in packets of a hundred pounds lay at the feet of the
_voyageurs_ awaiting De la Verendrye's command.  A dozen soldiers in
the plumed hats, slashed buskins, the brightly colored doublets of the
period, joined the motley company.  Priests came out to bless the
departing _voyageurs_.  Chapel bells rang out their God-speed.  To the
booming of cannon, and at a word from De la Verendrye, the gates
opened.  Falling in line with measured tread, the soldiers marched out
from Mount Royal.  Behind, in the ambling gait of the moccasined
woodsman, came the _voyageurs_ and _coureurs_ and interpreters,
pack-straps across their foreheads, packets on the bent backs, the long
birch canoes hoisted to the shoulders of four men, two abreast at each
end, heads hidden in the inverted keel.

The path led between the white fret of Lachine Rapids and the dense
forests that shrouded the base of Mount Royal.  Checkerboard squares of
farm patches had been cleared in the woods.  La Salle's old
thatch-roofed seigniory lay not far back from the water.  St. Anne's
was the launching place for fleets of canoes that were to ascend the
Ottawa.  Here, a last look was taken of splits and seams in the birch
keels.  With invocations of St. Anne in one breath, and invocations of
a personage not mentioned in the cure's "petee cat-ee-cheesm" in the
next breath, and imprecations that their "souls might be smashed on the
end of a picket fence,"--the _voyageur's_ common oath even to this
day,--the boatmen stored goods fore, aft, and athwart till each long
canoe sank to the gunwale as it was gently pushed out on the water.  A
last sign of the cross, and the lithe figures leap light as a mountain
cat to their place in the canoes.  There are four benches of paddlers,
two abreast, with bowman and steersman, to each canoe.  One can guess
that the explorer and his sons and his nephew, Sieur de la Jemmeraie,
who was to be second in command, all unhatted as they heard the long
last farewell of the bells.  Every eye is fastened on the chief
bowman's steel-shod pole, held high--there is silence but for the
bells--the bowman's pole is lowered--as with one stroke out sweep the
paddles in a poetry of motion.  The chimes die away over the water, the
chapel spire gleams--it, too, is gone.  Some one strikes up a plaintive
ditty,--the _voyageur's_ song of the lost lady and the faded roses, or
the dying farewell of Cadieux, the hunter, to his comrades,--and the
adventurers are launched for the Western Sea.

[Illustration: Fight at the Foot-hills of the Rockies between Crows and
Snakes.]


II

1731-1736

Every mile westward was consecrated by heroism.  There was the place
where Cadieux, the white hunter, went ashore single-handed to hold the
Iroquois at bay, while his comrades escaped by running the rapids; but
Cadieux was assailed by a subtler foe than the Iroquois, _la folie des
bois_,--the folly of the woods,--that sends the hunter wandering in
endless circles till he dies from hunger; and when his companions
returned, Cadieux lay in eternal sleep with a death chant scribbled on
bark across his breast.  There were the Rapids of the Long Sault where
Dollard and seventeen Frenchmen fought seven hundred Iroquois till
every white man fell.  Not one of all De la Verendrye's fifty followers
but knew that perils as great awaited him.

Streaked foam told the voyageurs where they were approaching rapids.
