The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dead Giveaway, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dead Giveaway

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Release Date: December 27, 2007 [EBook #24054]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAD GIVEAWAY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









DEAD GIVEAWAY

BY RANDALL GARRETT

Illustrated by Martinez

[Transcriber's note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction August 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




_Logic's a wonderful thing; by logical analysis, one can determine the
necessary reason for the existence of a dead city of a very high order
on an utterly useless planet. Obviously a shipping transfer point!
Necessarily..._




"Mendez?" said the young man in the blue-and-green tartan jacket. "Why,
yes ... sure I've heard of it. Why?"

The clerk behind the desk looked again at the information screen.
"That's the destination we have on file for Scholar Duckworth, Mr.
Turnbull. That was six months ago." He looked up from the screen,
waiting to see if Turnbull had any more questions.

Turnbull tapped his teeth with a thumbnail for a couple of seconds, then
shrugged slightly. "Any address given for him?"

"Yes, sir. The Hotel Byron, Landing City, Mendez."

Turnbull nodded. "How much is the fare to Mendez?"

The clerk thumbed a button which wiped the information screen clean,
then replaced it with another list, which flowed upward for a few
seconds, then stopped. "Seven hundred and eighty-five fifty, sir," said
the clerk. "Shall I make you out a ticket?"

Turnbull hesitated. "What's the route?"

The clerk touched another control, and again the information on the
screen changed. "You'll take the regular shuttle from here to Luna, then
take either the _Stellar Queen_ or the _Oriona_ to Sirius VI. From
there, you will have to pick up a ship to the Central Worlds--either to
Vanderlin or BenAbram--and take a ship from there to Mendez. Not
complicated, really. The whole trip won't take you more than three
weeks, including stopovers."

"I see," said Turnbull. "I haven't made up my mind yet. I'll let you
know."

"Very well, sir. The _Stellar Queen_ leaves on Wednesdays and the
_Oriona_ on Saturdays. We'll need three days' notice."

Turnbull thanked the clerk and headed toward the big doors that led out
of Long Island Terminal, threading his way through the little clumps of
people that milled around inside the big waiting room.

He hadn't learned a hell of a lot, he thought. He'd known that Duckworth
had gone to Mendez, and he already had the Hotel Byron address. There
was, however, some negative information there. The last address they had
was on Mendez, and yet Scholar Duckworth couldn't be found on Mendez.
Obviously, he had not filed a change of address there; just as
obviously, he had managed to leave the planet without a trace. There was
always the possibility that he'd been killed, of course. On a thinly
populated world like Mendez, murder could still be committed with little
chance of being caught. Even here on Earth, a murderer with the right
combination of skill and luck could remain unsuspected.

But who would want to kill Scholar Duckworth?

And why?

Turnbull pushed the thought out of his mind. It was possible that
Duckworth was dead, but it was highly unlikely. It was vastly more
probable that the old scholar had skipped off for reasons of his own and
that something had happened to prevent him from contacting Turnbull.

After all, almost the same thing had happened in reverse a year ago.

Outside the Terminal Building, Turnbull walked over to a hackstand and
pressed the signal button on the top of the control column. An empty cab
slid out of the traffic pattern and pulled up beside the barrier which
separated the vehicular traffic from the pedestrian walkway. The gate in
the barrier slid open at the same time the cab door did, and Turnbull
stepped inside and sat down. He dialed his own number, dropped in the
indicated number of coins, and then relaxed as the cab pulled out and
sped down the freeway towards Manhattan.

He'd been back on Earth now for three days, and the problem of Scholar
James Duckworth was still bothering him. He hadn't known anything about
it until he'd arrived at his apartment after a year's absence.

       *       *       *       *       *

The apartment door sighed a little as Dave Turnbull broke the electronic
seal with the double key. Half the key had been in his possession for a
year, jealousy guarded against loss during all the time he had been on
Lobon; the other half had been kept by the manager of the Excelsior
Apartments.

As the door opened, Turnbull noticed the faint musty odor that told of
long-unused and poorly circulated air. The conditioners had been turned
down to low power for a year now.

He went inside and allowed the door to close silently behind him. The
apartment was just the same--the broad expanse of pale blue rug, the
matching furniture, including the long, comfortable couch and the fat
overstuffed chair--all just as he'd left them.

He ran a finger experimentally over the top of the table near the door.
There was a faint patina of dust covering the glossy surface, but it was
very faint, indeed. He grinned to himself. In spite of the excitement of
the explorations on Lobon, it was great to be home again.

He went into the small kitchen, slid open the wall panel that concealed
the apartment's power controls, and flipped the switch from
"maintenance" to "normal." The lights came on, and there was a faint
sigh from the air conditioners as they began to move the air at a more
normal rate through the rooms.

Then he walked over to the liquor cabinet, opened it, and surveyed the
contents. There, in all their glory, sat the half dozen bottles of
