The Project Gutenberg EBook of Divine Songs, by Isaac Watts

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Divine Songs

Author: Isaac Watts

Release Date: September 11, 2004 [EBook #13439]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIVINE SONGS ***




Produced by Lewis Jones





Divine Songs

Attempted in the Easy Language of Children.

By I. Watts.

_Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou hast perfected
Praise_. Matt. xxi. 16.


Transcriber's Note.

Throughout, modern numerals have been substituted for their Roman
equivalents.

In Watts' dedication the original capitalisation, italics and
spelling are retained; the aim thereby is to convey more accurately
the flavour of the original.



TO

Mrs. SARAH     )
Mrs. MARY _and_) ABNEY,
Mrs. ELIZABETH )

_Daughters of Sir_ THOMAS ABNEY, _Kt. and Alderman of London_.


_My Dear Young Friends_,

Whom I am constrained to love and honour by many Obligations. It was
the generous and condescending Friendship of your Parents under my
weak Circumstances of Health, that brought me to their Country-Seat
for the Benefit of the Air; but it was an Instance of most uncommon
Kindness, to supply me there so chearfully for two Years of Sickness
with the richest Conveniences of Life. Such a Favour requires my
most affectionate Returns of Service to themselves, and to all that
is dear to them; and meer Gratitude demands some solemn and publick
Acknowledgment.

But great Minds have the true Relish and Pleasure of doing Good, and
are content to be unknown.

It is such a silent Satisfaction Sir _Thomas Abney_ enjoys in the
unspeakable Blessings of this Year, that brought our present King to
the Throne: and he permits the World to forget that happy Turn that
was given to the Affairs of the Kingdom by his wise Management in
the Highest Office of the City, whereby the Settlement of the Crown
was so much strengthen'd in the Illustrious Family which now
possesses it. O may the Crown flourish many Years on the Head of our
Soveraign, and may his House possess it to the End of Time, to
secure all Religious and Civil Liberties to the Posterity of those
who have been so zealous to establish this Succession!

The fair and lovely Character your Honoured Father hath acquired by
passing thro' all the chief Offices of the City, and leaving a
Lustre upon them, seems imperfect in his own Esteem, without the
Addition of this Title, _A Succourer and a Friend of the Ministers
of Christ_. And in this part of his Honour the Lady your Mother is
resolved to have an unborrow'd Share, and becomes his daily Rival.

It is to her unwearied Tenderness, and many kind Offices by Night
and Day, in the more violent Seasons of my Indisposition, that
(under God) I own my Life, and Power to write or think. And while I
remember those Hours, I can't forget the cheerful and ready
Attendance of her worthy Sister, her dear Companion and Assistant in
every good Work.

Under the Influence of two such Examples I have also enjoy'd the
Pleasure and Conveniency of your younger Services, according to the
Capacity of your Years; and that with such a Degree of sincere and
hearty Zeal for my Welfare, that you are ready to vie with each
other in the kind Imployment, and assist all you can toward my
Recovery and Usefulness. So that whoever shall reap benefit by any
of my Labours, it is but a reasonable Request, that you share with
me in their Thanks and their Prayers.

But this is a small Part of your Praise.

If it would not be suspected of Flattery, I could tell the World
what an Acquaintance with Scripture, what a Knowledge of Religion,
what a Memory of Divine things both in Verse and Prose is found
among you; and what a just and regular account is given of Sermons
at your Age; to awaken all the Children that shall read these
_Songs_, to furnish their memories and beautify their Souls like
yours. The Honour you have done me in learning by heart so large a
number of the _Hymns_ I have publish'd, perhaps has been of some use
towards these greater Improvements, and gives me rich Encouragement
to offer you this little Present.

Since I have ventured to shew a Part of your early Character to the
World, I perswade my self you will remember, that it must inlarge
and brighten daily. Remember what the World will expect from the
Daughters of Sir _Thomas Abney's_ Family, under such an Education,
such Examples, and after such fair and promising Blossoms of Piety
and Goodness. Remember what God himself will expect at your hands,
from whose Grace you have received plentiful Distributions in the
Beginning of your Days. May the Blessings of his Right Hand more
enrich you daily, as your Capacities and your Years increase; and
may he add bountifully of the Favours of his Left Hand, Riches and
Honour. May his Grace make you so large a Return of all the Kindness
I have received in your Family, as may prevail above the fondest
Hopes of your Parents, and even exceed the warmest Prayers of

_Your most Affectionate Monitor and obliged Servant in the daily
Views of a future World_,


I. WATTS.

Theobalds,

June 18.
1715.


PREFACE
To all that are concerned in the Education of Children.



My Friends,

It is an awful and important charge that is committed to you. The
wisdom and welfare of the succeeding generation are intrusted with
you beforehand, and depend much on your conduct. The seeds of misery
or happiness in this world, and that to come, are oftentimes sown
very early, and therefore whatever may conduce to give the minds of
children a relish for vertue and religion, ought in the first place
to be proposed to you.

Verse was at first design'd for the service of God, tho' it hath
been wretchedly abused since. The ancients among the Jews and the
Heathens taught their children and disciples the precepts of
morality and worship in verse. The children of Israel were commanded
to learn the words of the song of Moses, Deut. 31. 19,30. And we are
directed in the New Testament, not only to sing with grace in the
heart, but to teach and admonish one another by hymns and songs,
Eph. 5. 19. and there are these four advantages in it:

1. There is a greater delight in the very learning of truths and
duties this way. There is something so amusing and entertaining in
rhymes and metre, that will incline children to make this part of
their business a diversion. And you may turn their very duty into a
reward, by giving them the privilege of learning one of these songs
every week, if they fulfil the business of the week well, and
promising them the book itself when they have learned ten or twenty
songs out of it.

2. What is learnt in verse is longer retained in memory, and sooner
recollected. The like sounds and the like number of syllables
exceedingly assist the remembrance. And it may often happen, that
the end of a song running in the mind may be an effectual means to
keep off some temptation, or to incline to some duty, when a word of
scripture is not upon the thoughts.

3. This will be a constant furniture for the minds of children, that
they may have something to think upon when alone, and sing over to
themselves. This may sometimes give their thoughts a divine turn,
and raise a young meditation. Thus they will not be forced to seek
relief for an emptiness of mind out of the loose and dangerous
sonnets of the age.

4. These _Divine Songs_ may be a pleasant and proper matter for
their daily or weekly worship, to sing one in the family at such
time as the parents or governors shall appoint; and therefore I have
confin'd the verse to the most usual psalm tunes.

