scarcely see my hand. And if we get into the fog you talk about it
will be as black as ink."

"Oh, I know the way," the officer said confidently. "We keep along the
road for two miles, then turn up a track leading up a valley, follow
that for three miles; then branch to the right, cross over one or two
slight rises, and then follow another slight depression till we are
within a hundred yards of the place. I could find my way there with my
eyes shut."

"That sounds easy enough," Ralph said; "but I know how difficult it is
finding one's way in a fog. However, we must hope we shall get there
all right. Sergeant, have the men got anything in their haversacks?"

"Yes, sir. Captain O'Connor ordered them to take their breakfast
ration of bread, and he told me to see that their water bottles were
filled; and--" (and here he moved closer up to Ralph, so that he
should not be heard by the men) "he gave me a couple of bottles of
whisky to mix with the water, and told me to fill the bottles myself,
so that the men shouldn't know what was in them till they had their
breakfast; otherwise there would be none left by the time they wanted
to eat their bread. He is always thoughtful the captain is."

"That's a very good plan, sergeant. I shall bear it in mind myself for
the future. They will want something before they get back after a
fourteen-mile march."

The fine mist continued steadily as they tramped along; but the night
seemed to grow darker and darker. They turned off from the road; and
as they began to ascend the track along the valley the cloud seemed to
settle round them. The excise officer walked ahead, keeping upon the
path. Ralph followed as closely as he could in his footsteps; but
although almost touching him he could not make out his figure in the
darkness.

"Tell the men to follow in single file, sergeant," he said; "keeping
touch with each other. As long as we are on the beaten track we know
we are right, but there may be bowlders or anything else close by on
one side or the other."

Marching as closely as they could to each other the party proceeded.

"How on earth are you going to find the place where we turn off, Mr.
Fitzgibbon?" Ralph asked.

"We shall find it easy enough sir. The path regularly forks, and there
is a pile of stones at the junction, which makes as good a guide as
you can want on a dark night. We can't miss that even on a night like
this."

Ralph had struck a light with his flint and steel, and looked at his
watch at the point where they turned off from the road, and he did the
same thing two or three times as they went along.

"It's an hour and twenty minutes since we turned off, Mr. Fitzgibbon.
Even allowing for our stoppages when we have got off the path, we
ought to be near the turning now."

"Yes, I fancy we are not far off now, sir. I can feel that we are
rising more sharply, and there is a rise in the last hundred yards or
so before we reach the place where the road forks. We had better go a
little more slowly now, sir."

Another five minutes there was a stumble and a fall in front of Ralph.

"Halt!" he exclaimed sharply. "What is it, Mr. Fitzgibbon?"

"I have fallen over the pile of stones," the officer said, "and hurt
myself confoundedly."

"Don't you think we had better halt till daylight?"

"I think we can keep on, sir. The nearer we get there the better; and
if we should miss the path we can halt then and wait till daybreak."

"Well, we can do that," Ralph agreed.

"I will go on ahead, sir, twenty or thirty yards at a time and then
speak, and you can bring the men on to me, then I will go on again. It
will be slow work, but I can keep the path better if I go at my own
pace."

Ralph agreed, and they proceeded in this manner for some time.

"I don't think we are on the track now," Ralph said at last.

"Oh, yes, we are," the officer replied confidently.

Ralph stooped and felt the ground. "The grass is very short," he
observed, "but it is grass."

The officer followed his example.

"Oh, it is only a track now," he said. "Just a footpath, and the grass
is not worn off. I am convinced we are right."

"Well," Ralph said, "just go a little way to the right and left, and
see if the grass gets longer. It seems to me all the same."

The officer did so, and was obliged to own that he could not perceive
any difference. Ralph now spread his men out in a line and directed
them to feel on the ground to see if they could discover the track.
They failed to do so, and Ralph then ordered them together again.

"We will halt here, sergeant, till daylight. It's no use groping about
in the dark. For anything we know we may be going exactly in the wrong
direction. The men can of course sit down if they like; and they may
as well eat a piece of bread and try their water-bottles. But tell
them not to eat more than half their ration. We may be longer before
we get out of this than we expect."

The order was given, the men piled their arms and seated themselves on
the short turf. Presently Ralph heard a sudden exclamation of surprise
and satisfaction as one of the men tasted the contents of his
water-bottle, and in a minute there was a buzz of talk. Before scarce
a word had been spoken; the men had been marching in a sort of sulky
silence, disgusted at being taken from their beds for work they
disliked, and at their long march through the damp night air; but
their satisfaction at this unexpected comfort loosened their tongues.

Pipes were produced and lighted, and the discomfort of the situation
altogether forgotten. Desmond had handed to Ralph the flask and packet
of sandwiches he had prepared for himself, and he, too, felt less
strongly the chilling effects of the damp and darkness after partaking
of them. The excise officer had also made his preparations.

"We should be more certain as to our whereabouts if we had stopped at
that heap of stones as I proposed, Mr. Fitzgibbon."

"I don't deny, sir, you were right as it has turned out; only I
wouldn't have believed that I could have missed the path, and I did
want to get close to the place before we were observed. I knew that we
couldn't actually surprise them till morning; for the hut lies some
distance in a bog, and there would be no crossing it unless we could
see. Still if we could have got to the edge without the alarm being
given, they would not have time to hide the things before we reached
them. I have ridden across this place many a time after dark, and
never missed my way."

"That was the sagacity of your horse more than your own, I expect,"
Ralph said. "A horse can find his way along a path he has once
traveled better than any man can do. In the first place, I think he
can see better in the night; and in the second, he has some sort of
instinct to guide him. However, I don't suppose it much matters; we
shall find the path easily enough in the morning. And, as you said,
the mist will hide our movements quite as effectually as the darkness
would do."

At last the morning began to break in a dim misty light, and as it
grew stronger they were able to perceive how dense was the fog that
surrounded them. At three paces distant they were invisible to each
other.

"It does not seem to me that we are much better off than we were
before, so far as finding the path lies. What do you think?"

"It looks bad, certainly," the officer admitted reluctantly. "I am
awfully sorry I have led you into this mess."

"It can't be helped," Ralph said. "We must make the best of matters.
At any rate it's better than it was, and the mist is not nearly as
heavy as when we were marching up that valley."




CHAPTER XI.

STILL-HUNTING.


"Now, sergeant, the men may as well fall in," Ralph said cheerfully,
"and then we will set about finding this path. On which side do you
think it is most likely to lie, Mr. Fitzgibbon?"

"I really can't give an opinion, sir. You see there is not a breath of
wind to help us, and in this sort of light there is no telling where
the sun is, so I don't know at the present moment which way we are
facing."

"Well, we will try to the right first, sergeant," Ralph said. "I will
lead the way. Let the men follow at a distance of about ten paces
apart. I will keep on speaking. Do you stand at the left of the file,
and when the last man has gone ten paces from you pass the word along.
By that time I shall be about two hundred yards away. If I have not
found the path then we will come back to you and do the same thing on
the left. If we don't light upon the path itself we may come upon some
rise or bog or something that will enable Mr. Fitzgibbon to form an
idea as to where we are."

This was done, but beyond finding that the ground on the right was
higher than that on the left no index as to their position was
discovered.

"You see, Mr. Fitzgibbon, we are on sloping ground rising to the
right. Now, does that help you at all?"

"Not much sir. The country here is all undulating."

"Very well, then, we must try a march forward. Now, sergeant, place
the men five paces apart. Do you put yourself in the center. I will
move on three yards ahead of you. I shall go as straight forward as I
can, but if you think I am inclining either to the right or left you
say so. The fact that the ground is sloping ought to be a help to us
to keep straight. I wish it sloped a little more, then one would be
able to tell directly whether one was keeping straight. Let the men
speak to each other every few paces so as to keep the right distances
apart."

Mr. Fitzgibbon placed himself by Ralph's side, and they started. For
half an hour they kept on, then Ralph cried, "Halt. I am certain I am
going downhill, it may be because I have changed my direction, or it
may be because there is a change in the lay of the ground. What do you
think?"

"It's impossible to say," Mr. Fitzgibbon replied. "It seems to me that
we have been going straight, but when one can't see a yard before one
one may have turned any direction."

"How long do you think that this rascally fog is likely to last?"

"It may clear up as the sun gets high, sir, but I must acknowledge
that it may last for days. There is never any saying among these
hills."

"Well, at any rate you must give up all idea of making a raid on this
still, Mr. Fitzgibbon. That has become a secondary object altogether
now. What we have to do is to find our way out of this. Hitherto I
have tried what we could do in silence. Now I shall give that up. Now,
sergeant, get the men together again. I will go ahead, and shall, if I
can, keep on descending. If one does that one must get out of these
hills at last. When I get about fifty yards I will shout. Then you
send a man on to me. When he reaches me I will shout again and go on
another fifty yards. When I shout send another man forward. When he
gets to the first man the first man is to shout and then come on to
me, and you send off another. In that way we shall make a regular line
fifty yards apart, and I don't think any one can get lost. Should any
one get confused and stray, which he can't do if he keeps his head, he
must shout till he hears his shouts answered. After a time if he
doesn't hear any answer he must fire his gun, and we must answer till
he rejoins us. But if my orders are observed I do not see how any one
can miss their way, as there will be posts stationed every fifty
yards. You remain till the last and see them all before you. You quite
understand? When each man comes up to the one in front of him he is to
stop until the next man joins him, and then move on to the man ahead."

"I understand, sir."

"They must not be in a hurry, sergeant; because moving ahead as I
shall, I shall have to move to the right or left sometimes so as to
make as sure as I can that I am still going down. Now, Mr. Fitzgibbon,
if you keep with me, between us we ought to find the road."

The plan seemed a good one, but it was difficult to follow. The fall
of the ground was so slight that Ralph and the officer often differed
as to whether they were going up or down, and it was only by
separating and taking short runs right and left, forward or backward,
that they arrived at any conclusion, and even then often doubted
whether they were right. The shouting as the long line proceeded was
prodigious, and must have astonished any stray animals that might have
been grazing among the hills. So bewildering was the fog that the men
sometimes went back to the men behind them instead of forward to the
men in front, and long pauses were necessitated before they got right
again. Ralph, finding the cause of the delays, passed the word down
for the first man to keep on shouting "number one," the second "number
two," and so on, and this facilitated matters. The line of shouting
men had at least the advantage that it enabled Ralph to keep a fairly
straight course, as the sound of voices told him if he was deviating
much to the right or left.

"We may not be going right," he said to his companion, "but at least
we have the satisfaction of knowing that we are not moving in a
circle."

After some hours' marching Ralph, to his great delight, came upon a
hill rill of water.

"Thank goodness," he said, "we have got a guide at last. If we follow
this we must get somewhere. We need not go on in this tedious way, but
will halt here till all the men come up."

It was half an hour before the sergeant arrived.

"We have got a guide now, sergeant, and can push on. I suppose you
have no idea what stream this is, Mr. Fitzgibbon?"

"Not at present," the officer admitted. "There are scores of these
little rills about. They make their way down from the bogs at the top
of the hills, and there is nothing to distinguish one from the other."

They now tramped on briskly, keeping close to the little stream.
Sometimes the ground became soft and marshy, and it was difficult to
follow its course; but they went straight on and after three more
hours' marching came upon a road that crossed the stream over a little
culvert. There was a cheer from the tired men as they stood on hard
ground again.

"Now, the question is shall we turn to the right or the left, for we
have not the faintest idea as to the points of the compass. What do
you say, Mr. Fitzgibbon?"

"I should say that it is an even chance; but at any rate whichever way
we go we are sure to come in time upon a hut or village, and be able
to find out where we are."

"Very well, then; we will take the right," Ralph said. "Form fours,
sergeant. We shall get on better by keeping in step. Now, sergeant, if
any of the men can sing let him strike up a tune with a chorus. That
will help us along."

There was a little hesitation, and then one of the men struck up a
song, and with renewed life and energy they all marched along. It was
nearly an hour before they heard the welcome sound of voices close by.
Ralph halted his men and proceeded toward this sound, and then
discovered what the fog had prevented them from seeing before, that
they were passing through a village, the voices being those of some
women who were brought to their doors by the sound of music, and who
were somewhat puzzled at the, to them, mysterious sounds.

"What place is this?" Ralph asked.

"It is Kilmaknocket."

"Bless me!" Mr. Fitzgibbon exclaimed, "we are twenty miles away from
Ballyporrit if we are an inch."

"Then it's evident we can't get there to-day," Ralph said. "We must
have come more than that distance since we halted in the night. Now,
my good woman, I have a party of twenty men here, and we have lost our
way in the hills, and must stop here for the night. How many houses
are there in the village?"

"There are ten or twelve, sir."

"That is all right, then. We must quarter two men on each. I will pay
every one for the trouble it will give, and for something to eat,
which we want badly enough, for we have come at least twenty-five or
twenty-six miles, and probably ten more than that, and have had
nothing but a bit of bread since we started."

"It's heartily welcome you will be, sir," the woman said, "and we will
all do the best we can for you."

The men were now ordered to fall out. The sergeant proceeded with them
through the village, quartering two men on each house, while Ralph
went round to see what provisions were obtainable. Potatoes and black
bread were to be had everywhere, and he also was able to buy a
good-sized pig, which, in a very few minutes, was killed and cut up.

"We have reason to consider ourselves lucky indeed," Ralph said, as he
sat down with the excise officer half an hour later to a meal of
boiled potatoes and pork chops roasted over a peat fire. "It's
half-past four now, and will be pitch dark in another half-hour. If we
had not struck upon that stream we should have had another night out
among the hills."

Ralph's first measure after seeing his men quartered in the village
was to inquire for a boy who would carry a message to Ballyporrit, and
the offer of half a crown produced four or five lads willing to
undertake it. Ralph chose one of them, an active-looking lad of about
fifteen, tore out a leaf from his pocketbook, and wrote an account of
what had happened, and said that the detachment would be in by two
o'clock on the following day. Then directing it to Captain O'Connor or
Lieutenant Desmond, whichever might be in the village, he gave it to
the lad, who at once started at a trot along the road in the direction
from which they had come.

"He will be there in four hours," Mr. Fitzgibbon said. "It's a regular
road all the way, and he can't miss it even in the dark. It's lucky we
turned the way we did, for although it was taking us further from home
it was but two miles along the road here, while, if we had gone the
right way, it would have been six or seven before we arrived at the
next village."

"I think we are lucky all round," Ralph said. "An hour ago if any one
told us we were going to sit down at half-past four to a hot dinner of
pork and potatoes we should have slain him as a scoffer. It would have
seemed altogether too good to be true."

Ralph had no difficulty in purchasing whisky, and he ordered the
sergeant to serve out a tot to each man with his dinner and another
half an hour later, and by seven o'clock there was scarcely one of the
tired men who was not already asleep. The next morning they started at
eight o'clock, having had a breakfast of potatoes before they fell in.
Ralph rewarded the peasants generously for their hospitality, and the
men set off in high spirits for their tramp, and reached Ballyporrit
at half-past two in the afternoon.

"You gave us a nice scare yesterday, Conway," was Captain O'Connor's
greeting as they marched in. "When twelve o'clock came and you didn't
come back I began to think you must have lost yourselves; and a nice
time we had of it till your messenger arrived at eight. It was no use
sending out to look for you on the hills. But I went out with a party,
with two or three men to guide us, to the end of a valley, up which a
path went; beyond that there was no going, for one couldn't see one's
hand. I stayed there an hour, firing off guns once a minute, and as
there was no reply was sure that you must be a good distance off,
wherever you were; so there was nothing to do but to come back and
hope you had found shelter somewhere. Come in, lad; I have got some
hot lunch waiting for you. Come in, Mr. Fitzgibbon. It's lucky I
didn't catch you yesterday, or I should have considered it my duty to
have hung you forthwith for decoying his majesty's troops among the
hills."

"Well, Conway, you didn't bargain for all this when you offered to
change places with me," Lieutenant Desmond said when they were seated
at table.

"No; but now it's all over I am glad I did change, in spite of the
tramp we had. It has been an adventure, and beside, it was a good
thing to learn how best to get out of a fog."

"How did you manage, Conway?" Captain O'Connor asked; "for once lost
in such a fog as that on those hills there really does not seem
anything to be done."

Ralph related the various steps he had taken, and how, eventually,
they had come upon running water and followed it down to a road.

"Well, I really think you have done remarkably well, youngster. I
shouldn't be surprised if we have some more tramps before us, for I
had a letter this morning from the colonel saying that the fellow
known as the Red Captain, a notorious scoundrel who has been with his
gang committing all sorts of atrocities in Galway, has made the place
too hot for him at last, and is reported to have made his way down to
the south coast, somewhere in this direction; and we are ordered to
keep a sharp lookout for him. He is an unmitigated ruffian, and a
desperate one. He has shot several constables who have tried to
capture him, and as he has three or four men with him nearly as bad as
