might need a booster shot?"

"Oh, no ... of course not!" The man leaned forward and placed one hand,
palm up, on the desk. "Last year I had an accident ... stupid ... lost a
thumb." He shrugged apologetically, "It took almost six months to grow
back."

Thoughtfully, the doctor leaned back in his chair, "Hm-m-m ... I see."
As the man before him made an involuntary movement toward his pocket,
the doctor smiled, "Go on, smoke if you want to." Picking up the chart,
he murmured, "Six months ... much too long. Strange we didn't catch that
at the time." He read silently for a few moments, then began to fill out
a form clipped to the folder. "Well, I think you probably are due for
another booster about now. There'll have to be the usual tests. Not that
there's much doubt ... we like to be certain."

The middle-aged man seemed relieved. Then, on second thought, he
hesitated uneasily, "Why? Is there any danger?"

Amusement flickered across the doctor's face, turned smoothly into a
reassuring half-smile. "Oh, no. There's absolutely no danger involved.
None at all. We have tissue-regeneration pretty well under control now.
Still, I'm sure you understand that accurate records and data are very
necessary to further research and progress."

Reassured, the patient thawed and became confidential, "I see. Well, I
suppose it's kinda silly, but I don't much like shots. It's not that
they hurt ... it's just that I guess I'm old-fashioned. I still feel
kinda 'creepy' about the whole business." Slightly embarrassed, he
paused and asked defensively, "Is that unusual?"

The doctor smiled openly now, "Not at all, not at all. Things have moved
pretty fast in the past few years. I suppose it takes people's emotional
reactions a while to catch up with developments that, logically, we
accept as matter of fact."

He pushed his chair back from the desk, "Maybe it's not too hard to
understand. Take 'fire' for example: Man lived in fear of fire for a
good many hundred-thousand years--and rightly so, because he hadn't
learned to control it. The principle's the same; First you learn to
protect yourself from a thing; then control it; and, eventually, we
learn to 'harness' it for a useful purpose." He gestured toward the
man's cigarette, "Even so, man still instinctively fears fire--even
while he uses it. In the case of tissue-regeneration, where the change
took place so rapidly, in just a generation or so, that instinctive fear
is even more understandable--although quite as unjustified, I assure
you."

The doctor stood up, indicating that the session was ending. While his
patient scrambled to his feet, hastily putting out his cigarette, the
