all to Thy glory."

Her eyes were shut while she was speaking; when she opened them she
felt almost startled by the look Cecile had given her. A look of
wonder, of question, of appeal.

"You want to ask me some'ut, dear?" she said gently to the child.

"Oh, yes! oh, yes!"

"Well, I'm very busy now, and I'll be busy all the afternoon. But we
has tea at six, and arter tea my man 'ull play wid Maurice, and you
shall sit at my knee and ask me what you like."




CHAPTER VI.

CECILE GIVES HER HEART.


It was thus, sitting at Mrs. Moseley's knee in that snug kitchen, that
Cecile got her great question answered. It was Mrs. Moseley who
explained to the longing, wondering child, what Jesus the Guide would
do, who Jesus the Guide really was. It was Mrs. Moseley who told Cecile
what a glorious future she had before her, and how safe her life down
in this world really was.

And Cecile listened, half glad, half sorry, but, if the truth must be
known, dimly understanding. For Cecile, sweet as her nature was had
slow perceptions.

She was eight years old, and in her peculiar, half English, half
foreign life, she had never before heard anything of true religion. All
the time Mrs. Moseley was speaking, she listened with bright eyes and
flushed cheeks. But when the sweet old story came to an end, Cecile
burst into tears.

"Oh! I'm glad and I'm sorry," she sobbed; "I wanted a real, real guide.
I'm glad as the story's quite true, but I wanted someone to hold my
hand, and to carry Maurice when he's ever so tired. I'm glad and sorry."

"But I'm not sorry," said Maurice, who was lying full length on the
hearth-rug, and listening attentively. "I'm glad, I am--and I'd like to
die; I'd much rather die than go south."

"Oh, Maurice!" said Cecile.

"Yes, Cecile. I'd much rather die. I like what that kind woman says
about heaven, and I never did want to walk all that great way. Do Jesus
have little boys as small as me in heaven, Mrs. Moseley, ma'am?"

"Lord bless the child. Yes, my sweet lamb. Why, there's new-born babes
up there; and I had a little un, he wor a year younger nor you. But
Jesus took him there; it near broke my heart, but he went there."

"Then I'll go too," said Maurice. "I'll not go south; I'll go to
heaven."

"Bless the bonnie children both," said Mrs. Moseley softly under her
breath. She laid her hand on Cecile's head, who was gazing at her
little brother in a sort of wonder and consternation. Then the good
woman rose to get supper.

The next day ushered in the most wonderful Sunday Cecile had ever
spent. In the first place, this little girl, who had been so many years
of her little life in our Christian England, went to church. In her
father's time, no one had ever thought of so employing part of their
Sunday. The sweet bells sounded all around, but they fell on unheeding
ears. Cecile's stepmother, too, was far too busy working for Lovedy to
have time for God's house, and when the children went down to Warren's
Grove, though Lydia Purcell regularly Sunday after Sunday put on her
best bonnet, and neat black silk gown, and went book in hand into the
simple village church, it had never occurred to her to take the orphan
children with her. Therefore, when Mrs. Moseley said to Cecile and
Maurice:

"Now come and let me brush your hair, and make you tidy for church,"
they were both surprised and excited. Maurice fretted a little at the
thought of leaving Toby behind, but, on the whole, he was satisfied
with the novelty of the proceeding.

The two children sat very gravely hand in hand. The music delighted
them, but the rest of the service was rather above their comprehension.

Cecile, however, listened hard, taking in, in her slow, grave way, here
a thought and there an idea.

Mrs. Moseley watched the children as much as she listened to the
sermon, and as she said afterward to her husband, she felt her heart
growing full of them.

The rest of the Sunday passed even more delightfully in Maurice's
estimation. Mrs. Moseley's pudding was pronounced quite beyond praise
by the little hungry boy, and after dinner Moseley showed him pictures,
while Mrs. Moseley amused Cecile with some Bible stories.

But a strange experience was to come to the impressionable Cecile later
in the day.

Quite late, when all the light had faded, and only the lamps were lit,
and Maurice was sound asleep in his little bed in Mrs. Moseley's small
closet, that good woman, taking the little girl's hand, said to her:

"When we go to church we go to learn about Jesus. I took you to one
kind of church this morning. I saw by yer looks, my little maid, as you
were trying hard to understand. Now I will take you to another kind of
church. A church wot ain't to call orthodox, and wot many speaks
against, and I don't say as it ha'n't its abuses. But for all that,
when Molly Moseley wants to be lifted clean off her feet into heaven,
she goes there; so you shall come to-night with me, Cecile."

All religious teaching was new to Cecile, and she gave her hand quite
willingly to her kind friend.

They went down into the cold and wet winter street, and presently,
after a few moments' quick walking, found themselves in an immense,
square-built hall. Galleries ran round it, and these galleries were
furnished with chairs and benches. The whole body of the hall was also
full of seats, and from the roof hung banners, with texts of Scripture
printed on them, and the motto of the Salvation Army:

_"Fire and Blood."_

Cecile, living though she had done in its very midst had never heard of
this great religious revival. To such as her, poor little ignorant lost
lamb, it preached, but hitherto no message had reached her. She
followed Mrs. Moseley, who seated herself on a bench in the front row
of a gallery which was close to the platform. The space into which she
and Cecile had to squeeze was very small, for the immense place was
already full to overflowing.

"We'll have three thousand to-night, see if we don't," said a
thin-faced girl, bending over to Mrs. Moseley.

"Oh, ma'am!" said another, who had a very worn, thin, but sweet face,
"I've found such peace since I saw you last. I never could guess how
good Jesus would be to me. Why, now as I'm converted, He never seems to
leave my side for a minute. Oh! I do ache awful with this cough and
pain in my chest, but I don't seem to mind it now, as Jesus is with me
all day and all night."

Another, nudging her, here said:

"Do you know as Black Bess ha' bin converted too?"

"Oh, praise the Lord!" said this girl, sinking back on her seat, being
here interrupted by a most violent fit of coughing.

The building filled and filled, until there was scarcely room to stand.
A man passing Mrs. Moseley said:

"'Tis a glorious gathering, all brought together by prayer and faith,
all by prayer and faith."

Mrs. Moseley took Cecile on her lap.

"They'll sing in a moment, darling, and 'twill be all about your Guide,
the blessed, blessed Jesus." And scarcely were the words out of her
mouth, when the whole vast building rang again to the words:

  "Come, let us join our cheerful songs:
  Hallelujah to the Lamb who died on Mount Calvary.
  Hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah! Amen."

Line after line was sung exultantly, accompanied by a brass band.

Immediately afterward a man fell on his knees and prayed most earnestly
for a blessing on the meeting.

Then came another hymn:

  "I love thee in life, I love thee in death;
  If ever I love thee, my Jesus, 'tis now."

This hymn was also sung right through, and then, while a young sergeant
went to fetch the colors, the whole great body of people burst into
perfectly rapturous singing of the inspiriting words:

  "The angels stand on the Hallelujah strand,
  And sing their welcome home."

"Oh! Maurice would like that," whispered Cecile as she leant up against
Mrs. Moseley. She never forgot the chorus of that hymn, it was to come
back to her with a thrill of great comfort in a dark day by and by.
Mrs. Moseley held her hand firmly; she and her little charge were
looking at a strange sight.

There were three thousand faces, all intensely in earnest, all bearing
marks of great poverty, many of great and cruel hardship--many, too,
had the stamp of sin on their brows. That man looked like a drunken
husband; that woman like a cruel mother. Here was a lad who made his
living by stealing; here a girl, who would sink from this to worse. Not
a well-dressed person in the whole place, not a soul who did not belong
to the vast army of the very poor. But for all that, there was not one
in this building who was not getting his heart stirred, not one who was
not having the best of him awakened into at least a struggling life,
and many, many poor and outcast as they were, had that indescribable
look on their worn faces which only comes with "God's peace."

A man got up to speak. He was pale and thin, and had long, sensitive
fingers. He shut his eyes, clenched his hand, and began:

"Bless thy word, Lord." This he repeated three times.

The people caught it up, they shouted it through the galleries, all
over the building. He waved his hand to stop them, then opening his
eyes, he began:

"I want to tell you about _Jesus_. Jesus is here tonight, He's down in
this hall, He's walking about, He's going from one to another of you,
He's knocking at your hearts. Brothers and sisters, the Lord Jesus is
knocking at your hearts. Oh! I see His face, and 'tis very pale, 'tis
very sad, 'tis all burdened with sadness. What makes it so sad? _Your
sins_, your great, awful _black_ sins. Sometimes He smiles, and is
pleased. When is that? That is when a young girl, or a boy, or even a
little child, opens the door of the heart, and He can take that heart
and make it His own, then the Lord Jesus is happy. Now, just listen! He
is talking to an old woman, she is very old, her face is all wrinkled,
her hands shake, she _must_ die soon, she can't live more than a year
or so, the Lord Jesus is standing by her, and talking to her. He is
saying, 'Give me thy heart, give me thy heart.'

"She says she is so old and so wicked, she has been a bad wife, a bad
mother, and bad friend; she is an awful drunkard.

"'Never mind,' says Jesus, 'Give me thy heart, I'll forgive thee, poor
sinner; I'll make that black heart white.'

"Then she gives it to Him, and she is happy, and her whole face is
changed, and she is not at all afraid to die.

"Now, do you see that man? He is just out of prison. What was he in
prison for? For beating his wife. Oh! what a villain, what a coward!
How cruel he looks! Respectable people, and kind people, don't like to
go near him, they are afraid of him. What a strong, brutal face he has!
But the blessed Jesus isn't afraid. See, He is standing by this bad
man, and He says, 'Give me thy heart.'

"'Oh! go away,' says the man; 'do go away, my heart is too bad.'

"I'll not go away without thy heart,' says Jesus; ''tis not too bad for
me.'

"And then the man, just because he can't help it, gives this heart, and
hard as stone it is, to Jesus, and Jesus gives it back to him quite
soft and tender, and there's no fear that _he_ will beat his wife again.

"Now, look where Jesus is; standing by the side of a little child--of a
little, young, tender child. That little heart has not had time to grow
hard, and Jesus says, 'Give it to Me. I'll keep it soft always. It
shall always be fit for the kingdom of heaven;' and the little child
smiles, for she can't help it, and she gives her baby heart away at
once. Oh! how glad Jesus is! What a beautiful sight! look at her face;
is not it all sunshine? I think I see just such a little child there in
front of me."

Here the preacher paused, and pointed to Cecile, whose eyes, brilliant
with excitement, were fixed on his face. She had been listening,
drinking in, comprehending. Now when the preacher pointed to her, it
was too much for the excitable child, she burst into tears and sobbed
out:

"Oh! I give my heart, I give my heart."

"Blessings on thee, sweet lamb," came from several rough but kindly
voices.

Mrs. Moseley took her in her arms and carried her out. She saw wisely
that she could bear no more.

As they were leaving the hall, again there came a great burst of
singing:

  "I love Jesus, Hallelujah!
  I love Jesus; yes, I do.
  I love Jesus, He's my Saviour;
  Jesus smiles and _loves me too_."




CHAPTER VII.

"SUSIE."


Cecile had never anything more to say to the Salvation Army. What lay
behind the scenes, what must shock a more refined taste, never came to
her knowledge. To her that fervent, passionate meeting seemed always
like the very gate of heaven. To her the Jesus she had long been
seeking had at last come, come close, and entered into her heart of
hearts. She no longer regretted not seeing Him in the flesh; nay, a
wonderful spiritual sight and faith seemed born in her, and she felt
that this spiritual Christ was more suited to her need. She got up
gravely the next morning; her journey was before her, and the Guide was
there. There was no longer the least reason for delay, and it was much
better that she, Maurice, and Toby should start for France, while they
had a little money that they could lawfully spend. When she had got up
and dressed herself, she resolved to try the new powerful weapon she
had got in her hand. This weapon was prayer; the Guide who was so near
needed no darkness to enable Him to listen to her. She did not kneel,
she sat on the side of her tiny bed, and, while Maurice still slept,
began to speak aloud her earnest need:

"Jesus, I think it is hotter that me, and Maurice, and Toby should go
to France while we have a little money left. Please, Jesus, if there is
a man called Jography, will you help us to find him to-day, please?"
Then she paused, and added slowly, being prompted by her new and great
love, "But it must be just as you like, Jesus." After this prayer,
Cecile resolved to wait in all day, for if there was a man called
Jography, he would be sure to knock at the door during the day, and
come in and say to Cecile that Jesus had sent him, and that he was
ready to show her the way to France. Maurice, therefore, and Toby, went
out together with Mrs. Moseley, and Cecile stayed at home and watched,
but though she, watched all day long, and her heart beat quickly many
times, there was never any sound coming up the funny stairs; the rope
was never pulled, nor the boards lifted, to let in any one of the name
of Jography. Cecile, instead of having her faith shaken by this, came
to the wise resolution that Jography was not a man at all. She now felt
that she must apply to Mrs. Moseley, and wondered how far she dare
trust her with her secret.

