steady, rapid precision for which the American seamen soon became
famous, the crackling of musketry, from the men in the tops, with the
yells and cheers and curses and groans of the maddened men, completed a
scene which suggested a bit of hell.

"This is warm work, Wallingford," said the captain, coolly, though his
eyes were sparkling with excitement.  "Do we gain any advantage?"

"I think so; their fire does not seem to be so heavy.  Does it not
slacken a little, sir?"

"Ay, I think so too.  I trust our sticks hold."

"I have not had any serious damage reported so far, sir."

"Well, we must end it soon, or that frigate will be down on us; in half
an hour at most, I should say.  Ha! what was that?" he said, as a loud
crash from the Juno interrupted him.

"Their maintopmast 's gone by the board, hurrah!" shouted Wallingford,
looking toward the ship, after springing on the rail, from whence a
moment later he fell back dead, with a bullet in his breast.

"Poor fellow!" murmured Jones, and then called out, "Give it to them,
lads, they have lost their maintopmast."  A cheer was the answer.  But
the matter must be ended at once.

"Johnson," said Jones, to the young midshipman by his side, "run
forward and have the main-yard hauled; give her a good full,
quartermaster," he said to the veteran seaman at the helm, and then
watched the water over the side to see when she gathered headway
through it.  "Now!  Hard up with the helm!  Flatten in the head sheets!
Round in the weather braces!  Cease firing, and load all!"

The ship gathered way, forged ahead slowly, fell off when the helm was
put up, and in a trice was standing across the stern of the Juno, which
endeavored to meet the manoeuvre as soon as it was seen; but, owing to
the loss of the jib and maintopsail and the fouling of the gear, she
did not answer the helm rapidly enough to escape the threatening danger.

"Stand by to rake her!  Ready!  Fire!  Stand by to board!"

The effect of this raking broadside delivered at short range was awful;
the whole stern of the Juno was beaten in, and the deadly projectiles
had free range the full length of the devoted ship, which reeled and
trembled under the terrible shock.  A moment of silence followed,
broken by shrieks and groans and a few feeble cheers from some
undaunted spirits.  Then the Ranger, still falling off, a rank sheer of
the helm brought her beam against the stern of the Juno, when eager
hands hove the grapnels which bound the two ships together.

"Away, boarders!"

Certain of the men left their quarters at the guns, and cutlass and
pistol in hand, led by Jones himself, swarmed over the rail and on the
poop of the Juno.  Two or three men were standing there among the dead
and wounded men, half dazed by the sudden catastrophe, but they bravely
sprang forward.

"Do you surrender?" cried Jones.

"No, you damned rebel!" answered the foremost, in the uniform of an
officer, crossing swords with him gallantly; but in a moment the sword
of the impetuous American beat down his guard and was buried in his
breast.  With a hollow groan, he fell dying on the deck of the ship he
had so gallantly defended, while his men, borne back by the determined
rush of the Rangers, after a feeble resistance, threw down their arms,
crying, "Quarter, quarter!"

All this time the guns of that ship had been firing, one or two of them
depressed by Simpson's orders so as to pierce the hull below the
water-line, the rest sending their heavy shot ripping and tearing
through the length of the Juno, which was unable to bring a single gun
to bear in reply.

"Do you strike?" called Jones, from the break of the poop, his men
massed behind him for a rush through the gangways, to one or two of the
officers who were stationed there.

"Yes, yes, God help us," cried a wounded officer; "what else can we do?"

"Where's your captain?"

"Dead, sir," answered one of the seamen who had been seized by the
boarders.  "Him you killed when you boarded."

"Poor fellow, he was a brave man, and fought his ship well."

"Captain, the frigate is bearing down upon us!" cried one of the
Ranger's men.

"Ay, ay.  Well, gentlemen, we cannot take possession, so we will have
to leave you to your consort," he said to the British officers.  "Give
the captain of the Acasta the compliments of Captain John Paul Jones,
of the American Continental ship Ranger, and say that he will find me
in the British Channel.  Thank him for our entertainment to-night," he
said, bowing courteously, and then--"Back to the ship, all you
Rangers.--Let that man's sword alone, sirrah!  He used it well, let it
remain with him on his own ship; but first haul down and bring the
Juno's flag with us."

The men hastily scrambled over the rails to their own ship, the
grapnels were cut loose, and none too soon the ship slowly gathered way
and slipped by the stern of the Juno, whose mizzenmast fell a moment
after, and she lay rolling, a ghastly shattered hulk on the waters,
fire breaking out forward.

The frigate, coming down rapidly on the starboard tack, luffed up into
the wind, and fired a broadside at the rapidly disappearing Ranger,
which, however, did no harm, and was only answered by a musket-shot in
contempt, and then she ranged down beside her battered and shattered
consort.  As soon as she reached the side of the Juno she was hove to,
and a boat was sent off at once.  An officer stepped on board.  He was
horrified at the scene of carnage which presented itself.  The ship
aloft was a wreck, the decks were a perfect shambles, wounded and dying
men lay around in every position.  The masts were gone, the ship was
full of shot-holes, the water was rushing and gurgling in through the
shot-holes below the waterline, flames were breaking out forward.

"Where is Captain Burden?" cried the officer.

"Dead," replied the wounded first lieutenant, in a hollow voice.

"Did you strike?"

"Yes."

"What was the ship with which you fought?"

"The American ship Ranger, Captain John Paul Jones.  He says he will
see you in the English Channel.  Oh, God, Lawless, isn't this awful?
Three-fourths of ours are dead or wounded!  The cursed rebel captured
the Mellish, we ranged alongside at quarters; they got in the first
broadside; the maintopmast went, then the jib; they fell off, raked us
through the stern, boarded; Jones cut down Burden with his sword; we
could not get a gun to bear, they were pounding through us.  We could
not keep the men at quarters, we struck; they took our flag too; then
you came down, and he sheered off; then the mizzenmast went.  I expect
the fore will go next."

"What's his force?  Was it a frigate?"

"I can answer that," said the brave master of the Mellish, who had
gained the Juno and fought well in the fight; "she's a sloop of
eighteen guns."

"Less than ours!  We have twenty-two.  Oh, Lawless, what a disgrace!  I
can't understand it.  Our men did well.  And she goes free, and look at
us!"

"Ship is making water fast; we can't get at the fire forward either,
sir," reported one of the Juno's officers.

"Good God, can't we save the ship?" queried Lieutenant Lawless, of the
Acasta.

"No, it will be as much as we can do to get off the wounded, I fear."

"Back," cried Lawless, turning to the cutter in which they had come,
"to the Acasta, and tell her to send all her boats alongside; this ship
is a perfect wreck.  She must sink in a few minutes.  We have hardly
time to get the wounded off.  Lively, bear a hand for your lives, men."

However, in spite of all that could be done by willing and able hands,
some of the helpless men were still on board when the Juno pitched
forward suddenly and then sank bow foremost into the dark waters,
carrying many of her gallant defenders into the deep with her.  Among
them on the quarter-deck lay the body of the dead captain, the sword
which the magnanimity of his conqueror had left to him lying by his
side.

And this is war upon the sea!




CHAPTER XV

_Chased by a Frigate_

Three days after the sinking of the Juno, the Mellish, which had
escaped in the dark without pursuit from the fleet, after witnessing
the successful termination of the action between the two sloops of war,
was heading about northwest-by-west for Massachusetts Bay and Boston,
with single reefs in her topsails and close hauled on the starboard
tack.  Seymour's orders had left him sufficient discretion as to his
destination, but Boston being the nearest harbor held by the Americans,
he had deemed it best to try to make that port rather than incur
further risk of recapture by making the longer voyage to Philadelphia.

The weather had turned cloudy and cold; there was a decided touch of
winter in the air.  The men were muffled up in their pea-jackets, and
the little squad of prisoners, tramping up and down, taking exercise
and air under a strong guard, looked decidedly uncomfortable, not to
say disgusted, with the situation.

It had been a matter of some difficulty to disarm the prisoners,
especially the soldiers, and to feed and properly exercise them; but
the end had been successfully arrived at through the prudence and
ability of Seymour, who was well aided by Talbot and Wilton, and who
profited much by many valuable suggestions born of the long experience
of the old boatswain.

On this particular afternoon, about ten days before Christmas, the
young captain, now confident of carrying his prize into the harbor,
felt very much relieved and elated by his apparent command of the
situation.  He knew what a godsend the ship's cargo, which he and
Talbot had ascertained to be even more valuable than had been
represented, would be to the American army.  It might be said without
exaggeration, that the success of the great cause depended upon the
fortune of that one little ship under his command.  Talbot had properly
classified and inventoried the cargo according to orders, and was
prepared to make immediate distribution of it upon their arrival in
port.  Both of the young men were as happy as larks, and even the
thought of their captured friends did not disquiet them as it might
under less fortunate circumstances, for among the captives on the
Mellish was a Colonel Seaton of the Highlanders, whom they trusted to
be able to exchange for Colonel Wilton, and they did not doubt in that
case that Katharine would return with her father.

While indulging themselves in these rosy dreams, natural to young men
in the elation of spirit consequent upon the events of their short and
exciting cruise,--the capture and successful escape of the transport,
the apparent assurance of bringing her in, and the daring and brilliant
night-action which they had witnessed,--they had neither of them
ventured to touch upon the subject uppermost in each heart,--the love
each bore for Katharine,--and the subject still remained a sealed book
between them.  The cruise was not yet over, however, and fate had in
store for them several more exciting occurrences to be faced.  Seymour,
often accompanied by Talbot, and Wilton, always accompanied by Bentley,
kept watch and watch on the brief cruise of the transport.  On the
afternoon of the third day, about three bells in the afternoon watch,
or half after one o'clock, Seymour, whose watch below it was, was
called from the cabin by old Bentley, who informed him that a
suspicious sail had been seen hull down to the northeast, and Wilton
had desired that his commanding officer be informed of it.  Seizing a
glass and springing to his feet, he hastened on deck.

"Well, Mr. Wilton," he said to that young officer, proud of his
responsibilities, "you keep a good lookout.  Where away is the sail
reported?"

"Broad off the weather bow, sir, due north of us.  You can't see her
from the deck yet," replied Wilton, flushing with pride at the
compliment.

Seymour sprang into the main rigging, and rapidly ascended to the
crosstrees, glass in hand.  There he speedily made out the
topgallantsails of a large ship, having the wind on the quarter
apparently, and slowly coming into view.  He subjected her to a long
and careful scrutiny, during which the heads of her topsails rose,
confirming his first idea that she was a ship-of-war, and if so,
without doubt, one of the enemy.  She was coming down steadily; and if
the two vessels continued on their present courses they would pass each
other within gun-shot distance in a few hours, a thing not to be
permitted under any circumstances, if it could be avoided.  He
continued his inspection a moment longer, and then closing the glass,
descended to the deck with all speed by sliding down the back-stay.

"Forward, there!" he shouted.  "Call the other watch, and be quick
about it!  Philip, step below and ask Mr. Talbot to come on deck at
once.  Bentley, that seems to be a frigate or a heavy sloop going free;
she will be down on us in a few hours if we don't change our course.
Take a look at her, man," he said, handing him the glass, "and let me
know what you think of her."

While the men were coming on deck, Bentley leaped into the mizzen
rigging and ran up the shrouds with an agility surprising in one of his
gigantic figure and advanced age.  After a rapid survey he came down
swiftly.  "It's an English frigate, and not a doubt of it, sir, and
rising very fast."

"I thought so.  Man the weather braces!  Up with the helm!  Bear a hand
now, my hearties!  Now, then, all together!  Brace in!"  He himself set
a good example to the short crew, who hastened to obey his rapid
commands, by assisting the two seamen stationed aft to brail in the
spanker, in which labor he was speedily joined by Talbot, who had come
on deck.  Young Wilton and Bentley lent the same assistance forward,
and in an astonishingly brief time, considering her small crew, the
Mellish, like the stranger, was going free with the wind on her
quarter, her best point of sailing, her course now making a wide obtuse
angle with that of the approaching ship.

"Now, then, men, lay aloft, and shake the reefs out of the topsails.
Stand by to loose the fore and main topgallantsails as well."

"Why, what's wrong, Seymour?" said Talbot, in surprise.  "I rather
expected we should be in Massachusetts Bay this evening, and here we
are, heading south again.  Isn't that Cape Cod,--that blue haze yonder?
Why are we leaving it?  What's the matter?"

"Take the glass, man; there, aft on the starboard quarter, a sail!  You
should be able to see her from the deck now.  Can you make her out?"

"Yes, by heaven, it's a ship, and a large ship too!  What is it, think
you, Seymour?"

"An English ship, of course, a frigate; we have no ships like that in
these waters, or in our navy, either--more's the pity."

"Whew!  This looks bad for us."

"Well, we 're not caught yet by a long sight, Talbot.  A good many
leagues will have to be sailed before we are overhauled, and there 's
many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip, you know; that old stale maxim
is truer on the sea than any place else, and truer in a chase, too; a
thousand things may help us or hinder her.  See, we are going better
now that the reefs are out and the topgallantsails set.  But it's a
fearful strain on our spars.  They look new--pray God they be good
ones," he continued, gazing over the side at the masses of green water
tossed aside from the bows and sweeping aft under the counter in great
swirls.

The spars and rigging of the Mellish were indeed fearfully tested, the
masts buckling and bending like a strained bow.  The wind was
freshening every moment, and there was the promise of a gale in the
lowering sky of the gray afternoon.  The ship felt the increased
pressure from the additional sail which had been made, and her speed
had materially increased, though she rolled and pitched frightfully,
wallowing through the water and smashing into the waves with her broad,
fat bows, and making rather heavy weather of it.  In spite of all this,
however, the chase gained slowly upon them, until she was now visible
to the naked eye from the decks of the Mellish.  Seymour, full of
anxiety, tried every expedient that his thorough seamanship and long
experience could dictate to accelerate the speed of his ship,--rather a
sluggish vessel at best, and now, heavily laden, slower than ever.  The
stream anchors were cut away, and then one of the bowers also; all the
boats, save one, the smallest, were scuttled and cast adrift; purchases
were got on all the sheets and halliards, and the sails hauled flat as
boards, and kept well wetted down; some of the water tanks were pumped
out, to alter the trim and lighten her; the bulwarks and rails partly
cut away, and, as a final resort, the maintopmast studdingsail was set,
but the boom broke at the iron and the whole thing went adrift in a few
moments.  Talbot, anxious to do something, suggested the novel
expedient of breaking out a field-piece from the fore hold and mounting
it on the quarter-deck to use as a stern-chaser.  This had been done,
but the frigate was yet too far away for it to be of any service.

