almost rebuilt the entire outside and grounds. But he was sorry. He had
wanted it to be as before.

The head of the American Legion and the chief of police, who had
escorted him on this trip from the square, didn't ask to go in with him.
He was glad. He'd had enough of strangers. Not that he was through with
strangers. There were dozens of them up and down the street, standing
beside parked cars, looking at him. But when he looked back at them,
their eyes dropped, they turned away, they began moving off. He was
still too much the First One to have his gaze met.

He walked up what had once been a concrete path and was now an ornate
flagstone path. He climbed the new porch and raised the ornamental
knocker on the new door and heard the soft music sound within. He was
surprised that he'd had to do this. He'd thought Edith would be watching
at a window.

And perhaps she _had_ been watching ... but she hadn't opened the door.

The door opened; he looked at her. It hadn't been too long and she
hadn't changed at all. She was still the small, slender girl he'd loved
in high school, the small, slender woman he'd married twelve years ago.
Ralphie was with her. They held onto each other as if seeking mutual
support, the thirty-three-year old woman and ten-year-old boy. They
looked at him, and then both moved forward, still together. He said,
"It's good to be home!"

Edith nodded and, still holding to Ralphie with one hand, put the other
arm around him. He kissed her--her neck, her cheek--and all the old
jokes came to mind, the jokes of travel-weary, battle-weary men, the
and-_then_-I'll-put-my-pack-aside jokes that spoke of terrible hunger.
She was trembling, and even as her lips came up to touch his he felt the
difference, and because of this difference he turned with urgency to
Ralphie and picked him up and hugged him and said, because he could
think of nothing else to say, "What a big fella, what a big fella."

Ralphie stood in his arms as if his feet were still planted on the
floor, and he didn't look at his father but somewhere beyond him. "I
didn't grow much while you were gone, Dad, Mom says I don't eat enough."

So he put him down and told himself that it would all change, that
everything would loosen up just as his commanding officer, General
Carlisle, had said it would early this morning before he left
Washington.

"Give it some time," Carlisle had said. "You need the time; they need
the time. And for the love of heaven, don't be sensitive."

       *       *       *       *       *

Edith was leading him into the living room, her hand lying still in his,
a cool, dead bird lying still in his. He sat down on the couch, she sat
down beside him--but she had hesitated. He _wasn't_ being sensitive; she
had hesitated. His wife had hesitated before sitting down beside him.

Carlisle had said his position was analogous to Columbus', to Vasco De
Gama's, to Preshoff's when the Russian returned from the Moon--but more
so. Carlisle had said lots of things, but even Carlisle who had worked
with him all the way, who had engineered the entire fantastic
journey--even Carlisle the Nobel prize winner, the multi-degreed genius
in uniform, had not actually spoken to him as one man to another.

_The eyes. It always showed in their eyes._

He looked across the room at Ralphie, standing in the doorway, a boy
already tall, already widening in the shoulders, already large of
feature. It was like looking into the mirror and seeing himself
twenty-five years ago. But Ralphie's face was drawn, was worried in a
way that few ten-year-old faces are.

"How's it going in school?" he asked.

"Gee, Dad, it's the second month of summer vacation."

"Well, then, before summer vacation?"

"Pretty good."

Edith said, "He made top forum the six-month period before vacation, and
he made top forum the six-month period you went away, Hank."

He nodded, remembering that, remembering everything, remembering the
warmth of her farewell, the warmth of Ralphie's farewell, their tears as
he left for the experimental flight station in the Aleutians. They had
feared for him, having read of the many launchings gone wrong even in
continent-to-continent experimental flight.

They had been right to worry. He had suffered much after that blow-up.
But now they should be rejoicing, because he had survived and made the
long journey. Ralphie suddenly said, "I got to go, Dad. I promised Walt
and the others I'd pitch. It's Inter-Town Little League, you know. It's
