

"You're a fascinating person," the girl said. "I've never met anyone
like you before. Tell me your story again."

The man was short and stocky, with Asiatic features and a long, stringy
mustache. "The whole story?" he asked. "It would take a lifetime to tell
you." He stared out the window at the yellow sun and the red sun. He
still hadn't gotten used to seeing two suns. But that was minor, really,
when there were so many other things he had to get used to.

A robot waiter, with long thin metal tubes for arms and legs, glided
over. When he'd first seen one of those, he'd thought it was a demon.
He'd tried to smash it. They'd had trouble with him at first.

"They had trouble with me at first," he said.

"I can imagine," said the girl. "How did they explain it to you?"

"It was hard. They had to give me the whole history of medicine. It was
years before I got over the notion that I was up in the Everlasting Blue
Sky, or under the earth, or something." He grinned at the girl. She was
the first person he'd met since they got him a job and gave him a home
in a world uncountable light years from the one he'd been born on.

"When did you begin to understand?"

"They simply taught all of history to me. Including the part about
myself. Then I began to get the picture. Funny. I wound up teaching them
a lot of history."

"I bet you know a lot."

"I do," the man with the Asiatic features said modestly. "Anyway, they
finally got across to me that in the 22nd century--they had explained
the calendar to me, too; I used a different one in my day--they had
learned how to grow new limbs on people who had lost arms and legs."

"That was the first real step," said the girl.

"It was a long time till they got to the second step," he said. "They
learned how to stimulate life and new growth in people who had already
died."

"The next part is the thing I don't understand," the girl said.

"Well," said the man, "as I get it, they found that any piece of matter
that has been part of an organism, retains a physical 'memory' of the
entire structure of the organism of which it was part. And that they
