Wherever someone had found a suitable spot, there he had embedded his
poles. And there, he had erected walls, daubed them with clay from the
nearby stream, and formed long, limber wands from the thickets into
arched roofs, to be covered with long grass from the valley. There
were isolated houses, and there were tight little groups of houses.
Possibly, Pete thought, family groups.

No streets existed here, though generations of sandaled feet had beaten
the ground into winding paths which led from houses to wells, and from
wells to fields, and to the surrounding forest.

And there was no litter, as could be found in any city. No fallen twig
or leaf was allowed to remain on the ground of the village. Grass and
moss grew on unused ground and on hillsides, but before each hut, the
growth gave way to the forecourt and the small garden.

Here and there, a bank by a path had been reinforced with clay cemented
stones and over these grew the moss, to soften the hard outlines of the
works of man. Here and there, a small, neat pile of material for
building lay, to remind the onlooker that this was a still growing
community. Pete leaned back.

"It's quite a bit different from the plains," he said, "and not as I
thought it would be. I always thought the hillmen were wild and
uncultured." He turned toward Don.

"But you still haven't really answered my question. Why is it my father
has to talk to the Korental--alone?"

Don lifted a shoulder. "Simple enough," he said. "Your father is the
head of your branch of the family right now. It's a pretty small clan
branch--just the two of you, but he's the clan head--the Waerntal.
Right?"

"I suppose so. Yes." Pete thought a moment. "Actually, I guess he's tal
over more than just the two of us. We are the senior line of the
family."

"Well, then. This is clan business. Your father wants to advance a
member of his clan as a claimant for the throne of Oredan. He needs the
support of other clans to do this. And this is important clan business.
See?"

Pete rubbed at an ear. "I begin to get the idea, I guess, but it just
doesn't make too much sense. He could have you speak for him. Or I
could plead my own case, for that matter, couldn't I?"

"Makes all kinds of sense." Don shook his head. "Look, you can't talk
to the Korental--not on even terms--not now. You're just a clansman. If
he accepts you as king-to-be, then you'll be a sort of super clan head.
Then you'll be able to discuss policy with him. But even then, only as
an equal--never as a superior. He actually acknowledges no superior."
He pointed to himself, pausing.

"Me? Good grief, I'm not even in this. I'm just a hired hand--not even
a member of your clan. Before I could open my mouth, I'd have to be
adopted into your clan and designated as a clan councilor. Even then,
the tal would have to open the discussion.

[Illustration]

"Oh, I can talk to the Korental as an individual who wants to get help
from some of his people for a hunt, sure. And we can then arrange an
exchange of goods. That's between him and me. But if I tried to talk to
him on this affair, he'd throw me out of the village." He rubbed his
cheek thoughtfully.

"And, come to think of it, if he thought you'd asked me to intervene,
after he'd tossed me out, he'd probably feed you to the Choyneu. That,
he'd regard as a selling of honor."

Pete looked at him quizzically. "I can just see him--or any other
person, monarch or no--throwing you anywhere you didn't want to go. I'd
say the throwing would be the other way."

Don laughed softly. "Oh, that." He shook his head. "Well, let's just
say I don't think I'd care to try it out on a whole clan at once.
Things might get a little complicated."

                    *      *      *      *      *

A short, heavily muscled man came out of the council hut. In his hands,
he held his slender sling-stick. He paused as he got to the door, then
shook out the thong. For a moment, he stood, glancing across the end of
the valley, then he wound the thong about the stick, securing it at the
end with a half-hitch.

Again, he looked in the direction of Don and Pete. Then he held up the
stick and beckoned to them.

Don pushed himself away from the bank.

"Well," he said, "here we go. They've come to some sort of a decision."

They walked through the door of the hut, stopping as they came inside.
An old man sat on a hide-covered stool, facing the entrance. Near him
stood Jasu Waern. The old man got to his feet.

"Waernpeto?" he asked.

Pete stepped forward and bowed. "I am Peto of the clan Waern," he said.

"It is good." The Korental nodded briefly, then looked at Don.

"And Michaels. I know you," he added.

Don looked at him curiously. There was that odd form of address again.
Had he suddenly come to be regarded as clanless? What was this? He
bowed.

"I know you, Korental," he said formally.

The old man before him nodded.

"We are not now sure how to address you," he explained. "Your father
may yet be alive, so we cannot regard you as clan head. But as your
father has not been found you may, therefore, be clan head in fact. The
men of clan Mal-ka have joined us in searching the gorge of the Gharu,
where his flier was shot down. Thus far, nothing has been found. It is
a long gorge, and deep."

"Dad?" Don blinked. "Shot down?"

The Korental nodded. "Two days since," he said. "A flier of the Royal
Guard fired upon him and his flier weaved and dropped into the gorge.
No man saw its landing place." He paused thoughtfully.

"Nor were there flames."

Don glanced about the hut. It was the same place he had come to
many times before, when he wanted to get beaters. It was familiar.
And yet it was now a place of strangeness. Suddenly, he felt
rootless--disassociated from people. He struggled to regain his
poise and retain the formal manner expected of him. He managed a
bow of acknowledgment.

"I thank the Korental for this information," he said. "I beg permission
to await further word under his protection."

Somehow, he couldn't imagine anyone succeeding in shooting his father
out of the sky. Kent Michaels had been one of the hottest fighter men
in the guard. And even if he hadn't been able to get away from the guy,
he'd have taken him down with him. How...? He jerked his attention to
the Korental.

The old man had inclined his head. "My clan is yours during this time
of trouble," he was saying. He looked toward Pete.

                    *      *      *      *      *

"And you are he who would be King of the Oredanu?"

Pete nodded. "I am."

"I see. Your father tells me of certain agreements made many years ago.
He tells me of relationships, and of your possible adoption into
another clan. These things are true?"

Again Pete nodded. "These things are true."

The old man considered him for a few seconds.

"Among the men of the hills," he said, "the simple word of a man may be
accepted. For only a clanless one would think of speaking other than
the truth. But I am told the men of the low countries have no such
faith. They require writings, and the speech of many witnesses. This is
also true?"

The question was obviously rhetorical. Pete smiled ruefully, but said
nothing.

The Korental allowed his lips to curl in a half smile.

"These customs of the plainsmen are not unknown to me," he said. "Men
of my clan have gone to the low country and have dealt with the men of
the cities. Even now, members of the Kor-en live in the cities. But on
the clan days, they return to their home, here in the hills." He looked
down at the matting on the floor.

"Your father mentions a clan book," he continued. "Do you have this
with you?"

Pete looked at him, then at his father. His expression was suddenly
blank.

Jasu Waern stepped forward. "This book is in a safe place," he said,
"in Riandar."

Don closed his eyes for an instant. "Oh, Brother," he told himself,
"the lights just went out! I'll bet they're tearing that house up,
stone by stone, about now."

The Korental nodded slowly. "How safe?"

"Why," Jasu was thoughtful. "Why, the hiding place is known only to
me--and to my son." He bent his head, then looked up, smiling
confidently. "No, it could never be discovered by an outsider."

"The book must be produced," the Korental told him. He resumed his seat
on the stool and folded his hands over a short staff.

"We of the clans would be happy to support a legitimate claimant to the
throne of Oredan. We are not happy with the rule of this outlander who
has forced himself into power. But we also recognize the rules and the
customs of the nobles of the land, who must have proof of everything
before they will act. We are not strangers to the conclave, you must
remember. And we are familiar with the power of the outlander." He
looked at Don.

"Tell me," he said, "do you have an interest in this matter?"

Don nodded. "I am not of the clan Waern," he said carefully. "But my
interests have become tied with theirs. Should the Waernu fail, my
father's lands would be lost. And the climate of this land would become
unhealthy for me--as well as for my father, if he still lives."

"Yes." The Korental regarded him. "I can understand that. We are not as
uncivilized as many think us to be. We watched the broadcast of an
attack upon your house." He tilted his head.

"Tell me," he added. "The broadcast ended rather suddenly. The
announcer mentioned technical difficulties. Can you explain this?"

Don relaxed. The formal session was over for a while.

"I took a shot at them," he said, "with a Ghar rifle."

"Ha! They do have a weak spot, then. We'll discuss this later." The old
man looked at Jasu Waern.

"Let us suppose that this young man should ask to be adopted into your
clan. What would your answer be?"

Waern looked confused. "Why---- But he's been giving us----"

The Korental chuckled. "I know. He has some of those characteristics
attributed by legend to clan talu, and to them only." He bent his head
for a moment.

"Suppose I put it this way. When the clans and tribes meet for full
consideration of your request for support, you will need strong
council. And the councilor who presents your cause must be a member of
your clan, of course. He must speak for you, the head of the Waernu."

Waern looked at him. "I see," he said thoughtfully. "And here, we may
find strong council." He looked across at Don.

"You would consider this?"

Don paused. This, he thought, was getting serious. It had been fine at
first. He had just followed instructions from an experienced agent. And
there had been quite a thrill at being in the middle of things. But
somehow, everything was flying apart. All at once, he was on his own.

And now--well, clan councilors were pretty responsible individuals.
They were supposed to be the experts on law and custom. They were
supposed to put things together--and keep them that way. He could
remember daydreams he'd had once, of helping run a country. Some of
them had been pretty dramatic. But--well, it was beginning to look like
real trouble. If things went wrong, a councilor could get his neck on a
block for sure.

Then he smiled inwardly. So what of it? How could he get into any more
trouble? He already had the entire Enforcement Corps screaming for his
blood. He'd killed off a Royal Guard projector crew, an entire
Enforcement crew, and a few odd news people. They didn't like him. But
they wanted him. The only way out of this one would be straight ahead.
He nodded.

"Of course," he said simply.

The Korental came to his feet and grabbed his staff. Beside his stool
was a battered tone tube. He swung the staff at the dented wood and a
deep tone followed the sharp crack.

He wheeled upon the man who came through the door.

"Tell the Korensahn to come up here," he ordered. "And have him bring
five men with him. We have a clan adoption to witness."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Don flexed his back and hunched his shoulders a little to get the
pack-board more comfortably settled. The darn things were heavy. He
looked at the others, who walked along the road. Hang it, they seemed
to swing along under their loads as though they were just taking a
short walk before breakfast. He poked at the hard ground with his
stick.

How had he managed to haul himself into this one, anyway? Blasted thing
had all seemed so logical, back there in Korelanni. He reviewed the
steps.

First, it had been essential that the safety and contents of the Book
of the Waernu be determined. Without it, Pete's claim would be so vague
as to be untenable. Especially before a conclave with the regent in
active opposition.

Second, the book would have to be placed in safekeeping where it could
be immediately produced upon demand. He frowned. That was a tough one.
So anyway----

Then, there had come the question. Who was going to get this book and
bring it back--or protect it? Pete was too valuable and too vulnerable.
He was known, and if any of the police agencies got their hands on him
... well, that would be all. So Pete was out.

Jasu Waern? Don grinned to himself. "Skip it," he told himself. He
poked at the ground again with the stick. It was getting hot. And he
was thirsty.

"Hope that gunk they used to monkey up my complexion doesn't sweat
out," he told himself. "That would do it for sure."

He glanced up at the sky. It was getting close to midday. Ahead, he
