    have compassion of him and to deliver him out of the hands of Satan."

What a picture! what a story! "Of all tales 'tis the saddest--and more sad
because it makes us smile."

Captain John Underhill was a brave though somewhat bumptious soldier, who
had fought under the Prince of Orange in the War of the Netherlands, and
had been employed as temporal drill-master in the church-militant in New
England. He did good service for the colonists in the war with the Pequot
Indians, and indeed wherever there was any fighting to be done. "He thrust
about and justled into fame" He also managed to have apparently a very good
time in the new land, both in sinning and repenting. When he stood up on
the church-seat before the horrified, yet wide-open eyes of pious Boston
folk, in his studiously and theatrically disarranged garments, and
blubbered out his whining yet vain-glorious repentance, he doubtless acted
his part well, for he had twice before been through the same performance,
supplementing his second rehearsal by kneeling down before an injured
husband in the congregation, and asking earthly forgiveness. I wish I
could believe that this final repentance of the resilient captain were
sincere--but I cannot. Nor did Boston people believe it either, though that
noble and generous-minded man, Winthrop, thought he saw at the time of
confession evidences of a truly contrite heart. The Puritans sternly and
eagerly cast out the gay captain to the Dutch when he became an Antinomian,
and he came to live and fight and gallant in a town on the western end of
Long Island, where he perhaps found a church-home with members less severe
and less sharp-eyed than those of his Boston place of martyrdom, and a
people less inclined to resent and punish his frailties and his ways of
amusing himself.

In justice to Underhill (or perhaps to show his double-dealing) I will say
that he left behind him a letter to Hanserd Knollys, complaining of the
ill-treatment he had received; and in it he gives a very different account
of this little affair with the Boston Church from that given us by Governor
Winthrop. The offender says nothing about his hypocrisy, his public and
self-abasing confession, nor of his sanctimonious blubbering and wishes for
death. He explains that his offence was mild and purely mental, that in an
infaust moment he glanced (doubtless stared soldier-fashion) at "Mistris
Miriam Wildbore" as she sat in her "pue" at meeting. The elders, noting his
admiring and amorous glances, thereupon accused him of sin in his heart,
and severely asked him why he did not look instead at Mistress Newell or
Mistress Upham. He replied very spiritedly and pertinently that these dames
were "not desiryable women as to temporal graces," which was certainly
sufficient and proper reason for any man to give, were he Puritan or
Cavalier. Then acerb old John Cotton and some other Boston ascetics
(perhaps Goodman Newell and Goodman Upham, resenting for their wives the
_spretae injuria formae_) at once hunted up some plainly applicable
verses from the Bible that clearly proved him guilty of the alleged
sin--and summarily excommunicated him. He also wrote that the pious church
complained that the attractive, the temporally graced Mistress Wildbore
came vainly and over-bravely clad to meeting, with "wanton open-worked
gloves slitt at the thumbs and fingers for the purpose of taking snuff,"
and he resented this complaint against the fair one, saying no harm could
surely come from indulging in the "good creature called tobacco." He would
naturally feel that snuff-taking was a proper and suitable church-custom,
since his own conversion,--dubious though it was,--his religious belief had
come to him, "the spirit fell home upon his heart" while he was indulging
in a quiet smoke.

The story of his offences as told b his contemporaries does not assign to
him so innocuous a diversion as staring across the meeting-house, but the
account is quite as amusing as his own plaintive and deeply injured version
of his arraignment.

Other letters of his have been preserved to us,--letters blustering as
was Ancient Pistol, and equally sanctimonious, letters fearfully and
phonetically spelt. Here is the opening of a letter written while he
was under sentence of excommunication from the Boston Church, and of
banishment. It is to Governor Winthrop, his friend and fellow-emigrant:--

"Honnored in the Lord,--

"Your silenc one more admirse me. I Youse chrischan playnnes. I know you
love it.... Silene can not reduce the hart of youer lovd brother: I would
the rightchous would smite me espechah youerslfe & the honnered Depoti to
whom I also dereckt this letter.... I would to God you would tender me
soule so as to youse playnnes with me. I wrot to you both but now answer: &
here I am dayli abused by malishous tongue. John Baker I here hath wrot to
the honnored depoti how as I was drouck & like to be cild & both falc, upon
okachon I delt with Wannerton for intrushon & finddmg them resolutli bent
to rout all gud a mong us & advanc there superstischous ways & by boystrous
words indeferd to fritten men to accomplish his end. & he abusing me to
my face, dru upon him with intent to corb his insolent & dastardli
sperrite.... Ister daye on Pickeren their Chorch Warden caim up to us with
intent to make some of ourse drone as is sospeckted but the Lord sofered
him so to misdemen himslfe as he is likli to li by the hielse this too
month.... My homble request is that you will be charitable of me.... Let
justies and merci be goyned.... You may plese to soggest youer will to this
barrer you will find him tracktabel."

My sense of drollery is always most keenly tickled when I read Underhill's
epistles, with their amazing and highly-varied letter concoctions, and
remember that he also--wrote a book. What that seventeenth-century printer
and proof-reader endured ere they presented his "edited" volume to the
public must have been beyond expression by words. It was a pretty good book
though, and in it, like many another man of his ilk, he tendered to his
much-injured wife loud and diffuse praise, ending with these sententious
words, "Let no man despise advice and counsel of his wife--though she be a
woman."

And yet, upon careful examination we find a method, a system, in
Underhill's orthography, or rather in his cacography. He thinks a final
tion should be spelt chon--and why not? "proposichon," "satisfackchon,"
"oblegachon," "persekuchon," "dereckchon," "himelyachon"--thus he spells
such words. And his plurals are plain when once you grasp his laws:
"poseschouse" and "considderachonse," "facktse," and "respecktse." And
his ly is alwajs li, "exacktli," "thorroli," "fidelliti," "charriti,"
"falsciti." And why is not "indiered," as good as 'endeared,' "pregedic,"
as 'prejudice,' "obstrucktter" as 'obstructer,' "pascheges," and
"prouydentt," and "antyentt," just as clear as our own way of spelling
these words? A "painful" speller you surely were, my gay Don Juan
Underbill, as your pedantic "writtingse" all show, and the most dramatic
and comic figure among all the early Puritans as well, though you scarcely
deserve to be called a Puritan; we might rather say of you, as of Malvolio,
"The devil a Puritan that he was, or anything constantly but a
time-pleaser ... his ground of faith that all who looked on him loved him."

In keen contrast to this sentimental excitement is the presence of noble
Judge Sewall, white-haired and benignant, standing up calmly in Boston
meeting, with dignified face and demeanor, but an aching and contrite
heart, to ask through the voice of his minister humble forgiveness of God
and man for his sad share as a judge in the unjust and awful condemnation
and cruel sentencing to death of the poor murdered victims of that terrible
delusion the Salem Witchcraft. Years of calm and unshrinking reflection, of
pleading and constant communion with God had brought to him an overwhelming
sense of his mistaken and over-influenced judgment, and a horror and
remorse for the fatal results of his error. Then, like the steadfast and
upright old Puritan that he was, he publicly acknowledged his terrible
mistake. It is one of the finest instances of true nobility of soul and of
absolute self-renunciation that the world affords. And the deep strain, the
sharp wrench of the step is made more apparent still by the fact of the
disapproval of his fellow-judges of his public confession and recantation.
The yearly entries in his diary, simply expressed yet deeply speaking,
entries of the prayerful fasts which he spent alone in his chamber when
the anniversary of the fatal judgment-day returned, show that no half-vain
bigotry, no emotional excitement filled and moved him to the open words of
remorse. The lesson of his repentance is farther reaching than he
dreamed, when the story of his confession can so move and affect this
nineteenth-century generation, and fill more than one soul with a nobler
idea of the Puritan nature, and with a higher and fuller conception of the
absolute truth of the Puritan Christianity.

Some very prosaic and earthly interruptions to the church services are
recorded as being made, and possibly by the church-members themselves. In
one church, in 1661, a fine of five shillings was imposed on any one "who
shot off a gun or led a horse into the meeting-house." These seem to me
quite as unseemly, irreverent, and disagreeable disturbances as shouting
out, Quaker-fashion, "Parson, your sermon is too long;" but possibly the
house of God was turned into a stable on week-days, not on the Sabbath.

In many parishes church-attendants were fined who brought their "doggs"
into the meeting-house. Dogs swarmed in the colony, for they had been
imported from England, "sufficient mastive dogs, hounds and beagles," and
also Irish wolf-hounds; and they caused an interruption in one afternoon
service by chasing into the meeting-house one of those pungently offensive,
though harmless, animals that abounded even in the earliest colonial
days, and whose mephitic odor, in this case, had power to scatter the
congregation as effectively as would have a score of armed Indian braves.
Officially appointed "Dogg-whippers" and the never idle tithingman expelled
the intruding and unwelcome canine attendants from the meeting-house with
fierce blows and fiercer yelps. The swarming dogs, though they were trained
to hunt the Indians and wolves and tear them in pieces, were much fonder of
hunting and tearing the peaceful sheep, and thus became such unmitigated
nuisances, out of meeting as well as in, that they had to be muzzled and
hobbled, and killed, and land was granted (as in Newbury in 1703) on
condition that no dog was ever kept thereon. As late as the year 1820, it
was ordered in the town of Brewster that any dog that came into meeting
should be killed unless the owner promised to thenceforth keep the intruder
out.

Alarms of fire in the neighborhood frequently disturbed the quiet of
the early colonial services; for the combustible catted chimneys were
a constant source of conflagration, especially on Sundays, when the
fireplaces with their roaring fires were left unwatched; and all the men
rushed out of the meeting at sound of the alarm to aid in quenching the
flames, which could however be ill-fought with the scanty supply of
water that could be brought in a few leathern fire-buckets and
milk-pails,--though at a very early date as an aid in extinguishing
fires each New England family was ordered by law to own a fire-ladder.
Occasionally the town's ladder and poles and hooks and cedar-buckets were
kept in the meeting-house, and thus were handy for Sunday fires.

Sometimes armed men, bearing rumors of wars and of hostile attacks, rode
clattering up to the church-door, and strode with jingling spurs and
rattling swords into the excited assembly with appeal for more soldiers to
bear arms, or for more help for those already in the army, and the whole
congregation felt it no interruption but a high religious privilege and
duty, to which they responded in word and deed. On some happy Sabbaths the
armed riders bore good news of great victories, and great was the rejoicing
thereat in prayer and praise in the old meeting-house.

But usually through the Sabbath services, though the quiet was not that
of our modern carpeted, cushioned, orderly churches, but few interrupting
sounds were heard. The cry of a waking infant, the scraping of restless
feet on the sanded floor, the lumbering noise of the motions of a cramped
farmer as he stood up to lean over the pew-door or gallery-rail, the
clatter of an overturned cricket, the twittering of swallows in the
rafters, and in the summer-time the bumping and buzzing of an invading
bumble-bee as he soared through the air and against the walls, were
the only sounds within the meeting-house that broke the monotonous
"thirteenthly" and "fourteenthly" of the minister's sermon.




XVII.

The Observances of the Day.



The so-called "False Blue Laws" of Connecticut, which were foisted upon the
public by the Reverend Samuel Peter, have caused much indignation among all
thoughtful descendants and all lovers of New England Puritans. Three of
his most bitterly resented false laws which refer to the observance of the
Sabbath read thus:--

"No one shall travel, cook victuals, make beds, sweep house, cut hair, or
shave on the Sabbath Day.

"No woman shall kiss her child on the Sabbath or fasting day.

"No one shall ride on the Sabbath Day, or walk in his garden or elsewhere
except reverently to and from meeting."

Though these laws were worded by Dr. Peters, and though we are disgusted to
hear them so often quoted as historical facts, still we must acknowledge
that though in detail not correct, they are in spirit true records of the
old Puritan laws which were enacted to enforce the strict and decorous
observance of the Sabbath, and which were valid not only in Connecticut and
Massachusetts, but in other New England States. Even a careless glance at
the historical record of any old town or church will give plenty of details
to prove this.

Thus in New London we find in the latter part of the seventeenth century a
wicked fisherman presented before the Court and fined for catching eels on
Sunday; another "fined twenty shillings for sailing a boat on the Lord's
Day;" while in 1670 two lovers, John Lewis and Sarah Chapman, were accused
of and tried for "sitting together on the Lord's Day under an apple tree in
Goodman Chapman's Orchard,"--so harmless and so natural an act. In Plymouth
a man was "sharply whipped" for shooting fowl on Sunday; another was fined
for carrying a grist of corn home on the Lord's Day, and the miller who
allowed him to take it was also fined. Elizabeth Eddy of the same town was
fined, in 1652, "ten shillings for wringing and hanging out clothes." A
Plymouth man, for attending to his tar-pits on the Sabbath, was set in the
stocks. James Watt, in 1658, was publicly reproved "for writing a note
about common business on the Lord's Day, _at least in the evening
somewhat too soon._" A Plymouth man who drove a yoke of oxen was
"presented" before the Court, as was also another offender, who drove some
cows a short distance "without need" on the Sabbath.

In Newbury, in 1646, Aquila Chase and his wife were presented and fined for
gathering peas from their garden on the Sabbath, but upon investigation the
fines were remitted, and the offenders were only admonished. In Wareham,
in 1772, William Estes acknowledged himself "Gilty of Racking Hay on the
Lord's Day" and was fined ten shillings; and in 1774 another Wareham
citizen, "for a breach of the Sabbath in puling apples," was fined five
shillings. A Dunstable soldier, for "wetting a piece of an old hat to put
in his shoe" to protect his foot--for doing this piece of heavy work on the
Lord's Day, was fined, and paid forty shillings.

Captain Kemble of Boston was in 1656 set for two hours in the public stocks
for his "lewd and unseemly behavior," which, consisted in his kissing his
wife "publicquely" on the Sabbath Day, upon the doorstep of his house, when
he had just returned from a voyage and absence of three years. The lewd
offender was a man of wealth and influence, the father of Madam Sarah
Knights, the "fearfull female travailler" whose diary of a journey from
Boston to New York and return, written in 1704, rivals in quality if not in
quantity Judge Sewall's much-quoted diary. A traveller named Burnaby tells
of a similar offence of an English sea-captain who was soundly whipped for
kissing his wife on the street of a New England town on Sunday, and of his
retaliation in kind, by a clever trick upon his chastisers; but Burnaby's
narrative always seemed to me of dubious credibility.

Abundant proof can be given that the act of the legislature in 1649 was not
a dead letter which ordered that "whosoever shall prophane the Lords daye
by doeing any seruill worke or such like abusses shall forfeite for euery
such default ten shillings or be whipt."

The Vermont "Blue Book" contained equally sharp "Sunday laws." Whoever was
guilty of any rude, profane, or unlawful conduct on the Lord's Day, in
words or action, by clamorous discourses, shouting, hallooing, screaming,
running, riding, dancing, jumping, was to be fined forty shillings and
whipped upon the naked back not to exceed ten stripes. The New Haven code
of laws, more severe still, ordered that "Profanation of the Lord's Day
shall be punished by fine, imprisonment, or corporeal punishment; and
if proudly, and with a high hand against the authority of God--_with
death_."

Lists of arrests and fines for walking and travelling unnecessarily on the
Sabbath might be given in great numbers, and it was specially ordered
that none should "ride violently to and from meeting." Many a pious New
Englander, in olden days, was fined for his ungodly pride, and his desire
to "show off" his "new colt" as he "rode violently" up to the meeting-house
green on Sabbath morn. One offender explained in excuse of his unnecessary
driving on the Sabbath that he had been to visit a sick relative, but
his excuse was not accepted. A Maine man who was rebuked and fined for
"unseemly walking" on the Lord's Day protested that he ran to save a man
from drowning. The Court made him pay his fine, but ordered that the money
should be returned to him when he could prove by witnesses that he had
been on that errand of mercy and duty. As late as the year 1831, in
Lebanon, Connecticut, a lady journeying to her father's home was arrested
within sight of her father's house for unnecessary travelling on the
Sabbath; and a long and fiercely contested lawsuit was the result, and
damages were finally given for false imprisonment. In 1720 Samuel Sabin
complained of himself before a justice in Norwich that he visited on
Sabbath night some relatives at a neighbor's house. His morbidly tender
conscience smote him and made him "fear he had transgressed the law,"
though he felt sure no harm had been done thereby. In 1659 Sam Clarke, for
"Hankering about on men's gates on Sabbath evening to draw company out
to him," was reproved and warned not to "harden his neck" and be "wholly
destrojed." Poor stiff-necked, lonely, "hankering" Sam! to be so harshly
reproved for his harmlessly sociable intents. Perhaps he "hankered" after
the Puritan maids, and if so, deserved his reproof and the threat of
annihilation.

Sabbath-breaking by visiting abounded in staid Worcester town to a most
base extent, but was severely punished, as local records show. In Belfast,
Maine, in 1776, a meeting was held to get the "Towns Mind" with regard to
a plan to restrain visiting on the Sabbath. The time had passed when such
offences could be punished either by fine or imprisonment, so it was voted
"that if any person makes unnecessary Vizits on the Sabeth, They shall be
Look't on with Contempt." This was the universal expression throughout the
Puritan colonies; and looked on with contempt are Sabbath-breakers and
Sabbath-slighters in New England to the present day. Even if they committed
no active offence, the colonists could not passively neglect the Church
and its duties. As late as 1774 the First Church of Roxbury fined
non-attendance at public worship. In 1651 Thomas Scott "was fyned ten
shillings unless he have learned Mr. Norton's 'Chatacise' by the next
court" In 1760 the legislature of Massachusetts passed the law that "any
person able of Body who shall absent themselves from publick worship of God
on the Lord's Day shall pay ten shillings fine." By the Connecticut code
ten shillings was the fine, and the law was not suspended until the year
1770. By the New Haven code five shillings was the fine for non-attendance
at church, and the offender was often punished as well. Captain Dennison,
one of New Haven's most popular and respected citizens, was fined fifteen
shillings for absence from church. William Blagden, who lived in New Haven
in 1647, was "brought up" for absence from meeting. He pleaded that he had
fallen into the water late on Saturday, could light no fire on Sunday to
dry his clothes, and so had lain in bed to keep warm while his only suit of
garments was drying. In spite of this seemingly fair excuse, Blagden was
found guilty of "sloathefuluess" and sentenced to be "publiquely whipped."
Of course the Quakers contributed liberally to the support of the Court,
and were fined in great numbers for refusing to attend the church which
they hated, and which also warmly abhorred them; and they were zealously
set in the stocks, and whipped and caged and pilloried as well,--whipped
if they came and expressed any dissatisfaction, and whipped if they stayed
away.

Severe and explicit were the orders with regard to the use of the "Creature
called Tobacko" on the Sabbath. In the very earliest days of the colony
means had been taken to present the planting of the pernicious weed
except in very small quantities "for meere necessitie, for phisick, for
preseruaceon of health, and that the same be taken privatly by auncient
men." In Connecticut a man could by permission of the law smoke once if
he went on a journey of ten miles (as some slight solace for the arduous
trip), but never more than once a day, and never in another man's house.
Let us hope that on their lonely journeys they conscientiously obeyed the
law, though we can but suspect that the one unsocial smoke may have been a
long one. In some communities the colonists could not plant tobacco, nor
buy it, nor sell it, but since they loved the fascinating weed then as men
love it now, they somehow invoked or spirited it into their pipes, though
they never could smoke it in public unfined and unpunished. The shrewd and
thrifty New Haven people permitted the raising of it for purposes of trade,
though not for use, thus supplying the "devil's weed" to others, chiefly
the godless Dutch, but piously spurning it themselves--in public. Its use
was absolutely forbidden under any circumstances on the Sabbath within two
miles of the meeting-house, which (since at that date all the homes were
clustered around the church-green) was equivalent to not smoking it at all
on the Lord's Day, if the lav were obeyed. But wicked backsliders existed,
poor slaves of habit, who were in Duxbury fined ten shillings for each
offence, and in Portsmouth, not only were fined, but to their shame be it
told, set as jail-birds in the Portsmouth cage. In Sandwich and in Boston
the fine for "drinking tobacco in the meeting-house" was five shillings for
each drink, which I take to mean chewing tobacco rather than smoking it;
many men were fined for thus drinking, and solacing the weary hours, though
doubtless they were as sly and kept themselves as unobserved as possible.
Four Yarmouth men--old sea-dogs, perhaps, who loved their pipe--were, in
1687, fined four shillings each for smoking tobacco around the end of the
meeting-house. Silly, ostrich-brained Yarmouth men! to fancy to escape
detection by hiding around the corner of the church; and to think that the
tithingman had no nose when he was so Argus-eyed. Some few of the ministers
used the "tobacco weed." Mr. Baily wrote with distress of mind and
abasement of soul in his diary of his "exceeding in tobacco." The hatred of
the public use of tobacco lingered long in New England, even in large towns
such as Providence, though chiefly on account of universal dread lest
sparks from the burning weed should start conflagrations in the towns.
Until within a few years, in small towns in western Massachusetts,
Easthampton and neighboring villages, tobacco-smoking on the street was not
permitted either on weekdays or Sundays.

Not content with strict observance of the Sabbathday alone, the Puritans
included Saturday evening in their holy day, and in the first colonial
years these instructions were given to Governor Endicott by the New England
Plantation Company: "And to the end that the Sabeth may be celebrated in
a religious man ner wee appoint that all may surcease their labor every
Satterday throughout the yeare at three of the clock in the afternoone, and
that they spend the rest of the day in chatechizing and preparacoon for
the Sabeth as the ministers shall direct." Cotton Mather wrote thus of his
grandfather, old John Cotton: "The Sabbath he begun the evening before, for
which keeping from evening to evening he wrote arguments before his coming
to New England, and I suppose 't was from his reason and practice that the
Christians of New England have generally done so too." He then tells of the
protracted religious services held in the Cotton household every Saturday
night,--services so long that the Sabbath-day exercises must have seemed in
comparison like a light interlude.

John Norton described these Cotton Sabbaths more briefly thus: "He [John
Cotton] began the Sabbath at evening; therefore then performed family-duty
after supper, being longer than ordinary in Exposition. After which he
catechized his children and servants and then returned unto his study. The
