saving truth are driving to perdition those criminals under their
care, whom it is their duty to save.

[FN#168]  It is not conscience in the ordinary sense of the term.  It
is 'moral' principle, according to Wang, pervading through the
Universe.  'It expresses itself as Providence in Heaven, as moral
nature in man, and as mechanical laws in things.'  The reader will
notice that Wang's Conscience is the nearest approach to
Buddha-nature.



11. The Bad are the Good in the Egg.

This is not only the case with a robber or a murderer, but also with
ordinary people.  There are many who are honest and good in their
homesteads, but turn out to be base and dishonest folk outside them.
Similarly, there are those who, having an enthusiastic love of their
local district, act unlawfully against the interests of other
districts.  They are upright and honourable gentlemen within the
boundary of their own district, but a gang of rascals without it.  So
also there are many who are Washingtons and William Tells in their
own, but at the same time pirates and cannibals in the other
countries.  Again, there are not a few persons who, having racial
prejudices, would not allow the rays of their Buddha-nature to pass
through a coloured skin.  There are civilized persons who are humane
enough to love and esteem any human being as their brother, but so
unfeeling that they think lower creatures as their proper food.  The
highly enlightened person, however, cannot but sympathize with human
beings and lower creatures as well, as Shakya Muni felt all sentient
beings to be his children.

These people are exactly the same in their Buddha-nature, but a wide
difference obtains among them in the extent of their expressing that
nature in deeds.  If thieves and murderers be called bad-natured,
reformers and revolutionists should be called so.  If, on the other
hand, patriotism and loyalty be said to be good, treason and
insurrection should likewise be so.  Therefore it is evident that a
so-called good person is none but one who acts to promote wider
interests of life, and a so-called bad person is none but one who
acts to advance narrower ones.  In other words, the bad are the good
in the egg, so to speak, and the good are the bad on the wing.  As
the bird in the egg is one and the same as the bird on the wing, so
the good in the egg is entirely of the same nature as the bad on the
wing.  To show that human nature transcends the duality of good and
evil, the author of Avatamsaka-sutra declares that 'all beings are
endowed with the wisdom and virtue of Tathagata.'  Kwei Fung (Kei-ho)
also says: "All sentient beings have the Real Spirit of Original
Enlightenment (within themselves).  It is unchanging and pure.  It is
eternally bright and clear, and conscious.  It is also named
Buddha-nature, or Tathagata-garbha."



12. The Great Person and Small Person.

For these reasons Zen proposes to call man Buddha-natured or
Good-natured in a sense transcendental to the duality of good and
bad.  It conveys no sense to call some individuals good in case there
is no bad individual.  For the sake of convenience, however, Zen
calls man good, as is exemplified by Shakya Muni, who was wont to
address his hearers as 'good men and women,' and by the Sixth
Patriarch in China, who called everybody 'a good and wise one.'  This
does not imply in the least that all human beings are virtuous,
sinless, and saintly-nay, the world is full of vices and crimes.  It
is an undeniable fact that life is the warfare of good against evil,
and many a valiant hero has fallen in the foremost ranks.  It is
curious, however, to notice that the champions on the both sides are
fighting for the same cause.  There can be no single individual in
the world who is fighting against his own cause or interest, and the
only possible difference between one party and the other consists in
the extent of interests which they fight for.  So-called bad persons,
who are properly designated as 'small persons' by Chinese and
Japanese scholars, express their Buddha-nature to a small extent
mostly within their own doors, while so-called good persons, or
'great persons' as the Oriental scholars call them, actualize their
Buddha-nature to a large extent in the whole sphere of a country, or
of the whole earth.

Enlightened Consciousness, or Buddha-nature, as we have seen in the
previous chapter, is the mind of mind and the consciousness of
consciousness, Universal Spirit awakened in individual minds, which
realizes the universal brotherhood of all beings and the unity of
individual lives.  It is the real self, the guiding principle, the
Original Physiognomy[FN#169] (nature), as it is called by Zen, of
man.  This real self lies dormant under the threshold of
consciousness in the minds of the confused; consequently, each of
them is inclined to regard petty individual as his self, and to exert
himself to further the interests of the individual self even at the
cost of those of the others.  He is 'the smallest person' in the
world, for his self is reduced to the smallest extent possible.  Some
of the less confused identify their selves with their families, and
feel happy or unhappy in proportion as their families are happy or
unhappy, for the sake of which they sacrifice the interests of other
families.  On the other hand, some of the more enlightened unite
their selves through love and compassion with their whole tribe or
countrymen, and consider the rise or fall of the tribe or of the
country as their own, and willingly sacrifice their own lives, if
need be, for the cause of the tribe or the country.  When they are
fully enlightened, they can realize the unity of all sentient lives,
and be ever merciful and helpful towards all creatures.  They are
'the greatest persons' on earth, because their selves are enlarged to
the greatest extent possible.


[FN#169]  The expression first occurs in Ho-bo-dan-kyo of the Sixth
Patriarch, and is frequently used by later Zenists.



13. The Theory of Buddha-Nature adequately explains the Ethical
States of Man.

This theory of Buddha-nature enables us to get an insight into the
origin of morality.  The first awakening of Buddha-nature within man
is the very beginning of morality, and man's ethical progress is the
gradually widening expression of that nature in conduct.  But for it
morality is impossible for man.  But for it not only moral culture or
discipline, but education and social improvement must be futile.
Again, the theory adequately explains the ethical facts that the
standard of morality undergoes change in different times and places,
that good and bad are so inseparably knit together, and that the bad
at times become good all on a sudden, and the good grow bad quite
unexpectedly.  First, it goes without saying that the standard of
morality is raised just in proportion as Buddha-nature or real self
extends and amplifies itself in different times and places.
Secondly, since good is Buddha-nature actualized to a large extent,
and bad is also Buddha-nature actualized to a small extent, the
existence of the former presupposes that of the latter, and the mess
of duality can never be got rid of.  Thirdly, the fact that the bad
become good under certain circumstances, and the good also become bad
often unexpectedly, can hardly be explained by the dualistic theory,
because if good nature be so arbitrarily turned into bad and bad
nature into good, the distinction of good and bad nature has no
meaning whatever.  According to the theory of Buddha-nature, the fact
that the good become bad or the bad become good, does not imply in
the least a change of nature, but the widening or the narrowing of
its actualization.  So that no matter how morally degenerated one may
be, he can uplift himself to a high ethical plane by the widening of
his self, and at the same time no matter how morally exalted one may
be, he can descend to the level of the brute by the narrowing of his
self.  To be an angel or to be a devil rests with one's degrees of
enlightenment and free choice.  This is why such infinite varieties
exist both among the good and the bad.  This is why the higher the
peak of enlightenment the people climb, the more widely the vista of
moral possibilities open before them.



14. Buddha-Nature is the Common Source of Morals.

Furthermore, Buddha-nature or real self, being the seat of love and
the nucleus of sincerity, forms the warp and woof of all moral
actions.  He is an obedient son who serves his parents with sincerity
and love.  He is a loyal subject who serves his master with sincerity
and love.  A virtuous wife is she who loves her husband with her
sincere heart.  A trustworthy friend is he who keeps company with
others with sincerity and love.  A man of righteousness is he who
leads a life of sincerity and love.  Generous and humane is he who
sympathizes with his fellow-men with his sincere heart.  Veracity,
chastity, filial piety, loyalty, righteousness, generosity, humanity,
and what not-all-this is no other than Buddha-nature applied to
various relationships of human brotherhood.  This is the common
source, ever fresh and inexhaustible, of morality that fosters and
furthers the interests of all.  To-ju[FN#170] expresses the similar
idea as follows:

"There exists the Inexhaustible Source (of morality) within me.
It is an invaluable treasure.
It is called Bright Nature of man.
It is peerless and surpasses all jewels.
The aim of learning is to bring out this Bright Nature.
This is the best thing in the world.
Real happiness can only be secured by it."

Thus, in the first place, moral conduct, which is nothing but the
expression of Buddha-nature in action, implies the assertion of self
and the furtherance of one's interests.  On this point is based the
half-truth of the Egoistic theory. Secondly, it is invariably
accompanied by a feeling of pleasure or satisfaction when it fulfils
its end.  This accidental concomitance is mistaken for its essence by
superficial observers who adhere to the Hedonistic theory.  Thirdly,
it conduces to the furtherance of the material and spiritual
interests of man, and it led the Utilitarians to the confusion of the
result with the cause of morality.  Fourthly, it involves the control
or sacrifice of the lower and ignoble self of an individual in order
to realize his higher and nobler self.  This gave rise to the
half-truth of the Ascetic theory of morality.


[FN#170]  To-ju Naka-e (died A.D. 1649), the founder of the Japanese
Wang School of Confucianism, known as the Sage of Omi.



15. The Parable of a Drunkard.

Now the question arises, If all human beings are endowed with
Buddha-nature, why have they not come naturally to be Enlightened?
To answer this question, the Indian Mahayanists[FN#171] told the
parable of a drunkard who forgets the precious gems put in his own
pocket by one of his friends.  The man is drunk with the poisonous
liquor of selfishness, led astray by the alluring sight of the
sensual objects, and goes mad with anger, lust, and folly.  Thus he
is in a state of moral poverty, entirely forgetting the precious gem
of Buddha-nature within him.  To be in an honourable position in
society as the owner of that valuable property, he must first get rid
himself of the influence of the liquor of self, and detach himself
from sensual objects, gain control over his passion, restore peace
and sincerity to his mind, and illumine his whole existence by his
inborn divine light.  Otherwise he has to remain in the same plight
to all eternity.


[FN#171]  Mahaparinirvana-sutra.


Lot us avail ourselves of another figure to explain more clearly the
point at issue.  Universal Spirit may fitly be likened to the
universal water, or water circulating through the whole earth.  This
universal water exists everywhere.  It exists in the tree.  It exists
in the grass.  It exists in the mountain.  It exists in the river.
It exists in the sea.  It exists in the air.  It exists in the cloud.
 Thus man is not only surrounded by water on all sides, but it
penetrates his very body.  But be can never appease his thirst
without drinking water.  In like manner Universal Spirit exists
everywhere.  It exists in the tree.  It exists in the grass.  It
exists in the ground.  It exists in the mountain.  It exists in the
river.  It exists in the sea.  It exists in the bird.  It exists in
the beast.  Thus man is not merely surrounded by Spirit on all sides,
but it permeates through his whole existence.  But he can never be
Enlightened unless he awakens it within him by means of Meditation.
To drink water is to drink the universal water; to awaken
Buddha-nature is to be conscious of Universal Spirit.

Therefore, to get Enlightened we have to believe that all beings are
Buddha-natured--that is, absolutely good-natured in the sense that
transcends the duality of good and bad.  "One day," to cite an
example, "Pan Shan (Ban-zan) happened to pass by a meat-shop.  He
heard a customer saying: 'Give me a pound of fresh meat.'  To which
the shopkeeper, putting down his knife, replied: Certainly, sir.
Could there be any meat that is not fresh in my shop?'  Pan Shan,
hearing these remarks, was Enlightened at once."



16. Shakya Muni and the Prodigal Son.

A great trouble with us is that we do not believe in half the good
that we are born with.  We are just like the only son of a
well-to-do, as the author of Saddharma-pundarika-sutra[FN#172] tells
us, who, being forgetful of his rich inheritance, leaves his home and
leads a life of hand-to-mouth as a coolie.  How miserable it is to
see one, having no faith in his noble endowment, burying the precious
gem of Buddha-nature into the foul rubbish of vices and crimes,
wasting his excellent genius in the exertion that is sure to disgrace
his name, falling a prey to bitter remorse and doubt, and casting
himself away into the jaw of perdition.  Shakya Muni, full of
fatherly love towards all beings, looked with compassion on us, his
prodigal son, and used every means to restore the half-starved man to
his home.  It was for this that he left the palace and the beloved
wife and son, practised his self-mortification and prolonged
Meditation, attained to Enlightenment, and preached Dharma for
forty-nine years; in other words, all his strength and effort were
focussed on that single aim, which was to bring the prodigal son to
his rich mansion of Buddha-nature.  He taught not only by words, but
by his own actual example, that man has Buddha-nature, by the
unfoldment of which he can save himself from the miseries of life and
death, and bring himself to a higher realm than gods.  When we are
Enlightened, or when Universal Spirit awakens within us, we open the
inexhaustible store of virtues and excellencies, and can freely make
use of them at our will.


[FN#172]  See 'Sacred Books of the East,' vol. xxi., chap. iv., pp.
98-118.



17. The Parable of the Monk and the Stupid Woman.

The confused or unenlightened may be compared with a monk and a
stupid woman in a Japanese parable which runs as follows: "One
evening a monk (who was used to have his head shaved clean), getting
drunk against the moral precepts, visited a woman, known as a
blockhead, at her house.  No sooner had he got into her room than the
female fell asleep so soundly that the monk could not wake her nap.
Thereupon he made up his mind to use every possible means to arouse
her, and searched and searched all over the room for some instrument
that would help him in his task of arousing her from death-like
slumber.  Fortunately, he found a razor in one of the drawers of her
mirror stand.  With it he gave a stroke to her hair, but she did not
stir a whit.  Then came another stroke, and she snored like thunder.
The third and fourth strokes came, but with no better result.  And at
last her head was shaven clean, yet still she slept on.  The next
morning when she awoke, she could not find her visitor, the monk, as
he had left the house in the previous night.  'Where is my visitor,
where my dear monk?' she called aloud, and waking in a state of
somnambulation looked for him in vain, repeating the outcry.  When at
length her hand accidentally touched her shaven head, she mistook it
for that of her visitor, and exclaimed: 'Here you are, my dear, where
am I myself gone then?"  A great trouble with the confused is their
forgetting of real self or Buddha-nature, and not knowing 'where it
is gone.'  Duke Ngai, of the State of Lu, once said to Confucius:
"One of my subjects, Sir, is so much forgetful that he forgot to take
his wife when be changed his residence."  "That is not much, my
lord," said the sage, "the Emperors Kieh[FN#173] and Cheu[FN#174]
forgot their own selves."[FN#175]


[FN#173]  The last Emperor of the Ha dynasty, notorious for his
vices. His reign was 1818-1767 B.C.

[FN#174]  The last Emperor of the Yin dynasty, one of the worst
despots. His reign was 1154-1122 B.C.

[FN#175]  Ko-shi-ke-go.



18. 'Each Smile a Hymn, each Kindly Word a Prayer.'

The glorious sun of Buddha-nature shines in the zenith of Enlightened
Consciousness, but men still dream a dream of illusion.  Bells and
clocks of the Universal Church proclaim the dawn of Bodhi, yet men,
drunk with the liquors of the Three Poisons[FN#176] Still slumber in
the darkness of sin.  Let us pray to Buddha, in whose bosom we live,
for the sake of our own salvation.  Let us invoke Buddha, whose
boundless mercy ever besets us, for the Sake of joy and peace of all
our fellow-beings.  Let us adore Him through our sympathy towards the
poor, through our kindness shown to the suffering, through our
thought of the sublime and the good.

"O brother man, fold to thy heart thy brother;
Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there;
To worship rightly is to love each other,
Each smile a hymn, each kindly word a prayer."
--Whittier.

Let, then, your heart be so pure that you may not be unworthy of the
sunshine beaming upon you the light of Universal Spirit.  Let your
thought be so noble that you may deserve fair flowers blooming before
you, reminding you of merciful Buddha.  Let your life be so good that
you may not be ashamed of yourself in the presence of the Blessed
One.  This is the piety of Mahayanists, especially of Zenists.


