do so."

"In fact, I suppose," Fergus said, "you all combine, at Leitmeritz,
to represent the passes as being a great deal more dangerous than
they are; in order to force those obliged to make the journey to
take as many men as possible with him, or to pay two or three times
the proper fare, by boat."

"The passes over the hills would be terrible, now," the man said.
"Most of them would be absolutely impassable, until the snow
hardens.

"As for the rest," he added with a smile, "it may be that there is
something in what you say; but you see, times are hard. There is
little work to be done, and scarce any timber coming down; and if
we did not get a good job, occasionally, it would go very hard with
us."

By nightfall they were nearly through the defile. Lanterns were
placed in the bow of the boat and, until long after Fergus was
asleep, the men continued to work at their poles. When he woke up
in the morning the boat was floating down a quiet river, with the
plains of Saxony on either side, and the mountain range far astern.

At noon they neared Dresden, and an hour later Fergus stepped
ashore. He paid the men the sum arranged, and handed over to them
the rest of his provisions, which would be sufficient to carry them
far on their way back.

He soon learnt that Marshal Keith was established in his old
quarters, and made his way thither. He met two or three officers of
his acquaintance, but no one recognized him in his present attire.
He had hired a boy, when he landed, to carry his cloak and valises.
The saddle and bridle he had sold with the horse.

He was, as usual, passing the sentries at the gate without notice,
when one of them stepped in front of him.

"What is your business, sir?"

"My business is with Marshal Keith," he said, "and it is
particular."

The sentry called a sergeant of the guard.

"You can pass me up," Fergus said sharply. "I am well known to
Marshal Keith, and he will assuredly see me."

A soldier took him up to the anteroom. Lieutenant Lindsay, who was
on duty, came forward, looked at him doubtfully for a moment, and
then shouted joyfully:

"Why, Drummond, is it you? This is indeed a joyful meeting, old
fellow. I had thought of you as immured in one of the enemy's
fortresses, and as likely to remain there till the war was over,
and now here you are! The marshal will be delighted."

"He cannot be more pleased than I am to be back again, Lindsay. Is
he alone?"

"Yes. Come in at once. I won't announce you."

He opened the door.

"A gentleman to see you, marshal," he said, and Fergus walked in.

The marshal recognized him at once and, holding out both hands,
shook those of Fergus cordially.

"I am indeed glad to see you," he said. "We knew that you were
unhurt, for on the morning after the battle we sent in a
parlementaire to Browne with the list of prisoners taken, and
received his list in return; and as your name was among them, and
you were not put down as wounded, my anxiety about you was
relieved. We tried a month later to get exchanges, but they would
not hear of it. In the first place, there is no doubt that the
king's action, in incorporating the Saxons with our army, has
caused a strong feeling against him; and in the second, they had
plenty of fortresses in which to stow their prisoners, while they
would calculate that the more prisoners we had to look after, the
fewer men they would have to fight.

"And now, tell me by what miracle you have got here. I have nothing
particular to do.

"Lindsay, you may as well stop and hear the story. Tell the
sergeant to call you out if any one in particular comes; to
everyone else, I am engaged.

"Or stay," he broke off, "they have just told me that luncheon is
ready in the next room. A story is always better told over a bottle
of wine, so tell the sergeant, Lindsay, that for the next hour I
can see no one, unless it is on very particular business.

"Now, in the first place, Captain Drummond.

"Oh, of course, you have not heard!" he broke off, in answer to
Fergus's look of surprise. "The king and I watched you charge
through that Austrian squadron, and when he saw you reach our
cavalry in safety, and they turned to come back, he ordered me at
once to make out your commission as captain. I ventured to object
that you were very young. He said you had saved half his cavalry,
and that he would promote you, if you were an infant in arms."

"It is really absurd, marshal. I shall feel downright ashamed to be
called captain by men still lieutenants, though a dozen years older
than I am. I fear I have gone over Lindsay's head."

"You need not mind me, Drummond," Lindsay laughed. "I shall have a
chance, one of these days; but not a soul will grudge you your
promotion. There were many of us who saw your charge; and I can
tell you that it was the talk of the whole army, next day, and it
was thoroughly recognized that it saved the cavalry; for their
commander would certainly have taken them against the Austrians
and, if he had, it is equally certain that none of them would have
got back again; and when your name appeared in orders the next day,
we all felt that no one ever better deserved promotion."

"The king inquired especially, as soon as the list came, whether
you were wounded, Fergus," Keith said; "and was very much pleased
when he heard that you were not.

"Now, let us hear how you come to be here."

The marshal laughed heartily, when Fergus told of his escape in the
disguise of an Austrian field officer.

"It was most admirably managed, Fergus," he said, when the tale was
finished; "and your making for Vienna, instead of for the frontier,
was a masterly stroke. Of course your finding a friend there was
most fortunate; but even had you not done so, I have no doubt you
would have got through, somehow. I think the best idea of all was
your taking the post horses, and then getting a fresh suit of
clothes from the postmaster.

"I am glad you ordered the major's suit of clothes to be sent back
to him. I should have liked to have seen his face when he found
that not only his uniform, but his prisoner, had disappeared.

"It will be a good story to tell the king. He has sore troubles
enough on his shoulders, for the difficulties are thickening round;
and although Frederick is a born general, he really loves peace,
and quiet, and books, and the society of a few friends, far better
than the turmoil into which we are plunged.

"The French are going to open the campaign, in the spring, with an
army of a hundred thousand men. Russia will invade the east
frontier with certainly as many more, perhaps a hundred and fifty
thousand. They say these rascally Swedes, who have not a shadow of
quarrel against us, intend to land fifty thousand men in Pomerania;
and that Austria will put two hundred and fifty thousand in the
field. Even tempered and self relying as the king is, all this is
enough to drive him to despair; and anything that will interest him
for an hour, and make him forget his difficulties, is very
welcome."

The marshal asked many questions for, as he said, the king would
like to know all the ins and outs of the matter; and he knew that
Fergus would much rather that the story should be told the king by
another, than that he should be called upon to do so.

"I hope the horse came back safely, Lindsay?" Fergus asked, as they
left the marshal's apartments.

"Oh, yes! He went back with the convoy of wounded, and he is now
safe in Keith's stable. The other is, of course, at the count's. I
sent your things back at the same time, and when we returned here I
packed everything up and sewed them in a sack. They are all in the
storeroom."

"What has become of Karl? Did he get safely back?"

"Yes; but he had a nasty sabre wound he got in the charge, and he
was in hospital for six weeks. The king gave him a handsome
present, on the day after he came in; and would have given him a
commission, if he would have taken it, but he declined altogether,
saying that he was very comfortable as he was. His colonel would
have made him a sergeant at once, but he refused that also.

"Just at present he is still looking after your horse, and helping
generally in Keith's stable. His wound was on the head, and he is
scarcely fit for duty with his regiment, so of course he will now
fall in to his place with you again."

Fergus went down to the stable, where he was received with the
greatest delight by Karl; whose pride in his master was great,
after his exploit at Count Eulenfurst's, and had been heightened by
the feeling excited in the army at his having saved the cavalry
from destruction.

"I thought that you would be back by the spring, Captain," he said.
"Donald and I have talked it over, many a time, and we were of one
mind that, if any one could get away from an Austrian prison, you
would do it."



Chapter 8: Prague.


The next morning Fergus rode over to see Count Eulenfurst, found
him quite restored to health, and was received by him, the
countess, and Thirza with great pleasure.


[Illustration: Fergus was received by the count, the countess
and Thirza with great pleasure]


"My return in safety is in no small degree due to you, count. Had
it not been for the letter to Count Platurn, with which the
countess furnished me, I doubt whether I should have been able to
get through; or at any rate, if I had done so it could only have
been with many hardships and dangers, and certainly great delay."

"I have no doubt that the help you received from the count was of
considerable assistance to you, and lessened your difficulties
much, Captain Drummond; but I am sure you would have managed,
without it. Had you formed any plans as to what you would have
done, had you found him absent?"

"I had thought of several things, count, but I had settled on
nothing. I should have remained but a day in Vienna, and should
have exchanged the suit I had got from the innkeeper for some
other. My idea was that I had best join one of the convoys of
provisions going up to Bohemia. I calculated that I should have no
difficulty in obtaining a place as a driver, for of course the
service is not popular, and any of the men would have been glad
enough for me to take his place. I might thus have got forward as
far as Prague. After that I must have taken my chance, and I think
I could, in the same sort of way, have got as far as Leitmeritz;
but there I might have been detained for a very long time, until
there was an opportunity of crossing the defiles. It would have
been difficult, indeed, for me to have earned my living there; and
what was left of the money I had, after paying for the landlord's
suit, would scarce have lasted, with the closest pinching, till
spring."

"You would have managed it somehow, I am sure," Thirza said
confidently. "After getting out of that strong fortress, it would
be nothing to get out of Bohemia into Saxony."

"We have not congratulated you yet," the countess said, "upon your
last promotion. Lieutenant Lindsay came over to tell us about it,
and how you had gained it. Of course we were greatly pleased,
although grieved to hear that you had been made prisoner. We
wondered whether, at the time you were captured, you had any of the
letters I had written with you, and whether they would come in
useful.

"It did not even occur to me that you would have called upon Count
Platurn, my cousin. I thought that you might be detained at Prague,
but Vienna is the last place where we should have pictured you. Had
we known that you had been sent to Spielberg, I think we should
have given up all hope of seeing you again, until you were
exchanged; for I have heard that it is one of the strongest of the
Austrian fortresses.

"I do hope, Captain Drummond, we shall see a great deal of you this
winter. There will not be many gaieties, though no doubt there will
be some state balls; but there will be many little gatherings, as
usual, among ourselves, and we shall count upon you to attend them
always, unless you are detained on service. We learn that it is
probable your king will pass the whole of the winter here."

"We will send your horse down to you today," the count said. "You
will find him in good condition. He has been regularly exercised."

"Thank you very much, count. I wrote to you before I started, but I
have had no opportunity of thanking you, personally, for those
splendid animals. Sorry as I was to lose the horse I rode at
Lobositz, I congratulated myself that I was not riding one of
yours."

"I should have had no difficulty in replacing him, Captain
Drummond," the count said with a smile. "The least we can do is to
keep you in horse flesh while the war lasts; which I hope will not
be very long, for surely your king can never hope to make head
against the forces that will assail him in the spring, but will be
glad to make peace on any terms."

"No doubt he would be glad to, count; but as his enemies propose to
divide his dominions among them, it is not very clear what terms he
could make. But though I grant that, on paper, the odds against him
is enormous, I think that you will see there will be some hard
fighting yet, before Prussia is partitioned."

"Perhaps so," the count replied; "but surely the end must be the
same. You know I have been a strong opponent of the course taken by
the court here. Saxony and Prussia, as Protestant countries, should
be natural allies; and I consider it is infamous that the court, or
rather Bruhl, who is all powerful, should have joined in a
coalition against Frederick, who had given us no cause of
complaint, whatever. My sympathies, then, are wholly with him; but
I can see no hope, whatever, of his successfully resisting this
tremendous combination."

"Various things might happen, count. The Empresses of Russia or
Austria or the Pompadour might die, or the allies might quarrel
between themselves. England may find some capable statesman, who
will once again get an army together and, joined perhaps by the
Netherlands, give France so much to do that she will not be able to
give much help to her allies."

"Yes, all these things might happen; but Frederick's first campaign
has been, to a great extent, a failure. It is true that he has
established Saxony as his base, but the Saxon troops will be of no
advantage to him. He would have acted much more wisely had he, on
their surrender, allowed them to disband and go to their homes..
Many then might have enlisted voluntarily. The country would not
have had a legitimate grievance, and the common religious tie would
soon have turned the scale in favour of Prussia; who, as all see,
has been driven to this invasion by our court's intrigues with
Austria. Had he done this he could have marched straight to Prague,
have overrun all Bohemia, established his headquarters there, and
menaced Vienna itself in the spring."

"Looking at it coolly, that might have been the best way, count;
but a man who finds that three or four of his neighbours have
entered into a plot to attack his house, and seize all his goods,
may be pardoned if he does not at first go the very wisest way to
work."

The count laughed.

"I hope that the next campaign will turn out differently; but I own
that I can scarce see a possibility of Prussia, alone, making head
against the dangers that surround her."

The winter passed quietly. There were fetes, state balls, and many
private entertainments; for while all Europe was indignant, or
pretended to be so, at the occupation of Saxony, the people of that
country were by no means so angry on their own account. They were
no more heavily taxed by Frederick than they were by their own
court and, now that the published treaty between the Confederates
had made it evident that the country, without its own consent, had
been deeply engaged in a conspiracy hostile to Prussia, none could
deny that Frederick was amply justified in the step he had taken.

At these parties, only Prussian officers who were personal friends
of the host were invited; but Fergus, who had been introduced by
Count Eulenfurst to all his acquaintances, was always asked, and
was requested to bring with him a few of his personal friends.
Lindsay, therefore, was generally his companion, and was, indeed,
in a short time invited for his own sake; for the Scottish officers
were regarded in a different light to the Prussians, and their
pleasant manners and frank gaiety made them general favourites.

Their duties as aides-de-camp were now light, indeed; although both
were, two or three times, sent with despatches to Berlin; and even
to more distant parts of Prussia, where preparations for the coming
campaign were being made on a great scale.

The whole Prussian population were united. It was a war not for
conquest but for existence, and all classes responded cheerfully to
the royal demands. These were confined to orders for drafts of men,
for no new tax of any kind was laid on the people; the expenses of
the war being met entirely from the treasure that had, since the
termination of the Silesian war, been steadily accumulating, a
fixed sum being laid by every year to meet any emergency that might
arise.

Towards spring both parties were ready to take the field. The
allies had 430,000 men ready for service. Frederick had 150,000
well-trained soldiers, while 40,000 newly-raised troops were posted
in fortresses, at points most open to invasion. The odds were
indeed sufficient to appall even the steadfast heart of Frederick
of Prussia; but no one would have judged, from the calm and
tranquil manner in which the king made his arrangements to meet the
storm, that he had any doubt as to the issue.

Man for man, the Prussian soldier of the time was the finest in the
world. He was splendidly drilled, absolutely obedient to orders,
and filled with implicit confidence in his king and his comrades.
He had been taught to march with extraordinary rapidity, and at the
same time to manoeuvre with the regularity and perfection of a
machine; and could be trusted, in all emergencies, to do everything
that man was capable of.

The French army, 110,000 strong, was the first to move. Another
30,000 men were preparing to march, to join the army that had been
got up by that mixed body, the German Federation. The main force
was to move through Hanover.

To oppose them was a mixed army, maintained by British money,
comprising Hanoverians, Brunswickers, and Hessians, some 50,000
strong, commanded by the Duke of Cumberland. With these were some
5000 Prussians; who had, by Frederick's orders, evacuated the
frontier fortresses and joined what was called the British army of
observation. Frederick prepared, for the present, to deal with the
Austrians; intending, if successful against them, to send off
25,000 men to strengthen Cumberland's army. The proposed Swedish
invasion was altogether disregarded; but thirty thousand men,
principally militia, were posted to check the Russian invasion.

So quiet had been the preparations, that none of their enemies
dreamt that the Prussians would assume the offensive, but
considered that they would confine their efforts to defending the
defiles into Saxony and Silesia. But this was not Frederick's idea.
As spring approached, he had been busy redistributing his troops
from their winter cantonment, and preparing three armies for the
invasion of Bohemia. April had been a busy month for the staff, and
the aides-de-camp had passed their days, and even their nights, on
horseback.

At last all was in readiness for the delivery of the stroke, and on
the 20th the king started from Lockwitch, facing the old Saxon camp
at Pirna; the Duke of Bevern from Lousitz; and Marshal Schwerin
from Schlesien; and without the slightest warning, the three great
columns poured down into Bohemia.

The movement took the Austrians absolutely by surprise. Not
dreaming of such a step on Frederick's part, they had prepared,
near the frontier, vast magazines for the supply of their advancing
army. These had to be abandoned in the greatest haste, and a
sufficient amount of food to supply the entire army, for three
months, fell into the hands of the Prussians. Marshal Browne and
General Konigseck, who commanded the Austrian armies in Bohemia,
fell back to Prague with the greatest speed that they could make.

The light irregular corps, that Frederick had raised during the
winter and placed under experienced and energetic officers,
pervaded the whole country, capturing magazines and towns, putting
some to ransom, dispersing small bodies of the enemy, and spreading
terror far and wide. Browne succeeded in reaching Prague before the
king could come up to him. Bevern, however, overtook Konigseck, and
greatly hastened his retreat; killing a thousand men and taking
five hundred prisoners, after which Konigseck reached Prague
without further molestation, the Duke of Bevern joining Schwerin's
column.

The Austrians retired through Prague and encamped on high ground on
the south side of the city, Prince Karl being now in command of the
whole. Had this prince been possessed of military talents, or
listened to Marshal Browne's advice, instead of taking up a
defensive position he would have marched with his whole army
against the king, whose force he would very greatly have
outnumbered; but instead of doing so, he remained inactive.

On the 2nd of May, twelve days after moving from Saxony, Frederick
arrived within sight of Prague. So closely had he followed the
retreating Austrians that he occupied, that evening, a monastery at
which Prince Karl and Marshal Browne had slept the night before.
Thirty thousand men, who were under the command of Marshal Keith,
were left to watch Prague and its garrison; while Frederick, on
Tuesday, searched for a spot where he could cross the river and
effect a junction with Schwerin. He knew his position, and had
arranged that three cannon shots were to be the signal that the
river had been crossed.

A pontoon bridge was rapidly thrown over, the signal was given, and
the Prussians poured across it; and before the whole were over
Schwerin's light cavalry came up, and an arrangement was made that
the two forces should meet, at six o'clock next morning, at a spot
within two miles of the Austrian camp on the Lisca hills.


[Map: Battle of Prague]


All this time the Austrians stood inactive, and permitted the
Prussian columns to join hands without the slightest attempt to
interfere with them. Had Browne been in command, very different
steps would have been taken; but Prince Karl was indolent, self
confident, and opinionated, and had set his army to work to
strengthen its position in every possible manner. This was
naturally extremely strong, its right flank being covered by swampy
ground formed by a chain of ponds; from which the water was let off
in the winter, and the ground sown with oats. These were now a
brilliant green, and to the eyes of Frederick and his generals,
surveying them from the distance, had the aspect of ordinary
meadows. The whole ground was commanded by redoubts and batteries
on the hill, which rose precipitately seven or eight hundred feet
behind the position. In the batteries were sixty heavy cannon;
while there were, in addition, one hundred and fifty field guns.

Well might Prince Karl think his position altogether unassailable,
and believe that, if the Prussians were mad enough to attack, they
would be destroyed. Frederick and Schwerin spent much time in
surveying the position, and agreed that on two sides the Austrian
position was absolutely impregnable; but that on the right flank,
