thousand cattle and horses had been driven off from Natal.

Then their conversation turned upon a point still more interesting to
the listeners. A commando had started from Barberton, a border town
some thirty or forty miles to the west, into Swaziland. A native had
mentioned to one of the Boers there that four Englishmen had passed
north. They had stopped at his chief's kraal. They were all quite
young, and had five natives with them, and three pack-horses. They had
come to shoot and see the country, they said; but they had spoken with
one of the men with them, who said that so far they had not done much
hunting, only enough for food; he supposed that they were going to
begin further on. The Boer had an hour later ridden down to Barberton
with the news, and it had been at once resolved to send off a commando
of a hundred men to search the hills, for there was a suspicion that
the hunters were British officers who had come up to act as spies.

"Our cornet had a telegram this afternoon," one of them said, "that we
were to be specially vigilant here, and we must keep a sharp lookout at
night. I don't suppose they are on this side of the river. They may be
going to pull up the railway, or blow up a culvert somewhere between
this and Barberton. Four men with their Kaffirs might do that, but they
certainly could not damage this bridge."

At ten o'clock most of the party retired into a small shed a few yards
away, but two remained sitting by the fire, and were evidently left on
guard, for they kept their rifles close at hand. The lads now crawled
away some distance, and then made their way down a steep bank to the
river. It was a stream of some size, running with great rapidity, and
it did not take them long to decide that it would be impossible to swim
out with the cases and place these in such a situation that the
explosion would damage the structure. They then moved quietly up to the
spot where the end of the last span touched the level ground; it rested
upon a solid wall built into the rock, and ran some forty feet above
their heads. They were now just under where the Boers were sitting,
could hear their voices, and see the glow of their fire. They were
unable to make out the exact position of the girders, but they had,
when watching it, obtained a general view of the construction.

It consisted of two lines of strong girders on each side, connected by
lattice bars, with strong communications between the sides at each
pier. The depth of the girders was some twenty feet. After cautiously
feeling the wall and finding that there were no openings in which their
explosives could be placed, they crawled away noiselessly, ascended to
the bank again a couple of hundred yards from the bridge, and returned
to their camping ground. They observed as they went that there were
still fires burning in the station yard, that some Kaffirs were seated
near these, and as, in the silence of the night, a faint sound could be
heard like that of a distant train, they had no doubt that they were
waiting up for one to arrive. Indeed, before they had reached the
camping place they saw a train pass by. It had no lights save the
head-lights and that of the engine fire, and they therefore had no
doubt that it was another train with stores.

When they reached their tents they had a long consultation. No fire had
been lighted. The horses had been taken some way up a little ravine
down which a stream of water trickled; here the four natives had taken
up their post. These had only come down in the middle of the day to
fetch their food, which Jack cooked over the spirit stove. This was
alight when the lads returned, but was carefully screened round by
blankets so that not the slightest glow could be seen from a distance.

"What do you think of it, Chris?" Brown said.

"I don't know what to think about it. I have no idea what effect
dynamite would have when exploded at a distance of thirty or forty feet
below a bridge. Certainly it would blow the roadway up, but I have very
great doubts whether it would so twist or smash the main girders as to
render the bridge impassable. The distance to the first pier is not
great, and unless one entirely destroyed the bridge, I should say that
it could be repaired very soon--I mean, in a week or two--by a strong
gang. If the girders kept their places, two or three days' work might
patch it up temporarily. If it were destroyed altogether as far as the
first pier, it would stop the cannon getting over till a temporary
bridge is constructed; but by rigging up some strong cables, they could
pass cases of musket ammunition across the gap in the same way, you
know, as I have seen pictures of shipwrecked people being swung along
under a cable in a sort of cradle. What do you think, Peters?"

"Two hundred pounds of dynamite would do a lot of damage, Chris. I
should think that it would certainly bring the wall down."

"I have no doubt that it would do that, Peters, but the ironwork goes
some ten yards farther, and no doubts rests on the solid rock. I expect
the wall is put there more to finish the thing off than to carry much
of the weight. Again, you see it is only a single line, and not above
ten feet wide, which is against us, for the wider the line the better
chance it has of being smashed by an explosion some forty feet below
it. Well, we will have another look at the bridge and the waggons
to-morrow. Of course the bridge is the great thing if it can be
managed, though I don't say that blowing up the yard would not be a
good thing if we can't make sure of the other. Anyhow, we need not feel
down-hearted about it. We came up here on the chance, and even though
we may not be able to do exactly what we want, we ought to manage to do
them a lot of damage."

After eating their supper they turned in to their two little tents. The
spirit-lamp had been extinguished, and as they had not the least fear
of discovery, they did not consider it necessary to place a sentinel.
In the morning they were out again early and at their former post of
observation.

"What are they up to now?" Brown said an hour later when he saw a party
of Boers come down the opposite side close to the bridge, carrying
posts and planks.

Chris made no answer, he was watching them intently. They stopped near
the bank of the river close to the bridge. Then some of them set to
work to level a space of ground, while others made holes at the corners.

"I am afraid that it is all up with our plans as far as the bridge is
concerned. They are going to put up a hut there, and I have not the
least doubt it means they are going to station a guard under the
bridge. If they do it that side, they are probably doing the same on
this, only we can't see them. The Boers are stupid enough in some
things, but they are sharp enough in others, and it is possible that
the commando from Barberton has come upon one of the kraals where we
slept, and asking a lot of questions about us, they have found out that
we had four heavy boxes with us, and the idea may have struck them that
these contained explosives. If that did occur to them, it is almost
certain that a man has been sent off at once to Barberton with orders
to telegraph here and to other bridges, to take every precaution
against their being blown up. Anyhow, there is a hut building there,
and I don't see that it can be for any other purpose."

After three hours' work the hut was completed, and a party of eight men
brought down blankets and other kit. Two of these at once ascended the
bank with their rifles and sat down at the foot of the wall.

"That ends the business," Chris said. "However, I will creep round to a
point where I can get a view of this side of the bridge. Possibly they
have only taken precautions on their own side, for we were travelling
for some time in the Swazis' country to the west of the Komati, and
that is where they will have heard of us." He crawled away among the
rocks, and rejoined his companions an hour later.

"It is just the same this side. They have settled the question for us.
Now we will give our attention to the waggons."




CHAPTER X

AN EXPLOSION


Having given up all hopes of blowing up the bridge, Chris and his
comrades turned their whole attention to the lines of waggons. The
train that had come in on the previous evening had added to the number,
although it had taken some of them away with it up country. They now
made out that there were eight waggons piled with cases, that almost
certainly contained rifles; six with tarpaulins closely packed over
them, and these they guessed contained ammunition boxes; four, each
with two large cases that might contain field guns; while the two with
what they were sure were big guns still remained on the siding.

"I should say that about four or five pounds of dynamite would be an
abundance for each of those ammunition waggons; less than that would
do, as we could, by slitting the tarpaulins, put a pound among the
cases, and if one case were exploded it would set all the others off.
There is no trouble about them. I will just take a note. They are on
the second siding; there are eight other waggons in front of them and
six behind, so we cannot make any mistake about that. There must be a
good heavy charge under the rifle trucks, for we shall have to blow
them all well into the air to bend and damage them enough to be
altogether unserviceable. As for the guns, and especially the heavy
ones, it is a difficult question. Of course, if we could open the cases
and get at the breech-pieces, and put dynamite among them, we could
damage all the mechanism so much that the guns would be useless until
new breech-pieces were made, which I fancy must be altogether beyond
the Boers; but as there is no possibility of opening them, we must
trust to blowing the guns so high in the air that they will be too much
damaged for use by the explosion and fall. We have got altogether two
hundredweight; now two pounds to each ammunition waggon will take
twelve pounds. What shall we say for the rifles?"

"Ten pounds," Brown suggested.

"That would take eighty more pounds," Willesden objected, "which would
make a big hole in our stores."

"We must have a good charge," Chris said. "Suppose we say nine pounds
to each, that will save eight pounds; fifteen pounds apiece ought to
give the eight cases which we suppose hold field-guns a good hoist;
that will leave us with over a hundred pounds, fifty for each of the
big guns. Now that we have seen all that is necessary, we may as well
be off and begin to get ready."

The covers were taken off the boxes of dynamite, and these were
unscrewed, and the explosive was with great care divided into the
portions as agreed upon. Two of the cases furnished just sufficient for
the ammunition waggons and the two big guns, the other two for the
smaller cannon and the trucks with the rifles. The charges were sewn up
in pieces of the canvas, the smaller charges for the ammunition boxes
being enclosed in thinner stuff that had been sewn under the canvas
used in packing; the fuses and detonators were then cut and inserted.
Chris was perfectly up in this work, having performed the operation
scores of times in the mines. The length it should burn was only
decided after a discussion.

There would be in all nineteen charges to explode, and these were in
three groups at some little distance from each other, all the cannon
being on the same siding. It would be necessary, perhaps, to wait for
some time till all these were free from observation by natives or
others who might be moving about the yard, then a signal must be given
that they could all see. It would not take long to light the fuses, for
each of them would be provided with a slow match, which burns with but
a spark, and could be held under a hat or an inverted tin cup till the
time came for using it. The question was how far must they be away to
ensure their own safety, and Chris maintained that at least four or
five hundred yards would be necessary to place them in even comparative
safety from the rain of fragments that would fall over a wide area.
Finally it was agreed to cut the fuses to a length to burn four
minutes; this would allow a minute for any hitch that might occur in
lighting them, and three minutes to burn. It was of course important
that they should be no longer than was absolutely necessary, as there
existed a certain risk that one of the little sparks might be seen by a
passing Kaffir, or, as was still more probable, the smell of burning
powder should attract attention. It was agreed that Chris should light
the fuses at the cannon, which were farthest from the others, that
Peters should see to the six rifle trucks, and Willesden and Brown
attend the eight trucks with the ammunition, one to begin at each end
of the line.

When each had finished his work, he was to run straight away in the
direction of the encampment, and all were to throw themselves down when
they felt sure that the time for the explosions had arrived. As soon as
all was over they were to meet at their place of encampment. Tents and
all stores were to be removed before the work began to the ravine where
the horses were, the men with them being charged to stand at the
animals' heads, as there would be a great explosion, and the horses
might break loose and stampede. The matter that puzzled them the most
was how, when they reached their respective stations--separated from
each other by lines of waggons, and in some cases by distances of a
couple of hundred yards--they were to know when the work of lighting
the fuses was to begin. It could not be done by sound, for this would
reach the ears of any awake in the yard or the sentries at the bridge.
Chris at last suggested a plan.

"When we start, Jack shall be stationed at a point on the hillside high
enough for us to see him from all points of the yard. We will show him
the exact spot while it is light. When we start he shall go down with
us to the edge of the yard, and as we separate will turn and go up to
the point we had shown him. He will be ordered to walk up quietly, and
not to hurry; that will give us ample time to get to our stations
before he reaches his. We must all keep our eyes fixed on that point.
He will take the dark lantern with him; when he gets there he must turn
the shade off, so as to show the light for a quarter of a minute. That
will be our signal to begin. It is most unlikely that anyone else will
see it, but even if they did they would simply stare in that direction
and wonder what it was. Of course, only a flash would be safer; but
some of us might not see it, and would remain waiting for it until the
other explosions took place."

All agreed that this would be a very good plan. Chris crawled up with
Jack until he reached a spot where he commanded a perfect view of the
yard, and explained to him exactly what he was to do. He had already
been told what was going to take place. Knowing that the Kaffirs have
very little idea of time, he said: "You will hold it open while you say
slowly like this, 'I am showing the light, baas, and I hope that you
can all see it.' You will say that over twice and then turn off the
light, and lie down under that big rock till you hear the explosion.
Wait a little, for stones and fragments will come tumbling down. When
they have stopped doing so make your way straight to where the horses
are; you will find us there before you. Now, repeat over to me the
words you are to say slowly twice."

Jack did so, and finding on questioning him that he perfectly
understood what he was to do, Chris went back with him to the
encampment, where they remained quietly until the sun set and darkness
came on. Then, according to arrangement, the four natives came in and
carried all the things back to the ravine, and laid them down ready to
pack the horses as soon as their masters returned.

The day passed slowly to the lads. All were in a state of suppressed
excitement, an excitement vastly greater than they had felt during
their two fights with the Boers.

"How they will wonder who did it when they hear the news down in
Natal!" Peters said.

"I don't expect they will hear much about it," Chris said. "You may be
sure the Boers will not say much; they make a big brag over every
success, but they won't care to publish such a thing as this. Probably
their papers will only say: 'An explosion of a trifling nature occurred
on the Portuguese side of Komati-poort. Some barrels of powder
exploded; it is unknown whether it was the result of accident or the
work of spies. Due precaution will be taken to prevent the recurrence
of the accident. Beyond a few natives employed at the station, no one
was hurt.'"

The others laughed. "I suppose that will be about it, Chris. However, I
have no doubt that that commando from Barberton will keep a very sharp
look-out for us as we go back."

"Yes, but they won't catch us. We won't venture into Swaziland again,
but will make our way down on the Portuguese side, following the
railway till we are fairly beyond the mountain range. We can ride fast
now that we have got rid of the dynamite. It will be some time before
they get the news about what has happened here, for the telegraph wires
are sure to be broken and the instruments smashed. I really think that
our best way will be to ride straight down to Lorenzo Marques. When we
get there we can very well state that we had been ordered to leave
Johannesburg, and that, as the trains are so slow and so crowded with
fugitives, we had ridden down. I don't suppose that we shall attract
the least notice, for we know that a great many of those who had
intended to stay have been ordered off. That way we shall get back to
Natal in a few days and avoid all danger." The others agreed that this
would be a capital plan; and the distance by the road, which they had
crossed a few miles to the south, and which runs from Lorenzo Marques
up to Ladysdorp and the Murchison and Klein Lemba gold-fields, would
not be above seventy miles. They would wait till daybreak showed them
the amount of damage that had been done, and then start, and would be
down at Lorenzo Marques in the evening, when, even if the news of the
explosion reached the town, the Boers' suspicions that some Englishmen
were in the hills, and that it was probably their work, would not be
known. Not until ten o'clock was a move made. Then they took up the
packages of dynamite, and, accompanied by Jack, made their way
noiselessly down to the railway yard.

Here they separated. Chris, aided by Jack, carried the big packets for
the large guns and for the eight smaller ones. They met no one about,
and depositing their packages in the right position under them--the
fuses had been already inserted--they returned to the spot they had
left. In a minute or two they were joined by the others. Peters had
placed his parcels under the eight trucks with rifles; Willesden and
Brown had cut holes in the tarpaulins of the ammunition trucks, and
thrust down their charges well among the boxes. All was ready. While
the others stood closely round him Jack opened the lantern just widely
enough for them to light their slow matches.

"Now, you are not to hurry back to the place, Jack; we shall all be on
the look-out for you by the time you get there. You know your
instructions; you are to turn round, open the slide of the lantern, say
the words I told you over twice slowly, then shut the lantern and get
under that great boulder lying against the rock. You will be perfectly
safe in there."

"I understand, baas," he said, and at once turned and went off. The
others hurried to their respective posts, and then turned round and
gazed at the spot where the light would be shown. In their anxiety and
excitement the time seemed interminable, and each began to think that
the native had somehow blundered; at last the light appeared, and they
turned at once to their work. Half a minute sufficed to light the
fuses, and then they hurried away cautiously until past all the
waggons, and then at full speed along the hillside, their
thickly-padded shoes making no noise upon the rocks. Knowing that they
were sure to be confused as to the time, they had calculated before the
sun had set how far they could run in three minutes, which should be,
if all went well, the time they would have after leaving the yard. They
thought that even on the rough ground, and in the dark, they could make
a hundred and fifty yards a minute, and at about four hundred and fifty
from the waggons there was a low ridge of rock behind which they would
obtain protection from all fragments blown directly outwards.

Chris was the first to arrive, for the trucks with the cannon were
those farthest away from the bridge, and he was able to run for some
distance along the line before making for the elope, and therefore
travelled faster than his companions, who had farther to run on broken
ground. In half a minute they rushed up almost together.

"Throw yourselves down," Chris shouted; "we shall have it directly."

Twenty seconds later there was a tremendous roar and a blinding crash,
and they felt the ground shake. Almost simultaneously came eight
others, then in quick succession followed six other reports, and
mingled with these a confused roar of innumerable shots blended
together. There was a momentary pause, and then a deafening clatter as
rifles, fragments of iron and wood came falling down over a wide area.
Several fell close to where the lads were crouched against the rock,
but none touched them. For a full half-minute the fragments continued
to fall, then the boys stood up and looked round. It was too dark to
see more than that the yard was a chaos; the long lines of waggons, the
huts and buildings, had all disappeared; loud shouts could be heard
from the other side of the bridge, but nearer to them everything was
silent. There was no doubt that the success of the attempt was
complete, and the lads walked back quietly until they were at the spot
where the horses had been placed, Jack overtaking them just as they
reached it.

"It was terrible, baas," he said in an awed voice. "Jack thought his
life was gone. Things fell on the rock but could not break it."

"Nothing short of one of those big cannon would have done that, Jack.
Well, we shall see in the morning what damage is done."

The four natives, although they had been warned, were still terribly
frightened. The horses had at the first crash broken away and run up
the ravine, but they had just brought them down again, still trembling
and lathering with fear. For some minutes the boys patted and soothed
them, and accustomed to their voices and caresses they gradually
quieted down, but were very restless until day began to break. The boys
had no thought of sleep. The lamp was lit and tea made, and each of the
