sacrifices for the sake of the progress of the whole country."

"I know," Paul said. "Give me enough time and I'll find out what this
lecture is all about."

The Chief grunted at him. "The Commies are still in power. If they
remain in power and continue to develop the way they're going, we'll be
through, completely through, in another few years. We'll be so far
behind we'll be the world's laughing-stock--and everybody else will be
on the Soviet bandwagon."

He seemed to switch subjects. "Ever hear of Somerset Maugham?"

"Sure. I've read several of his novels."

"I was thinking of Maugham the British Agent, rather than Maugham the
novelist, but it's the same man."

"British agent?"

"Um-m-m. He was sent to Petrograd in 1917 to prevent the Bolshevik
revolution. The Germans had sent Lenin and Zinoviev up from Switzerland,
where they'd been in exile, by a sealed train in hopes of starting a
revolution in Czarist Russia. The point I'm leading to is that in one of
his books, 'The Summing Up,' I believe, Maugham mentions in passing that
had he got to Petrograd possibly six weeks earlier he thinks he could
have done his job successfully."

Paul looked at him blankly. "What could he have done?"

The Chief shrugged. "It was all out war. The British wanted to keep
Russia in the allied ranks so as to divert as many German troops as
possible from the Western front. The Germans wanted to eliminate the
Russians. Maugham had carte blanche. Anything would have gone. Elements
of the British fleet to fight the Bolsheviks, unlimited amounts of money
for anything he saw fit from bribery to hiring assassins. What would
have happened, for instance, if he could have had Lenin and Trotsky
killed?"

Paul said suddenly, "What has all this got to do with me?"

"We're giving you the job this time."

"Maugham's job?" Paul didn't get it.

"No, the other one. I don't know who the German was who engineered
sending Lenin up to Petrograd, but that's the equivalent of your job."
He seemed to go off on another bent. "Did you read Djilas' 'The New
Class' about a decade ago?"

"Most of it, as I recall. One of Tito's top men who turned against the
Commies and did quite a job of exposing the so-called classless
society."

"That's right. I've always been surprised that so few people bothered to
wonder how Djilas was able to smuggle his book out of one of Tito's
strongest prisons and get it to publishers in the West."

"Never thought of it," Paul agreed. "How could he?"

"Because," the Chief said, knocking the ash from his pipe and replacing
it in the rack, "there was and is a very strong underground in all the
Communist countries. Not only Yugoslavia, but the Soviet Union as well."

Paul stirred impatiently. "Once again, what's all this got to do with
me?"

"They're the ones you're going to work with. The anti-Soviet
underground. You've got unlimited leeway. Unlimited support to the
extent we can get it to you. Unlimited funds for whatever you find you
need them for. Your job is to help the underground start a new Russian
Revolution."

       *       *       *       *       *

Paul Koslov, his face still bandaged following plastic surgery, spent a
couple of hours in the Rube Goldberg department inspecting the latest
gadgets of his trade.

Derek Stevens said, "The Chief sent down a memo to introduce you to this
new item. We call it a Tracy."

Paul frowned at the wristwatch, fingered it a moment, held it to his
ear. It ticked and the second hand moved. "Tracy?" he said.

Stevens said, "After Dick Tracy. Remember, a few years ago? His wrist
two-way radio."

"But this is really a watch," Paul said.

"Sure. Keeps fairly good time, too. However, that's camouflage. It's
also a two-way radio. Tight beam from wherever you are to the Chief."

Paul pursed his lips. "The transistor boys are really doing it up
brown." He handed the watch back to Derek Stevens. "Show me how it
works, Derek."

They spent fifteen minutes on the communications device, then Derek
Stevens said, "Here's another item the Chief thought you might want to
see:"

It was a compact, short-muzzled hand gun. Paul handled it with the ease
of long practice. "The grip's clumsy. What's its advantage? I don't
particularly like an automatic."

Derek Stevens motioned with his head. "Come into the firing range,
Koslov, and we'll give you a demonstration."

Paul shot him a glance from the side of his eyes, then nodded. "Lead
on."

In the range, Stevens had a man-size silhouette put up. He stood to one
side and said, "O.K., let her go."

Paul stood easily, left hand in pants pocket, brought the gun up and
tightened on the trigger. He frowned and pressed again.

He scowled at Derek Stevens. "It's not loaded."

Stevens grunted amusement. "Look at the target. First time you got it
right over the heart."

"I'll be ...," Paul began. He looked down at the weapon in surprise.
"Noiseless and recoilless. What caliber is it, Derek, and what's the
muzzle velocity?"

"We call it the .38 Noiseless," Stevens said. "It has the punch of that
.44 Magnum you're presently carrying."

With a fluid motion Paul Koslov produced the .44 Magnum from the holster
under his left shoulder and tossed it to one side. "That's the last time
I tote that cannon," he said. He balanced the new gun in his hand in
admiration. "Have the front sight taken off for me, Derek, and the fore
part of the trigger guard. I need a quick draw gun." He added absently,
"How did you know I carried a .44?"

Stevens said, "You're rather famous, Koslov. The Colonel Lawrence of the
Cold War. The journalists are kept from getting very much about you, but
what they do learn they spread around."

Paul Koslov said flatly, "Why don't you like me, Stevens? In this game I
don't appreciate people on our team who don't like me. It's dangerous."

Derek Stevens flushed. "I didn't say I didn't like you."

"You didn't have to."

"It's nothing personal," Stevens said.

Paul Koslov looked at him.

Stevens said, "I don't approve of Americans committing political
assassinations."

Paul Koslov grinned wolfishly and without humor. "You'll have a hard
time proving that even our cloak and dagger department has ever
authorized assassination, Stevens. By the way, I'm not an American."

Derek Stevens was not the type of man whose jaw dropped, but he blinked.
"Then what are you?"

"A Russian," Paul snapped. "And look, Stevens, we're busy now, but when
you've got some time to do a little thinking, consider the ethics of
warfare."

Stevens was flushed again at the tone. "Ethics of warfare?"

"There aren't any," Paul Koslov snapped. "There hasn't been chivalry in
war for a long time, and there probably never will be again. Neither
side can afford it. And I'm talking about cold war as well as hot." He
scowled at the other. "Or did you labor under the illusion that only the
Commies had tough operators on their side?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Paul Koslov crossed the Atlantic in a supersonic TU-180 operated by
Europa Airways. That in itself galled him. It was bad enough that the
Commies had stolen a march on the West with the first jet liner to go
into mass production, the TU-104 back in 1957. By the time the United
States brought out its first really practical trans-Atlantic jets in
1959 the Russians had come up with the TU-114 which its designer, old
Andrei Tupolev named the largest, most efficient and economical
aircraft flying.

In civil aircraft they had got ahead and stayed ahead. Subsidized beyond
anything the West could or at least would manage, the air lines of the
world couldn't afford to operate the slower, smaller and more expensive
Western models. One by one, first the neutrals such as India, and then
even members of the Western bloc began equipping their air lines with
Russian craft.

Paul grunted his disgust at the memory of the strong measures that had
to be taken by the government to prevent even some of the American lines
from buying Soviet craft at the unbelievably low prices they offered
them.
