"Yudhishthira said, 'By what means do Brahmanas, who accept gifts from
all the four orders, save others as well as themselves?"

"Markandeya said, 'By _Japa_,[13] and _Mantras_,[14] and _Homa_[15] and
the study of the _Vedas_, the Brahmanas construct a _Vedic_ boat[16]
wherewith they save both others and themselves. The gods themselves are
pleased with that man who gratifieth the Brahmanas. Indeed, a man may
attain heaven at the command of a Brahmana. Thou wilt, O king, without
doubt ascend to regions of everlasting bliss, in consequence of thy
worship of the _Pitris_ and the gods, and thy reverence for the
Brahmanas, even though thy body is filled with phlegmatic humours and
withal so dull and inert! He that desires virtue and heaven should adore
the Brahmanas. One should feed Brahmanas with care on occasions of
_Sraddhas_, although those among them that are cursed or fallen should
be excluded. They also should be carefully excluded that are either
excessively fair or excessively black, that have diseased nails, that
are lepers, that are deceitful, that are born in bastardy of widows or
of women having husbands alive; and they also that support themselves by
the profession of arms. That _Sraddha_ which is censurable, consumeth
the performer thereof like fire consuming fuel. If they that are to be
employed in _Sraddhas_ happen to be dumb, blind, or deaf, care should be
taken to employ them along with Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas. O
Yudhishthira, listen now unto whom thou shouldst give. He that knoweth
all the _Vedas_ should give only to that able Brahmana who is competent
to rescue both the giver and himself, for he, indeed, is to be regarded
as able who can rescue both the giver and himself. O son of Pritha, the
sacred fires do not receive such gratification from libations of
clarified butter, from offerings of flowers and sandal and other
perfumed pastes as from the entertainment of guests. Therefore, do thou
strive to entertain guests, O son of Pandu! O king, they that give unto
guests water to wash their feet, butter to rub over their (tired) legs,
light during the hours of darkness, food, and shelter, have not to go
before Yama. The removal (after worship) of the flowery offerings unto
the gods, the removal of the remnants of a Brahmana's feast, waiting
(upon a Brahmana) with perfumed pastes, and the massaging of a
Brahmana's limbs, are, each of them, O foremost of kings, productive of
greater merit than the gift of kine. A person, without doubt, rescueth
himself by the gift of a _Kapila_ cow. Therefore, should one give away a
_Kapila_ cow decked with ornaments unto Brahmanas. O thou of the Bharata
race, one should give unto a person of good lineage and conversant with
the Vedas; unto a person that is poor; unto one leading a domestic mode
of life but burdened with wife and children; unto one that daily adoreth
the sacred fire; and unto one that hath done thee no service. Thou
shouldst always give unto such persons but not to them that are in
affluence. What merit is there, O thou foremost of the Bharata race, by
giving unto one that is affluent? One cow must be given unto one
Brahmana. A single cow must not be given unto many. For if the cow so
given away (unto many) be sold, the giver's family is lost for three
generations. Such a gift would not assuredly rescue the giver nor the
Brahmana that takes it. He who giveth eighty _Ratis_ of pure gold,
earneth the merit of giving away a hundred pieces of gold for ever. He
that giveth away a strong bull capable also of drawing the plough, is
certainly rescued from all difficulties and finally goeth to heaven. He
that giveth away land unto a learned Brahmana, hath all his desires
fulfilled. The tired traveller, with weakened limbs and feet besmeared
with dust, asks for the name of him that may give him food. There are
men who answer him by telling him the name. That wise man who informs
these toil-worn ones of the name of the person who may give them food,
is, without doubt, regarded as equal in merit unto the giver himself of
food. Therefore, abstaining from other kinds of gift, give thou food.
There is no merit (arising out of gifts) that is so great as that of
giving food. The man that according to the measure of his might gives
well-cooked and pure food unto the Brahmanas, acquires, by that act of
his, the companionship of Prajapati (_Brahma_). There is nothing
superior to food. Therefore, food is regarded as the first and foremost
of all things (to be given away). It hath been said that food itself is
_Prajapati_. And _Prajapati_ is regarded as the Year. And the Year is
sacrifice. And everything is established in sacrifice, for it is from
sacrifice that all creatures, mobile and immobile, take their origin.
For this reason, it hath been heard by us, food is the foremost of all
things. They that give away lakes and large pieces of water, and tanks
and wells, and shelter and food and they that have sweet words for all,
have not to hear the admonitions of Yama. With him who gives rice, and
wealth earned by his labour, unto Brahmana of good behaviour, the earth
is satisfied. And she poureth upon him showers of wealth. The giver of
food walketh first, after him the speaker of truth and he that giveth
unto persons that do not solicit. But the three go to the same place.'"

    [13] _Japa_ is the silent recitation of particular _Mantras_.

    [14] _Mantras_ are particular formulae of worship. They are for
    the most part rhythmic compositions, believed to be of great
    efficacy.

    [15] The _Homa_ is that sacrificial rite which consists of
    pouring libations of clarified butter into fire.

    [16] _Vedamayi nou_. Lit, a boat made of the Vedas.

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing all this, Yudhishthira, along with his
younger brothers, impelled by curiosity, again addressed the high-souled
Markandeya, saying, 'O great _Muni_, what is the distance of Yama's
region from that of men? What is its measurement? How also do men pass
it over? And by what means? O, tell me all this!'

"Markandeya said, 'O king, O them foremost of virtuous men, this
question of thine appertains to a great mystery. It is sacred and much
applauded by the _Rishis_. Appertaining as it also does to virtue, I
will speak of it to thee. The distance of Yama's region from the abode
of men is, O king, eighty-six thousand _Yojanas_! The way is over space,
without water, and very terrible to behold. Nowhere on that road is the
shade of a tree, nowhere any water, and nowhere any resting place in
which the traveller, when fatigued, may rest for some moments. And men
and women and all on earth that have life, are forcibly led along this
way by the messengers of Yama. Those creatures that obey the mandates of
the grim king, and they, O king, that have given horses and other good
conveyances unto Brahmanas, proceed along this way on those animals and
vehicles. And they that have given umbrellas proceed along this way with
umbrellas warding off the sun's rays. And they that have given food,
proceed without hunger, while they that have not given food proceed
afflicted with hunger. And they that have given robes, proceed along
this way attired in robes while they that have given none, proceed
naked. And they that have given gold, proceed in happiness, themselves
decked in ornaments. And they that have given land, proceed with every
desire completely gratified. And they that have given grain, proceed
without being afflicted with any want. And they that have given houses,
proceed happily on cars. And those men that have given something to
drink, proceed with cheerful hearts unafflicted with thirst. And they
that have given lights, proceed happily lighting the way before them.
And they that have given kine, proceed along the way happily, freed from
all their sins. And they that have fasted for a month, proceed on cars
drawn by swans. And they who have fasted for six nights, proceed on cars
drawn by peacocks. And, O son of Pandu, he that fasteth three nights
upon only one meal without a second during this period goeth into a
region free from disease and anxiety. And water hath this excellent
property that it produceth happiness in the region of Yama. And they
that give water find for themselves a river there of the name of
Pushpodaka. And the givers of water on the earth drink cool and
ambrosial draughts from that stream. And they that are of evil deeds
have pus ordained for them. Thus, O great king, that river serveth all
purposes. Therefore, O king, adore thou duly these Brahmanas (that are
with thee). Weak in limbs owing to the way he has walked, and besmeared
with the dust of the high-road, the traveller enquireth for the name of
him who giveth food, and cometh in hope to his house. Adore thou him
with reverent attention, for he indeed is a guest, and he is a Brahmana.
The gods with Indra at their head follow him as he proceedeth. And if he
is adored, the gods with Indra become gratified, and if he is not
adored, the celestials with their chief become cheerless. Therefore, O
thou foremost of kings, worship thou these Brahmanas duly. I have thus
spoken to thee upon a hundred subjects. What dost thou desire to hear
from me again?'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O master, conversant thou art with virtue and
morality, and so I desire to repeatedly listen to thee as thou speakest
on sacred subjects appertaining to virtue and morals.'

"Markandeya said, 'O king, I will now speak on another sacred subject
appertaining to eternal interests and capable of washing off all sins.
Listen thou with rapt attention. O thou foremost of the Bharatas, the
merit equal to that of giving away a _Kapila_ cow in (the _tirtha_
called) _Jyeshtha-Pushkara_ arises from washing the feet of Brahmanas.
As long as the earth remains wet with water which a Brahmana hath
touched with his feet, so long do _Pitris_ drink water of cups made of
lotus-leaves. If the guest is welcomed (with enquiries about his
welfare), the deities of fire become glad; and if he is offered a seat,
it is the god of a hundred sacrifices, who is gratified. If his feet are
washed, it is the _Pitris_ who are delighted; and if he is fed it is
_Prajapati_ that is pleased. One should with collected soul, give a cow
when (during her throes) the feet and head of her calf are visible,
before her delivery is complete. A cow with her calf in the air in
course of falling from the uterus to the earth, is to be regarded as
equal to the earth herself. He, therefore, that giveth away such a cow,
reapeth the merit of giving away the earth. And he that giveth away such
a cow, is adored in heaven for as many thousands of _Yugas_ as there are
bristles on the bodies of the animal and her young one together. And, O
Bharata, he that having accepted a thing in gift giveth it away
immediately unto a person that is virtuous and honest, reapeth very
great merit. Without doubt, he reapeth the fruit of giving away the
whole earth to her utmost limits and with her oceans and seas and caves,
her mountains and forests and woods. That Brahmana who eateth in silence
from a plate, keeping his hands between his knees, succeedeth in
rescuing others. And those Brahmanas that abstain from drink and who are
never spoken of by others as having any faults and who daily read the
_Samhitas_, are capable of rescuing others. Libations of butter and
edible offerings should all be presented to a Brahmana who is learned in
the _Vedas_. And as libations of clarified butter poured into fire never
go in vain, so gift to virtuous Brahmanas learned in the _Vedas_ can
never go in vain. The Brahmanas have anger for their weapon; they never
fight with arms of iron and steel. Indeed the Brahmanas slay with anger
like Indra slaying the Asuras with his thunder-bolt. Thus prelection
appertaining to virtue and morality is now over. Hearing this, the
_Munis_ of the forest of _Naimisha_ were filled with delight. And those
ascetics were also freed from grief and anger by listening to it. And
they were also purged of all their sins in consequence of this. And, O
king, those human beings that listen to it become freed from the
obligation of rebirth.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great wisdom, what purification is there
by which a Brahmana may always keep himself pure? I desire to hear of it
from thee, O thou foremost of all virtuous men!'

"Markandeya answered, 'There are three kinds of purity, viz., purity in
speech, purity in deed, and purity achieved by use of water. He that has
recourse to these three different kinds of purity, attains, without
doubt, to heaven. That Brahmana who adoreth the goddess _Sandhya_ in the
morning and the evening, and who recites meditatively the sacred goddess
_Gayairi_ who is the mother of the _Vedas_, sanctified by the latter, is
freed from all his sins. Even if he accepts in gift the entire earth
with her oceans, he doth not, on that account, suffer the least
unhappiness. And those heavenly bodies in the sky including the sun that
may be inauspicious and hostile towards him soon become auspicious and
favourable towards him in consequence of these acts of his, while those
stars that are auspicious and favourable become more auspicious and more
favourable in consequence of such conduct of his. And terrible Rakshasas
subsisting on animal food, of gigantic and fierce mien, all become
unable to prevail over a Brahmana who practiseth these purifications.
The Brahmanas are even like blazing fires. They incur no fault in
consequence of teaching, of officiating at sacrifices, and of accepting
gifts from others. Whether the Brahmana be cognisant of the _Vedas_ or
ignorant of them, whether they be pure or impure, they should never be
insulted, for Brahmanas are like fires. As the fire that blazeth up in
the place set apart for the cremation of the dead is never regarded
impure on that account, so the Brahmana, be he learned or ignorant, is
always pure. He is great and a very god! Cities that are adorned with
walls and gates and palaces one after another, lose their beauty if they
are bereft of Brahmanas. That, indeed, O king, is a city where Brahmanas
accomplished in the _Vedas_, duly observing the duties of their order
and possessed of learning and ascetic merit, reside. O son of Pritha,
that spot, be it a wood or pasture land, where learned Brahmanas reside,
hath been called a city. And that place, O king, becometh a _tirtha_
also. By approaching a king that offereth protection, as also a Brahmana
possessed of ascetic merit, and by offering worship unto both, a man may
purge off his sins immediately. The learned have said that ablutions in
the sacred _tirthas_, recitation of the names of holy ones, and converse
with the good and virtuous, are all acts worthy of applause. They that
are virtuous and honest always regard themselves as sanctified by the
holy companionship of persons like themselves and by the water of pure
and sacred converse. The carrying of three staffs, the vow of silence,
matted hair on head, the shaving of the crown, covering one's person
with barks and deerskins, the practice of vows, ablutions, the worship
of fire, abode in the woods, emaciating the body, all these are useless
if the heart be not pure. The indulgence of the six senses is easy, if
purity be not sought in the object of enjoyment. Abstinence, however,
which of itself is difficult, is scarcely easy without purity of the
objects of enjoyment. O king of kings, among the six senses, the mind
alone that is easily moved is the most dangerous! Those high-souled
persons that do not commit sins in word, deed, heart and soul, are said
to undergo ascetic austerities, and not they that suffer their bodies to
be wasted by fasts and penances. He that hath no feeling of kindness for
relatives cannot be free from sin even if his body be pure. That
hard-heartedness of his is the enemy of his asceticism. Asceticism,
again, is not mere abstinence from the pleasures of the world. He that
is always pure and decked with virtue, he that practises kindness all
his life, is a _Muni_ even though he may lead a domestic life. Such a
man is purged of all his sins. Fasts and other penances cannot destroy
sins, however much they may weaken and dry up the body that is made of
flesh and blood. The man whose heart is without holiness, suffers
torture only by undergoing penances in ignorance of their meaning. He is
never freed from sins of such acts. The fire he worshippeth doth not
consume his sins. It is in consequence of holiness and virtue alone that
men attain to regions of blessedness, and fasts and vows become
efficacious. Subsistence on fruits and roots, the vow of silence, living
upon air, the shaving of the crown, abandonment of a fixed home, the
wearing of matted locks on the head, lying under the canopy of heaven,
daily fasts, the worship of fire, immersion in water, and lying on the
bare ground,--these alone cannot produce such a result. They only that
are possessed of holiness succeed, by knowledge and deeds, to conquer
disease, decrepitude and death, and acquire a high status. As seeds that
have been scorched by fire do not sprout forth, so the pains that have
been burnt by knowledge cannot effect the soul. This inert body that is
only like a block of wood when destitute of souls, is, without doubt,
short lived like froth in the ocean. He that obtaineth a view of his
soul, the soul that resideth in every body, by help of one or half of a
rhythmic line (of the _Vedas_), hath no more need for anything. Some
obtaining a knowledge of identity with the Supreme Soul from but two
letters (of the _Vedas_) and some from hundreds and thousands of
rhythmic lines, acquire salvation, for the knowledge of one's identity
with the Supreme Soul is the sure indication of salvation. The men of
old, distinguished for their knowledge, have said, neither this world
nor that hereafter nor bliss can be his who is disturbed by doubts. And
belief of one's identity with the Supreme Soul is the indication of
salvation. He that knoweth the true meaning of the Vedas, understandeth
their true use. Such a man is affrighted at the Vedic ritual like a man
at sight of a forest conflagration. Giving up dry disputation, have
recourse to _Sruti_ and _Smriti_, and seek thou, with the aid of thy
reason, the knowledge of the Undecaying One that is without a second.
One's search (after this knowledge) becometh futile from defect of
means. Therefore, should one carefully strive to obtain that knowledge
by aid of the _Vedas_. The _Vedas_ are the Supreme Soul; they are His
body; they are the Truth. The soul that is bounded by the animal
organism is incompetent to know Him in whom all the _Vedas_ merge. That
Supreme Soul, however, is capable of being known by the pure intellect.
The existence of the _gods_ as stated in the _Vedas_, the efficacy of
acts, and the capacity for action of being furnished with bodies, are
noticeable in every _Yuga_. Independence of these and annihilation are
to be sought from purity of the senses. Therefore, the suspension of the
function of the senses is the true fasting. One may attain to heaven by
asceticism, one may obtain objects of enjoyment by the practice of
charity and may have his sins purged off by ablutions in _tirthas_. But
complete emancipation cannot be had except by knowledge.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed, O great king, by the _Rishi_,
Yudhishthira of great fame then said, 'O holy one, I desire to listen to
the rules about that charity which is meritorious.'

"Markandeya said, 'O great king, O Yudhishthira, the rules about charity
which thou wishest to hear from me are always highly regarded by me.
Listen now to the mysteries of charity as expounded in the _sruti_ and
the _smritis_! A man that performs a _sraddha_ in the conjunction called
_Gajacchaya_ at a place that is fanned by the leaves of the _Aswattha_
tree enjoys the fruits thereof, O Yudhishthira, for a hundred thousand
_kalpas_. O king, he that foundeth a _dharmasala_ and established there
a person to look after all comers, is crowned with the merits of all the
sacrifices. He that giveth away a horse at a _tirtha_ where the current
of the river runneth in a direction opposite to its general course,
reapeth merit that is inexhaustible. The guest that comes to one's house
for food is none other than Indra himself. If he is entertained with
food, Indra himself conferreth on the best merit that is inexhaustible.
As men cross seas by vessels, so are the givers mentioned above are
saved from all their sins. So what is given unto Brahmanas produceth,
like gift of curds, inexhaustible merits. A gift on particular lunations
produceth merit that is twice as much as a gift on other days. That in a
particular season produceth merit ten times greater that in other
seasons. That in a particular year produceth merit a hundred times
greater than in other years. And lastly, a gift on the last day of the
last month of the year produceth merit that is inexhaustible. A gift
also that is made while the Sun is on the solstitial points, one again
that is made on the last day of the Sun's path through Libra, Aries,
Gemini, Virgo, and Pisces, a gift again during eclipses of the Moon and
the Sun, produce merit that is inexhaustible. The learned have also said
that gifts made during the seasons produce merit that is ten times,
those made during the change of seasons, a hundred times--and those made
during the days when _Rahu_ is visible, a thousand times--greater than
what is produced by gifts at other time; while a gift made on the last
day of the Sun's course through Libra and Aries produces merit that
knows no diminution. O king, no one can enjoy landed possessions unless
he giveth away land, and no one can go on cars and vehicles unless he
giveth away these. Indeed a person on rebirth obtaineth the fruition of
whatever objects he hath in view at the time of making a gift to a
Brahmana. Gold hath sprung from Fire; the Earth from Vishnu; and the
cows from the Sun. He, therefore, that giveth away gold, land, and kine
attaineth all the regions of Agni, Vishnu, and the Sun. There is nothing
so eternal as a gift. Where, therefore, in the three worlds is anything
that is more auspicious? It is for this, O king, that they who have
great intelligence say that there is nothing higher and greater in the
three worlds than gift!'"


SECTION CC

Vaisampayana said, "Having, O great king, heard from the illustrious
Markandeya the history of the attainment of heaven by the royal sage
Indradyumna, Yudhishthira, that bull of the Bharata race, once more
asked that sinless _Muni_ endued with great ascetic merit and long life,
saying, 'Thou knowest, O virtuous one, the entire host of the gods, the
_Danavas_, and the _Rakshasas_. Thou art acquainted also with various
royal genealogies and many eternal lines of _Rishis_! O best of
Brahmanas, there is nothing in this world that thou dost not know! Thou
knowest also, O _Muni_, many delightful stories about _men, Snakes_ and
_Rakshasas_; about gods, _Gandharvas_, and _Yakshas_, and about
_Kinnaras_ and _Apsaras_! I desire now to hear from thee, O best of
Brahmanas, as to why Kuvalaswa--that unvanquished king of Ikshavaku's
race changed his name, assuming another, viz., _Dhundhumara_. O thou
best of Bhrigu's line, I desire to know in detail why the name of
Kuvalaswa of great intelligence underwent such a change!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, the great
_Muni_ Markandeya, O Bharata, then began the history of Dhundhumara!"

"Markandeya said, 'O royal Yudhishthira, listen to me, I will tell thee
all! The story of Dhundhumara is a moral one. Listen to it then! Listen
now, O king, to the story of how the royal Kuvalaswa of Ikshvaku's race
came to be known as Dhundhumara. O son, O Bharata, there was a
celebrated _Rishi_ of the name of Utanka and, O thou of the Kuru race,
Utanka had his hermitage in a delightful wilderness. And, O great king,
the _Rishi_ Utanka underwent ascetic austerities of the severest kind
and the lord Utanka underwent those penances for numberless years with
the object of obtaining the favours of Vishnu, and gratified with his
penances that illustrious Lord presented himself before Utanka. And
beholding the Deity, the _Rishi_ in all humility began to gratify him
with many hymns, and Utanka said, "O thou of great effulgence all
creatures with the gods, _Asuras_ and human beings, all things that are
mobile or immobile, even _Brahma_ himself, the Vedas, and all things
that are capable of being known, have, O lord, been created by thee! The
firmament is thy head, O god, and the sun and the moon are thy eyes!
And, O Unfading One, the winds are thy breath and fire thy energy! The
directions of the horizon constitute thy arms and the great ocean thy
stomach! And, O god, the hills and mountains constitute thy thigh and
the sky thy hips, O slayer of Madhu! The earth constitutes thy feet, and
the plants the bristles on thy body. And, O lord, Indra and Soma and
Agni and Varuna, indeed all the gods, the _Asuras_ and the great Snakes
all wait upon thee with humility, adoring thee with various hymns! O
Lord of the Universe, created things are pervaded by thee. The great
_Rishis_ of high energy and ever plunged in ascetic meditation, always
adore thee. When thou art gratified, the universe is in peace. And when
thou art angry, terror pervadeth every soul. Thou art, O Lord, the great
dispeller of all terrors and thou art the One Supreme Male Being! Thou
art the cause of happiness of both gods and human beings! And, O Lord,
by three steps of thine thou didst cover the three worlds! And it was by
thee that the _Asuras_ in the height of their power were destroyed! It
is owing to thy prowess, O God, that the celestials obtained peace and
happiness and, O thou of great effulgence, it was thy anger that
destroyed hundred great _Daitya_ chiefs. Thou art the Creator and
destroyer of all creatures in the world. It is by adoring thee that the
gods have obtained happiness." It was thus, O Yudhishthira, that the
high-souled Utanka praised the Lord of the senses. And Vishnu,
therefore, said unto Utanka, "I am gratified with thee. Ask thou the
boon that thou desirest." And Utanka said, "This indeed hath been a
great boon to me, in that I have been able to behold Hari, that eternal
Being, that divine Creator, that Lord of the universe!" Thus addressed
Vishnu said, "I am gratified with this absence of all desires on thy
part and with thy devotion, O thou best of men! But, O Brahmanas, O
regenerate one, thou shouldst of a certainty accept some boon from me!"
Thus requested by Hari to accept a boon Utanka then, O thou best of
Bharatas, with joined hands begged a boon saying, "O illustrious one, O
thou of eyes like lotus leaves, if thou hast been gratified with me,
then let my heart always rest on virtue, truth, and self-content. And, O
Lord, let my heart always turn to thee in devotion." And hearing these
words of Utanka, the holy one said, "O regenerate one, all this shall
happen to thee through my grace. And there will also appear in thee a
_yoga_ power endued with which thou shalt achieve a great thing for the
dwellers of Heaven, as also for the triple world. Even now a great
_Asura_ of the name of Dhundhu is undergoing ascetic penances of fierce
austerity with the object of destroying the triple world. Hear now as to
who will slay that _Asura_. O son, there will appear a king of
invincible energy and great prowess and he will be born in the race of
Ikshvaku and will be known by the name of Vrihadaswa who will have a son
of the name of Kuvalaswa endued with great holiness and self-control and
celebrity. And that best of kings will be furnished with _yoga_ power
springing from me and urged and commended by thee, O regenerate _Rishi_,
that king will be the slayer of the Asura Dhundhu." And having said
these words unto that Brahmana, Vishnu disappeared there and then.'"


SECTION CCI

"Markandeya said, 'O king, after the death of Ikshvaku, a highly
virtuous king of the name of _Sasada_, ascending the throne of Ayodhya
ruled this earth. And from _Sasada_ was descended Kakutstha of great
energy. And Kakutstha had a son of name Anenas. And Anenas had a son
named Prithu and Prithu had a son named Viswagaswa and from Viswagaswa
sprang Adri and from Adri sprang Yuvanaswa and from Yuvanaswa sprang
Sravastha and it was by this Sravastha that the city called _Sravasthi_
was built and from Sravastha was descended Vrihadaswa and from
Vrihadaswa sprang Kuvalaswa and Kuvalaswa had twentyone thousand sons
and all these sons were fierce and powerful and skilled in learning. And
Kuvalaswa excelled his father in every quality. And when the time came,
his father Vrihadaswa installed him--the brave and highly virtuous
Kuvalaswa--on the throne. And having thus made over the royal dignity to
his son, that slayer of foes--king Vrihadaswa of great intelligence--
retired into the woods for asceticism.'

"Markandeya continued, 'O king, when the royal sage Vrihadaswa was about
to retire into the woods, that best of Brahmanas, Utanka heard of it.
And Utanka who was possessed of great energy and immeasurable soul,
approached that foremost of all wielders of weapons and best of men. And
approaching him, the _Rishis_ began to persuade him to give up
asceticism. And Utanka said, "O king, to protect (the people) is thy
duty. It behoveth thee to do that duty of thine. Let us be free from all
anxiety through thy grace. Possessed as thou art of a great soul,
protected by thee, the earth will be freed from all dangers. Therefore,
it behoveth thee, not to retire into the woods. Great merit attaches to
the act of protecting people in this world. Such merit can never be
acquired in the woods. Let not thy heart, therefore, turn to this
course. The merit, great king, that was acquired in days of old by great
royal sages by protecting their subjects was so great that nothing equal
to it could be seen. The king should always protect his subjects. It
behoveth thee, therefore, to protect thy people. O lord of the earth, I
cannot (at present) perform my ascetic devotions peacefully. Close to my
asylum there is a sea of sands known by the name of _Ujjalaka._ And it
occupies a level country and is without any water. And it extends many
_yojanas_ in length and breadth and in that desert dwells a chief of the
_Danavas_ called Dhundhu by name. And Dhundhu is the son of Madhu and
Kaitabha, and is fierce and terrible and possessed of great prowess. And
endued with immeasurable energy, that _Danava_, O king, dwelleth under
the ground, and, O king, it behoveth thee to retire into the woods,
having first slain that _Asura_. That _Asura_ is now lying still in the
observance of an ascetic penance of great austerity and, O king, the
object he hath in view is sovereignty over the celestials as also of the
three worlds. And, O king, having obtained a boon from the Grandsire of
all creatures, that _Asura_ hath become incapable of being slain by the
gods and _Daityas_ and _Rakshasas_ and _Gandharvas_. Slay though him, O
king, and blessed be thou and let not thy heart turn to any other
course. By slaying him thou wilt without doubt, achieve a great thing
and thou wilt also obtain eternal and undying fame. And O king, when at
the end of every year that wicked _Asura_ lying covered with sands,
wakes up and begins to breathe, then the whole earth with her mountains,
forests and woods begins to tremble. And his breath raiseth up clouds of
sands, and shroudeth the very sun, and for seven days continually the
earth tremble all over, and sparks and flames of fire mixed with smoke
spread far around and for all this, O king, I cannot rest in peace in my
asylum. Slay thou him, O king, for the good of the world. Indeed, when
that _Asura_ is slain the triple world will be in peace and happiness.
That thou art competent, O king, to slay that _Asura_, I fully believe.
Thy energy will be enhanced by Vishnu with the addition of his own. In
days of old, O king, Vishnu gave this boon that the king who should slay
this fierce and great _Asura_ would be pervaded by the invincible energy
of Vishnu himself. Bearing that invincible _Vaishnava_ energy in
thyself, slay thou, O great king, that _Daitya_ of fierce prowess.
Possessed as Dhundhu is of mighty energy, no one, O king, that is endued
with small energy himself will be capable of consuming him, even if he
were to strive for a hundred years."'"


SECTION CCII

"Markandeya said, 'Thus addressed by Utanka, that unvanquished royal
sage, with joined hands, O thou foremost of the Kuru race, replied unto
Utanka, saying, "This visit of thine, O Brahmana, will not be in vain.
This my son, O holy one, known by the name of Kuvalaswa is endued with
steadiness and activity. In prowess also he is unequaled on earth.
Without doubt he will accomplish all this that is agreeable to thee,
aided by all his brave sons endued with arms like unto iron maces. Give
me leave to retire, O Brahmana, for I have now given up my weapons."
Thus addressed by the king, that _Muni_ of immeasurable energy replied
unto him, saying, "So be it." And the royal sage Vrihadaswa then, having
commended his son to obey the behest of the high-souled Utanka saying,
"Let it be done by thee," himself retired into an excellent forest.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O holy one, O thou possessed of the wealth of
asceticism, who was this _Daitya_ of great energy? Whose son and whose
grandson was he? I desire to know all this; O thou possessed of the
wealth of asceticism I never heard of this mighty _Daitya_ before. I
desire to know all this truly, O holy one, and with all particulars in
detail, O thou of great wisdom and ascetic wealth!'

"Markandeya said, 'O monarch, know everything as it happened, O ruler of
men, as I narrate the particulars truly, O thou of great wisdom! When
the world became one broad expanse of water and creatures mobile and
immobile were destroyed, when, O bull of the Bharata race, the entire
creation came to its end, He who is the Source and Creator of the
Universe, viz., the Eternal and unfading Vishnu, He who is called by
_Munis_ crowned with ascetic success as the Supreme Lord of the
Universe, that Being of great holiness, then lay in _Yoga_ sleep on the
wide hood of the Snake Sesha of immeasurable energy, and the Creator of
the Universe, that highly-blessed and holy Hari, knowing no
deterioration, lay on the hood of that Snake encircling the whole Earth
and as the Deity lay asleep on that bed, a lotus, endued with great
beauty and effulgence equal unto that of the Sun, sprang from his navel.
And from that lotus possessed of effulgence like unto the Sun's, sprang
the Grandsire _Brahma_, that lord of the worlds who is the four _Vedas_,
who hath four forms and four faces, who is invincible in consequence of
his own energy and who is endued with mighty strength and great prowess
and as the Lord Hari of wondrous frame, possessed of great lustre and
decked with a crown and the _Kaustubha_ gem and attired in purple silk,
lay stretched for many a _yojana_ on that excellent bed furnished by the
hood of the snake itself extending far and wide, blazing, O king, in his
beauty and the lustre of his own body like a thousand Suns concentrated
in one mass. He was beheld some time after by two _Danavas_ of great
prowess named Madhu and Kaitabha and beholding Hari (in that posture)
and the Grandsire with eyes like lotus-leaves seated on that lotus, both
Madhu and Kaitabha wandered much and they began to terrify and alarm
