
"I don't see how you can do it," said Harry.

"Practice, my boy."

"But practice wouldn't make everybody a ventriloquist, would it?"

"Most persons might become ventriloquists, though in an unequal degree.
I often amuse myself by making use of it for playing practical jokes
upon people.

"Do you see that old lady ahead?"

"Yes, sir."

"I'll offer her a ride. If she accepts, you'll see sport. I shall make
you talk but you must be careful to say nothing yourself."

A few rods farther on, they overtook an old woman.

"Good morning, ma'am," said the professor. "Won't you get in and ride?
It's easier riding than walking."

The old women scanned his countenance and answered: "Thank you, sir, I'm
obleeged to ye. I don't mind if I do."

She was assisted into the carriage and sat at one end of the seat, Harry
being in the middle.

"I was going to see my darter, Nancy," said the old women. "Mrs.
Nehemiah Babcock her name is. Mebbe you know her husband."

"I don't think I do," said the professor.

"He's got a brother in Boston in the dry goods business. Mebbe you've
been at his store."

"Mebbe I have."

"I ginerally call to see my darter--her name is Nancy--once a week; but
it's rather hard for me to walk, now I'm getting' on in years."

"You're most eighty, ain't you?" appeared to proceed from Harry's mouth.
Our hero's face twitched and he had hard work to keep from laughing.

"Indeed, I'm not!" said the old lady, indignantly.

"I'm only sixty-seven and folks say I don't look more'n sixty," and the
old lady looked angrily at Harry.

"You must excuse him, ma'am," said the professor, soothingly. "He is no
judge of a lady's age."

"I should think not, indeed."

"Indeed, madam, you are very young looking."

The old lady was pacified by this compliment but looked askance at
Harry.

"Is he your son?"

"No, ma'am."

The old lady sniffed, as if to say, "So much the better for you."

"Are you travelin' far?" asked the old lady.

"What do you want to know for?" Harry appeared to ask.

"You're a sassy boy!" exclaimed the old woman.

"Harry," said Professor Henderson, gravely, "how often have I told you
not to be so unmannerly?"

"He orter be whipped," said the old lady. "Ef I had a boy that was so
sassy, I'd larn him manners!"

"I'm glad I ain't your boy," Harry appeared to reply.

"I declare I won't ride another step if you let him insult me so," said
the old woman, glaring at our hero.

Professor Henderson caught her eye and significantly touched his
forehead, giving her to understand that Harry was only "half-witted."

"You don't say so," she ejaculated, taking the hint at once. "How long's
he been so?"

"Ever since he was born."

"Ain't you afraid to have him drive?"

"Oh, not at all. He understands horses as well as I do."

"What's his name?"

Before the professor's answer could be heard, Harry appeared to rattle
off the extraordinary name: "George Washington Harry Jefferson Ebenezer
Popkins."

"My gracious! Has he got all them names?"

"Why not? What have you got to say about it, old women?" said the same
voice.

"Oh, I ain't got no objection," said the old woman.

"You may have fifty-'leven names ef you want to."

"I don't interfere with his names," said the professor.

"If he chooses to call himself--"

"George Washington Harry Jefferson Ebenezer Popkins," repeated the
voice, with great volubility.

"If he chooses to call himself by all those names, I'm sure I don't
care. How far do you go, ma'am?"

"About quarter of a mile farther."

The professor saw that he must proceed to his final joke.

"Let me out! Don't keep me locked up here!" said the child's voice, from
behind, in a pleading tone.

"What's that?" asked the startled old lady.

"What's what?" asked the professor, innocently.

"That child that wants to get out."

"You must have dreamed it, my good lady."

"No, there 'tis agin'," said the old lady, excited.

"It's in the trunk behind you," said the assumed voice, appearing to
proceed from our hero.

"So 'tis," said the old lady, turning halfway round.

"Oh, I shall die! Let me out! Let me out!"

"He's locked up his little girl in the trunk," Harry seemed to say.

"You wicked man, let her out this minute," said the old lady, very much
excited. "Don't you know no better than to lock up a child where she
can't get no air?"

"There is no child in the trunk, I assure you," said Professor
Henderson, politely.

"Don't you believe him," said Harry's voice.

"Do let me out, father!" implored the child's voice

"If you don't open the trunk, I'll have you took up for murder," said
the old lady.

"I will open it to show you are mistaken."

The professor got over the seat, and, opening the trunk, displayed its
contents to the astonished old lady.

"I told you that there was no child there," he said; "but you would not
believe me."

"Le' me out," gasped the old woman. "I'd rather walk. I never heerd of
such strange goin's on afore."

"If you insist upon it, madam, but I'm sorry to lose your company. Take
this with you and read it."

He handed her one of his bills, which she put in her pocket, saying she
couldn't see to read it.

When they were far enough off to make it safe, Harry gave vent to his
mirth, which he had restrained till this at difficulty and laughed long
and loud.





CHAPTER XXVI. PAGES FROM THE PAST


"What will the old lady think of you?" said Harry.

"She will have a very bad opinion till she puts on her specs and read
the bill. That will explain all. I shouldn't be surprised to see her at
my entertainment."

"I wonder if she'll recognize me," said Harry.

"No doubt; as soon as she learns with whom she rode, she'll be very
curious to come and see me perform."

"How old were you when you began to be a ventriloquist?"

"I was eighteen. I accidentally made the discovery, and devoted
considerable time to perfecting myself in it before acquainting anyone
with it. That idea came later. You see when I was twenty-one, with a
little property which I inherited from my uncle, I went into business
for myself; but I was young and inexperienced in management, and the
consequence was, that in about two years I failed. I found it difficult
to get employment as a clerk, business being very dull at the
time. While uncertain what to do, one of my friends, to whom I had
communicated my power, induced me to give me a public entertainment,
combining with it a few tricks of magic, which I had been able to pick
up from books. I succeeded so well my vocation in life became Professor
Henderson."

"It must be great fun to be a ventriloquist."

"So I regarded it at first. It may not be a very high vocation but I
make the people laugh and so I regard myself as a public benefactor.
Indeed, I once did an essential service to a young man by means of my
ventriloquism."

"I should like very much to hear the story."

"I will tell you. One day, a young man, a stranger, came to me and
introduced himself under the name of Paul Dabney. He said that I
might, if I would, do him a great service. His father had died the year
previous, leaving a farm and other property to the value of fifteen
thousand dollars. Of course, being as only son, he expected that this
would be left to himself, or, at least, the greater part of it. Conceive
his surprise, therefore, when the will came to be read, to find that the
entire property was left to his Uncle Jonas, his father brother, who,
for three years past, had been a member of the family. Jonas had never
prospered in life, and his brother, out of pity, had offered him
an asylum on his farm. He had formerly been a bookkeeper and was an
accomplished penman.

"The will was so extraordinary--since Paul and his father had always
been on perfectly good terms--that the young man was thunderstruck. His
uncle expressed hypocritical surprise at the nature of the will.

"'I don't believe my father made that will,' exclaimed Paul, angrily.

"'What do you mean by that?' demanded the uncle.

"His anger made Paul think that he had hit upon the truth, particularly
as his uncle was an adroit penman.

"He carefully examined the will; but the writing so closely resembled
his father's that he could see no difference. The witnesses were
his Uncle Jonas and a hired man, who, shortly after witnessing
the signature, had been discharged and had disappeared from the
neighborhood. All this excited Paul's suspicions.

"His uncle offered him a home on the farm; but positively refused to
give him any portion of the property.

"'I sympathize with you,' I said at the conclusion of Paul's story; 'but
how can I help you?'

"'I will tell you, sir,' he replied. 'You must know that my Uncle Jonas
is very superstitious. I mean, through your help, to play upon his fears
and thus induce him to give up the property to me.'

"With this he unfolded his plan and I agreed to help him. His uncle
lived ten miles distant. I procured a laborer's disguise and the morning
after--Paul having previously gone back--I entered the yard of the
farmhouse. The old man was standing outside, smoking a pipe.

"'Can you give me work?' I asked.

"'What kind of work?' inquired Jonas.

"'Farm work,' I answered.

"'How much do you want?'

"'Eight dollars a month.'

"'I'll give you six,' he said.

"'That's too little.'

"'It's the most I'll give you.'

"'Then I'll take,' I replied, and was at once engaged.

"Delighted to get me so cheap, the sordid old man asked me no
troublesome questions. I knew enough of farm work to get along pretty
well and not betray myself.

"That night I concealed myself in the old man's apartment without
arousing his suspicions, Paul helping me. After he had been in bed about
twenty minutes, I thought it time to begin. Accordingly I uttered a
hollow groan.

"'Eh! What's that?' cried the old man, rising in bed.

"'I am the spirit of your dead brother,' I answered, throwing my voice
near the bed.

"'What do you want?' he asked, his teeth chattering.

"'You have cheated Paul out of his property.'

"'Forgive me!' he cried, terror-stricken.

"'Then give him back the property.'

"'The whole?' he groaned.

"'Yes, the whole.'

"'Are--are you really my brother?'

"'I will give you this proof. Unless you do as I order you, in three
days you will be with me.'

"'What, dead?' he said, shuddering.

"'Yes,' I answered in sepulchral a tone as possible.

"'Are--are you sure of it?'

"'If you doubt it, disobey me.'

"'I'll do it, but--don't come again.'

"'Be sure you do it then.'

"I ceased to speak, being tired, and escaped as soon as I could. But the
battle was not yet over. The next day gave Jonas courage. Afternoon
came and he had done nothing. He was with me in the field when I threw a
hollow voice, which seemed to be close to his ear. I said, 'Obey, or in
three days you die.'

"He turned pale as a sheet and asked me if I heard anything. I expressed
surprise and this confirmed him in his belief of the ghostly visitation.
He went to the house, sent for a lawyer and transferred the entire
property to his nephew. The latter made him a present of a thousand
dollars and so the affair ended happily. Paul paid me handsomely for
my share in the trick and the next day I made an excuse for leaving the
farm."

"Did the old man ever discover your agency in the affair, Professor
Henderson?"

"Never. He is dead now and my friend Paul is happily married, and has
a fine family. His oldest boy is named after me. But here we are in
Holston."





CHAPTER XXVII. A MYSTIFYING PERFORMANCE


The people of Holston turned out in large numbers. Among the first to
appear was the old lady whom the professor had taken up on his way over.

"You're the boy that was so sassy to me this mornin'," she said, peering
at Harry through her spectacles.

"I didn't say a word to you," said Harry.

"I'm afraid you're tellin' fibs. I heerd you."

"It was the professor. He put the words in my mouth."

"Well, come to think on't the voice was different from yours. Then there
wa'n't nobody in the trunk?"

"No, ma'am," said Harry, smiling.

"It's wonderful, I declare for't. This is my darter, Mrs. Nehemiah
Babcock," continued the old lady. "Nancy, this is the ventriloquer's
boy. I thought he was sassy to me this mornin'; but he says he didn't
speak a word. How much is to pay?" said the old lady.

"I won't charge you anything," said Harry. "Professor Henderson told me,
if you came to let you in free, and any of your family."

"Really, now, that's very perlite of the professor," said the old lady.
"He's a gentleman if ever there was one. Do you hear, Nancy, we can go
in without payin' a cent. That's all on, account of your marm's being
acquainted with the professor. I'm glad I come."

The old lady and her party entered the hall, and being early, secured
good seats. Tom, her grandson, was glad to be so near, as he was
ambitious to assist the professor in case volunteers were called for.

"Will any young gentleman come forward and assist me in the next trick?"
asked the professor, after a while.

Tom started from his seat. His grandmother tried to seize him by the
coat but he was too quick for her.
