The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hot Swamp, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hot Swamp

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21757]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOT SWAMP ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE HOT SWAMP, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.

CHAPTER ONE.

A ROMANCE OF OLD ALBION.

OPENS WITH LEAVE-TAKING.

Nearly two thousand seven hundred years ago--or somewhere about eight
hundred years BuCu--there dwelt a Phoenician sea-captain in one of the
eastern sea-ports of Greece--known at that period, or soon after, as
Hellas.

This captain was solid, square, bronzed, bluff, and resolute, as all
sea-captains are--or ought to be--whether ancient or modern.  He owned,
as well as commanded, one of those curious vessels with one mast and a
mighty square-sail, fifty oars or so, double-banked, a dragon's tail in
the stern and a horse's head at the prow, in which the Phoenicians of
old and other mariners were wont to drive an extensive and lucrative
trade in the Mediterranean; sometimes pushing their adventurous keels
beyond the Pillars of Hercules, visiting the distant Cassiterides or Tin
Isles, and Albion, and even penetrating northward into the Baltic, in
search of tin, amber, gold, and what not.

One morning this captain, whose name was Arkal, sauntered up from the
harbour to his hut, which stood on a conspicuous eminence overlooking
the bay.  His hands were not thrust into his pockets, because he had no
pockets to put them into--the simple tunic of the period being destitute
of such appendages.  Indeed, the coarse linen tunic referred to
constituted the chief part of his costume, the only other portions being
a pair of rude shoes on his feet, a red fez or tarbouche on his bushy
brown locks, and yards of something wound round his lower limbs to
protect them from thorns on shore, as well as from the rasping of
cordage and cargo at sea.

At the door of his hut stood his pretty little Greek wife, with a solid,
square, bluff, and resolute, but not yet bronzed, baby in her arms.

"Well, Penelope, I'm off," said the captain.  At least he used words to
that effect, as he enveloped wife and baby in a huge embrace.

Of course he spoke in a dialect of ancient Greek, of which we render a
free translation.

The leave-taking was of the briefest, for just then a loud halloo from
his mate, or second in command, apprised the captain that all was ready
to set sail.  But neither Penelope nor her husband were anxious souls or
addicted to the melting mood.  The square baby was rather more given to
such conditions.  In emulation of the mate it set up a sudden howl which
sent its father away laughing to the harbour.

"No sign of the young men," remarked the mate, as his superior came
within hail.

"It is ever the way with these half-fledged boys who think themselves
men while their faces are yet hairless," growled the captain, casting a
glance at his unfailing chronometer, the rising sun.  "They have no more
regard for the movements of that ball of fire than if it was set in the
sky merely to shine and keep them warm, and had no reference whatever to
time.  If this youth from Albion does not appear soon, I shall set sail
without him, prince though he be, and leave him to try his hand at
swimming to the Cassiterides.  His comrade and friend, Dromas, assured
me they would not keep us waiting; but he is no better than the rest of
them--a shouting, singing, smooth-faced, six-foot set they are, who
think they inherit the combined wisdom of all their grandfathers but
none of their weaknesses; reckless fear-nothings, fit only for war and
the Olympic games!"

"Nevertheless, we could not do well without them," returned the mate,
glancing significantly at the ship's crew, a large proportion of which
was composed of these same stalwart fear-nothings of whom his leader
spoke so contemptuously; "at least they would make a fine show at these
games, and our ventures at sea would not prosper so well if we had not
such to help us."

"True, true, and I would not speak slightingly of them, but they do try
one's patience; here is the wind failing, and we all ready to hoist
sail," returned the captain with another growl, a glance at the sky, and
a frown at his vessel, everything about which betokened readiness for
instant departure.  The crew--partly composed of slaves--were seated at
the oars; the fighting men and seamen were all on board arranging their
shields round the vessel's sides, and the great sail was cast loose
ready to hoist as soon as the mouth of the harbour should be cleared.

Just then a band of young men issued from the town, and the captain's
good humour was restored as they hurried towards him.  They seemed to be
much excited, and talked in loud tones as they advanced, their manners
and costumes indicating that they belonged to the upper ranks of
society.

One of the band, a fair youth, towered, like Saul, head and shoulders
above his fellows.  Another, of dark complexion, handsome features, and
elegant, active frame, hurried forward to salute the captain.

"I fear we have kept you waiting," he said with a pleasant expression
that disarmed reproof.

"I will not deny that, Dromas," answered the captain, "but you have not
detained me long.  Nevertheless, I was on the point of sailing without
your friend, for the winds and waves respect no one."

"But you are neither a wind nor a wave," remarked the youth.

"True, but I am the humble friend of both," retorted the captain, "and
am bound to accommodate myself to them.  I suppose this is the prince
you spoke of," he added, turning to the towering youth already referred
to, with the air of a man who had as little--or as much--regard for a
prince as a peasant.

"Yes, Captain Arkal, this is Prince Bladud.  Let me present him to you."

As the prince and the seaman joined hands the latter looked up from an
altitude of five feet six and squared his broad shoulders with the air
of a man ready to defy all creation, and anxious rather than otherwise
to do so.  The prince, on the other hand, looked down from an eminence
of six feet seven, and bent his head with a modest grace and a genial
smile that indicated a desire to be on good terms, if possible, with the
world at large.

Although almost equal as to physical strength, the inequality of the two
men in height rendered their experience in those rude warlike times very
dissimilar, for, whereas the sailor was often compelled to give proof of
his strength to tall unbelievers, the prince very seldom had occasion to
do so.  Hence, partly, their difference in manner, the one being
somewhat pugnacious and the other conciliatory, while both were in
reality good-natured, peace-loving men.

No two men, however, could have been more unlike in outward aspect.  The
prince was, if we may say so, built on the Gothic model--fair,
blue-eyed, bulky of limb, huge, muscular, massive, with a soft beard and
moustache--for he had not yet seen twenty-four summers--and hair that
fell like rippling gold on his shoulders.  Captain Arkal, on the
contrary, was dark, with a thick reddish beard, luxuriant brown hair,
piercing black eyes, and limbs that were hardened as well as darkened by
thirty years of constant exposure to elemental and other warfare.

"I hope that I may be of some use to you," said the prince, "though I
profess not to know more of seamanship than I acquired during my voyage
hither, and as that voyage occurred six years ago, it may be that I have
lost the little I had learned.  But if pirates should assail us, perhaps
I may do you some service."

"Little fear I have of that," returned the captain with an approving
nod.  "Now, bid your comrades farewell and get on board, for the wind is
failing fast, and it behoves us to get well forward on our voyage before
night."

It was evident that the leave-taking which ensued was not merely formal,
for the youths from whom Bladud was parting had been his companions in
study for six years, as well as his competitors in all the manly games
of the period, and as he excelled them all in most things--especially in
athletics--some looked up to the young prince from Albion as a sort of
demi-god, while others to whom he had been helpful in many ways regarded
him with the warmest affection.

"Come here aside with me; I must have a few last words with you alone,"
said Bladud, taking young Dromas by the arm and leading him aside.

The prince's other friends made no objection to this evidence of
preference, for Dromas had shared the same apartment with him while in
Athens, and engaged in similar studies with Bladud for several years;
had travelled with him in the East, and sailed over the sea in his
company, even as far as Egypt, besides having been second to him in most
of the games practised by the young men.  Indeed, at the high jump he
equalled, and at the short race had even excelled him.

"Dromas," said the prince impressively--"Come, now, my old friend and
comrade," interrupted the Greek youth lightly, "don't put on such a long
face.  I foresee that you are about to give me a lecture, and I don't
want the tone of remonstrance to be the last that I shall hear.  I know
that I'm a wild, good-for-nothing fellow, and can guess all you would
say to me.  Let us rather talk of your speedy return to Hellas, for, to
tell you the truth, I feel as if the loss of you would leave me like a
poor man who has been crippled in the wars.  I shall be a mere shadow
till you return."

There was a slight tremor in the voice, which showed that much of the
gaiety of the young man was forced.

"Nay, I have no mind to give you a lecture," returned Bladud, "I only
ask you to grant me two requests."

"Granted, before mentioned, for you have ever been a reasonable
creature, Bladud, and I trust you to retain your character on the
present occasion."

"Well, then, my first request is that you will often remember the many
talks that you and I have had about the gods, and the future life, and
the perplexing conditions in which we now live."

"Remember them," exclaimed Dromas with animation, "my difficulty would
be to forget them!  The questions which you have propounded and
attempted to answer--for I do not admit that you have been quite
successful in the attempt--have started up and rung in my ears at all
kinds of unseasonable times.  They haunt me often in my dreams--though,
to say truth, I dream but little, save when good fellowship has led me
to run supper into breakfast--they worry me during my studies, which,
you know, are frequent though not prolonged; they come between me and
the worthy rhapsodist when he is in the middle of the most interesting--
or least wearisome--passage of the poem, and they even intrude on me at
the games.  The very last race I ran was lost, only by a few inches,
because our recent talk on the future of cats caused a touch of internal
laughter which checked my pace at the most critical moment.  You may
rest assured that I cannot avoid granting your first request.  What is
your second?"

"That you promise to visit me in my home in Albion.  You know that it
will be impossible for me ever again to re-visit these shores, where I
have been so happy.  My father, if he forgives my running away from him,
will expect me to help him in the management of his affairs.  But you
have nothing particular to detain you here--"

"You forget--the old woman," interrupted Dromas gravely.

"What old woman?" asked Bladud in surprise.

"My mother!" returned his friend.

The prince looked a little confused and hastened to apologise.  Dromas'
mother was one of those unfortunate people who existed in the olden time
as well as in modern days, though perhaps not so numerously.  She was a
confirmed invalid, who rarely quitted her house, and was seldom seen by
any one save her most intimate friends, so that she was apt to be
forgotten--out of sight out of mind, then as now.

"Forgive me, Dromas--," began Bladud, but his friend interrupted him.

"I cannot forgive when I have nothing to forgive!  Say no more about
that.  But, now I come to consider of it, I grant your second request
conditionally.  If my mother agrees to accompany me to Albion, you may
expect to see me some day or other--perhaps a year or two hence.  You
see, since my father and brother were slain in the last fight with our
neighbours, I am the only one left to comfort her, so I cannot forsake
her."

"Then this will be our final parting," returned Bladud, sadly, "for your
mother will never consent to leave home."

"I don't know that," returned Dromas with a laugh.  "The dear old soul
is intensely adventurous, like myself, and I do believe would venture on
a voyage to the Cassiterides, if the fancy were strong upon her.  You
have no idea how powerfully I can work upon her feelings.  I won't say
that I can make much impression on her intellect.  Indeed, I have reason
to know that she does not believe in intellect except as an unavoidable
doorway leading into the feelings.  The fact is, I tried her the other
day with the future of cats, and do you know, instead of treating that
subject with the gravity it merits, she laughed in my face and called me
names--not exactly bad names, such as the gods might object to--but
names that were not creditable to the intelligence of her first-born.
Now," continued Dromas with increasing gravity, "when I paint to her the
beauty of your native land; the splendour of your father's court; the
kindliness of your mother, and the exceeding beauty of your sister--fair
like yourself, blue-eyed, tall--you said she was tall, I think?"

"Yes--rather tall."

"Of course not _quite_ so tall as yourself, say six feet or so, with a
slight, feminine beard--no? you shake your head; well, smooth-faced and
rosy, immense breadth of shoulders--ah!  I have often pictured to myself
that sister of yours--"

"Hilloa!" shouted Captain Arkal in a nautical tone that might almost
have been styled modern British in its character.

It was an opportune interruption, for Dromas had been running on with
his jesting remarks for the sole purpose of crushing down the feelings
that almost unmanned him.

With few but fervently uttered words the final farewells were at last
spoken.  The oars were dipped; the vessel shot from the land, swept out
upon the blue waves of the Aegean, the sail was hoisted, and thus began
the long voyage to the almost unknown islands of the far North-West.

CHAPTER TWO.

TEMPORARY DELAY THROUGH ELEMENTS AND PIRATES.

But it is not our purpose to inflict the entire log of that voyage on
our reader, adventurous though the voyage was.  Matter of much greater
importance claims our regard.  Still it would be unjust to our voyagers
to pass it over in absolute silence.

At the very commencement of it, there occurred one of those incidents to
which all voyagers are more or less subject.  A gale arose the very
evening of the day on which they left port, which all but swamped the
little vessel, and the violence of the wind was so great that their huge
sail was split from top to bottom.  In spite of the darkness and the
confusion that ensued, Captain Arkal, by his prompt action and skilful
management, saved the vessel from immediate destruction.  Fortunately
the gale did not last long, and, during the calm that followed, the rent
was repaired and the sail re-set.

Then occurred another incident that threatened to cut short the voyage
even more disastrously than by swamping.

The sea over which they steered swarmed with pirates at the time we
write of, as it continued to swarm during many centuries after.
Merchantmen, fully aware of the fact, were in those days also men of
war.  They went forth on their voyages fully armed with sword, javelin,
and shield, as well as with the simple artillery of the period--bows and
arrows, slings and stones.

On the afternoon of the day that followed the gale, the vessel--which
her captain and owner had named the _Penelope_ in honour of his wife--
was running before a light breeze, along the coast of one of the islands
with which that sea is studded.

Bladud and some of the crew were listening at the time to an account
given by a small seaman named Maikar, of a recent adventure on the sea,
when a galley about as large as their own was seen to shoot suddenly
from the mouth of a cavern in the cliffs in which it had lain concealed.
It was double-banked and full of armed men, and was rowed in such a way
as to cut in advance of the _Penelope_.  The vigour with which the oars
were plied, and the rapidity with which the sail was run up, left no
doubt as to the nature of the craft or the intentions of those who
manned it.

"The rascals!" growled Arkal with a dark frown, "I more than half
expected to find them here."

