
'You can't ride bulls,' Alice said; 'at least, not if their backs are
sharp like cows.'

But Oswald thought he could. The bull lives in a house made of wood and
prickly furze bushes, and he has a yard to his house. You cannot climb
on the roof of his house at all comfortably.

When we got there he was half in his house and half out in his yard, and
he was swinging his tail because of the flies which bothered. It was a
very hot day.

'You'll see,' Alice said, 'he won't want a goad. He'll be so glad to
get out for a walk he'll drop his head in my hand like a tame fawn, and
follow me lovingly all the way.'

Oswald called to him. He said, 'Bull! Bull! Bull! Bull!' because we did
not know the animal's real name. The bull took no notice; then Oswald
picked up a stone and threw it at the bull, not angrily, but just to
make it pay attention. But the bull did not pay a farthing's worth of
it. So then Oswald leaned over the iron gate of the bull's yard and just
flicked the bull with the whiplash. And then the bull DID pay attention.
He started when the lash struck him, then suddenly he faced round,
uttering a roar like that of the wounded King of Beasts, and putting his
head down close to his feet he ran straight at the iron gate where we
were standing.

Alice and Oswald mechanically turned away; they did not wish to annoy
the bull any more, and they ran as fast as they could across the field
so as not to keep the others waiting.

As they ran across the field Oswald had a dream-like fancy that perhaps
the bull had rooted up the gate with one paralysing blow, and was now
tearing across the field after him and Alice, with the broken gate
balanced on its horns. We climbed the stile quickly and looked back; the
bull was still on the right side of the gate.

Oswald said, 'I think we'll do without the bull. He did not seem to want
to come. We must be kind to dumb animals.'

Alice said, between laughing and crying--

'Oh, Oswald, how can you!' But we did do without the bull, and we did
not tell the others how we had hurried to get back. We just said, 'The
bull didn't seem to care about coming.'

The others had not been idle. They had got old Clover, the cart-horse,
but she would do nothing but graze, so we decided not to use her in the
bull-fight, but to let her be the Elephant. The Elephant's is a nice
quiet part, and she was quite big enough for a young one. Then the black
pig could be Learned, and the other two could be something else. They
had also got the goat; he was tethered to a young tree.

The donkey was there. Denny was leading him in the halter. The dogs were
there, of course--they always are.

So now we only had to get the turkeys for the applause and the calves
and pigs.

The calves were easy to get, because they were in their own house. There
were five. And the pigs were in their houses too. We got them out after
long and patient toil, and persuaded them that they wanted to go into
the paddock, where the circus was to be. This is done by pretending to
drive them the other way. A pig only knows two ways--the way you want
him to go, and the other. But the turkeys knew thousands of different
ways, and tried them all. They made such an awful row, we had to drop
all ideas of ever hearing applause from their lips, so we came away and
left them.

'Never mind,' H. O. said, 'they'll be sorry enough afterwards, nasty,
unobliging things, because now they won't see the circus. I hope the
other animals will tell them about it.'

While the turkeys were engaged in baffling the rest of us, Dicky had
found three sheep who seemed to wish to join the glad throng, so we let
them.

Then we shut the gate of the paddock, and left the dumb circus
performers to make friends with each other while we dressed.

Oswald and H. O. were to be clowns. It is quite easy with Albert's
uncle's pyjamas, and flour on your hair and face, and the red they do
the brick-floors with.

Alice had very short pink and white skirts, and roses in her hair and
round her dress. Her dress was the pink calico and white muslin stuff
off the dressing-table in the girls' room fastened with pins and tied
round the waist with a small bath towel. She was to be the Dauntless
Equestrienne, and to give her enhancing act a barebacked daring, riding
either a pig or a sheep, whichever we found was freshest and most
skittish. Dora was dressed for the Haute ecole, which means a
riding-habit and a high hat. She took Dick's topper that he wears with
his Etons, and a skirt of Mrs Pettigrew's. Daisy, dressed the same as
Alice, taking the muslin from Mrs Pettigrew's dressing-table with-out
saying anything beforehand. None of us would have advised this, and
indeed we were thinking of trying to put it back, when Denny and Noel,
who were wishing to look like highwaymen, with brown-paper top-boots
and slouch hats and Turkish towel cloaks, suddenly stopped dressing and
gazed out of the window.

'Krikey!' said Dick, 'come on, Oswald!' and he bounded like an antelope
from the room.

Oswald and the rest followed, casting a hasty glance through the window.
Noel had got brown-paper boots too, and a Turkish towel cloak. H. O. had
been waiting for Dora to dress him up for the other clown. He had only
his shirt and knickerbockers and his braces on. He came down as he
was--as indeed we all did. And no wonder, for in the paddock, where the
circus was to be, a blood-thrilling thing had transpired. The dogs were
chasing the sheep. And we had now lived long enough in the country to
know the fell nature of our dogs' improper conduct.

We all rushed into the paddock, calling to Pincher, and Martha, and
Lady. Pincher came almost at once. He is a well-brought-up dog--Oswald
trained him. Martha did not seem to hear. She is awfully deaf, but
she did not matter so much, because the sheep could walk away from her
easily. She has no pace and no wind. But Lady is a deer-hound. She
is used to pursuing that fleet and antlered pride of the forest--the
stag--and she can go like billyo. She was now far away in a distant
region of the paddock, with a fat sheep just before her in full flight.
I am sure if ever anybody's eyes did start out of their heads with
horror, like in narratives of adventure, ours did then.

There was a moment's pause of speechless horror. We expected to see Lady
pull down her quarry, and we know what a lot of money a sheep costs, to
say nothing of its own personal feelings.

Then we started to run for all we were worth. It is hard to run
swiftly as the arrow from the bow when you happen to be wearing pyjamas
belonging to a grown-up person--as I was--but even so I beat Dicky. He
said afterwards it was because his brown-paper boots came undone and
tripped him up. Alice came in third. She held on the dressing-table
muslin and ran jolly well. But ere we reached the fatal spot all was
very nearly up with the sheep. We heard a plop; Lady stopped and looked
round. She must have heard us bellowing to her as we ran. Then she came
towards us, prancing with happiness, but we said 'Down!' and 'Bad dog!'
and ran sternly on.

When we came to the brook which forms the northern boundary of the
paddock we saw the sheep struggling in the water. It is not very deep,
and I believe the sheep could have stood up, and been well in its depth,
if it had liked, but it would not try.

It was a steepish bank. Alice and I got down and stuck our legs into the
water, and then Dicky came down, and the three of us hauled that sheep
up by its shoulders till it could rest on Alice and me as we sat on the
bank. It kicked all the time we were hauling. It gave one extra kick
at last, that raised it up, and I tell you that sopping wet, heavy,
panting, silly donkey of a sheep sat there on our laps like a pet dog;
and Dicky got his shoulder under it at the back and heaved constantly to
keep it from flumping off into the water again, while the others fetched
the shepherd.

When the shepherd came he called us every name you can think of, and
then he said--

'Good thing master didn't come along. He would ha' called you some tidy
names.'

He got the sheep out, and took it and the others away. And the calves
too. He did not seem to care about the other performing animals.

Alice, Oswald and Dick had had almost enough circus for just then, so
we sat in the sun and dried ourselves and wrote the programme of the
circus. This was it:


               PROGRAMME

1. Startling leap from the lofty precipice by the performing sheep. Real
water, and real precipice. The gallant rescue. O. A. and D. Bastable.
(We thought we might as well put that in though it was over and had
happened accidentally.)

2. Graceful bare-backed equestrienne act on the trained pig, Eliza. A.
Bastable. 3. Amusing clown interlude, introducing trained dog, Pincher,
and the other white pig. H. O. and O. Bastable.

4. The See-Saw. Trained donkeys. (H. O. said we had only one donkey, so
Dicky said H. O. could be the other. When peace was restored we went on
to 5.)

5. Elegant equestrian act by D. Bastable. Haute ecole, on Clover, the
incomparative trained elephant from the plains of Venezuela.

6. Alpine feat of daring. The climbing of the Andes, by Billy, the
well-known acrobatic goat. (We thought we could make the Andes out of
hurdles and things, and so we could have but for what always happens.
(This is the unexpected. (This is a saying Father told me--but I see
I am three deep in brackets so I will close them before I get into any
more).).).

7. The Black but Learned Pig. ('I daresay he knows something,' Alice
said, 'if we can only find out what.' We DID find out all too soon.)


We could not think of anything else, and our things were nearly dry--all
except Dick's brown-paper top-boots, which were mingled with the
gurgling waters of the brook.

We went back to the seat of action--which was the iron trough where the
sheep have their salt put--and began to dress up the creatures.

We had just tied the Union Jack we made out of Daisy's flannel petticoat
and cetera, when we gave the soldiers the baccy, round the waist of the
Black and Learned Pig, when we heard screams from the back part of the
house, and suddenly we saw that Billy, the acrobatic goat, had got loose
from the tree we had tied him to. (He had eaten all the parts of its
bark that he could get at, but we did not notice it until next day, when
led to the spot by a grown-up.)

The gate of the paddock was open. The gate leading to the bridge that
goes over the moat to the back door was open too. We hastily proceeded
in the direction of the screams, and, guided by the sound, threaded
our way into the kitchen. As we went, Noel, ever fertile in melancholy
ideas, said he wondered whether Mrs Pettigrew was being robbed, or only
murdered.

In the kitchen we saw that Noel was wrong as usual. It was neither. Mrs
Pettigrew, screaming like a steam-siren and waving a broom, occupied
the foreground. In the distance the maid was shrieking in a hoarse and
monotonous way, and trying to shut herself up inside a clothes-horse on
which washing was being aired.

On the dresser--which he had ascended by a chair--was Billy, the
acrobatic goat, doing his Alpine daring act. He had found out his Andes
for himself, and even as we gazed he turned and tossed his head in a
way that showed us some mysterious purpose was hidden beneath his calm
exterior. The next moment he put his off-horn neatly behind the end
plate of the next to the bottom row, and ran it along against the wall.
The plates fell crashing on to the soup tureen and vegetable dishes
which adorned the lower range of the Andes.

Mrs Pettigrew's screams were almost drowned in the discarding crash and
crackle of the falling avalanche of crockery.

Oswald, though stricken with horror and polite regret, preserved the
most dauntless coolness.

Disregarding the mop which Mrs Pettigrew kept on poking at the goat in
a timid yet cross way, he sprang forward, crying out to his trusty
followers, 'Stand by to catch him!'

But Dick had thought of the same thing, and ere Oswald could carry out
his long-cherished and general-like design, Dicky had caught the goat's
legs and tripped it up. The goat fell against another row of plates,
righted itself hastily in the gloomy ruins of the soup tureen and the
sauce-boats, and then fell again, this time towards Dicky. The two fell
heavily on the ground together. The trusty followers had been so struck
by the daring of Dicky and his lion-hearted brother, that they had not
stood by to catch anything.

The goat was not hurt, but Dicky had a sprained thumb and a lump on his
head like a black marble door-knob. He had to go to bed.

I will draw a veil and asterisks over what Mrs Pettigrew said. Also
Albert's uncle, who was brought to the scene of ruin by her screams. Few
words escaped our lips. There are times when it is not wise to argue;
however, little what has occurred is really our fault.

When they had said what they deemed enough and we were let go, we all
went out. Then Alice said distractedly, in a voice which she vainly
strove to render firm--

'Let's give up the circus. Let's put the toys back in the boxes--no,
I don't mean that--the creatures in their places--and drop the whole
thing. I want to go and read to Dicky.'

Oswald has a spirit that no reverses can depreciate. He hates to be
beaten. But he gave in to Alice, as the others said so too, and we went
out to collect the performing troop and sort it out into its proper
places.

Alas! we came too late. In the interest we had felt about whether Mrs
Pettigrew was the abject victim of burglars or not, we had left both
gates open again. The old horse--I mean the trained elephant from
Venezuela--was there all right enough. The dogs we had beaten and tied
up after the first act, when the intrepid sheep bounded, as it says in
the programme. The two white pigs were there, but the donkey was gone.
We heard his hoofs down the road, growing fainter and fainter, in the
direction of the 'Rose and Crown'. And just round the gatepost we saw
a flash of red and white and blue and black that told us, with dumb
signification, that the pig was off in exactly the opposite direction.
Why couldn't they have gone the same way? But no, one was a pig and the
other was a donkey, as Denny said afterwards.

Daisy and H. O. started after the donkey; the rest of us, with one
accord, pursued the pig--I don't know why. It trotted quietly down the
road; it looked very black against the white road, and the ends on the
top, where the Union Jack was tied, bobbed brightly as it trotted. At
first we thought it would be easy to catch up to it. This was an error.

When we ran faster it ran faster; when we stopped it stopped and looked
round at us, and nodded. (I daresay you won't swallow this, but you may
safely. It's as true as true, and so's all that about the goat. I give
you my sacred word of honour.) I tell you the pig nodded as much as to
say--

'Oh, yes. You think you will, but you won't!' and then as soon as we
moved again off it went. That pig led us on and on, o'er miles and miles
of strange country. One thing, it did keep to the roads. When we met
people, which wasn't often, we called out to them to help us, but they
only waved their arms and roared with laughter. One chap on a bicycle
almost tumbled off his machine, and then he got off it and propped it
against a gate and sat down in the hedge to laugh properly. You remember
Alice was still dressed up as the gay equestrienne in the dressing-table
pink and white, with rosy garlands, now very droopy, and she had no
stockings on, only white sand-shoes, because she thought they would be
easier than boots for balancing on the pig in the graceful bare-backed
act.

Oswald was attired in red paint and flour and pyjamas, for a clown.
It is really IMPOSSIBLE to run speedfully in another man's pyjamas,
