wouldn't be hurt and we can't spare the men."

"But we must find a way out! We must get rid of them somehow!" exclaimed
Mr. Ware.

"That's true," said Upton, and as he spoke they heard a bullet thud
against the wall of the house. From the forest came a wild quavering
yell of triumph, full of the most merciless menace. Mr. Ware and Mr.
Upton shuddered. Each had a young daughter, and it was in the minds of
each to slay her in the last resort if there should be no other way.

"If those fellows in the tree keep on driving us from the palisade,"
said Ross, setting his face in the grim manner of one who forces himself
to tell the truth, "there's nothin' to prevent the main band from makin'
an attack, and while the other fellows rain bullets on us they'll be
inside the palisade."

They stared at each other in silent despair, and Ross going to the
corner of the house, but keeping himself protected well, looked at the
fatal tree. No one was firing, then, and he could see nothing among its
branches. In the fresh green of its young foliage it looked like a huge
cone set upon a giant stem, and Ross shook his fist at it in futile
anger. Nor was a foe visible elsewhere. The entire savage army lay
hidden in the forest and nothing fluttered or moved but the leaves and
the grass.

The others, led by the same interest, followed Ross, and keeping to the
safety of the walls, stole glances at the tree. As they looked they
heard the faint report of a shot and a cry of death, and saw a brown
body shoot down from the green cone of the tree to the ground, where it
lay still.

"There is a marksman among us who can beat them at their own trick,"
cried the schoolmaster in exultation. "Who did it? Who fired that shot,
Tom?"

Ross did not answer. First a look of wonder came upon his face, and then
he began to study the forest, where all but nature was yet lifeless. The
faint sound of a second shot came and what followed was a duplicate of
the sequel to the first. Another brown body shot downward, and lay
lifeless beside its fellow on the grass.

The master cried out once more in exultation, and wished to know why
others within the palisade did not imitate the skillful sharpshooter.
But Ross shook his head slowly and spoke these slow words:

"A great piece of luck has happened to us, Mr. Pennypacker, an' how it's
happened I don't know, at least not yet. Them shots never come from any
of our men. We've got a friend outside an' he's pickin' off them
ambushed murderers one by one. The savages think we're doin' it, but
they'll soon find out the difference."

There was a third shot and the tree ejected a third body.

"What wonderful shootin'!" exclaimed Ross in a tone of amazement. "Them
shots come from a long distance, but all three of 'em plugged the mark
to the center. Them savages was dead before they touched the ground. I
never saw the like."

The others waited expectantly, as if he could give them an explanation,
but if he had a thought in his mind he kept it to himself.

"There, they've found it out," he said, when a terrific yell full of
anger came from the forest, "but they haven't got him, whoever he is.
They'd shout in a different way if they had."

"Why do you say him?" asked Mr. Pennypacker. "Surely a single man has
not been doing such daring and deadly work!"

"It's one man, because there are not two in all this wilderness who can
shoot like that. I'd hate to be in the place of the savages left in that
tree."

The wonder of the new and unknown ally soon spread through Wareville,
and reached Lucy Upton as it reached others. A thought came to her and
she was about to speak of it, but she stopped, fearing ridicule, and
merely listened to the excited talk going on all about her.

An hour later a fourth Indian was shot from the tree, and less than
fifteen minutes afterwards a fifth fell a victim to the terrible rifle.
Then two, the only survivors, dropped from the boughs and ran for the
forest. Ross, Sol and Paul Cotter were watching together and saw the
flight.

"One of them brown rascals will never reach the woods," said Ross with
the intuition of the borderer.

The foremost savage fell just at the edge of the forest, shot through
the heart, and the other, the sole survivor of the tree, escaped behind
the sheltering trunks.

The cry of the angry savages swelled into a terrible chorus and bullets
beat upon the stockade, but the attack was quickly repulsed, and again
quiet and treacherous peace settled down upon this little spot, this pin
point in the mighty wilderness, whose struggle must be carried on
unaided, and, in truth, unknown to all the rest of the world.

When the savages were driven back they melted again into the forest, and
the old silence and peace laid hold of everything, the brilliant
sunshine gilding every house, and dyeing into deeper colors the glowing
tints of the wilderness. The huge tree, so fatal to those who had sought
to use it, stood up, a great green cone, its branches waving softly
before the wind.

In the little fortress the wonder and excitement yet prevailed, but
mingled with it was a devout gratitude for this help from an unknown
quarter which had been so timely and so effective. The spirits of the
garrison, from the boldest ranger down to the most timid woman, took a
sudden upward heave and they felt that they should surely repel every
attack by the savage army.

The remainder of the day passed in silence and with the foe invisible,
but the guard at the palisade, now safe from ambushed marksmen, relaxed
its vigilance not at all. These men knew that they dealt with an enemy
whose uncertainty made him all the more terrible, and they would not
leave the issue to shifting chance.

The day waned, the night came, heavy and dark again, and full, as it was
bound to be, of threats and omens for the beleaguered people. Lucy Upton
with Mary Ware slipped to the little wooden embrasure where Paul Cotter
was on watch.

They found Paul in the sheltered nook, watching the forest and the open,
through the holes pierced for rifles, and he did not seek to hide his
pleasure at seeing them. Two other men were there, but they were
middle-aged and married, the fathers of increasing families, and they
were not offended when Paul received a major share of attention.

He told them that all was quiet, his own eyes were keen, but they failed
to mark anything unusual, and he believed that the savages, profiting by
their costly experience, would make no new attempt yet a while. Then he
spoke of the mysterious help that had come to them, and the same thought
was in his mind and Lucy's, though neither spoke of it. They stood there
a while, talking in low tones and looking for excuses to linger, when
one of the older men moved a little and held up a warning hand. He had
just taken his eyes from a loophole, and he whispered that he thought he
had seen something pass in the shadow of the wall.

All in the embrasure became silent at once, and Lucy, brave as she was,
could hear her heart beating. There was a slight noise on the outside of
the wall, so faint that only keen ears could hear it, and then as they
looked up they saw a hideous, painted face raised above the palisade.

One of the older men threw his rifle to his shoulder, but, quick as a
flash, Paul struck his hand away from the trigger. He knew who had come,
when he looked into the eyes that looked down at him, though he felt
fear, too--he could not deny it--as he met their gaze, so fierce, so
wild, so full of the primitive man.

"Don't you see?" he said, "it is Henry! Henry Ware!"

Even then Lucy Upton, intimate friend though she had been, scarcely saw,
but laughing a low soft laugh of intense satisfaction, Henry dropped
lightly among them. Good excuse had these men for not knowing him as his
transformation was complete! He stood before them not a white man, but
an Indian warrior, a prince of savages. His hair was drawn up in the
defiant scalp lock, his face bore the war paint in all its variations
and violent contrast of colors, the dark-green hunting shirt and
leggings with their beaded decorations were gone, and in their place a
red Indian blanket was wrapped around him, drooping in its graceful
folds like a Roman toga.

His figure, erect in the moonlight, nearly a head above the others, had
a certain savage majesty, and they gazed upon him in silence. He seemed
to know what they felt and his eyes gleamed with pride out of his darkly
painted face. He laughed again a low laugh, not like that of the white
man, but the almost inaudible chuckle of the Indian.

"It had to be," he said, glancing down at his garb though not with
shame. "To do what I wished to do, it was necessary to pass as an
Indian, at least between times, and, as all the Shawnees do not know
each other, this helped."

"It was you who shot the Indians in the tree; I knew it from the first,"
said the voice of the guide, Ross, over their shoulders. He had come so
softly that they did not notice him before.

Henry did not reply, but laughed again the dry chuckle that made Lucy
tremble she scarcely knew why, and ran his hand lovingly along the
slender barrel of his rifle.

"At least you do not complain of it," he said presently.

"No, we do not," replied Ross, "an' I guess we won't. You saved us,
that's sure. I've lived on the border all my life, but I never saw such
shootin' before."

Then Henry gave some details of his work and Lucy Upton, watching him
closely, saw how he had been engrossed by it. Paul Cotter too noticed,
and feeling constraint, at least, demanded that Henry doff his savage
disguise, put on white men's clothes and get something to eat.

He consented, though scarce seeing the necessity of it, but kept the
Indian blanket close to hand, saying that he would soon need it again.
But he was very gentle with his mother telling her that she need have no
fear for him, that he knew all the wiles of the savage and more; they
could never catch him and the outside was his place, as then he could be
of far more service than if he were merely one of the garrison.

The news of Henry Ware's return was throughout the village in five
minutes, and with it came the knowledge of his great deed. In the face
of such a solid and valuable fact the vague charge that he was a
renegade died. Even Braxton Wyatt did not dare to lift his voice to that
effect again, but, with sly insinuation, he spoke of savages herding
with savages, and of what might happen some day.

When night came Henry resuming his Indian garb and paint slipped out
again, and so skillful was he that he seemed to melt away like a mist in
the darkness.

The savage army beleaguering the colony now found that it was assailed
by a mysterious enemy, one whom all their vigilance and skill could not
catch. They lost warrior after warrior and many of them began to think
Manitou hostile to them, but the leaders persisted with the siege. They
wished to destroy utterly this white vanguard, and they would not return
to their villages, far across the Ohio, until it was done.

They no longer made a direct attack upon the walls, but, forming a
complete circle around, hung about at a convenient distance, waiting and
hoping for thirst and famine to help them. The people believed
themselves to have taken good precautions against these twin evils, but
now a terrible misfortune befell them. No rain fell and the well inside
the palisade ran dry. It was John Ware himself who first saw the coming
of the danger and he tried to hide it, but it could not, from its very
nature, be kept a secret long. The supply for each person was cut down
one half and then one fourth, and that too would soon go, unless the
welcome rains came; and the sky was without a cloud. Men who feared no
physical danger saw those whom they loved growing pale and weak before
their eyes, and they knew not what to do. It seemed that the place must
fall without a blow from the enemy.




CHAPTER XVI

A GIRL'S WAY


Lucy left her father's house one of these dry mornings, and stood for a
few moments in the grounds, inclosed by the palisade, gazing at the dark
forest, outlined so sharply against the blue of the sky. She could see
the green of the forest beyond the fort, and she knew that in the open
spaces, where the sun reached them, tiny wild flowers of pink and
purple, nestled low in the grass, were already in bloom. From the west a
wind sweet and soft was blowing, and, as she inhaled it, she wanted to
live, and she wanted all those about her to live. She wondered, if there
was not some way in which she could help.

The stout, double log cabins, rude, but full of comfort, stood in rows,
with well-trodden streets, between, then a fringe of grass around all,
and beyond that rose the palisade of stout stakes, driven deep into the
ground, and against each other. All was of the West and so was Lucy, a
tall, lithe young girl, her face tanned a healthy and becoming brown by
the sun, her clothing of home-woven red cloth, adorned at the wrists and
around the bottom of the skirt with many tiny beads of red and yellow
and blue and green, which, when she moved, flashed in the brilliant
light, like the quivering colors of a prism. She had thrust in her hair
a tiny plume of the scarlet tanager, and it lay there, like a flash of
flame, against the dark brown of her soft curls.

Where she stood she could see the water of the spring near the edge of
the forest sparkling in the sunlight, as if it wished to tantalize her,
but as she looked a thought came to her, and she acted upon it at once.
She went to the little square, where her father, John Ware, Ross and
others were in conference.

"Father," she exclaimed, "I will show you how to get the water!"

Mr. Upton and the other men looked at her in so much astonishment that
none of them replied, and Lucy used the opportunity.

"I know the way," she continued eagerly. "Open the gate, let the women
take the buckets--I will lead--and we can go to the spring and fill them
with water. Maybe the Indians won't fire on us!"

"Lucy, child!" exclaimed her father. "I cannot think of such a thing."

Then up spoke Tom Ross, wise in the ways of the wilderness.

"Mr. Upton," he said, "the girl is right. If the women are willing to go
out it must be done. It looks like an awful thing, but--if they die we
are here to avenge them and die with them, if they don't die we are all
saved because we can hold this fort, if we have water; without it every
soul here from the oldest man down to the littlest baby will be lost."

Mr. Upton covered his face with his hands.

"I do not like to think of it, Tom," he said.

The other men waited in silence.

Lucy looked appealingly at her father, but he turned his eyes away.

"See what the women say about it, Tom," he said at last.

The women thought well of it. There was not one border heroine, but
many; disregarding danger they prepared eagerly for the task, and soon
they were in line more than fifty, every one with a bucket or pail in
each hand. Henry Ware, looking on, said nothing. The intended act
appealed to the nature within him that was growing wilder every day.

A sentinel, peeping over the palisade, reported that all was quiet in
the forest, though, as he knew, the warriors were none the less
watchful.

"Open the gate," commanded Mr. Ware.

The heavy bars were quickly taken down, and the gate was swung wide.
Then a slim, scarlet-clad figure took her place at the head of the line,
and they passed out.

Lucy was borne on now by a great impulse, the desire to save the fort
and all these people whom she knew and loved. It was she who had
suggested the plan and she believed that it should be she who should
lead the way, when it came to the doing of it.

She felt a tremor when she was outside the gate, but it came from
excitement and not from fear--the exaltation of spirit would not permit
her to be afraid. She glanced at the forest, but it was only a blur
before her.

The slim, scarlet-clad figure led on. Lucy glanced over her shoulder,
and she saw the women following her in a double file, grave and
resolute. She did not look back again, but marched on straight toward
the spring. She began to feel now what she was doing, that she was
marching into the cannon's mouth, as truly as any soldier that ever led
a forlorn hope against a battery. She knew that hundreds of keen eyes
there in the forest before her were watching her every step, and that
behind her fathers and brothers and husbands were waiting, with an
anxiety that none of them had ever known before.

She expected every moment to hear the sharp whiplike crack of the rifle,
but there was no sound. The fort and all about it seemed to be inclosed
in a deathly stillness. She looked again at the forest, trying to see
the ambushed figures, but again it was only a blur before her, seeming
now and then to float in a kind of mist. Her pulses were beating fast,
she could hear the thump, thump in her temples, but the slim scarlet
figure never wavered and behind, the double file of women followed,
grave and silent.

"They will not fire until we reach the spring," thought Lucy, and now
she could hear the bubble of the cool, clear water, as it gushed from
the hillside. But still nothing stirred in the forest, no rifle cracked,
there was no sound of moving men.

She reached the spring, bent down, filled both buckets at the pool, and
passing in a circle around it, turned her face toward the fort, and,
after her, came the silent procession, each filling her buckets at the
pool, passing around it and turning her face toward the fort as she had
done.

Lucy now felt her greatest fear when she began the return journey and
her back was toward the forest. There was in her something of the
warrior; if the bullet was to find her she preferred to meet it, face to
face. But she would not let her hands tremble, nor would she bend
beneath the weight of the water. She held herself proudly erect and
glanced at the wooden wall before her. It was lined with faces, brown,
usually, but now with the pallor showing through the tan. She saw her
father's among them and she smiled at him, because she was upheld by a
great pride and exultation. It was she who had told them what to do, and
it was she who led the way.

She reached the open gate again, but she did not hasten her footsteps.
She walked sedately in, and behind her she heard only the regular tread
of the long double file of women. The forest was as silent as ever.

The last woman passed in, the gate was slammed shut, the heavy bars were
dropped into place, and Mr. Upton throwing his arms about Lucy
exclaimed:

"Oh, my brave daughter!"

She sank against him trembling, her nerves weak after the long tension,
but she felt a great pride nevertheless. She wished to show that a woman
too could be physically brave in the face of the most terrible of all
dangers, and she had triumphantly done so.

The bringing of the water, or rather the courage that inspired the act,
heartened the garrison anew, and color came back to men's faces. The
schoolmaster discussed the incident with Tom Ross, and wondered why the
Indians who were not in the habit of sparing women had not fired.

"Sometimes a man or a crowd of men won't do a thing that they would do
at any other time," said Ross, "maybe they thought they could get us all
in a bunch by waitin' an' maybe way down at the bottom of their savage
souls, was a spark of generosity that lighted up for just this once.
We'll never know."

Henry Ware went out that night, and returning before dawn with the same
facility that marked all his movements in the wilderness, reported that
the savage army was troubled. All such forces are loose and irregular,
with little cohesive power, and they will not bear disappointment and
waiting. Moreover the warriors having lost many men, with nothing in
repayment were grumbling and saying that the face of Manitou was set
against them. They were confirmed too in this belief by the presence of
the mysterious foe who had slain the warriors in the tree, and who had
since given other unmistakable signs of his presence.

"They will have more discouragement soon," he said, "because it is going
to rain to-day."

He had read the signs aright, as the sun came up amid the mists and
vapors, and the gentle wind was damp to the face; then dark clouds
