The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fee of the Frontier, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fee of the Frontier

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Illustrator: Emsh

Release Date: January 9, 2010 [EBook #30901]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FEE OF THE FRONTIER ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories August 1960. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


  _They didn't think of themselves as
   pioneers. They simply had a job to
   do. And if they had to give up
   money, or power, or love--or life
     itself--that was the_


                              FEE OF THE
                               FRONTIER


                            By H. B. FYFE


                           ILLUSTRATOR EMSH

       *       *       *       *       *




From inside the dome, the night sky is a beautiful thing, even though
Deimos and Phobos are nothing to brag about. If you walk outside,
maybe as far as the rocket field, you notice a difference.

Past the narrow developed strip around the dome, the desert land lies
as chilled and brittle as it did for eons before Earthmen reached
Mars. The sky is suddenly raw and cruel. You pull your furs around
your nose and check your oxygen mask, and wish you were _inside_
something, even a thin wall of clear plastic.

I like to stand here, though, and look out at it, just thinking about
how far those ships grope out into the dark nowadays, and about the
men who have gone out there on a few jets and a lot of guts. I knew a
bunch of them ... some still out there, I guess.

[Illustration]

There was a time when nearly everything had to be rocketed out from
Earth, before they organized all those chemical tricks that change the
Martian crops to real food. Domes weren't fancy then. Adequate, of
course; no sense in taking chances with lives that cost so much fuel
to bring here. Still, the colonies kept growing. Where people go,
others follow to live off them, one way or another. It began to look
like time for the next step outward.

Oh, the Asteroids ... sure. Not them. I did a bit of hopping there in
my own time. In fact--on account of conditions beyond my choice and
control--I spent too much time on the wrong side of the hull shields.
One fine day, the medics told me I'd have to be a Martian for the rest
of my life. Even the one-way hop back to Earth was "not recommended."

So I used to watch the ships go out. I still remember one that almost
missed leaving. _The Martian Merchant._ What joker thought that would
be a good name for an exploring ship I can't imagine, but it always
happens that way.

I was starting my cross-country tractor line then, and had just made
the run from Schiaparelli to Asaph Dome, which was not as nice as it
is now but still pretty civilized for the time. They had eight or ten
bars, taverns, and other amusements, and were already getting to be
quite a city.

One of the taverns near the western airlock was named the _Stardust_,
and I was approaching, measuring the sand in my throat, when these
spacers came out. The first one in sight was a blocky, dark-haired
fellow. He came rolling through the door with a man under each arm.

Just as I got there, he made it to his feet somehow and cracked their
heads together exactly hard enough to bring peace. He acted like a man
used to handling things with precision. He glanced quickly at me out
of a square, serious face, then plunged back through the splintered
door toward the breakup inside.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a moment, he came out again, with two friends who looked the worse
