it. Girls will sometimes; I suppose it is their nature, and we ought to
be sorry for their affliction.

'It's no good,' Dora was saying, 'you all hate me, and you think I'm
a prig and a busybody, but I do try to do right--oh, I do! Oswald, go
away; don't come here making fun of me!'

So I said, 'I'm not making fun, Sissy; don't cry, old girl.'

Mother taught me to call her Sissy when we were very little and before
the others came, but I don't often somehow, now we are old. I patted her
on the back, and she put her head against my sleeve, holding on to Alice
all the time, and she went on. She was in that laughy-cryey state when
people say things they wouldn't say at other times.

'Oh dear, oh dear--I do try, I do. And when Mother died she said, "Dora,
take care of the others, and teach them to be good, and keep them out of
trouble and make them happy." She said, "Take care of them for me, Dora
dear." And I have tried, and all of you hate me for it; and to-day I let
you do this, though I knew all the time it was silly.'

I hope you will not think I was a muff but I kissed Dora for some time.
Because girls like it. And I will never say again that she comes the
good elder sister too much. And I have put all this in though I do hate
telling about it, because I own I have been hard on Dora, but I never
will be again. She is a good old sort; of course we never knew before
about what Mother told her, or we wouldn't have ragged her as we did. We
did not tell the little ones, but I got Alice to speak to Dicky, and we
three can sit on the others if requisite.

This made us forget all about the sherry; but about eight o'clock there
was a knock, and Eliza went, and we saw it was poor Jane, if her name
was Jane, from the Vicarage. She handed in a brown-paper parcel and a
letter. And three minutes later Father called us into his study.

On the table was the brown-paper parcel, open, with our bottle and glass
on it, and Father had a letter in his hand. He Pointed to the bottle and
sighed, and said, 'What have you been doing now?' The letter in his hand
was covered with little black writing, all over the four large pages.

So Dicky spoke up, and he told Father the whole thing, as far as he knew
it, for Alice and I had not told about the dead sailors' lady.

And when he had done, Alice said, 'Has Mr Mallow written to you to say
he will buy a dozen of the sherry after all? It is really not half bad
with sugar in it.'

Father said no, he didn't think clergymen could afford such expensive
wine; and he said _he_ would like to taste it. So we gave him what there
was left, for we had decided coming home that we would give up trying
for the two pounds a week in our spare time.

Father tasted it, and then he acted just as H. O. had done when he had
his teaspoonful, but of course we did not say anything. Then he laughed
till I thought he would never stop.

I think it was the sherry, because I am sure I have read somewhere about
'wine that maketh glad the heart of man'. He had only a very little,
which shows that it was a good after-dinner wine, stimulating, and yet
...I forget the rest.

But when he had done laughing he said, 'It's all right, kids. Only don't
do it again. The wine trade is overcrowded; and besides, I thought you
promised to consult me before going into business?'

'Before buying one I thought you meant,' said Dicky. 'This was only on
commission.' And Father laughed again. I am glad we got the Castilian
Amoroso, because it did really cheer Father up, and you cannot always do
that, however hard you try, even if you make jokes, or give him a comic
paper.



CHAPTER 12. THE NOBLENESS OF OSWALD

The part about his nobleness only comes at the end, but you would
not understand it unless you knew how it began. It began, like nearly
everything about that time, with treasure-seeking.

Of course as soon as we had promised to consult my Father about business
matters we all gave up wanting to go into business. I don't know how it
is, but having to consult about a thing with grown-up people, even
the bravest and the best, seems to make the thing not worth doing
afterwards.

We don't mind Albert's uncle chipping in sometimes when the thing's
going on, but we are glad he never asked us to promise to consult him
about anything. Yet Oswald saw that my Father was quite right; and I
daresay if we had had that hundred pounds we should have spent it on the
share in that lucrative business for the sale of useful patent, and then
found out afterwards that we should have done better to spend the money
in some other way. My Father says so, and he ought to know. We had
several ideas about that time, but having so little chink always stood
in the way.

This was the case with H. O.'s idea of setting up a coconut-shy on this
side of the Heath, where there are none generally. We had no sticks
or wooden balls, and the greengrocer said he could not book so many as
twelve dozen coconuts without Mr Bastable's written order. And as we did
not wish to consult my Father it was decided to drop it. And when Alice
dressed up Pincher in some of the dolls' clothes and we made up our
minds to take him round with an organ as soon as we had taught him to
dance, we were stopped at once by Dicky's remembering how he had once
heard that an organ cost seven hundred pounds. Of course this was
the big church kind, but even the ones on three legs can't be got for
one-and-sevenpence, which was all we had when we first thought of it. So
we gave that up too.

It was a wet day, I remember, and mutton hash for dinner--very tough
with pale gravy with lumps in it. I think the others would have left a
good deal on the sides of their plates, although they know better, only
Oswald said it was a savoury stew made of the red deer that Edward shot.
So then we were the Children of the New Forest, and the mutton tasted
much better. No one in the New Forest minds venison being tough and the
gravy pale.

Then after dinner we let the girls have a dolls' tea-party, on condition
they didn't expect us boys to wash up; and it was when we were drinking
the last of the liquorice water out of the little cups that Dicky said--

'This reminds me.'

So we said, 'What of?'

Dicky answered us at once, though his mouth was full of bread with
liquorice stuck in it to look like cake. You should not speak with your
mouth full, even to your own relations, and you shouldn't wipe your
mouth on the back of your hand, but on your handkerchief, if you have
one. Dicky did not do this. He said--

'Why, you remember when we first began about treasure-seeking, I said
I had thought of something, only I could not tell you because I hadn't
finished thinking about it.'

We said 'Yes.'

'Well, this liquorice water--'

'Tea,' said Alice softly.

'Well, tea then--made me think.' He was going on to say what it made him
think, but Noel interrupted and cried out, 'I say; let's finish off this
old tea-party and have a council of war.'

So we got out the flags and the wooden sword and the drum, and Oswald
beat it while the girls washed up, till Eliza came up to say she had the
jumping toothache, and the noise went through her like a knife. So of
course Oswald left off at once. When you are polite to Oswald he never
refuses to grant your requests.

When we were all dressed up we sat down round the camp fire, and Dicky
began again.

'Every one in the world wants money. Some people get it. The people who
get it are the ones who see things. I have seen one thing.'

Dicky stopped and smoked the pipe of peace. It is the pipe we did
bubbles with in the summer, and somehow it has not got broken yet.
We put tea-leaves in it for the pipe of peace, but the girls are not
allowed to have any. It is not right to let girls smoke. They get to
think too much of themselves if you let them do everything the same as
men. Oswald said, 'Out with it.'

'I see that glass bottles only cost a penny. H. O., if you dare to
snigger I'll send you round selling old bottles, and you shan't have any
sweets except out of the money you get for them. And the same with you,
Noel.'

'Noel wasn't sniggering,' said Alice in a hurry; 'it is only his taking
so much interest in what you were saying makes him look like that. Be
quiet, H. O., and don't you make faces, either. Do go on, Dicky dear.'

So Dicky went on.

'There must be hundreds of millions of bottles of medicines sold every
year. Because all the different medicines say, "Thousands of cures
daily," and if you only take that as two thousand, which it must be, at
least, it mounts up. And the people who sell them must make a great deal
of money by them because they are nearly always two-and-ninepence
the bottle, and three-and-six for one nearly double the size. Now the
bottles, as I was saying, don't cost anything like that.'

'It's the medicine costs the money,' said Dora; 'look how expensive
jujubes are at the chemist's, and peppermints too.'

'That's only because they're nice,' Dicky explained; 'nasty things are
not so dear. Look what a lot of brimstone you get for a penny, and the
same with alum. We would not put the nice kinds of chemist's things in
our medicine.'

Then he went on to tell us that when we had invented our medicine we
would write and tell the editor about it, and he would put it in
the paper, and then people would send their two-and-ninepence and
three-and-six for the bottle nearly double the size, and then when the
medicine had cured them they would write to the paper and their letters
would be printed, saying how they had been suffering for years, and
never thought to get about again, but thanks to the blessing of our
ointment--'

Dora interrupted and said, 'Not ointment--it's so messy.' And Alice
thought so too. And Dicky said he did not mean it, he was quite decided
to let it be in bottles. So now it was all settled, and we did not
see at the time that this would be a sort of going into business, but
afterwards when Albert's uncle showed us we saw it, and we were sorry.
We only had to invent the medicine. You might think that was easy,
because of the number of them you see every day in the paper, but it is
much harder than you think. First we had to decide what sort of illness
we should like to cure, and a 'heated discussion ensued', like in
Parliament.

Dora wanted it to be something to make the complexion of dazzling
fairness, but we remembered how her face came all red and rough when
she used the Rosabella soap that was advertised to make the darkest
complexion fair as the lily, and she agreed that perhaps it was better
not. Noel wanted to make the medicine first and then find out what
it would cure, but Dicky thought not, because there are so many more
medicines than there are things the matter with us, so it would be
easier to choose the disease first. Oswald would have liked wounds.
I still think it was a good idea, but Dicky said, 'Who has wounds,
especially now there aren't any wars? We shouldn't sell a bottle a day!'
So Oswald gave in because he knows what manners are, and it was Dicky's
idea. H. O. wanted a cure for the uncomfortable feeling that they give
you powders for, but we explained to him that grown-up people do not
have this feeling, however much they eat, and he agreed. Dicky said
he did not care a straw what the loathsome disease was, as long as we
hurried up and settled on something. Then Alice said--

'It ought to be something very common, and only one thing. Not the pains
in the back and all the hundreds of things the people have in somebody's
syrup. What's the commonest thing of all?'

And at once we said, 'Colds.'

So that was settled.

Then we wrote a label to go on the bottle. When it was written it would
not go on the vinegar bottle that we had got, but we knew it would go
small when it was printed. It was like this:

                 BASTABLE'S
           CERTAIN CURE FOR COLDS
Coughs, Asthma, Shortness of Breath, and all infections of the Chest

     One dose gives immediate relief
   It will cure your cold in one bottle
     Especially the larger size at 3s. 6d.
       Order at once of the Makers
       To prevent disappointment

               Makers:

     D., O., R., A., N., and H. O. BASTABLE
             150, Lewisham Road, S.E.

    (A halfpenny for all bottles returned)

             ------------

Of course the next thing was for one of us to catch a cold and try what
cured it; we all wanted to be the one, but it was Dicky's idea, and he
said he was not going to be done out of it, so we let him. It was only
fair. He left off his undershirt that very day, and next morning he
stood in a draught in his nightgown for quite a long time. And we damped
his day-shirt with the nail-brush before he put it on. But all was vain.
They always tell you that these things will give you cold, but we found
it was not so.

So then we all went over to the Park, and Dicky went right into the
water with his boots on, and stood there as long as he could bear it,
for it was rather cold, and we stood and cheered him on. He walked home
in his wet clothes, which they say is a sure thing, but it was no go,
though his boots were quite spoiled. And three days after Noel began to
cough and sneeze.

So then Dicky said it was not fair.

'I can't help it,' Noel said. 'You should have caught it yourself, then
it wouldn't have come to me.'

And Alice said she had known all along Noel oughtn't to have stood about
on the bank cheering in the cold.

Noel had to go to bed, and then we began to make the medicines; we were
sorry he was out of it, but he had the fun of taking the things.

We made a great many medicines. Alice made herb tea. She got sage and
thyme and savory and marjoram and boiled them all up together with salt
and water, but she _would_ put parsley in too. Oswald is sure parsley is
not a herb. It is only put on the cold meat and you are not supposed to
eat it. It kills parrots to eat parsley, I believe. I expect it was the
parsley that disagreed so with Noel. The medicine did not seem to do the
cough any good.

Oswald got a pennyworth of alum, because it is so cheap, and some
turpentine which every one knows is good for colds, and a little sugar
and an aniseed ball. These were mixed in a bottle with water, but Eliza
threw it away and said it was nasty rubbish, and I hadn't any money to
get more things with.

Dora made him some gruel, and he said it did his chest good; but of
course that was no use, because you cannot put gruel in bottles and say
it is medicine. It would not be honest, and besides nobody would believe
you.

Dick mixed up lemon-juice and sugar and a little of the juice of the red
flannel that Noel's throat was done up in. It comes out beautifully
in hot water. Noel took this and he liked it. Noel's own idea was
liquorice-water, and we let him have it, but it is too plain and black
to sell in bottles at the proper price.

