think about nothing. It is well to fittingly prepare for what is to come."

With this Julia marched her adherents down the field and around the corner
of the Omnibus House. She was followed by Grace and her band. There was a
chorus of giggles from the chosen helpers that was sternly checked by
Julia.

Before their eyes stood a large, open paste-board box lined with the
colors of both classes, in which reposed the Crosby hatchet, likened to a
battle-ax by Julia. Its handle was decorated with sophomore and junior
ribbons, and around the head was a wreath of immortelles. A disreputable
looking sheaf of wheat lay across the end of the box.

There was a smothered laugh from Nora, whose quick brain had grasped the
full significance of the thing.

"This is not an occasion for levity," reprimanded Grace sternly. "Laughing
will not be tolerated."

Three twisted ribbon handles of sophomore colors and three of junior
ornamented either side of the box. Each girl grasped a handle.

"We will proceed with the ceremony," directed Julia. "Lift up the box."

This was easier said than done. The handles were so close together that
the girls hardly had room to step. The journey was finally accomplished
without any further mishap than the sliding off of the wheat sheaf. This
was hastily replaced by Jessica before its fall had been marked by the
eagle eye of the master of ceremonies, who marched ahead with her
assistant.

When the box had been carefully deposited at one side of the "grave,"
Julia Crosby took her place beside it, and assuming a Daniel Webster
attitude began her address.

"Honored juniors and sophomores. We have met together to-day for a great
and noble purpose. We are about to take a step which will forever after
be recorded among the doughty deeds of Oakdale High School. It will go
down in High School history as the glorious inspiration of a master mind.
We are going to unfurl the banner of peace and bury the hatchet.

"Since the early days of our class history, war, cruel war, has raged
between the august bodies represented here to-day. On this very field many
moons ago the gallant sophomores advanced upon the, then, very fresh
freshmen, but retreated in wild confusion. It is therefore fitting that
this should be the place chosen for the burial of all grudges, jealousies
and unworthy emotions that formerly rent our breasts."

Here Julia paused to take breath.

The girls cheered wildly.

Julia bowed right and left, her hand over her heart. When the noise had
subsided, she continued. She bewailed junior misdeeds and professed meek
repentance. She dwelt upon the beauty of peace and she begged her hearers
henceforth to live with each other amicably.

It was a capital address, delivered in a mock-serious manner that provoked
mirth, and did more toward establishing general good feeling than any
other method she might have tried. In closing she said:

"The hatchet is the symbol of war. The wheat-sheaf represents our elderly
grudge; but the immortelles are the everlasting flowers of good will that
spring from the planting of these two. We will now listen to a few remarks
from the pride of the sophomore class, Assistant Master of Ceremonies
Grace Harlowe."

Grace attempted to speak, but received an ovation that made her flush and
laughingly put her hands over her ears. When she was finally allowed to
proceed, she delivered an oration as flowery as that of the master of
ceremonies.

When the cries of approbation evoked by Grace's oration had died away, it
was announced that the "renowned elocutionist," Miss Anne Pierson, would
recite a poem appropriate to the occasion. Anne accordingly recited "The
Bridge of Sighs," done over by Julia Crosby, and beginning:

    "Take it up gingerly;
      Handle with care;
    'Tis a relic of sophomore
      And junior warfare."

The intense feeling with which Anne rendered this touching effusion,
caused the master of ceremonies to sob audibly and lean so heavily upon
her assistant for support that that dignified person almost pitched head
first into the opening, and was saved from an ignominious tumble by one of
her attendants. This was too much for the others, who, forgetting the
solemnity of their office, shrieked with mirth, in which the spectators
were not slow to join.

"I think we had better wind up the ceremony," said Julia with great
dignity. "These people will soon be beyond our control."

The attendants managed to straighten their faces long enough to assist in
the concluding rites that were somewhat hastily performed, and the master
of ceremonies and her assistants held an impromptu reception on the spot.

"Now," said Julia Crosby, "we have done a good day's work for both
classes. I only hope that no prying freshmen hear of this. They will be
sure to come here and dig up what we have gone to such pains to bury. They
have no respect for their superiors. However, you have all behaved
yourselves with true High School spirit, and I wish to announce that you
will find a spread awaiting you around the corner of the Omnibus House."

There was a general hurrah at this statement, and the guests rushed off to
the spot designated.

Grace had held an earnest conference with old Jean, and the result showed
itself in the row of tables rudely constructed to fit the emergency. He
it was who had dug the "grave." He now sat on the steps waiting to build a
fire, over which Grace had planned to make coffee for the hungry girls
whose appetites had been whetted by the fresh air.

The money contributed by the classes had been used to good advantage by
Grace and Julia, and piles of tempting eatables gladdened the eyes of the
guests.

For the next half hour feasting was in order. Juniors and sophomores
shared cups; as the supply of these were limited. At the end of that time
the last crumb of food had disappeared and the girls stood in groups or
walked about the field, discussing the various features of school life.

Some one proposed playing old-fashioned games, and soon "puss in the
corner," "pom-pom-pull-away," and "prisoner's goal" were in full swing.

"This brings back one's Grammar School days, doesn't it?" said Nora to
Grace. They were deep in a game of prisoner's goal, and stood for a moment
waiting for the enemy to move toward them.

"I haven't had such a good, wholesale romp for ages," answered Grace, and
was off like the wind to intercept Eva Allen as she endeavored to make a
wide detour of their goal.

The hours slipped by on wings.

The start home was made about five o'clock. The juniors and sophomores
trooped back to Oakdale arm in arm, singing school songs and making the
welkin ring with their joyous laughter.

The people of Oakdale smiled at the procession of happy girls and wondered
what particular celebration was in order.

When the center of town was reached the party broke up with a great deal
of laughing and chattering, the girls going their separate ways in the
best of spirits.

"I've had a perfectly fine time," declared Grace, as she said good-bye to
her chums, "and how glad I am that we are all friends again."

She quite forgot when she made that statement that Miriam Nesbit had not
honored the reunion with her presence.




CHAPTER XVIII

AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR


One more excitement was to quicken the pulses of the sophomores before
they settled down to that long last period of study between Easter
holidays and vacation.

The great, decisive basketball game with the juniors was now to take
place.

Grace, in conclave with her team, had gone over her instructions for the
hundredth time. They had discussed the strong points of the juniors and
what were their own weak ones.

Miriam Nesbit was sullen at these meetings; but in the practice game she
had played with her usual agility and skill, so the girls felt that she
was far too valuable a member of the team for them to mind her humors.

"Everybody is coming to-morrow to see us play," exclaimed Nora in the
locker-room, at the recess on Friday. "I don't believe the President's
visit would create more excitement, really," she added with a touch of
pride.

"Did you know," interposed Anne, "that the upperclass girls are calling
Grace and Julia Crosby 'David and Jonathan'?"

This was also an amusing piece of news at which the other girls laughed
joyously. In fact, there was no such feeling of depression before this
game as had affected the class when the first game was played. The
sophomores were cheerful and confident, awaiting the great battle with
courage in their hearts.

"Be here early, girls," cautioned Grace, as they parted after school that
day. "Perhaps we may get in a little practice before the people begin to
come."

Grace hurried through her own dinner as fast as she could, on the eventful
Saturday.

"I shall be glad when this final game is over, child," exclaimed Mrs.
Harlowe anxiously, "I really think you have had more athletics this winter
than has been good for you, what with your walking, and skating, dancing,
and now basketball."

"You'll come, won't you, mother?" cried Grace, seizing her hat and rushing
off without listening to Mrs. Harlowe's comments. "We are sure to win,"
she called as she waved her a good-bye kiss.

There was no one in the school building when Grace got back; that is, no
one except the old janitress, who was sweeping down the corridor, as
usual. The other girls had not been so expeditious and Grace found the
locker-room deserted.

With trembling eagerness she was slipping on her gymnasium suit and
rubber-soled shoes, when she suddenly remembered that she had left her tie
in the geometry classroom. She had bought a new one the day before, placed
it in the back of her geometry and walked out of the classroom, leaving
book, tie and all behind.

"I'll run up and get it right away, before the others come," she said to
herself.

Running nimbly up the broad stairway, she entered the deserted classroom
and hurried down the aisle to the end of the room where she usually sat
during recitation.

"Here it is," she murmured, taking it out of the book and tying it on.
Then, sitting down at the desk, she rested her chin in her hands. The
quiet of the place was soothing to her excited nerves, and since it was so
early she would rest there for a moment and think.

Grace might have dreamed away five minutes when she heard the distant
sound of voices below.

"Dear me," she exclaimed, laughing, "they'll scold me for not being on
time. I must hurry." So she hastened up the aisle to the door, which was
shut, although she had not remembered closing it after her.

She turned the knob, still smiling to herself, but the door stuck fast. It
was locked!

Grace was so stunned that for a moment she hardly comprehended what had
happened. She sat down and tried to collect her thoughts. Locked up in an
upper classroom on the afternoon of the great game!

She tried the one other door in the room. It also was locked. As for the
great windows, they were too large for her to push up without a pole.

"I'll try calling," she said. "They may hear me."

But her calls were fruitless, and beating and knocking on the door panels
seemed nothing but muffled sounds in the stillness.

"Oh! Oh!" she cried, rushing wildly from doors to windows and back again.
"What shall I do! What shall I do?"

In the meantime, it was growing late. The sophomores had assembled and
were confidently waiting for their captain.

"She's late for the first time," observed one of the girls, "but we'll
forgive her under the circumstances."

"Maybe she's in the gymnasium," suggested Anne, hurrying off to look for
her friend. In spite of herself she felt some misgivings and she meant to
lose no time in finding her beloved Grace.

The gallery was already half full of people. Anne moved about looking for
David, or some one who could help her. Just then Mrs. Harlowe appeared at
the door.

"Where is Grace, Mrs. Harlowe?" Anne demanded eagerly.

"I don't know, dear," answered Mrs. Harlowe "She ate her dinner and went
off in such a hurry that I hardly had time to speak to her. She told me
she wanted to get back to meet the girls."

Anne ran back to the locker-room.

"Grace left home hours ago," she cried. "I just felt that something had
happened."

Jessica opened Grace's locker.

"Grace must be in the building," she exclaimed "Here are her clothes."

The girls began to rush about wildly, looking for their captain in the
various rooms on the basement floor.

In a few moments a junior came to the door.

"The game will be called in ten minutes," she said. "Are you ready?"

"Yes," answered Nora calmly. "Be careful," she whispered. "Don't let them
know yet."

Anne ran again to the gymnasium.

"I'll get David this time," she said to herself. "Something will have to
be done if Grace is to be found in time."

David was sitting at one side of the gallery with Reddy and Hippy.

He looked very grave when Anne whispered the news to him. The place was
packed with impatient spectators. The junior team was already standing on
the floor talking in low voices as they waited impatiently for their
opponents to appear at the opposite end.

"She must be somewhere in the building," David ejaculated. "That is if she
has on her gymnasium suit. Have you looked upstairs yet?"

"No," replied Anne, "but we have been all through the downstairs' rooms."

As they ran up the steps they heard the shrill whistle that summoned the
players to their positions.

"Come on," cried Nora. "Miriam, you will have to take Grace's place, and
Eva Allen will substitute for you."

It still lacked a few moments of the toss up; the whistle having been
blown sooner to hurry the dilatory sophomores, who seemed determined to
linger, unaccountably, in the little side room.

But in that brief time a remarkable change had taken place in the demeanor
of Miriam Nesbit. Two brilliant spots burned on her cheeks, and her black
eyes flashed and glowed with happiness. The other girls were too downcast
and wretched to notice the transformation. They walked slowly into the
gymnasium and stood, ill at ease and downcast, at their end of the hall.

A wave of gossip had spread quickly over the audience, that sat waiting
with breathless interest for the appearance of the tardy sophomore.

What had happened? Had there been an accident?

No; it was all a mistake. There they were. And tremendous applause burst
forth, which died down almost as soon as it had begun. Where was Grace
Harlowe, the daring captain of the sophomore team, who had boasted that
her team would win the game if it took their last breath to do it?

There was a great craning of necks as the spectators looked in vain for
the missing Grace.

Hippy dropped his chin upon his breast disconsolately.

"I feel limp as a rag," he groaned. "Where, oh, where, is our gallant
captain? I'll never believe Grace deserted her post."

In the meantime poor Grace, locked in the upper classroom, had
concentrated all her thoughts and mental energies on a means of making her
escape in time. She sat down quietly, and, folding her hands, began to
consider the situation. In looking back long afterwards upon this tragic
hour, it seemed to her that it was the blackest moment of her life. The
walls were thick. The doors heavy and massive. The ceilings high. There
was no possibility of her cries being heard below. It is true she might
