SOAP AND CANDLES, STARCH, DEXTRINE, and GLUCOSE. IN PRESS.

A Technical Treatise on Soap and Candles, with a Glance at the Industry
of Fats and Oils. By R. S. Cristiani. Fully illustrated. 500 pages 8vo,
handsomely printed on fine paper.

_Subscriptions will now be received at $6.00 per copy, payable on
delivery._

A Practical Treatise on the Manufacture of Starch, Dextrine, and
Glucose. Illustrated by about 75 engravings. 300 pages 8vo, handsomely
printed on fine paper.

_Subscriptions will now be received at $3.50 per copy, payable on
delivery._

HENRY CAREY BAIRD & CO., Industrial Publishers, Booksellers, and
Importers, 810 Walnut Street, Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

WITHERBY, RUGG & RICHARDSON, Manufacturers of Patent Wood Working
Machinery of every description. Facilities unsurpassed. Shop formerly
occupied by R. Ball & Co., Worcester, Mass. Send for Catalogue.

       *       *       *       *       *


$72 A WEEK. $12 a day at home easily made. Costly outfit free. Address
True & Co., Augusta, Me.

       *       *       *       *       *


Superior Wood Working Machinery, principally for Cabinet, Piano, and
Piano Action Makers. Shafting, Pulleys, and Hangers. P. Pryibil, 461 to
467 W. 40th St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


SURFACE FILE HOLDERS.

By their use a crooked file may be utilized as well as a straight one,
and _both_ are made to do better execution in filing broad surfaces than
has hitherto been possible.

No. 4 holds files 12 to 14 in. long. Price 75c. each.
No. 5 "     "     14 to 16 in. "     Price $1.00 each.

For sale by the trade generally. Manufactured only by the NICHOLSON FILE
CO., Providence, R. I.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BIGGEST THING OUT. Illustrated book sent free. Address E. NASON &
CO., 111 Nassau St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


ORGANS $30 to $1,000; 2 to 32 Stops. Pianos $125 up. Paper free. Address
Daniel F. Beatty, Washington, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

Leffel Water Wheels, With recent improvements.

Prices Greatly Reduced. 8000 in successful operation.

FINE NEW PAMPHLET FOR 1879, Sent free to those interested.

James Leffel & Co, Springfield, O. 110 Liberty St., N. Y. City.

       *       *       *       *       *


THREE BEAUTIFUL GIFT BOOKS FOR THE HOLIDAYS.


"THE DORE BIBLE GALLERY."

Containing One Hundred of the choicest of Gustave Dore's illustrations
of the Bible, and a page of explanatory letter-press facing each
engraving, together with a superb portrait of the artist.

Large quarto, cloth, full gilt, $6; morocco, full gilt, $10.


"ATALA" By M. De Chateaubriand.

An American story, and one of the best efforts of the celebrated author.
Superbly illustrated with numerous full pages of some of our grandest
scenery, by Gustave Dore. Printed on heavy tinted paper, and richly
bound.

Large quarto, cloth, full gilt, $5; morocco, full gilt, $10.


"THE WANDERING JEW."

A series of twelve illustrations by Gustave Dore, picturing the weird
and unearthly scenes of the legend, with explanatory letter-press.

Large quarto, cloth, gilt, $2.50.

"A most beautiful production."--_Brooklyn Advance_.

"Published in very rich style."--_Publishers' Weekly_.

"Is meeting with deserved success."--_Bookseller and Stationer_.

"Such books are educators in the highest sense of the term."--_Chicago
Inter-Ocean_.

"One of the most successful productions that have done honor to the
pencil of Gustave Dore."--_Providence Journal_.

"Contains some of the most striking productions of Dore at a moderate
cost."--_N. Y. Tribune_.

"We are very glad they have been put within the reach of the
many."--_Hartford Courant_.

THE FINE ART PUBLISHING CO., 535 Pearl Street, New York.

For sale by all Booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on receipt of price, by
the Publishers.

       *       *       *       *       *


SASH DOVETAILING MACHINE.

[Illustration]

Planers, Moulding Machines, Mortisers and Borers, Tenoning Machines,
Blind Rabbeting Machines; also, a large variety of other wood working
machines, manufactured by LEVI HOUSTON, Montgomery, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


TELEPHONE Works 1 mile. Price $4. Pat'd. Circulars free. Holcomb & Co.,
Mallet Creek, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *


AGENTS WANTED TO INTRODUCE a new and novel Account Book to business men.
A rich harvest to competent parties during the next three months. All
particulars by return mail.

H. W. PAMPHILON, 30 Bond St., New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *


$5 to $20 per day at home. Samples worth $5 free. Address Stinson & Co.,
Portland, Me.

       *       *       *       *       *


CATALOGUE OF NOVELTIES FOR AGENTS Free. J. F. GAGE, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


ERICSSON'S NEW MOTOR.

ERICSSON'S NEW CALORIC PUMPING ENGINE, FOR DWELLINGS AND COUNTRY SEATS.

Simplest cheapest, and most economical pumping engine for domestic
purposes. Any servant girl can operate. Absolutely safe. Send for
circulars and price lists.

DELAMATER IRON WORKS C. H. DELAMATER & CO., Proprietors, No. 10
Cortlandt Street, New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUPERIOR SUBSTITUTE FOR WOOD ENGRAVING.

_J. C. MOSS, Pres. and Sup't._
_R. B. MOSS, Assist. Sup't._
_M. A. MOSS, Treasurer._
_J. E. RAMSEY, Secretary._
_H. A. JACKSON, Assist. Sec._

MOSS ENGRAVING CO
INCORPORATED (MOSS'S NEW PROCESS.) APRIL 2, 1880
535 PEARL STREET, COR. ELM, NEW YORK.

LARGEST ESTABLISHMENT OF THE KIND IN THE WORLD.

ENGRAVINGS OF PORTRAITS, BUILDINGS, LANDSCAPES, MACHINERY, MAPS,
ORNAMENTAL LETTERING and GENERAL ILLUSTRATIONS FOR NEWSPAPERS, BOOKS,
CATALOGUES, etc. Much cheaper than Wood Cuts. _Mr. J. C. Moss, the
inventor of the Moss Process of Photo-Engraving, in withdrawing from the
Photo-Engraving Co., 67 Park Place, has retained for himself all
improvements made and used by him in Photo-Engraving since May, 1872._
Send green stamp for Illustrated Circular. Send copy for estimate.
Please mention this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

THE BLAKE "LION AND EAGLE" CRUSHER,

A patented improvement of the former "New Pattern" Blake machine. Has
much greater efficiency than the old. It requires only about half the
power to drive, and is transported at much less expense (the size most
used weighing several thousand pounds less than the unimproved machine).
It requires less than half the time in oiling and other manipulation,
and less than half the expense for repairs. Address

E. S. BLAKE & CO., Pittsburgh, Pa., Sole Proprietors and Manufacturers.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

W. C. WREN'S Pat. Grate Bar, Manufactured by D. & S. CRESWELL, Eagle
Iron Foundry, 816 RACE ST., PHILADELPHIA, PA.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

ROCK BREAKERS & ORE CRUSHERS.

(THE "BLAKE" STYLE.)

This machine has for twenty years stood the Test, and found to be the
_best one_ made for breaking all kinds of hard and brittle substances,
such as Ores, Quartz, Emery, etc., etc. Mr. S. L. Marsden, for the past
twenty years connected with the manufacture of this machine,
superintends its manufacture.

FARREL FOUNDRY AND MACHINE CO., Manufrs., Ausonia, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Melodette, or Automatic Piano,

[Illustration]

The most marvellous mechanical invention of the age. It will play any
tune that ever was written, in a melodious and pleasing manner.
Difficult and simple music produced in a masterly style, and it can be
played by a child as well as by a grown person, and will furnish music
for social gatherings of any description, playing hour after hour,
without any knowledge of music being required in the operation. The most
wonderful of all musical inventions; a machine which in a purely
mechanical manner produces any kind of music, Waltzes, Polkas, Marches,
&c., &c., without any practice or knowledge of music whatever; in this
respect far superior to any music-box, even though it costs many times
as much, for there is no limit whatever to the number of tunes it will
play. This instrument is on a somewhat similar principle to the
wonderful Phonograph, the perforations in a flexible strip producing the
effect. It has just been perfected (the accompanying cut showing it in
its improved form), and is having the largest sale ever obtained by a
musical instrument in the country. It has solid metal cases in imitation
of green bronze; the notes or bars (the music producers) are metal, on
same principle as a tuning-fork, which produce clear and most melodious
notes, and never get out of tune; the bars are struck by strikers, the
same as the wires are in a piano, only they work automatically instead
of by the fingers. The strip of prepared paper in which the tune is
stamped or perforated, is about 10 inches wide, and as it passes through
the rollers and over the keys the strikers spring through the
perforations in the paper and strike the right note; this is all done
automatically, without any assistance from the operator (except turning
the rollers), and the tune is played perfectly. It would be one of the
most appropriate presents to make anyone, especially where there is no
other musical instrument. Its execution is admirable, and its capacity
or capability almost unlimited. It is selling faster than any musical
instrument ever invented. The music is fine, and everybody delighted.
The regular retail price of the Melodette is only $5, including a
selection of popular tunes. Address, The Massachusetts Organ Co., 57
Washington Street Boston, Mass., U. S. A., Sole Manufacturers. SPECIAL
OFFER--Agents Wanted--We wish a good Agent in every town, and big money
can be made selling these instruments. We will send a sample instrument
to any one wishing to act as our agent, for $3.25, Boxed Free, including
music price lists, etc., etc., and will give territory. Order at once.
