The Project Gutenberg eBook, To Choke an Ocean, by Jesse F. (Jesse
Franklin) Bone, Illustrated by  Wood


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: To Choke an Ocean


Author: Jesse F. (Jesse Franklin) Bone



Release Date: April 24, 2010  [eBook #32124]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO CHOKE AN OCEAN***


E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's note:

      This etext was produced from the September, 1960, issue
      of _If_. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
      that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





TO CHOKE AN OCEAN

by

J. F. BONE

Illustrated by Wood



[Sidenote: _Gourmets all agree that nothing can beat oysters on the
half-shell--not even the armed might of the Terran Confederation!_]


"Nice that you dropped in," the man in the detention room said. "I never
expected a visit from the Consul General. It makes me feel important."

"The Confederation takes an interest in all of its citizens' welfare,"
Lanceford said. "You _are_ important! Incidentally, how is it going?"

"Not too bad. They treat me all right. But these natives sure are tough
on visitors. I've never been checked so thoroughly in all my life--and
now this thirty day quarantine! Why, you'd think I was carrying the
plague instead of a sample case!"

The chubby little commercial traveller probably had a right to complain,
Lanceford thought. After all, a Niobian quarantine station isn't the
pleasantest sort of environment. It's not meant to be comfortable,
physical discomfort being as good a way as any to discourage casual
visitors. The ones who have fortitude enough to stand the entry
regulations can get in, but tourists seldom visit Niobe. However, the
planet's expanding economy offered a fertile field for salesmen, and men
of that stripe would endure far worse hardships than a port of entry in
pursuit of the Almighty Credit.

Now this fellow, George Perkins, was a typical salesman. And despite his
soft exterior there was a good hard core inside.

Lanceford looked him over and decided that he would last. "You came here
of your own free will, didn't you?" he asked.

"If you call a company directive free will," Perkins answered. "I
wouldn't come here for a vacation, if that's what you mean. But the
commercial opportunities can't be ignored."

"I suppose not, but you can hardly blame the Niobians for being
suspicious of strangers. Perhaps there's no harm in you. But they have a
right to be sure; they've been burned before." Lanceford uncoiled his
lean gray length from the chair and walked over to the broad armorglas
window. He stared out at the gloomy view of Niobe's rainswept polar
landscape. "You know," he continued, "you might call this Customs
Service a natural consequence of uninvestigated visitors." He brooded
over the grayness outside. A polar view was depressing--scrubby
vegetation, dank grassland, the eternal Niobian rain. He felt sorry for
Perkins. Thirty days in this place would be sheer torture.

"It must have been quite some disturbance to result in this." Perkins
waved his hand at the barren room. "Sounds like you know something about
it."

"I do. In a way you might say that I was responsible for it."

"Would you mind telling me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I wouldn't mind at all." Lanceford looked at his watch. "If I have the
time, that is. I'm due to be picked up in an hour, but Niobians have
some quaint conceptions of time. So if you want to take a chance that I
won't finish--"

"Go ahead."

"To start with, take a look at that insigne over the door. The whole
story's right there."

Perkins eyed the emblem of the Niobian Customs Service. It was a
five-pointed star surrounding a circle, superimposed over the typically
Terran motto: "Eternal Vigilance is the Price of Safety." He nodded.

"How come the Terran style?" he asked.

"That's part of the story. Actually that insigne's a whole chapter of
Niobe's history. But you have to know what it stands for." Lanceford
sighed reminiscently. "It began during the banquet that celebrated the
signing of the Agreement which made Niobe a member of the Confederation.
I was the Director of the BEE's Niobe Division at that time. As a matter
of fact, I'd just taken the job over from Alvord Sims. The Old Man had
been ordered back to Terra, to take over a job in the Administration,
and I was the next man in line.

"The banquet was a flop, of course. Like most mixed gatherings involving
different races, it was a compromise affair. Nobody was satisfied. It
dragged along in a spirit of suffering resignation--the Niobians quietly
enduring the tasteless quality of the food, while the Confederation
representatives, wearing unobtrusive nose plugs, suffered politely
through the watered-down aroma and taste of the Niobian delicacies. All
things being considered, it was moving along more smoothly than it had
any right to, and if some moron on the kitchen staff hadn't used tobasco
sauce instead of catsup, we'd probably have signed the Agreement and
gone on happily ever after.

"But it didn't work out that way.

