During the course of the reconnaissance Lisle had been with the
rear guard, and had fallen in the torrent with a rifle ball through
his leg. As every man was engaged in fighting, the fall was
unnoticed and, as he could not recover his footing, he was washed
helplessly down to the mouth of the defile. As he managed to reach
the shore, a party of Afridis rushed down upon him with drawn
tulwars; but a man who was evidently their leader stopped them, as
they were about to fall upon him.

Illustration: A party of Afridis rushed down upon him.

"He is an officer," he said. "We must keep him for a hostage. It
will be better, so, than killing him."

Accordingly he was carried back to a village which the troops had
left that evening. Here some women were told to attend to his
wound, and the party who captured him went off to join in the
attack on the British rear guard.

In the evening, the man who had saved his life returned. He was, it
seemed, the headman of the village; and had been with his force in
the Bara valley, where the natives of the village had retired on
the approach of the British force. There Lisle lay for ten days, by
which time the inflammation from the wound had begun to subside.
The bullet had luckily grazed, and not broken the bone. At the end
of that time, some of the principal men came to him and, by signs,
directed him to write a letter to the British commander, saying
that he was a prisoner, that he was held as a hostage against any
further attempt to penetrate into the valley; and that, in the
event of another British force approaching, he would be at once put
to death.

Four of the Afridis always sat at the entrance to the house, which
was one of the largest in the valley. He was served regularly with
food; of which, as the valley had not been entered, there was, of
course, abundance. The women in the house seldom came in to see
him, except when they brought him his meals; and then it was
evident, from their surly manner, that they strongly objected to
his presence.

As he lay on his rough pallet, he resolved to maintain the
appearance of being unable to walk, as long as possible. He knew
very well that, if General Lockhart had to make another movement
against the Bara valley, he could not be averted from his purpose
by the fact that the Afridis held one officer prisoner, though he
would assuredly revenge his murder, by destroying every house in
the valley; and that he must accordingly trust only to himself to
make his escape. To do this, it would be absolutely necessary to
procure a disguise; and this, at present, he did not see his way to
accomplish.

The guards below were relieved every few hours, and kept up their
watch every day. Still, as they watched only the door, it might be
possible for him to let himself down from the window at the back of
the house.

On the tenth day he found himself really able to walk, without very
great difficulty. Looking out of the window, one morning, he saw
that the women of the house were all gathered round the guards, and
talking excitedly. Evidently some messenger had come in with news
from the Tirah valley. He knew, by this time, how many there were
in the house, and was satisfied that they were all there.

He at once made his way down to the floor below; feeling confident
that, for the moment, he would not be disturbed. Hanging against
the wall were several men's dresses and clothes. He hastily took
down sufficient for a disguise. They were summer clothes--for the
Afridis, when leaving to act against our troops in the mountains,
wear sheepskin garments. At any rate, there was little fear that
their loss would be discovered until the men returned from the
front.

He took the clothes up to his room, and hid them under the pallet.
Then, having ascertained that the women were still engaged in
talking, he took off his boots and made his way down to the lowest
story, which was principally used as a storehouse. Here, among bags
of corn and other stores, he saw a coil of rope. This he carried
upstairs and, having hidden it, lay down again.

The rest of the day passed quietly. It was apparent that the
clothes had not been missed and, with a strong feeling of
hopefulness, he awaited the night. When the house was quiet he
looked out. Four men were sitting, as usual, at the front of the
door. Then he took off his uniform and put on his disguise,
fastened one end of the rope securely, and slid down noiselessly to
the ground.

Keeping the house between him and the guard, he started. Making a
detour, he got free of the village, and then turned to the upper
end of the valley. Half an hour's walking took him to where the
force had encamped, and he soon reached the mouth of the gorge.

Here he plunged into the river. His leg hurt him a good deal, but
he waded on and, after great exertions, reached the head of the
gorge. His leg was now hurting him so much that he could proceed no
farther so, turning off, he mounted the hills and lay down among
the rocks, where there was little chance of his being discovered.

Here he dozed till morning. When he took the rope, he had thrust
several handfuls of grain into his pocket; and this he had tied up
in the skirt of his garment, when he started. He now munched some
of it, and lay, watching the mouth of the gorge below.

Two hours after daybreak, he saw a small party of tribesmen come
hurrying up through the gorge. They did not stop, but kept on their
course, evidently supposing that he had pushed on to join the
British camp. All day he lay hidden and, before dark, he saw the
men come back again. They had evidently given up the chase and, as
he had seen no searchers upon the hills, the idea that he was
hiding had evidently not occurred to them.

He felt, however, that he must give his leg another day's rest
before proceeding. On the following day he suffered a good deal
from thirst, and dared not venture down to the river. When it was
dark, however, he continued his way.

Illustration: It was the dead body of an Afridi.

Presently he saw something white, huddled up behind a rock and,
climbing up, he found that it was the dead body of an Afridi, who
had fallen in the fight. Beside him lay his Lee-Metford rifle. This
was indeed a find. In the scanty garments that he had alone dared
to take, he would be known at once by anyone who happened to pass
near him. He now set to work, and dressed himself in the dead
warrior's garments; and took up his rifle and pouch of ammunition.

"Now," he said, "I only want something to stain my face and hands,
and I shall be able to pass anywhere, if it does not come to
talking."

He kept his eyes about him, and presently saw the plant which he
knew Robah had used in preparing the dye for him. Pulling all the
leaves off, he pounded them with the stock of his rifle, and rubbed
his face with juice from the leaves. There was sufficient to stain
both his face and hands.

By nightfall he entered the Maidan. Here he saw many natives
gathered round the ruined houses. As he approached it, he saw that
heavy firing was going on round the camp. It was greatly reduced in
extent, and he guessed that a considerable proportion of the force
had moved off on some punitive expedition. Between him and it, he
could see many of the Afridis crouched among the rocks, ready to
attack any small parties that might issue out.

He saw at once that it would be impossible to reach the camp
without being questioned, and he therefore determined to fall in
with the column that had gone out. For this purpose, he made a wide
detour until he came upon a track where there were innumerable
signs that a column had recently passed. Crushed shrubs would, in
themselves, have been a sufficient guide; but there were many other
tokens of the path of the army: grain dropped from a hole in a
sack, scratches on the rock by the shod feet of the transport
animals, an empty cartridge case, and a broken earthenware pot.

He pushed on rapidly, keeping a sharp lookout for the enemy. Some
of them, passing along the hill, shouted to him to join them; but
with a wave of his rifle and a gesture, showing that he intended to
keep to the track, he went on.

Late in the afternoon, on mounting a high pass, he could distinctly
hear firing in the distance; and his heart beat at the thought that
he was near his friends. Still, between him and them the Afridis
might be swarming. The risk, however, must be run.

Ascending the slope of the hill, he obtained a view of the
conflict. A body of British troops was firing steadily, and another
regiment was coming up to their assistance. The Afridis were
swarming round in great numbers, and keeping up a continuous fire.
Waiting until he saw where the Afridis were thickest, he made his
way down to the firing line, and took up his position behind a
rock; there being none of the natives within fifty yards of him. He
now began to fire, taking pains to see that his bullets went far
over the heads of the British. This he continued until nightfall,
by which time the conflict had come to an end, and the British
regiments, with the convoy which they were protecting, had reached
camp.



Chapter 10: Through The Mohmund Country.


For a time the firing ceased entirely but, soon after nightfall, a
scattered fire opened round the camp. Lisle now made his way down
fearlessly, until within four hundred yards of the camp. He was
able to make out the white dresses of the Afridis, lying crouched
behind rocks. No one paid any attention to him and, as soon as he
had passed them, he dropped on his hands and knees and began
crawling forward; keeping himself carefully behind cover for, at
any moment, the pickets might open fire. When he approached the
British lines, he stopped behind a rock and shouted:

"Don't fire! I am a friend."

"Come on, friend, and let us have a look at you," the officer in
charge of the picket answered.

Rising, he ran forward.

"Who on earth are you?" the officer asked when he came up. "You
look like one of the Afridis, but your tongue is English."

"I am Lieutenant Bullen," he said; and a burst of cheering rose
from the men, who belonged to his own regiment.

"Why, we all thought you were killed, in that fight in the
torrent!"

"No; I was hit, and my leg so disabled that I was washed down by
the torrent; and the men were, I suppose, too much occupied in
keeping the Afridis at bay to notice me. On getting to the other
side of the pass I crawled ashore, and was made prisoner. No doubt
the Afridis thought that, as I was an officer, they would hold me
as a hostage, and so make better terms.

"I was put into the upper story of one of their houses but, after
ten days, my wounds healed sufficiently to allow me to walk; and I
have got here without any serious adventure."

"Well, I must congratulate you heartily. I will send two of the men
into camp with you, for otherwise you would have a good chance of
being shot down."

On arriving at the spot where the officers of the regiment were
sitting round a campfire, his escort left him. As he came into the
light of the fire, several of the officers jumped up, with their
hands on their revolvers.

"Don't shoot! Don't shoot!" Lisle exclaimed, with a laugh. "I can
assure you that I am perfectly harmless."

"It is Bullen's voice," one of them exclaimed, and all crowded
round him, and wrung his hands and patted him on the back.

"This is the second time, Bullen, that you have come back to us
from the dead; and this time, like Hamlet's father, you have come
back with very questionable disguise. Now, sit down and take a cup
of tea, which is all we have to offer you."

"I will," Lisle said, "and I shall be glad of some cold meat; for I
have been living, for the past three days, on uncooked grain."

The meat was brought, and Lisle ate it ravenously, declining to
answer any questions until he had finished.

"Now," he said, "I will tell you a plain, unvarnished tale;" and he
gave them, in full detail, the adventure he had gone through.

"Upon my word, Lisle, you are as full of resources as an egg is
full of meat. Your pluck, in going down to the lower story of that
house while the women were chatting outside, was wonderful. It was,
of course, sheer luck that you found that dead Pathan, and so got
suitable clothes; but how you dyed your face that colour, I cannot
understand."

Lisle explained how he had found a plant which was, as he knew,
used for that purpose; and how he had extracted the colouring
matter from it.

"You had wonderful luck in making your way through the Pathans,
without being questioned; but, as we know, fortune favours the
brave. Well, I shall have another yarn to tell General Lockhart, in
the morning; but how we are to rig you out, I don't know."

Several of the officers, however, had managed to carry one or two
spare garments in their kits. These were produced; and Lisle, with
great satisfaction, threw off the dirt-stained Pathan garments, and
arrayed himself in uniform.

Pleased as all the others were at his return, no one was so
delighted as Robah, who fairly cried over his master, whom he had
believed to be lost for ever.

"We shall not be uneasy about you again, Bullen," the colonel said,
as they lay down for the night. "Whenever we miss you we shall know
that, sooner or later, you will turn up, like a bad penny. If you
hadn't got that wound in the leg--which, by the way, the surgeon
had better dress and examine in the morning--I should have said
that you were invulnerable to Afridi bullets. The next time there
is some desperate service to be done, I shall certainly appoint you
to undertake it; feeling convinced that, whatever it might be, and
however great the risk, you will return unscathed. You don't carry
a charm about with you, do you?"

"No," Lisle laughed, "I wish I did; but anything I carry would not
be respected by a Pathan bullet."

Next morning the colonel reported Lisle's return, and Sir William
Lockhart sent for him and obtained, from his lips, the story of the
adventure.

"You managed excellently, sir," the general said, when he had
finished. "Of course, I cannot report your adventure in full, but
can merely say that Lieutenant Bullen, whom I had reported killed,
was wounded and taken prisoner by the Pathans; and has managed,
with great resource, to make his escape and rejoin the force. Your
last adventure, sir, showed remarkable courage; and this time you
have proved that you possess an equal amount of calmness and
judgment. If you go on as you have begun, sir, you will make a very
distinguished officer."

During the day Lisle had to repeat his story, again and again, to
the officers of other regiments; who came in to congratulate him on
making his escape, and to learn the particulars.

"I shall have," he said, laughing, "to get the printing officer to
strike off a number of copies of my statement, and to issue one to
each regiment. There, I think I would rather go through the
adventure again, than have to keep on repeating it."

He had received a hearty cheer, from the regiment, when he appeared
upon parade that morning; a reception that showed that he was a
general favourite, and that sincere pleasure was felt at his
return.

Lisle had been known among the men as 'the boy' when he first
joined, but he was a boy no longer. He was now eighteen; and had,
from the experiences he had gone through, a much older appearance.
He learned, on the evening of his return, that he was now a full
lieutenant; for there had been several changes in the regiment.
When in cantonments other officers had joined, junior to himself;
and four or five had been killed during the fighting.

"If this goes on much longer, Mr. Bullen, you will be a captain
before we get back to India," one of the officers said.

"I am sure I hope not," he replied. "I don't wish to gain steps by
the death of my friends. However, I hope that there is no chance of
it coming to that."

After the visit of the commander to the Mohmund hill force, the
troops under General Lockhart learned the history of the operations
of that force, of which they had hitherto been in complete
ignorance. On the 28th of August the force was concentrated. It
consisted of the troops which, under Sir Bindon Blood, had just
pacified the Upper Swat Valley; with a brigade, under Brigadier
General Jeffreys and General Wodehouse, mobilized near Malakand. On
the 6th of September orders were issued to march to Banjour,
through the Mohmund country to Shabkadr, near Peshawar, and operate
with a force under Major General Ellis. A force had already been
despatched, under General Wodehouse, to seize the bridge over the
Panjkora. This was successfully accomplished, the force arriving
just in time, as a large body of the enemy came up only a few hours
later.

General Meiklejohn was in command of the line of communication, and
the 2nd and 3rd Brigades crossed the Panjkora without opposition.
On the 13th of September the Rambuck Pass was reconnoitred, and the
two brigades arrived at Nawagai. General Jeffreys encamped near the
foot of the Ramjak Pass; and part of his force was detached, to
prepare the road for the passage of the expedition, and to bivouac
there for the night. The road was partially made, and the brigade
would have passed over but, about eight o'clock in the evening, the
camp at the foot of the pass was suddenly attacked. All lights were
at once extinguished, and the men fell in rapidly; the trenches
opening fire on the unseen enemy, who moved gradually round to the
other side of the camp. It was pitch dark, for the moon had not yet
risen; and the enemy poured in a murderous fire, but did not
attempt to rush the camp. The troops were firing almost at random
for, in spite of star shells being fired, very few of the enemy
could be made out.

The fire was hottest from the side occupied by the 38th Dogras, who
determined to make a sortie, for the purpose of clearing the enemy
away from that flank. In spite of the fact that the ground was
swept by bullets, several volunteered for the sortie. The fire,
however, was too hot. Captain Tomkins and Lieutenant Bailey fell,
almost the instant they rose to their feet. Lieutenant Harrington
received a mortal wound, and several men were also killed and
wounded, and the sortie was given up.

All night a heavy fire was kept up by the enemy, but they moved off
in the morning. The camp presented a sad sight, when day broke;
dead horses and mules were lying about among the tents and
shelters, which had been hurriedly thrown down at the first attack.
When it was learned that the assailants belonged to the Banjour
tribes, living in the Mohmund Valley, a squadron of Bengal Lancers
were sent off in pursuit and, overtaking them in a village at the
entrance of their valley, killed many, pursuing them for four or
five miles. When they returned to the village, they were joined by
the Guides Infantry and a mountain battery. This was too small a
force to follow the enemy into their hills, but they destroyed the
fortifications of several small villages and, before night, General
Jeffreys, with the rest of the brigade, arrived.

Night passed without interruption and, in the morning, the force
marched in three columns; the centre keeping straight up the
valley, while the other two were to destroy the villages on each
side. When the centre column had advanced six miles up the valley,
they saw the enemy in a village on the hill; and a detachment of
the Buffs went out to dislodge them. The remainder of the column
pushed on.

Two companies of the 35th Sikhs, who were in advance, went too far;
and were suddenly attacked by a great number of the enemy. Fighting
sturdily they fell back but, being hampered by their wounded, many
of the men were unable to return the fire of the tribesmen; who
formed round them, keeping up a heavy fire at close quarters. The
Ghazis, seeing their opportunity, came closer and closer; their
swordsmen charging in and cutting down the Sikhs in the ranks.
Seventeen were thus killed or wounded. Presently, however, the
Buffs arrived in support, and a squadron of the 11th Bengal Lancers
charged the Ghazis, and speared many of them before they could
reach the shelter of the hills; and the Buffs soon drove them away,
with heavy loss.

While this was going on the third detachment, which had destroyed
many of the numerous villages, was called in to join the main body.
The guns had been doing good work among the flying tribesmen. A
company and a half of the 35th Sikhs were told to take post, on a
high hill, to cover the guns. This force, when the troops returned,
diverged somewhat from the line of march which the main body were
following. It was hard pressed by the tribesmen, hampered by the
wounded, and was running short of ammunition; and was obliged to
send for help. The general ordered the Guides to go to their
assistance but, fortunately, a half company of that regiment with
some ammunition had already reached them, and the party could be
seen fighting their way up a steep rocky spur.

The tribesmen, confident that they could cut off the small band
from the main force, rushed at them with their swords. Both the
officers were severely wounded. When, however, the rest of the
Guides arrived on the hill, they poured several volleys into the
enemy, and so checked their advance. A Havildar then volunteered to
mount the hill with ammunition. He reached the party with seventy
cartridges, and carried back a wounded native officer. Other Guides
followed his example, and all reached the valley as evening was
closing in.

The Ghazis crept up the ravine, and maintained a hot fire upon
them. It soon became pitch dark, and the difficulty of the march
was increased by a heavy storm. The force lost the line of retreat
and, but for the vivid lightning, would have found it impossible to
make their way across the deep ravine. At ten o'clock they reached
the camp.

Here they found that General Jeffreys, with part of his brigade,
had not yet returned. At dawn, however, the general appeared, with
his mountain battery and a small escort. They had become separated
from the remainder of the brigade, and the general decided to
bivouac in a village. Defences were at once formed. The trenching
tools were with the main body, but the sappers used their bayonets
to make a hasty shelter.

The enemy took possession of the unoccupied part of the village,
and opened fire on the trenches. This grew so hot that it became
absolutely necessary to clear the village. Three attempts were
made, but failed; the handful of available men being altogether
insufficient for the purpose.

The enemy now tried to rush the troops, and a continuous fire was
poured into a small enclosure, packed with men and mules. The
casualties were frequent, but the men now threw up a fresh
defensive work, with mule saddles and ammunition boxes. The fury of
