and ceremonies, he was constantly congratulated on his daughter's
prominence as bridesmaid, and he was sent for professionally, that he
might be talked to socially. Yet if he ventured to hint
dissatisfaction, or to express himself by a scornful "Pooh! Pooh!" he
was answered by looks of such astonishment, of such quick-springing
womanly suspicions, that he could not doubt the kind of conversation
which followed his exit:

"Do you think Doctor Moran VERY clever?"

"Most people think so."

"He is so unsympathetic. Doctor Moore knows everything Madame Jacobus
is going to have, and to do. I think doctors ought to be chatty. It is
so good for their patients to be cheered up a little."

Doctor Moran divined perfectly this taste for gossip and MEDICINAL
sympathy combined, and to administer it was, to him, more nauseous than
his own bitterest drugs. So in these days he was not a cheerful man to
live with, and Cornelia's beauty and radiant happiness affected him
very much as Hyde's pronounced satisfaction affected Arenta. One
morning, as he was returning home after a round of disagreeable visits,
he saw Cornelia and Hyde coming up Broadway together. They were
sauntering side by side in all the lazy happiness of perfect love; and
as he looked at them the sorrow of an immense disillusion filled him to
the lips. He had believed himself, as yet, to be the first and the
dearest in his child's love; but in that moment his eyes were opened,
and he felt as if he had been suddenly thrust out from it and the door
closed upon him.

He did the wisest thing possible: he went home to his wife. She heard
him ride with clattering haste into the stone court, and soon after
enter the house from the back, banging every door after him. She knew
then that something had angered him--that he was in that temper which
makes a woman cry, but which a man can only relieve by noisy or
emphatic movement of some kind. A resolute look came into her face and
she said to herself, "John has always had his own way--and my way also;
but Cornelia's way--the child must surely have something to say about
that."

"Where is Cornelia, Ava?" He asked the question with a quick glance
round the room, as if he expected to find her present.

"Cornelia is not at home to-day."

"Is she ever at home now?"

"You know that Arenta's wedding--"

"Arenta's wedding! I am tired to death of it: I have heard nothing this
morning but Arenta's wedding. Why the deuce! should my house be turned
upside down and inside out for Arenta's wedding? Women have been
married before Arenta Van Ariens, and women will be married after her.
What is all this fuss about?"

"You know--"

"Bless my soul! of course I know. I know one thing at least, that I
have just met Cornelia and that young fop George Hyde coming up the
street together, as if they two alone were in the world. They never saw
me, they could see nothing but themselves."

"Men and women have done such a thing before, John, and they will do it
again. Cornelia is a beautiful girl; it is natural that she should have
a lover."

"It is very unnatural that she should choose for her lover the son of
my worst enemy."

"I am sure you wrong General Hyde. When was he your enemy? How could he
be your enemy?"

"When was he my enemy? Ever since the first hour we met. Often he tried
to injure me with General Washington; often he accused me of showing
partiality to certain officers in the army; only last year he prevented
my election to the Senate by using all his influence in favour of Joris
Van Heemskirk. If he has not done me more injury and more injustice,
'tis because he has not had the opportunity. And you want me to give
Cornelia to his son! Yes, you do, Ava! I see it on your face. You
stretch my patience too far. Can I not see--"

"Can an angry man ever see? No, he cannot. You feed your own
suspicions, John. You might just as well link Cornelia's name with Rem
Van Ariens as with Joris Hyde. She is continually in Rem's company. He
is devoted to her. She cannot possibly misunderstand his looks and
words, she must perceive that he is her ardent lover. You might have
seen them the last three evenings sitting together at that table
preparing the invitations for the wedding breakfast and ball; arranging
the cards and favours.--So happy! So pleasantly familiar! So
confidential! I think Rem Van Ariens has as much of Cornelia's liking
as George Hyde; and perhaps neither of them have enough of it to win
her hand. All lovers do not grow to husbands."

"Thank God, they do not! But what you say about Rem is only cobweb
stuff. She is too friendly, too pleasantly familiar, I would like to
see her more shy and silent with him. Every one has already given my
daughter to Hyde, and, say what you will, common fame is seldom to
blame."

"Dinner is waiting, John, and whether you eat it or not Destiny will go
straight to her mark. Love is destiny; and the heart is its own fate.
There are those to whom we are spiritually related, and the tie is
kinder than flesh and blood. Can you, or I, count such kindred? No; but
souls see each other at a glance. Did I not know thee, John, the very
moment that we met?"

She spoke softly, with a voice sweeter than music, and her husband was
touched and calmed. He took the hand she stretched out to him and
kissed it, and she added--

"Let us be patient. Love has reasons that reason does not understand;
and if Cornelia is Hyde's by predestination, as well as by choice,
vainly we shall worry and fret; all our opposition will come to
nothing. Give Cornelia this interval, and tithe it not; in a few days
Arenta will have gone away; and as for Hyde, any hour may summon him to
join his father in England; and this summons, as it will include his
mother, he can neither evade nor put off. Then Rem will have his
opportunity."

"To be patient--to wait--to say nothing--it is to give opportunity too
much scope. I must tell that young fellow a little of my mind--"

"You must not make yourself a town's talk, John. Just now New York is
all for lovers. If you interfere between Hyde and Cornelia while it is
in this temper, every one will cry out, 'Oh, the pity of it!' and you
will be bayed into doing some mad thing or other. Do I not know you,
dear one?"

"God's precious!" and he took her in his arms, saying, "the man who
learns nothing from his wife will never learn anything from anybody.
Come, then, and we will eat our meal. I had forgotten Rem, and as you
say, Hyde may have to go to England to-morrow; putting-off has broken
up many an ill marriage."

"Time and absence against any love affair that is not destiny! And if
it be destiny, there is only submission, nothing else. But life has a
'maybe' in everything dear; a maybe that is just as likely to please us
as not."

Then Doctor John looked up with a smile. "You are right, Ava," he said
cheerfully. "I will take the maybe. Maybes have a deal to do with life.
When you come to think of it, there is not a victory of any kind
gained, nor a good deed done except on a maybe. So maybe all I fear may
pass like a summer cloud. Yet, take my word for it, there is, I think,
no maybe in Rem's chances with Cornelia."

"We shall see. I think there is."

Certainly Rem was of this opinion. The past few weeks had been very
favourable to him. In them he had been continually associated with
Cornelia, and her manner towards him had been so frankly kind and
familiar, so confidential and sympathetic, that he could not help but
contrast it with their previous intercourse, when she had appeared to
withdraw herself from all his approaches and to forbid by her retiring
manner even the courtesies to which his long acquaintance with her
entitled him.

If he had known more of women he would not have given himself any hope
on this change of attitude. It simply meant that Cornelia had arrived
at that certainty with regard to her own affections which permitted her
a more general latitude. She knew that she loved Hyde, and she knew
that Hyde loved her. They had a most complete confidence in each other;
and she was not afraid, either for his sake or her own, to give to Rem
that friendship which the circumstances warranted. That this friendship
could ever grow to love on her part was an impossible thing; and if she
thought of Rem's feelings, it was to suppose that he must understand
this position as well as she did herself.

Rem, however, was quite aware of his rival, and with the blunt
directness of his nature watched with jealous dislike, and often with
rude impatience, the familiar intercourse which his aunt's partiality
permitted Hyde. He was, indeed, often so rude that a less
sweet-tempered, a less just youth than George Hyde would have pointedly
resented many offences that he passed by with that "noble not caring"
which is often the truest courage.

Still the situation was one of great tension, and it required not only
the wise forbearance of Hyde and Cornelia, but the domineering
selfishness of Arenta and the suave clever diplomacies of Madame
Jacobus to preserve at times the merely decent conventionalities of
polite life. To keep the peace until the wedding was over--that was all
that Rem promised himself; THEN! He often gave voice to this last word,
though he had no distinct idea as to what measures he included in those
four letters.

He told himself, however, that it would be well for George Hyde to be
in England, and that if he were there, the General might be trusted to
look after the marriage of his son. For he knew that an English noble
would be of necessity bound by his caste and his connections, and that
Hyde would have to face obligations he would not be able to shirk.
"Then, then, his opportunity to win Cornelia would come!" And it was at
this point the hopeful "maybe" entered into Rem's desires and
anticipations.

But wrath covered carries fate. Every one was in some measure conscious
of this danger and glad when the wedding day approached. Even Arenta
had grown a little weary of the prolonged excitement she had provoked,
for everything had gone so well with her that she had taken the public
very much into her confidence. There had been frequent little notices
in the Gazette and Journal of the approaching day--of the wedding
presents, the wedding favours, the wedding guests, and the wedding
garments. And, as if to add the last touch of glory to the event, just
a week before Arenta's nuptials a French armed frigate came to New York
bearing despatches for the Count de Moustier; and the Marquis de
Tounnerre was selected to bear back to France the Minister's Message.
So the marriage was put forward a few days for this end, and Arenta in
the most unexpected way obtained the bridal journey which she desired;
and also with it the advantage of entering France in a semi-public and
stately manner.

"I am the luckiest girl in the world," she said to Cornelia and her
brother when this point had been decided. They were tying up
"dream-cake" for the wedding guests in madame's queer, uncanny
drawing-room as she spoke, and the words were yet on her lips when
madame entered with a sandal wood box in her hands.

"Rem," she said, "go with Cornelia into the dining-room a few minutes.
I have something to say to Arenta that concerns no one else."

As soon as they were alone madame opened the box and upon a white
velvet cushion lay the string of oriental pearls which Arenta on
certain occasions had been permitted to wear. Arenta's eyes flashed
with delight. She had longed for them to complete her wedding costume,
but having a very strong hope that her aunt would offer her this
favour, she had resolved to wait for her generosity until the last
hour. Now she was going; to receive the reward of her prudent patience,
and she said to herself, "How good it is to be discreet!" With an
intense desire and interest she looked at the beautiful beads, but
madame's face was troubled and sombre, and she said almost reluctantly--

"Arenta, I am going to make you an offer. This necklace will be yours
when I die, at any rate; but I think there is in your heart a wish to
have it now. Is this so?"

"Aunt, I should like--oh, indeed I long to wear the beads at my
marriage. I shall only be half-dressed without them."

"You shall wear the necklace. And as you are going to what is left of
the French Court, I will give it to you now, if the gift will be to
your mind."

"There is nothing that could be more to my mind, dear aunt. I would
rather have the necklace, than twice its money's worth. Thank you,
aunt. You always know what is in a young girl's heart."

"First, listen to what I say. No woman of our family has escaped
calamity of some kind, if they owned these beads. My mother lost her
husband the year she received them. My Aunt Hildegarde lost her fortune
as soon as they were hers. As for myself, on the very day they became
mine your Uncle Jacobus sailed away, and he has never come back. Are
you not afraid of such fatality?"

"No, I am not. Things just happen that way. What power can a few beads
have over human life or happiness? To say so, to think so, is
foolishness."

"I know not. Yet I have heard that both pearls and opals have the power
to attract to themselves the ill fortune of their wearers. If they
happen to be maiden pearls or gems that would be good; but would you
wish to inherit the evil fortune of all the women who have possessed
before you?"

"Poor pearls! It is they who are the unfortunates."

"Yes, but a time comes when they have taken all of misfortune they can
take; then the pearls grow black and die, really die. Yes, indeed! I
have seen dead pearls. And if the necklace were of opals, when that
time came for them the gems would lose their fire and colour, grow ashy
grey, fall apart and become dust, nothing but dust."

"Do you believe such tales, aunt? I do not. And your pearls are yet as
white as moonlight. I do not fear them. Give them to me, aunt. I snap
my fingers at such fables."

"Give them to you, I will not, Arenta; but you may take them from the
box with your own hands."

"I am delighted to take them. I have always longed for them."

"Perhaps then they longed for you, for what is another's yearns for its
owner."

Then madame left the room and Arenta lifted the box and carried it
nearer to the light. And a little shiver crept through her heart and
she closed the lid quickly and said irritably--

"It is my aunt's words. She is always speaking dark and doubtful
things. However, the pearls are mine at last!" and she carried them
with her downstairs, throwing back her head as if they were round her
white throat and--as was her way--spreading herself as she went.

All fine weddings are much alike. It was only in such accidentals as
costume that Arenta's differed from the fine weddings of to-day. There
was the same crush of gayly attired women, of men in full dress, or
military dress, or distinguished by diplomatic insignia:--the same low
flutter of silk, and stir of whispered words, and suppressed
excitement--the same eager crowd along the streets and around the
church to watch the advent of the bride and bridegroom. All of the
guests had seen them very often before, yet they too looked at the
dazzling girl in white as if they expected an entirely different
person. The murmur of pleasure, the indefinable stir of human emotion,
the solemn mystical words at the altar that were making two one, the
triumphant peal of music when they ceased, and the quick crescendo of
rising congratulation--all these things were present then, as now. And
then, as now, all these things failed to conceal from sensitive minds
that odour of human sacrifice, not to be disguised with the scent of
bridal flowers--that immolation of youth and beauty and charming
girlhood upon the altar of an unknown and an untried love.
