would render him to blame.

This Gentleman who has of late becconed the attention of all men of
understanding who are any ways desirous of Novelty, [or] care what
becomes of any part of the World besides that themselves live in, had
the honour to be descended of an Ancient and Honourable Family, his
name Nathanael Bacon, to whom to the long known Title of Gentleman, by
his long study [at] the Inns of Court he has since added that of
Esquire. He was the Son of Mr. Thomas Bacon of an ancient Seat known
by the denomination of Freestone-Hall, in the County of Suffolk, a
Gentleman of known loyalty and ability. His Father as he was able so
he was willing to allow this his Son a very Gentile Competency to
subsist upon, but he as it proved having a Soul too large for that
allowance, could not contain himself within bounds; which his careful
Father perceiving, and also that he had a mind to Travel (having seen
divers parts of the World before) consented to his inclination of
going to Virginia, and accommodated him with a Stock for that purpose,
to the value of 1,800l. Starling, as I am credibly informed by a
Merchant of very good wealth, who is now in this City, and had the
fortune to carry him thither.

He began his Voyage thitherwards about Three years since, and lived
for about a years space in that Continent in very good repute, his
extraordinary parts like a Letter of recommendation rendring him
aceptable in all mens company, whilst his considerable Concerns in
that place were able to bear him out in the best of Society. These
Accomplishments of mind and fortune rendred him so remarkable, that
the worthy Governour of that Continent thought it requisite to take
him into his Privy Council.

That Plantation which he chose to settle in is generally known by the
name of Curles, situate in the upper part of James River and the time
of his revolt was not till the beginning of March, 1675-6. At which
time the Susquo-hannan Indians (a known Enemy to that Country) having
made an Insurrection, and kild divers of the English, amongst whom it
was his misfortune to have a Servant slain; in revenge of whose death,
and other dammage(s) he received from those turbulent Susquo-hanians,
without the Governeur's consent he furiously took up Arms against
them, and was so fortunate as to put them to flight, but not content
therewith; the aforesaid Governour hearing of his eager pursuit after
the vanquisht Indians, sent out a select Company of Souldiers to
command him to desist; but he instead of listning thereunto, persisted
in his Revenge, and sent to the Governour to intreat his Commission,
that he might more chearfully prosecute his design; which being denyed
him by the Messenger he sent for that purpose, he notwithstanding
continued to make head with his own Servants, and other English then
resident in Curles against them.

In this interim the people of Henrico had returned him Burgess of
their county; and he in order thereunto took his own Sloop and came
down towards James Town, conducted by thirty odd Souldiers, with part
of which he came ashore to Mr. Laurences House, to understand whether
he might come in with safety or not, but being discovered by one
Parson Clough, and also it being perceived that he had lined the
Bushes of the said Town with Souldiers, the Governour thereupon
ordered an allarm to be beaten through the whole Town, which took so
hot, that Bacon thinking himself not secure whilst he remained there
within reach of their Fort, immediately commanded his men aboard, and
tow'd his Sloop up the River; which the Governour perceiving, ordered
the Ships which lay at Sandy-point to pursue and take him; and they by
the industry of their Commanders succeeded so well in the attempt,
that they presently stopt his passage; so that Mr. Bacon finding
himself pursued both before and behind, after some capitulations,
quietly surrendered himself Prisoner to the Governours Commissioners,
to the great satisfaction of all his Friends; which action of his was
so obliging to the Governour, that he granted him his liberty
immediately upon Paroll, without confining him either to Prison or
Chamber, and the next day, after some private discourse passed betwixt
the Governour, the Privy Council, and himself, he was amply restored
to all his former Honours and Dignities, and a Commission partly
promised him to be General against the Indian Army; but upon further
enquiry into his Affairs it was not thought fit to be granted him;
whereat his ambitious mind seem'd mightily to be displeas'd; insomuch
that he gave out, that it was his intention to sell his whole concerns
in Virginia, and to go with his whole Family to live either in
Merry-land or the South, because he would avoid (as he said) the
scandal of being accounted a factious person there.

But this resolution it seems was but a pretence, for afterwards he
headed the same Runnagado English that he formerly found ready to
undertake and go sharers with him in any of his Rebellions, and adding
to them the assistance of his own Slaves and Servants, headed them so
far till they toucht at the Occonegies Town, where he was treated very
civilly, and by the Inhabitants informed where some of the
Susquohanno's were inforted, whom presently he assails, and after he
had vanquished them, slew about seventy of them in their Fort: But as
he returned back to the Occoneges, he found they had fortified
themselves with divers more Indians than they had at his first
arrival; wherefore he desired Hostages of them for their good
behaviour, whilst he and his followers lay within command of their
Fort. But those treacherous Indians grown confident by reason of their
late recruit, returned him this Answer, That their Guns were the only
Hostages he was like to have of them, and if he would have them he
must fetch them. Which was no soner spoke, but the Indians salied out
of the Fort and shot one of his Sentinels, whereupon he charged them
so fiercely, that the Fight continued not only all that day, but the
next also, till the approach of the Evening, at which time finding his
men grow faint for want of Provision, he laid hold of the opportunity,
being befriended by a gloomy night, and so made an honourable retreat
homewards. Howbeit we may judge what respect he had gain'd in
James-Town by this subsequent transaction.

When he was first brought hither it was frequently reported among the
Commonalty that he was kept close Prisoner, which report caused the
people of that Town, those of Charles-city, Henrico, and New-Kent
Countries, being in all about the Number of eight hundred, or a
thousand, to rise and march thitherwards in order to his rescue;
whereupon the Governor was forced to desire Mr. Bacon to go himself in
Person, and by his open appearance quiet the people.

This being past, Mr. Bacon, about the 25th of June last, dissatisfied
that he could not have a Commission granted him to go against the
Indians, in the night time departed the Town unknown to any body, and
about a week after got together between four and five hundred men of
New-Kent County, with whom he marched to James-Town, and drew up in
order before the House of State; and there peremptorily demanded of
the Governor, Council and Burgesses (there then collected) a
Commission to go against the Indians, which if they should refuse to
grant him, he told them that neither he nor ne're a man in his Company
would depart from their Doors till he had obtained his request;
whereupon to prevent farther danger in so great an exigence, the
Council and Burgesses by much intreaty obtain'd him a Commission
Signed by the Governor, an Act for one thousand men to be Listed under
his command to go against the Indians, to whom the same pay was to be
granted as was allowed to them who went against the Fort. But Bacon
was not satisfied with this, but afterwards earnestly importuned, and
at length obtained of the House, to pass an Act of Indemnity to all
Persons who had sided with him, and also Letters of recommendations
from the Governor to his Majesty in his behalf; and moreover caused
Collonel Claybourn and his Son, Captain Claybourn, Lieutenant Collonel
West, and Lieutenant Collonel Hill, and many others, to be degraded
for ever bearing any Office, whether it were Military or Civil.

Having obtained these large Civilities of the Governor, &c. one would
have thought that if the Principles of honesty would not have obliged
him to peace and loyalty, those of gratitude should. But, alas, when
men have been once flusht or entred with Vice, how hard is it for them
to leave it, especially it tends towards ambition or greatness, which
is the general lust of a large Soul, and the common error of vast
parts, which fix their Eyes so upon the lure of greatness, that they
have no time left them to consider by what indirect and unlawful means
they must (if ever) attain it.

This certainly was Mr. Bacon's Crime, who, after he had once lanched
into Rebellion, nay, and upon submission had been pardoned for it, and
also restored, as if he had committed no such hainous offence, to his
former honour and dignities (which weer considerable enough to content
any reasonable mind) yet for all this he could not forbear wading into
his former misdemeanors, and continued his opposition against that
prudent and established Government, ordered by his Majesty of Great
Brittain to be duely observed in that Continent.

In fine, he continued (I cannot say properly in the Fields, but) in
the Woods with a considerable Army all last Summer, and maintain'd
several Brushes with the Governors Party: sometime routing them, and
burning all before him, to the great damage of many of his Majesties
loyal Subjects there resident; sometimes he and his Rebels were beaten
by the Governor, &c., and forc't to run for shelter amongst the Woods
and Swomps. In which lamentable condition that unhappy Continent has
remain'd for the space of almost a Twelve-month, every one therein
that were able being forc't to take up Arms for security of their own
lives, and no one reckoning their Goods, Wives, or Children to be
their own, since they were so dangerously expos'd to the doubtful
Accidents of an uncertain War.

But the indulgent Heavens, who are alone able to compute what measure
of punishments are adequate or fit for the sins of transgressions of a
Nation, has in its great mercy thought fit to put a stop, at least, if
not a total period and conclusion to these Virginian troubles, by the
death of this Nat. Bacon, the great Molestor of the quiet of that
miserable Nation; so that now we who are here in England, and have any
Relations or Correspondence with any of the Inhabitants of that
Continent, may by the arrival of the next Ships from that Coast expect
to hear that they are freed from all their dangers, quitted of all
their fears, and in great hopes and expectations to live quietly under
their own Vines, and enjoy the benefit of their commendable labours.

I know it is by some reported that this Mr. Bacon was a very hard
drinker, and that he dyed by inbibing, or taking in two much Brandy.
But I am informed by those who are Persons of undoubted Reputation,
and had the happiness to see the same Letter which gave his Majesty an
account of his death, that there was no such thing therein mentioned:
he was certainly a Person indued with great natural parts, which
notwithstanding his juvenile extravagances he had adorned with many
elaborate acquisitions, and by the help of learning and study knew how
to manage them to a Miracle, it being the general vogue of all that
knew him, that he usually spoke as much sense in as few words, and
delivered that sense as opportunely as any they ever kept company
withal: Wherefore as I am my self a Lover of Ingenuity, though an
abhorrer of disturbance or Rebellion, I think fit since Providence was
pleased to let him dye a Natural death in his Bed, not to asperse him
with saying he kill'd himself with drinking.

    [1] This account was written a year after the events described by
    an author whose name is unknown. Internal evidence points to his
    intimate personal knowledge of what took place. Writing after the
    failure of the rebellion; moreover, after Bacon himself was dead,
    and the strong popular movement led by him had consequently much
    disintegrated, the writer's view is naturally somewhat out of
    sympathy with Bacon. Printed in Hart's "American History Told by
    Contemporaries."

    John Easton Cooke, in his "History of Virginia," declares that
    Bacon was "the soul of the rebellion" and his rising "not a
    hair-brained project, but the result of deliberate calculation." As
    a representative of the Virginia people Bacon "protested strongly
    against public grievances, compelling redress." He anticipated that
    the country would profit from his uprising, "and his anticipation
    was justified." The result as against Berkeley, "compelled the
    dissolution of the Royal Assembly, which had remained unchanged
    since 1680, and resulted in 'Bacon's assembly,' which began by
    raising the public revenue, extending suffrage to freemen, and was
    so defiant that Berkeley dissolved it."




KING PHILIP'S WAR

(1676)

BY WILLIAM HUBBARD[1]


The Occasion of Philips so sudden taking up Arms the last Year, was
this: There was one John Sausaman, a very cunning and plausible
Indian, well skilled in the English Language, and bred up in the
Profession of Christian Religion, employed as a Schoolmaster at
Natick, the Indian Town, who upon some Misdemeanor fled from his Place
to Philip, by whom he was entertained in the Room and Office of
Secretary, and his chief Councellor, whom he trusted with all his
Affairs and secret Counsels: But afterwards, whether upon the Sting of
his own Conscience, or by the frequent Sollicitations of Mr. Eliot,
that had known him from a Child, and instructed him in the Principles
of our Religion, who was often laying before him the heinous Sin of
his Apostacy, and returning back to his old Vomit; he was at last
prevailed with to forsake Philip, and return back to the Christian
Indians at Natick where he was baptised, manifested publick Repentance
for all his former Offences, [15] and made a serious profession of the
Christian Religion; and did apply himself to preach to the Indians,
wherein he was better gifted than any other of the Indian Nation; so
as he was observed to conform more to the English Manners than any
other Indian.

Yet having Occasion to go up with some others of his Country men to
Namasket, whether for the Advantage of Fishing or some such Occasion,
it matters not; being there not far from Phillips Country, he had
Occasion to be much in the Company of Philips Indians, and of Philip
himself: by which Means he discerned by several Circumstances that the
Indians were plotting anew against us; the which out of Faithfulness
to the English the said Sausaman informed the Governour of; adding
also, that if it were known that he revealed it, he knew they would
presently kill him. There appearing so many concurrent Testimonies
from others, making it the more probable, that there was certain Truth
in the Information; some Inquiry was made into the Business, by
examining Philip himself, several of his Indians, who although they
could do nothing, yet could not free themselves from just Suspicion;
Philip therefore soon after contrived the said Sausamans Death, which
was strangely discovered; notwithstanding it was so cunningly
effected, for they that murdered him, met him upon the Ice on a great
Pond, and presently after they had knocked him down, put him under the
Ice, yet leaving his Gun and his Hat upon the Ice, that it might be
thought he fell in accidentally through the Ice and was drowned: but
being missed by his Friend, who finding his Hat and his Gun, they were
thereby led to the Place, where his Body was found under the Ice: when
they took it up to bury him, some of his Friends, specially one David,
observed some Bruises about his Head, which made them suspect he was
first knocked down, before he was put into the Water: however, they
buried him near about the Place where he was found, without making any
further Inquiry at present: nevertheless David his Friend, reported
these Things to some English at Taunton (a Town not far from
Namasket), occasioned the Governour to inquire further into the
Business, wisely considering, that as Sausaman had told him, If it
were known that he had revealed any of their Plots, they would murder
him for his Pains.

Wherefore by special Warrant the Body of Sausaman being digged again
out of his Grave, it was very apparent that he had been killed, and
not drowned. And by a strange Providence an Indian was found, that by
Accident was standing unseen upon a Hill, had seen them murther the
said Sausaman, but durst never reveal it for Fear of losing his own
Life likewise, until he was called to the Court at Plimouth, or before
the Governour, where he plainly [16] confessed what he had seen. The
Murderers being apprehended, were convicted by his undeniable
Testimony, and other remarkable Circumstances, and so were all put to
Death, being but three in Number; the last of them confessed
immediately before his Death, that his Father (one of the Councellors
and special Friends of Philip) was one of the two that murdered
Sausaman, himself only looking on.

This was done at Plimouth Court, held in June, 1674. Insomuch that
Philip apprehending the Danger his own Head was in next, never used
any further Means to clear himself from what was like to be laid to
his Charge, either about his plotting against the English, nor yet
about Sausamans Death: but by keeping his Men continually about him in
Arms, and gathering what Strangers he could to join with him, marching
up and down constantly in Arms, both all the while the Court sat, as
well as afterwards. The English of Plimouth hearing of all this, yet
took no further Notice, than only to order a Militia Watch in all the
adjacent Towns, hoping that Philip finding himself not likely to be
arraigned by Order of the said Court, the present Cloud might blow
over, as some others of like Nature had done before; but in
Conclusion, the Matter proved otherwise; for Philip finding his
Strength daily increasing, by the flocking of Neighbour-Indians unto
him, and sending over their Wives and Children to the Narhagansets for
Security (as they use to do when they intend War with any of their
Enemies,) immediately they began to alarm the English at Swanzy, (the
next Town to Philips Country,) as it were daring the English to begin;
at last their Insolences grew to such an Height, that they began not
only to use threatening Words to the English, but also to kill their
Cattel and rifle their Houses; whereat an English-man was so provoked,
