The Project Gutenberg EBook of No Strings Attached, by Lester del Rey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: No Strings Attached

Author: Lester del Rey

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: May 16, 2010 [EBook #32395]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NO STRINGS ATTACHED ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science Fiction June 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         No Strings Attached


                          By Lester del Rey


                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


     _Poor Henry was an unhappy husband whose wife had a habit of
      using bad cliches. Alfear was a genii who was, quite like
      most humans, a creature of habit. Their murder compact was
      absolutely perfect, with--_

       *       *       *       *       *




Committing a perfect murder is a simple matter. Drive out some night
to a lonely road, find a single person walking along out of sight of
anyone else, offer him a ride, knife him, and go home. In such a
crime, there's no reason to connect killer and victim--no motive, no
clue, no suspect.

To achieve the perfect murder of a man's own wife, however, is a
different matter. For obvious reasons, husbands are always high on the
suspect list. Who has a better reason for such a crime?

Henry Aimsworth had been pondering the problem with more than academic
interest for some time. It wasn't that he hated his wife. He simply
couldn't stand the sight or sound of her; even thinking about her made
his flesh crawl. If she had been willing to give him a divorce, he'd
have been content to wish her all the happiness she was capable of
discovering. But Emma, unfortunately, was fond of being his wife;
perhaps she was even fond of him. Worse, she was too rigidly bound to
trite morality to give him grounds to sue.

There was no hope of her straying. What had been good enough for her
mother was good enough for her, and saved all need of thinking; a
woman needed a husband, her place was in the home, marriage was
forever, and what would the neighbors think? Anyhow, she'd have had
difficulty being unfaithful, even if she tried. She'd been gaining
some ten pounds every year for the eleven years they had been married,
and she'd long since stopped worrying about taking care of her
appearance.

He looked up at her now, letting the book drop to his lap. She sat
watching the television screen with a vacant look on her face, while
some comic went through a tired routine. If she enjoyed it, there was
no sign, though she spent half her life in front of the screen. Then
the comic went off, and dancers came on. She went back to darning a
