nibbles when he's nothing better to do.  Who shall describe his desk?
It is generally understood that a schoolboy's desk is the receptacle for
a moderately miscellaneous assortment of articles, but Jack's seemed
like a great pie, into which everything under the sun was crammed and
stored up.  The lid never shut; but if you were to open it, its contents
would astonish you as much as the contents of that wonderful pie in the
nursery rhyme astonished the king when he lifted the crust.

There were books, papers, hooks, balls, worms, stale sandwiches,
photographs, toffee, birds' eggs, keys, money, knives, cherry stones,
silkworms, marbles, pencils, handkerchiefs, tarts, gum, sleeve links,
and walnut shells.  Any one venturesome enough to take a header through
these might succeed in reaching the layer of last year's apple peel
below, or in penetrating to the crumb heaps in the bottom corners; but
few there were who possessed that amount of boldness.  Of course, Jack
had no notion of what his worldly goods consisted.  He had a way of
shying things into his desk and forgetting them; and only when it became
so full that the lid stood nearly wide open did he apprehend the
necessity of a "clear-out."

But if there was ever anything more awful to behold than Jack's desk, it
was one of these "clear-outs."  The event generally got wind when it was
about to happen, and never failed to create a sensation in the school.
All who had a right took care to be present at the ceremony, and I do
believe if Jack had had the sense to issue reserved seat tickets, he
might have made a nice thing out of it.  At any rate, he made a nice
thing out of that desk.

Quite indifferent to our presence and laughter, he began leisurely to
take out its contents and spread them in glorious array upon the floor,
with a view (as he was kind enough to explain to some one who asked him)
"to sort them up."  The books and papers went in a pile by themselves;
all loose papers were thrust inside the covers of the books; and all
books without covers were jammed into all the covers without books that
seemed likely to fit.  Then all the pens and pencils were put into a
pencil case, and if any happened to be too long, they were broken to the
required shortness.  This being satisfactorily done, Jack used next to
turn his attention to the miscellaneous articles of food of which he
found himself possessed.  The sandwiches, if not more than a week old,
he either ate or generously offered to some of us; the toffee he put
into his pocket, and the tarts (if the jam were not already dried up) he
put aside for private consumption hereafter.  The shells, stones, peel,
etcetera, he heaped up in one place on the floor, and trusted to
Providence to dispose of them.  The fish-hooks and baits, the birds'
eggs that were not broken, the silkworms, the photographs, pencils,
knives, and other articles of use or ornament, he sorted carefully, and
then put back into the desk.  By this time it would occur to him he had
been long enough over this business, so he shovelled the books and
papers in anyhow, and anything else which happened still to be left out,
and then finding that the lid would shut within an inch, he sighed with
the relief of a man who has well discharged a painful duty.

How was it to be expected Jack could ever find anything he wanted?
Sometimes he would sit grubbing in his desk, or among his books, to find
a certain exercise or paper for half an hour, and finally, when
everything was upside down, he would remember he had it in his waistcoat
pocket, from the recesses of which he produced it crumpled, greasy, and
almost illegible.  On Sundays he always had a hunt for his gloves; and
at the end of the term, when he undertook his own packing, he generally
first of all contrived to pack up his keys in the very bottom of the
trunk, and so had to take everything out before he could get them, and
then when (with the aid of some dozen of us sitting on the top of the
unfortunate receptacle, to cram down the jumble of things inside to a
shutting point) he had succeeded in triumphantly turning the lock, it
was a wonder if he had not to open and unpack it all again to find his
straps.

As to his dress, I can safely say that, though Jack always had good
clothes, he always looked much less respectable than other boys whose
parents could not afford them anything but common material.  Not only
did he lose buttons, and drop grease over his coat and trousers, but he
never folded or brushed them, or had them mended in time, as a tidy boy
would have done.  We were quite ashamed to be seen walking with him
sometimes, he looked so disreputable, but no reproofs or persuasions
could induce him to take more pains about his appearance.

"A place for everything, and everything in its place," was a lesson Jack
could not learn; the result was constant and incalculable trouble.  If
people could only realise the amount of time lost by untidiness, I think
they would regard the fault with positive horror.  Why, Jack Sloven, at
the very mildest computation, must have lost half an hour a day.  Half
an hour a day, at the end of the year, makes a clear working fortnight
to the bad, so that in twenty-five years, if he goes on as he has begun,
he will have one year of which it will take him all his time to give an
account.

But not only does untidiness waste time, and render the person who falls
into it a disreputable member of society, but it seriously endangers his
success in life.  Jack Sloven was naturally a clever fellow.  When he
could find his books, he made good use of them; none of us could come up
to him in translations, and he had the knack of always understanding
what he read.  If it had not been for this wretched habit, he might have
got prizes at school, and still higher honours in after life; but as it
was, he always came to grief.  The notes he had made on his work were
never to be found; he spent more time in collecting his materials than
he had to spare for using them; most of his work had to be scrambled
through at the last moment, and was accordingly imperfect.  If Jack goes
to business, he has a very poor chance of getting on, for untidiness and
business will no more go together than oil and water.  Few things are
more against a man in business than untidiness; people fight shy of him.
If his dress is untidy, his letters slovenly, his habits unpunctual,
and his accounts confused, he will be regarded as a man not reliable,
and not to be trusted, and people will refuse to transact with him.  If
he has a house of his own, he will never succeed in keeping his servants
long, for they--so they say--have quite enough to do without unnecessary
work.  In fact, I don't see how Jack is to get on at all unless he mends
his ways.

Is it possible for an untidy boy to become tidy?  Try.  And if at first
you don't succeed--try again.  You are sure to succeed if you stick to
it.  Don't aim at apple-pie order--everything in lavender--never to be
touched, and all that sort of thing.  That's as bad as the boy who once
possessed a desk, which he would never use, for fear of marking the
blotting-paper, and breaking the paper bands round the envelopes.

No; if you can get into the way of always putting the book you read back
into its place on the shelf, and the paper you want where you will be
certain to find it again--if you encourage a jealousy of rubbish, and a
horror of dirt--if you take to heart the proverb I quoted just now, "A
place for everything, and everything in its place"--you will be as tidy
as you ever need be; and Jack Sloven's troubles and misfortunes will
never be yours.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE SCAPEGRACE.

The fellow's always in a row!  No matter what it's about; no matter
whose fault it is; no matter how he tried to keep out of it; it's always
the same--he's in a row.

To fancy him not in a row would involve a flight of imagination of which
we, at any rate, are utterly incapable.  He has lived in an atmosphere
of rows--rows in the nursery, rows at the dinner table, rows in the
schoolroom, rows in the playground.  His hands are like leather, so
often have they been caned; his ears are past all feeling, so often have
they been boxed; and solitary confinement, impositions, the corner, and
the head master's study, have all lost their horrors for him, so often
has he had to endure them.

Sam Scamp of our school was, without exception, the unluckiest fellow I
ever came across.  It was the practice in the case of all ordinary
offences for the masters of the lower forms to deal out their own
retribution, but special cases were always reserved for a higher court--
the head master's study.  Hither the culprits were conducted in awful
state and impeached; here they heard judgment pronounced, and felt
sentence executed.  It was an awful tribunal, that head master's study!
"All hope abandon, ye who enter here," was the motto--if not written, at
least clearly implied--over the door.  The mere mention of the place was
enough to make one's flesh creep.  Yet, somehow or other, Sam Scamp, was
always finding himself there.  He must have abandoned hope once a week
at least during his school life, and before he left school I am certain
he must have worn that awful carpet threadbare, for all _his_ offences
were special offences.  When half a dozen boys had spent one afternoon
in throwing stones over a certain wall, the stone which broke the
doctor's conservatory window was, as might be expected, Sam's.  On the
occasion of the memorable battle of the dormitories--that famous fight
in which fifteen boys of Ward's dormitory, arrayed in their nightgowns
and armed with bolsters, engaged at dead of night in mortal combat with
twenty boys of Johnson's dormitory for the possession of a certain new
boy who had arrived that day with a trunk full of cakes--when the
monitors appeared on the scene, one boy, and one only, was captured, and
that was Sam.  When a dozen fellows had been copying off one another,
the exercise book from which the discovery was made would be sure to be
Sam's; and when, in the temporary absence of the master, the schoolroom
became transformed into a bear-garden--as it sometimes will--if suddenly
the door were to open the figure which would inevitably fall on the
master's eye would be that of Sam, dancing a hornpipe in the middle of
the floor, shouting at the top of his voice, and covered from head to
foot with the dust he had himself kicked up.

On such occasions he was led off to the doctor's study.  I happened to
be there once when he was brought up, and so had an opportunity of
witnessing a scene which, if new to me, must have been very familiar to
my unfortunate schoolfellow.  (By the way, the reason _I_ was in the
doctor's study was merely to return a book he had lent me, mind that,
reader!)

"What, here again, Samuel?" said the doctor, recognising his too-well-
known visitor.

"I'm very sorry, sir," says Sam, humbly.  "I can't make out how it is.
I try all I know--I do indeed--but somehow I'm always in trouble."

"You are," replies the doctor.  "What is it about this time, Mr
Wardlaw?"

"I can tell you, sir--" begins Sam eagerly.

"Be silent, sir!  Well, Mr Wardlaw?"

"The boy has been very disrespectful, sir.  When I came into the class-
room this morning and opened my desk, I found it contained a guinea-pig
and two white mice, who had--"

Here the unlucky Sam, after a desperate effort, in the course of which
he has almost choked himself with a handkerchief, bursts into a laugh.

"What do you mean, sir?" thunders the doctor.

"Oh, sir, I couldn't help it--really I couldn't; I would rather have
choked than do it--it's just like me!"

And he looks so distressed and humble that the doctor turns from him,
and invites Mr Wardlaw to resume his impeachment.

"I have only to say that this boy, on being charged with the deed,
confessed to having done it."

"Oh yes, sir, that's all right--I did it; I'm very sorry; somehow I
can't make out how it is I'm so bad," says Sam, with the air of one
suffering from the strain of a constant anxiety.

"Don't talk nonsense, sir!" says the doctor, sternly; "you can make it
out as well as I can."

"Shall I hold out my hand, sir?" says Sam, who by this time has a good
idea of the routine of practice pursued in such interviews.

"No," says the doctor.  "Leave him here, Mr Wardlaw; and you," adds he,
for the first time remembering that I was present--"you can go."

So we departed, leaving Sam shivering and shaking in the middle of the
carpet.  It was half an hour before he rejoined his schoolfellows, and
this time his hands were not sore.  But somehow he managed to avoid
getting into scrapes for a good deal longer than usual.  But there is no
resisting the inevitable.  He did in due time find himself in another
row; and then he suddenly vanished from our midst, for he had been
expelled.

Now, with regard to Sam and boys like him, it is of course only natural
to hold them up as examples to others.  No boy can be a scamp and not
suffer for it some way or other; and as to saying it's one's misfortune
rather than one's fault that it is so, that is as ridiculous as to say,
when you choose to walk north, that it is your misfortune you are not
walking south.

But, in excuse for Sam, we must say that he was by no means the worst
boy in our school, though he did get into the most rows, and was finally
expelled in disgrace.  If he had been deceitful or selfish, he would
probably have escaped oftener than he did; but he never denied his
faults or told tales of others.  We who knew him generally found him
good-natured and jovial; he looked upon himself as a far more desperate
character than we ourselves did, and once I remember he solemnly charged
me to take warning by his evil fate.

Still, you see, Sam sinned once too often.  Even though his crimes were
never more serious than putting guinea-pigs into the master's desk, yet
that sort of conduct time after time is not to be tolerated in any
school.  The example set by a mischievous boy to his fellows is not
good; and if his scrapes are winked at always, the time will come when
others will be encouraged to follow in his steps, and behave badly too.
Sam, no doubt, deserved the punishment he got; and because one bad boy
who is punished is no worse than a dozen bad boys who get off, that does
not make him out a good boy, or a boy more hardly treated than he
merited.

Scapegraces are boys who, being mischievously inclined, are constantly
transgressing the line between right and wrong.  Up to a certain point,
a boy of good spirits and fond of his joke, is as jolly a boy as one
could desire; but when his good spirits break the bounds of order, and
his jokes interfere with necessary authority, then it is time for him to
be reminded nothing ought to be carried too far in this world.

One last word about scapegraces.  Don't, like Sam, get it into your
heads that you are destined to get into scrapes, and that therefore it
is no use trying to keep out of them.  That would be a proof of nothing
but your silliness.  I can't tell you how it was Sam's stone always
broke the window, or why the master's eye always fell on him when there
was a row going on; but I can tell you this, that if Sam hadn't thrown
the stone, the window would not have been broken; and that if he had
behaved well when the master's eye was turned away, he would not have
cut a poor figure when the door was opened.  Some boys make a boast of
the number of scrapes they have been in, and fondly imagine themselves
heroes in proportion to the number of times they have been flogged.
Well, if it pleases them to think so, by all means let them indulge the
fancy; but we can at least promise them this--nobody else thinks so!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE UNORIGINAL BOY.

It takes one a long time to discover that there is something wanting in
the character of Ebenezer Ditto; and it takes a longer time still to
make out exactly what that something is.  He's an ordinary-looking and
ordinarily-behaved boy.  There's nothing amiss with the cut of his
coat--it's neither extra grand nor extra shabby; there's nothing queer
about his voice--he doesn't stammer and he doesn't squeak; there's
nothing remarkable about his conversation or his actions--he's not a
dunce, though he's not clever; he's not a scamp, though he's not goody;
he never offends any one, though he never becomes great friends with any
one.  What is it makes us not take to Ebenezer?  Why is it, on the
whole, we rather despise him, and feel annoyed when in his society?
For, it is the truth, we _don't_ much care about him.

Well, the answer to this question may be, as I have said, not very
readily discovered; but if you watch Master Ditto carefully, and make up
your mind, you will get at the bottom of the mystery, you will find that
it is this very "ordinary" manner about him to which you object.  The
fellow is dull--he is unoriginal.

You feel sometimes as if you would give a sovereign to see Ebenezer
stand on his head, by way of variety.  It annoys you when he sits there
with his eyes on you, smiling when you smile, frowning when you frown,
talking about the weather when you talk about the weather, and when you
whistle "Nancy Lee" whistling his everlasting "Grandfather's Clock."  It
is a relief, by the way, even to hear him whistle a different tune, for
it is about the only thing in which he does take an independent course.
But, if truth were known, it would come out he only knows this one tune,
and that is the reason.  He has not originality enough in him to learn a
second.

It _is_ an annoying thing to be copied and imitated by any one, most of
all by a fellow one's own age.  We can understand the little child
imitating its father, and we enjoy seeing what capers it sometimes cuts
in the attempt, but there's nothing either interesting or amusing in the
way Ebenezer goes on.  When, for instance, by a sudden inspiration of
genius, you take it into your head to shy a slice of apple across the
room at Jack Sleepy just while he is in the act of yawning, with his
mouth open wide enough to let a wheelbarrow down, it is not pleasant
that immediately afterwards some one at your side should hurl a walnut
at the same person and wound him seriously in the eye.  Besides making a
row, it takes away from the fun of your achievement, and makes the whole
affair more than a joke.  Or, being asked, let us suppose, to name your
favourite hero in fiction, you are careful to select a somewhat out-of-
the-way name, and reply, "Sidney Carton."  You are rather pleased to
think you have thereby not only named some one whom no one else is
likely to hit upon, but also you have delicately let your master see you
have lately read a very good book.  It is rather vexing when Ebenezer
replies to the same question, "Sidney Carton," in a knowing sort of
manner, although you are positive he has never read the _Tale of Two
Cities_, and doesn't even know that Dickens was its author.  Of course,
your distinction in the matter has gone, and if your answer is judged
the best, you only get half the credit you deserve.  Or, to take one
more example, supposing one day, being utterly sick of Ebenezer's
society, and longing to get a little time by yourself, you decline the
tempting offer of a cricket match in which you know he also is likely to
play.  You mean to read this afternoon, you say.  Well, isn't it too bad
when next moment you hear that wretched Ebenezer saying, in answer to
the same invitation, "Very sorry, but I mean to read this afternoon,"
and then have him come and sit down on a bench beside you with his book?
And the worst of it is, you know if you now change your mind and go in
for the match after all, he will change _his_ mind and do the same.

The most aggravating thing about unoriginal fellows is that you cannot
well get in a rage with them, for if you find fault with them, you find
fault with yourselves.

"What a young ass you are not to play in the match!" you say to
Ebenezer, hardly able to contain yourself.

"Why aren't _you_ playing in it?" he replies.

"Oh!  I've some particular reading I want to do," you say.

"So have I," replies he.

You cannot say, "You have no business to read when cricket is going on,"
nor can you say, "What do you mean by it?"

Clearly, if _you_ do it, you are not the person to say _he_ shall not.

I doubt if Ebenezer knows to what an extent he carries this trick of
his.  It is so natural for him to do as he sees others do that he fails
to see how his actions appear in the same light as that in which others
see them.  Sometimes, indeed, he appears to be conscious of following
his copy pretty closely, for we catch him trying to make some slight
variation which will prevent it being said he does exactly the same.
For instance, if you give a little select supper party in your study to
two friends off roast potatoes and sardines, he will probably have three
friends to breakfast off eggs and bread and jam; or if you hang up the
portraits of your father and sister over your mantelpiece, he will
suspend the likenesses of his mother and brother on his wall.  He
generally, you will find, tries to improve on you--which, of course, is
not always hard to do.  But sometimes he comes to grief in the attempt,
as happened in the case of his wonderful "hanging shelves."  Ted Hammer,
quite a mechanical genius, had made to himself a set of these shelves,
which for neatness, simplicity, and usefulness were the marvel of the
school.  Of course Ebby got to know of it, and was unhappy till he could
cap it with something finer still.  So he made all sorts of excuses for
coming constantly into Ted's room and inspecting his work of art, till
at last he felt quite sure he could make a set for himself.  So he
started to manufacture a set, twice the size, and with double the number
of shelves.  In due time he had it done and suspended on his wall, and
it seemed as if Ted's nose was completely out of joint, for Ebby's
shelves held not only his books, but his jam-pots and tumblers, and all
sorts of odds and ends besides.  But that very night there was a crash
in his room, the like of which had never been heard before.  We all
rushed to the place.  There were books, jam pots, ink pots, tumblers, in
one glorious state of smash on the floor, and the unlucky shelves on the
