notice it, as he expected that his comrades and himself would be guests
in the French camp.

"I have mentioned Tayoga," he said, "but I will introduce him again. He
is of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the great League
of the Hodenosaunee. I also present Mr. David Willet, a famous scout and
hunter, known to the Indians, and perhaps to some of the French, too, as
the Great Bear. My own name is Robert Lennox, of Albany and New York,
and I have done nothing that is descriptive of me, but I bear important
letters from the Governor of New York to Quebec, to be delivered to the
Marquis Duquesne, the Governor General of Canada."

"That, young sir, is no slight mission," said the elder man, "and it is
our good fortune to speed you on your way. My friend is the Chevalier
Francois de Jumonville, one of France's most gallant officers, and I am
Auguste de Courcelles, a colonel by fortune's favor, in the service of
His Majesty, King Louis."

"I am sure," said Robert, "that it is not chance or the favor of fortune
that has given you such important rank. Your manner and presence are
sufficient assurance to me that you have won your rank with your own
merits."

De Courcelles laughed a little, but it was a pleased laugh.

"You have a more graceful tongue than most of the English," he said,
"and I could almost believe you had been at court."

"No nearer a court than Albany or New York."

"Then, sir, your credit is all the greater, because you have acquired so
much with so little opportunity."

Robert bowed formally and Colonel de Courcelles bowed back in the same
manner.

"The roads from Albany to Quebec are but trails," said de Courcelles,
"but I hope your journey has been easy and pleasant."

Willet gave Robert a warning glance, and the lad replied:

"Fairly pleasant. We have met a slight obstacle or two, but it was not
hard to remove them."

De Courcelles lifted his eyebrows a little.

"'Tis reported," he said, "that the savages are restless, that your
English governors have been making them presents, and, as they interpret
them, 'tis an inducement for them to take up the tomahawk against our
good Canadians. Oh, don't be offended, Mr. Lennox! I have not said I
believe such tales. Perhaps 'tis but the tongue of scandal wagging in
this way, because it must wag in some way."

Robert believed much meaning underlay the man's words, and he made rapid
surmises. Was de Courcelles trying to draw him out? Did he know of the
attack made upon them at the hollow beside the river? Did he seek to
forestall by saying the English were corrupting the Indians and sending
them forth with the tomahawk? All these questions passed swiftly in his
mind, but the gift discovered so newly came to his aid. His face
expressed nothing, and smiling a little, he replied:

"The tongue of scandal, sir, does indeed wag wildly. The Governor of New
York seeks at all times to keep peace among the Indians, and the fact
that I am bearing letters from him to the Marquis Duquesne is proof of
his good intentions."

"I accept your professions," said de Courcelles, "as I trust you will
accept my own assurances of amity and good faith. Why should we discuss
politics, when we are well met here in the woods? We have a fairly good
camp, and it's at your service. If I may judge by appearances your
journey has been attended by some hardships."

"You infer correctly," replied Robert, "and we shall be glad indeed to
share your fire and food with you."

De Courcelles and Jumonville led the way to a large camp fire around
which at least fifty French, Canadians and Indians were seated. All the
French and Canadians were in uniform, and the Canadians, although living
in a colder climate, had become much darker than the parent stock. In
truth, many of them were quite as dark as the Indians.

These Canadians of the French stock were, for the present, silent men,
and Robert regarded them with the deepest interest. Those who were not
in uniform wore long frock coats of dark gray or dark brown, belted at
the waist with a woolen sash of bright colors, decorated heavily with
beads. Trousers and waistcoats were of the same material as the coats,
but their feet were inclosed in Indian moccasins, also adorned
profusely with beads. They wore long hair in a queue, incased in an
eel-skin, and with their swarthy complexions and high cheek bones they
looked like wild sons of the forest to Robert. Tayoga, the Onondaga, was
to him a more civilized being. All the Canadians were smoking short
pipes, and, while they did not speak, their black eyes, restless with
eager curiosity, inspected the strangers.

The Indians in de Courcelles' party were of two types, the converted
Indians of Canada, partly in white man's costume, and utterly savage
Indians of the far west, in very little costume at all, one or two of
them wearing only the breech cloth. The looks they bestowed upon Robert
and his comrades were far from friendly, and he wondered if any Ojibway,
a warrior who perhaps owned Tandakora as a chief, was among them. They
were sitting about the fire and none of them spoke.

"We cannot offer you a banquet," said de Courcelles, "but we can give
you variety, none the less. This portion of His Majesty's territory is a
wilderness, but it provides an abundance of fish and game."

Robert believed that he had alluded purposely to the territory as "His
Majesty's," and, his mind challenging it instantly, he was about to
reply that in reality it was the northern part of the Province of New
York, but his second and wiser thought caused him to refrain. He would
enter upon no controversy with the older man, especially when he saw
that the latter wished to draw him into one. De Courcelles, seeing that
his lead was not followed, devoted himself to hospitality.

"We have venison, beaver tail, quail, good light bread and some thin
red wine," he said. "You Americans or English--which shall I call you?"

"Either," replied Robert, "because we are both."

"Then English it shall be for the present, because you are under that
flag. I was going to say that you are somewhat hostile to wine, which we
French love, and which we know how to drink in moderation. In some
respects we are a people of more restraint than you are. The slow, cold
English mind starts with an effort, but when it is started it is stopped
with equal difficulty. You either do too little or too much. You lack
the logic and precision of the Frenchman."

Robert smiled and replied lightly. Having avoided controversy upon one
point, he was of no mind to enter it upon another, and de Courcelles,
not pressing a third attack, entered with Jumonville upon his duties as
host. Both were graceful, easy, assured, and they fulfilled Robert's
conception of French officers, as men of the world who knew courts and
manners. It was a time when courts were more important than they are
today, and they were recognized universally as the chief fountains from
which flowed honor and advancement.

Robert did not like them as well as St. Luc, but he found a certain
charm in their company. They could talk of things that interested him,
and they exerted themselves, telling indirectly of the glories of Quebec
and alluding now and then to the greater splendors of Paris and
Versailles. It was a time when the French monarchy loomed as the
greatest power in the world. The hollowness and decay of the House of
Bourbon were not yet disclosed, even to the shrewdest observers, and a
spell was cast upon all the civilized nations by the gorgeous and
glittering world of fashion and the world of arms. The influence reached
even into the depths of the vast North American wilderness and was felt
by Robert as he sat beside the camp fire in the savage woods with the
Frenchmen.

He drank a little of the red wine, but only a very little, and Tayoga
would not touch it at all. Willet took a small leather cup of it, but
declined a second. The food was good, better cooked than it usually was
among the English colonists, where the table was regarded as a
necessity, and in no particular as a rite. Robert, despite his habitual
caution, found his heart warming toward his French hosts. It could not
be possible that the Indians had been set upon his comrades and himself
by the French! The warmth of his heart increased when one of the
Canadians took a violin from a cloth cover and began to play wailing old
airs. Like so many others, Robert was not made melancholy by melancholy
music. Instead, he saw through a pleasing glow and the world grew poetic
and tender. The fire sank and Americans, French, Canadians and Indians
listened with the same silent interest. Presently the violinist played a
livelier tune and the _habitants_ sang to the music:

   "Malbrouck, s'en va t-en guerre
   Mironton, mironton, mirontaine;
   Malbrouck s'en va t-en guerre
   Ne sait quand reviendra."

Then he left Malbrouck, and it was:

   "Hier sur le pont d'Avignon
   J'ai oui chanter la belle
           Lon, la,
   J'ai oui chanter la belle
   Elle chantait d'un ton si doux
       Comme une demoiselle
           Lon, la,
       Comme une demoiselle."

The Canadians sang well, particularly in "The Bridge of Avignon," and
the dying fire, the black woods around them and the sighing wind created
an effect that no stage scenery could ever have given it. When the last
note melted with the wind de Courcelles sighed a little and stared into
the sinking fire.

"It is a fair country, sweet France," he said; "I myself have stood upon
the bridge of Avignon, and I have watched the pretty girls. It may be
that I have had a kiss or two, but all that is far away now. This is a
bolder country than France, Mr. Lennox, larger, more majestic, but it is
wild and savage, and will be so for many years to come. Nor can the
rules that apply to old and civilized Europe apply here, where the deeds
of men, like the land, are wilder, too."

Robert was conscious of some meaning in his words, perhaps a trace of
apology for a deed that he had done or would do, but in the mind of
young Lennox men's standards should be the same, whether in the
wilderness of New York and Canada or in the open fields of France and
England. De Courcelles, thoughtful for a moment, turned suddenly to the
man with the violin and cried:

"Play! Play again!"

The man played quaint old airs, folk songs that had been brought from
Normandy and Brittany, and the _habitants_ sang them in low voices or
rather hummed them in the subdued manner that seemed fitting to the
night, since the black shadows were creeping up closer, leaving only the
fire, as a core of light with the dusky figures around it. During all
the talk the Indians had been silent. They had eaten their food and
remained now, sitting in Turkish fashion, the flickering flames that
played across their faces giving to them a look sinister and menacing to
the last degree.

The Frenchmen, too, fell silent, as if their courtesy was exhausted and
conversation had become an effort. The last of the old French airs was
finished, and the player put his violin away. Jumonville, who had spoken
but little, threw a fresh stick on the fire and looked at the black wall
of circling forest.

"I can never get quite used to it," he said. "The wilderness is so
immense, so menacing that when I am in it at night a little shiver will
come now and then. I suppose our remote ancestors who lived in caves
must have had fear at their elbows all their lives."

"Very likely," said de Courcelles, thoughtfully, staring into the coals.
"It isn't strange that many people have worshiped fire as God. Why
shouldn't they when it brings light in the dark, and lifts up our souls,
when it warms us and makes us feel strong, when it cooks our food and
when in the earlier day it drove away the great wild animals, with
which man was not able to fight on equal terms?"

"I am not one to undervalue fire," said Robert.

"Few of us do in the forest. The night grows chill, but two of our good
Canadians will keep the coals alive until morning. And now I suppose you
are weary with your day's travels and wish sleep. I see that you have
blankets of your own or I should offer you some of ours."

Tayoga had been sitting before the fire, as silent as the Canadian
Indians, his rifle across his knees, his eyes turned toward the blaze.
The glow of the flames fell upon him, disclosing his lofty countenance,
his splendidly molded figure, and his superiority to the other Indians,
who were not of the Hodenosaunee and who to him were, therefore, as much
barbarians as all people who were not Greeks were barbarians to the
ancient Greeks. Not a word of kinship or friendship had passed between
him and them. For him, haughty and uncompromising, they did not exist.
For a long time his deep unfathomable eyes had never turned from the
fire, but now he rose suddenly and said:

"Someone comes in the forest!"

De Courcelles looked up in surprise.

"I hear nothing," he said.

"Someone comes in the forest!" repeated Tayoga with emphasis.

De Courcelles glanced at his own Indians. They had not yet moved, but in
a moment or two they too rose to their feet, and then he knew that the
Onondaga was right. Now Robert also heard a moccasined and light
footstep approaching. A darker shadow appeared against the darkness, and
the figure of an Indian, gigantic and sinister, stepped within the
circle of the firelight.

It was Tandakora, the Ojibway.




CHAPTER VII

NEW FRANCE


The huge and savage warrior had never looked more malignant. His face
and his bare chest were painted with the most hideous devices, and his
eyes, in the single glance that he cast upon Robert and his comrades,
showed full of black and evil passions. Then, as if they were no longer
present, he stalked to the fire, took up some cooked deer meat that lay
beside it, and, sitting down Turkish fashion like the other Indians,
began to eat, not saying a word to the Frenchmen.

It was the action of a savage of the savages, but Robert, startled at
first by the unexpected appearance of such an enemy, called to his aid
the forest stoicism that he had learned and sat down, calm, outwardly at
least. The initiative was not his now, nor that of his comrades, and he
glanced anxiously at de Courcelles to see how he would take this rude
invasion of his camp. The French colonel looked at Tandakora, then at
Jumonville, and Jumonville looked at him. The two shrugged their
shoulders, and in a flash of intuition he was convinced that they knew
the Ojibway well.

Whatever anger de Courcelles may have felt at the manners of the savage
he showed none at all. All the tact and forbearance which the French
used with such wonderful effect in their dealings with the North
American Indians were summoned to his aid. He spoke courteously to
Tandakora, but, as his words were in the Ojibway dialect, Robert did not
understand them. The Indian made a guttural reply and continued to gnaw
fiercely at the bone of the deer. De Courcelles still took no offense,
and spoke again, his words smooth and his face smiling. Then Tandakora,
in his deep guttural, spoke rapidly and with heat. When he had finished
de Courcelles turned to his guests, and with a deprecatory gesture,
said:

"Tandakora's heart burns with wrath. He says that you attacked him and
his party in the forest and have slain some of his warriors."

"Tandakora lies!"

It was the Onondaga who spoke. His voice was not raised, but every
syllable was articulated clearly, and the statement came with the impact
of a bullet. The tan of de Courcelles' face could not keep a momentary
flush from breaking through, but he kept his presence of mind.

"It is easy enough to call a man a liar," he said, "but it is another
thing to prove it."

"Since when," said Tayoga, haughtily, "has the word of an Ojibway, a
barbarian who knows not the law, been worth more than that of one who is
a member of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the great
League of the Hodenosaunee?"

He spoke in English, which Robert knew the Ojibway understood and which
both Frenchmen spoke fluently. The great hand of Tandakora drifted down
toward the handle of his tomahawk, but Tayoga apparently did not see
him, his fathomless eyes again staring into the fire. Robert looked at
Willet, and he saw the hunter's eye also fall upon the handle of his
tomahawk, a weapon which he knew the Great Bear could hurl with a
swiftness and precision equal to those of any Indian. He understood at
once that Tayoga was protected by the hunter from any sudden movement by
the Ojibway and his great strain relaxed.

De Courcelles frowned, but his face cleared in an instant. Robert,
watching him now, believed he was not at all averse to a quarrel between
the Onondaga and the Ojibway.

"It is not a question for me to decide," he replied. "The differences of
the Hodenosaunee and the western tribes are not mine, though His
Majesty, King Louis of France, wishes all his red brethren to dwell
together in peace. Yet I but tell to you, Tayoga, what Tandakora has
told to me. He says that you three attacked him and peaceful warriors
back there in a gorge of the river, and slew some of his comrades."

"Tandakora lies," repeated Tayoga in calm and measured tones. "It is
true that warriors who were with them fell beneath our bullets, but they
came swimming in the night, seeking to murder us while we slept, and
while there is yet no war between us. An Onondaga or a Mohawk or any
warrior of the Hodenosaunee hates and despises a snake."

The words, quiet though they were, were fairly filled with concentrated
loathing. The eyes of the huge Ojibway flashed and his clutch on the
handle of his tomahawk tightened convulsively, but the fixed gaze of the
hunter seemed to draw him at that moment. He saw that Willet's eyes were
upon him, that every muscle was attuned and that the tomahawk would leap
from his belt like a flash of lightning, and seeing, Tandakora paused.

The two Frenchmen looked at Tayoga, at Tandakora and at Willet. Then
they looked at each other, and being acute men with a full experience of
