"Tanit-Zerga, give Monsieur de Saint-Avit a rose sherbet."

The dark girl in red silk obeyed.

"My private secretary," said Antinea, introducing her. "Mademoiselle
Tanit-Zerga, of Gao, on the Niger. Her family is almost as ancient as
mine."

As she spoke, she looked at me. Her green eyes seemed to be appraising
me.

"And your comrade, the Captain?" she asked in a dreamy tone. "I have
not yet seen him. What is he like? Does he resemble you?"

For the first time since I had entered, I thought of Morhange. I did
not answer.

Antinea smiled.

She stretched herself out full length on the lion skin. Her bare right
knee slipped out from under her tunic.

"It is time to go find him," she said languidly. "You will soon
receive my orders. Tanit-Zerga, show him the way. First take him to
his room. He cannot have seen it."

I rose and lifted her hand to my lips. She struck me with it so
sharply as to make my lips bleed, as if to brand me as her possession.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was in the dark corridor again. The young girl in the red silk tunic
walked ahead of me.

"Here is your room," she said. "If you wish, I will take you to the
dining-room. The others are about to meet there for dinner."

She spoke an adorable lisping French.

"No, Tanit-Zerga, I would rather stay here this evening. I am not
hungry. I am tired."

"You remember my name?" she said.

She seemed proud of it. I felt that in her I had an ally in case of
need.

"I remember your name, Tanit-Zerga, because it is beautiful."[12]

[Footnote 12: In Berber, Tanit means a spring; zerga is the feminine of
the adjective azreg, blue. (Note by M. Leroux.)]

Then I added:

"Now, leave me, little one. I want to be alone."

It seemed as if she would never go. I was touched, but at the same
time vexed. I felt a great need of withdrawing into myself.

"My room is above yours," she said. "There is a copper gong on the
table here. You have only to strike if you want anything. A white
Targa will answer."

For a second, these instructions amused me. I was in a hotel in the
midst of the Sahara. I had only to ring for service.

I looked about my room. My room! For how long?

It was fairly large. Cushions, a couch, an alcove cut into the rock,
all lighted by a great window covered by a matting shade.

I went to the window and raised the shade. The light of the setting
sun entered.

I leaned my elbows on the rocky sill. Inexpressible emotion filled my
heart. The window faced south. It was about two hundred feet above the
ground. The black, polished volcanic wall yawned dizzily below me.

In front of me, perhaps a mile and a half away, was another wall, the
first enclosure mentioned in the Critias. And beyond it in the
distance, I saw the limitless red desert.




XII

MORHANGE DISAPPEARS


My fatigue was so great that I lay as if unconscious until the next
day. I awoke about three o'clock in the afternoon.

I thought at once of the events of the previous day; they seemed
amazing.

"Let me see," I said to myself. "Let us work this out. I must begin by
consulting Morhange."

I was ravenously hungry.

The gong which Tanit-Zerga had pointed out lay within arm's reach. I
struck it. A white Targa appeared.

"Show me the way to the library," I ordered.

He obeyed. As we wound our way through the labyrinth of stairs and
corridors I realized that I could never have found my way without his
help.

Morhange was in the library, intently reading a manuscript.

"A lost treatise of Saint Optat," he said. "Oh, if only Dom Granger
were here. See, it is written in semi-uncial characters."

I did not reply. My eyes were fixed on an object which lay on the
table beside the manuscript. It was an orichalch ring, exactly like
that which Antinea had given me the previous day and the one which she
herself wore.

Morhange smiled.

"Well?" I said.

"Well?"

"You have seen her?"

"I have indeed," Morhange replied.

"She is beautiful, is she not?"

"It would be difficult to dispute that," my comrade answered. "I even
believe that I can say that she is as intelligent as she is
beautiful."

There was a pause. Morhange was calmly fingering the orichalch ring.

"You know what our fate is to be?"

"I know. Le Mesge explained it to us yesterday in polite mythological
terms. This evidently is an extraordinary adventure."

He was silent, then said, looking at me:

"I am very sorry to have dragged you here. The only mitigating feature
is that since last evening you seem to have been bearing your lot very
easily."

Where had Morhange learned this insight into the human heart? I did
not reply, thus giving him the best of proofs that he had judged
correctly.

"What do you think of doing?" I finally murmured.

He rolled up the manuscript, leaned back comfortably in his armchair
and lit a cigar.

"I have thought it over carefully. With the aid of my conscience I
have marked out a line of conduct. The matter is clear and admits no
discussion.

"The question is not quite the same for me as for you, because of my
semi-religious character, which, I admit, has set out on a rather
doubtful adventure. To be sure, I have not taken holy orders, but,
even aside from the fact that the ninth commandment itself forbids my
having relations with a woman not my wife, I admit that I have no
taste for the kind of forced servitude for which the excellent
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has so kindly recruited us.

"That granted, the fact remains that my life is not my own with the
right to dispose of it as might a private explorer travelling at his
own expenses and for his own ends. I have a mission to accomplish,
results to obtain. If I could regain my liberty by paying the singular
ransom which this country exacts, I should consent to give
satisfaction to Antinea according to my ability. I know the tolerance
of the Church, and especially that of the order to which I aspire:
such a procedure would be ratified immediately and, who knows, perhaps
even approved? Saint Mary the Egyptian, gave her body to boatmen under
similar circumstances. She received only glorification for it. In so
doing she had the certainty of attaining her goal, which was holy. The
end justified the means.

"But my case is quite different. If I give in to the absurd caprices
of this woman, that will not keep me from being catalogued down in the
red marble hall, as Number 54, or as Number 55, if she prefers to take
you first. Under those conditions...."

"Under those conditions?"

"Under those conditions, it would be unpardonable for me to
acquiesce."

"Then what do you intend to do?"

"What do I intend to do?" Morhange leaned back in the armchair and
smilingly launched a puff of smoke toward the ceiling.

"Nothing," he said. "And that is all that is necessary. Man has this
superiority over woman. He is so constructed that he can refuse
advances."

Then he added with an ironical smile:

"A man cannot be forced to accept unless he wishes to."

I nodded.

"I tried the most subtle reasoning on Antinea," he continued. "It was
breath wasted. 'But,' I said at the end of my arguments, 'why not Le
Mesge?' She began to laugh. 'Why not the Reverend Spardek?' she
replied. 'Le Mesge and Spardek are savants whom I respect. But

    _Maudit soit a jamais reveur inutile,
    Qui voulut, le premier, dans sa stupidite,
    S'eprenant d'un probleme insoluble et sterile,
    Aux choses de l'amour meler l'honnetete._

"'Besides,' she added with that really very charming smile of hers,
'probably you have not looked carefully at either of them.' There
followed several compliments on my figure, to which I found nothing to
reply, so completely had she disarmed me by those four lines from
Baudelaire.

"She condescended to explain further: 'Le Mesge is a learned gentleman
whom I find useful. He knows Spanish and Italian, keeps my papers in
order, and is busy working out my genealogy. The Reverend Spardek
knows English and German. Count Bielowsky is thoroughly conversant
with the Slavic languages. Besides, I love him like a father. He knew
me as a child when I had not dreamed such stupid things as you know
of me. They are indispensable to me in my relations with visitors of
different races, although I am beginning to get along well enough in
the languages which I need.... But I am talking a great deal, and this
is the first time that I have ever explained my conduct. Your friend
is not so curious.' With that, she dismissed me. A strange woman
indeed. I think there is a bit of Renan in her but she is cleverer
than that master of sensualism."

"Gentlemen," said Le Mesge, suddenly entering the room, "why are you
so late? They are waiting dinner for you."

The little Professor was in a particularly good humor that evening. He
wore a new violet rosette.

"Well?" he said, in a mocking tone, "you have seen her?"

Neither Morhange nor I replied.

The Reverend Spardek and the Hetmari of Jitomir already had begun
eating when we arrived. The setting sun threw raspberry lights on the
cream-colored mat.

"Be seated, gentlemen," said Le Mesge noisily. "Lieutenant de
Saint-Avit, you were not with us last evening. You are about to taste
the cooking of Koukou, our Bambara chef, for the first time. You must
give me your opinion of it."

A Negro waiter set before me a superb fish covered with a pimento
sauce as red as tomatoes.

I have explained that I was ravenously hungry. The dish was exquisite.
The sauce immediately made me thirsty.

"White Ahaggar, 1879," the Herman of Jitomir breathed in my ear as he
filled my goblet with a clear topaz liquid. "I developed it myself:
_rien pour la tete, tout pour les jambes_."

I emptied the goblet at a gulp. The company began to seem charming.

"Well, Captain Morhange," Le Mesge called out to my comrade who had
taken a mouthful of fish, "what do you say to this acanthopterygian?
It was caught to-day in the lake in the oasis. Do you begin to admit
the hypothesis of the Saharan sea?"

"The fish is an argument," my companion replied.

Suddenly he became silent. The door had opened. A white Targa entered.
The diners stopped talking.

The veiled man walked slowly toward Morhange and touched his right
arm.

"Very well," said Morhange.

He got up and followed the messenger.

The pitcher of Ahaggar, 1879, stood between me and Count Bielowsky. I
filled my goblet--a goblet which held a pint, and gulped it down.

The Hetman looked at me sympathetically.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Le Mesge, nudging me with his elbow. "Antinea has
respect for the hierarchic order."

The Reverend Spardek smiled modestly.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Le Mesge again.

My glass was empty. For a moment I was tempted to hurl it at the head
of the Fellow in History. But what of it? I filled it and emptied it
again.

"Morhange will miss this delicious roast of mutton," said the
Professor, more and more hilarious, as he awarded himself a thick
slice of meat.
