Project Gutenberg's The Mummy and Miss Nitocris, by George Griffith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mummy and Miss Nitocris
       A Phantasy of the Fourth Dimension

Author: George Griffith

Release Date: September 10, 2006 [EBook #19231]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MUMMY AND MISS NITOCRIS ***




Produced by Janet Blenkinship and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





+---------------------------------------------------------+
|Transcribers Note: In this text the macron is represented|
|by [=o]                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------------+




  Supernatural & Occult Fiction

  This is a volume in the Arno Press collection

  Supernatural & Occult Fiction

  Advisory Editors

  R. Reginald
  Douglas Menville

  See last pages of this volume
  for a complete list of titles.




  THE MUMMY AND
  MISS NITOCRIS

  _A PHANTASY
  OF THE FOURTH DIMENSION_

  GEORGE GRIFFITH

  ARNO PRESS
  A New York Times Company
  1976




  Editorial Supervision: MARIE STARECK

  Reprint Edition 1976 by Arno Press Inc.

  Reprinted from a copy in The Library of the
  University of California, Riverside

  SUPERNATURAL AND OCCULT FICTION

  ISBN for complete set: O-405-08107-3

  See last pages of this volume for titles.

  Manufactured in the United States of America

  ~Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data~
  Griffith, George Chetwynd.
  The mummy and Miss Nitocris.

  (Supernatural and occult fiction)
  Reprint of the 1906? ed. published by T. W. Laurie, London.

  I. Title. II. Series.
  PZ3.G88Mu7 [PR4728.083] 823'.8   75-46273
  ISBN 0-405-08131-6




  THE MUMMY AND
  MISS NITOCRIS

  [Illustration]


  _A PHANTASY
  OF THE FOURTH DIMENSION_

  BY

  GEORGE GRIFFITH

  AUTHOR OF "THE ANGEL OF THE REVOLUTION," "A HONEYMOON
  IN SPACE," "AN ISLAND LOVE STORY,"
  "A MAYFAIR MAGICIAN," ETC., ETC.

  T. WERNER LAURIE
  CLIFFORD'S INN, FLEET STREET
  LONDON




FOREWORD


Certain it should be that, beyond and about this World of Length, and
Breadth, and Thickness, there is another World, or State of Existence,
consisting of these and another dimension of which only those beings who
are privileged to enter or dwell in it can have any conception. Now, if
this postulate be granted, it follows that a dweller in this State would
be freed from those conditions of Time and Space which bind those beings
who are confined within the limits of Tri-Dimensional Space, or
Existence. For example, he would be able to make himself visible or
invisible to us at will by entering into or withdrawing himself from
this State, and returning into that of Four Dimensions, whither our eyes
could not follow him--even though he might be close to us in our sense
of nearness. Moreover, he could be in two or more places at once, and
cause two bodies to occupy the same space--which to us is
inconceivable. Stranger still, he might be both alive and dead at the
same time--since Past, Present, and Future would be all one to him; the
world without beginning or end ...--From the "Geometrical
Possibilities," of Abd'el Kasir, of Cordoba, circa. 1050 A.D.




CONTENTS


    CHAP.                                        PAGE

      I.  INTRODUCES THE MUMMY                                         1

     II.  BACK TO THE PAST                                            15

    III.  THE DEATH-BRIDAL OF NITOCRIS                                27

     IV.  THIEVES IN THE NIGHT                                        36

      V.  ACROSS THE THRESHOLD                                        47

     VI.  THE LAW OF SELECTION                                        60

    VII.  MOSTLY POSSIBILITIES                                        70

   VIII.  MISS BRENDA ARRIVES, AND PHADRIG THE
          EGYPTIAN PROPHESIES                                         79

     IX.  "THE WILDERNESS," WIMBLEDON COMMON                          95

      X.  THE STAGE FILLS                                            101

     XI.  THE MARVELS OF PHADRIG                                     115

    XII.  CONTROVERSY AND CONFIDENCES                                138

   XIII.  OVER THE TEA AND THE TOAST                                 157

    XIV.  "SUPPOSED IMPOSSIBILITIES"                                 164

     XV.  THE ADVANCEMENT OF NITOCRIS--THE
          RESOLVE OF OSCAROVITCH                                     176

    XVI.  THE MYSTERY OF PRINCE ZASTROW                              185

   XVII.  M. NICOL HENDRY                                            199

  XVIII.  MURDER BY SUGGESTION                                       210

    XIX.  THE HORUS STONE                                            220

     XX.  THROUGH THE CENTURIES                                      237

    XXI.  WHAT HAPPENED AT TRELITZ                                   251

   XXII.  A TRIP ON THE SOUND                                        260

  XXIII.  THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE PROFESSOR                         274

   XXIV.  THE LUST THAT WAS--AND IS                                  281

    XXV.  THE PASSING OF PHADRIG                                     290

   XXVI.  CAPTAIN MERILL'S COMMISSION                                304

  XXVII.  THE BRIDAL OF OSCAROVITCH                                  307

          EPILOGUE                                                   312




THE MUMMY AND MISS NITOCRIS


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCES THE MUMMY


"Oh, what a perfectly lovely mummy! Just fancy!--the poor thing--dead
how many years? Something like five thousand, isn't it? And doesn't she
look just like me! I mean, wouldn't she, if we had both been dead as
long?"

As she said this, Miss Nitocris Marmion, the golden-haired, black-eyed
daughter of one of the most celebrated mathematicians and physicists in
Europe, stood herself up beside the mummy-case which her father had
received that morning from Memphis.

"Look!" she continued. "I am almost the same height. Just a little
taller, perhaps, but you see her hair is nearly as fair as mine. Of
course, you don't know what colour her eyes are--just fancy, Dad! they
have been shut for nearly five thousand years, perhaps a little
more--because I think they counted by dynasties then--and yet look at
the features! Just imagine me dead!"

"Just imagine yourself shutting the door on the other side, my dear
Niti," said the Professor, who had risen from the chair, and was facing
his daughter and the Mummy. "I don't want to banish you too
unceremoniously, but I really have a lot of work to do to-night, and, as
you might know, Bachelor of Science of London as you are, I have got to
worry out as best I can, if I can do it at all, this problem that
Hartley sent me about the Forty-seventh Proposition of the first book of
Euclid."

"Oh yes," she said, going to his side and putting her hand on to his
shoulder as he stood facing the Mummy; "I have reason enough to remember
that. And what does Professor Hartley say about it?"

"He says, my dear Niti," said the Professor, in a voice which had
something like a note of awe in it, "that when Pythagoras thought out
that problem--which, of course, is not Euclid's at all--he almost saw
across the horizon of the world that we live in."

"But that," she interrupted, "would be something like looking across the
edge of time into eternity, and that--well, of course, that is quite
impossible, even to you, Dad, or Mr Hartley. What does he mean?"

"He doesn't quite mean that, dear," replied the Professor, still staring
straight at the motionless Mummy as though he half expected the lips
which had not spoken for fifty centuries to answer the question that was
shaping itself in his mind. "What Hartley means, dear, is this--that
when Pythagoras thought out that proposition he had almost reached the
border which divides the world of three dimensions from the world of
four."

"Which, as our dear old friend Euclid would say, is impossible; because
you know, Dad, if that were possible, everything else would be. Come,
now, Annie is bringing up your whisky and soda. Put away your problems
and take your night-cap, and do get to bed in something like respectable
time. Don't worry your dear old head about forty-seventh propositions
and fourth dimensions and mummies and that sort of thing, even if this
Mummy does happen to look a bit like me. Now, good night, and remember
that the night-cap _is_ to be a night-cap, and when you've put it on you
really must go to bed. You've been thinking a great deal too much this
week. Good-night, Dad."

"Good-night, Niti, dear. Don't trouble your head about my thinking.
Sufficient unto the brain are the thoughts thereof. Sometimes they are
more than sufficient. Good-night. Sleep well and don't dream, if you can
help it."

"And don't _you_ dream, Dad, especially about that wretched proposition.
Just have another pipe, and drink your whisky and go to bed. There's
something in your eyes that says you want a long night's rest.
Good-night now, and sleep well."

She pulled his head down and kissed him twice on his grey, thin cheek,
and then, with a wave of her hand and a laughing nod towards the Mummy,
vanished through the closing study door to go and dream her dreams,
which were not very likely to be of mummies and fourth dimensional
problems, and left her father to dream his.

Then a couple of lines from one of "B.V.'s" poems, which had been
running in his head all the evening, came back to him, and he murmured
half-unconsciously:

  "'Was it hundreds of years ago, my love,
  Was it thousands of miles away...?'"

"And why should it not be? Why should you, who were once Ma-Rim[=o]n,
priest of Amen-Ra, in the City of Memphis--you who almost stood upon the
threshold of the Inmost Sanctuary of Knowledge: you who, if your
footsteps had not turned aside into the way of temptation and trodden
the black path of Sin, might even now be dwelling on the Shores of
Everlasting Peace in the Land of Amenti--dost _thou_ dare to ask such a
question?"

The sudden change of the pronoun seemed to him to put the Clock of Time
back indefinitely.

He was standing by his desk still facing the Mummy just as his daughter
had left him after saying "good-night." He was not a man to be easily
astonished. Not only was he one of the best-read amateur Egyptologists
in Europe, but he was also an ex-President of the Royal Society, a
Member of the Psychical Research Society, and, moreover, Chairman of a
recently appointed Commission on Comparative Insanity, the object of
whose labours was to determine, if possible, what proportion of people
outside asylums were mad or sane according to a standard which, somehow,
no one had thought of inventing before--the standard of common-sense.

The voice, strangely like his daughter's and his dead wife's also,
appeared to come from nowhere and yet from everywhere, and it had a
faint and far-away echo in it which harmonised most marvellously with
other echoes which seemed to come up out of the depths of his own soul.

Where had he heard it before? Somewhere, certainly. There was no
possibility of mistaking tones which were so irresistibly familiar, and,
moreover, why did they bring back to him such distinct memories of
tragedies long forgotten, even by him? Why did they instantly draw
before the windows of his soul a long panorama of vast cities, splendid
palaces, sombre temples, and towering tombs, in which he saw all these
and more with an infinitely greater vividness of form and light and
colour than he had ever been able to do in his most inspired hours of
dream or study?

Had the voice really come from those long-silenced lips of the Mummy of
Nitocris, that daughter of the Pharaohs who had so terribly avenged her
outraged love, and after whom he had named the only child of his
marriage?

"It is certainly very strange," he said, going to his writing-table and
taking up his pipe. "I know that voice, or at least I seem to know it,
and it is very like Niti's and her mother's; but where can it have come
from? Hardly from your lips, my long-dead Royal Egypt," he went on,
going up to the mummy-case and peering through his spectacles into the
rigid features. He put up his hand and tapped the tightly-drawn lips
very gently, then turned away with a smile, saying aloud to himself:
"No, no, I must have been allowing what they call my scientific
imagination to play tricks with me. Perhaps I have been worrying a
little too much about this confounded fourth dimension problem,--and yet
the thing is exceedingly fascinating. If the hand of Science could only
reach across the frontier line! If we could only see out of the world of
length and breadth and thickness into that other world of these and
something else, how many puzzles would be solved, how many
impossibilities would become possible, and how many of the miracles
which those old Egyptian adepts so seriously claimed to work would look
like the merest commonplaces! Ah well, now for the realities. I suppose
that's Annie with the whisky."

As he turned round the door opened, and he beheld a very strange sight,
one which, to a man who had had a less stern mental training than he had
had, would have been nothing less than terrifying. His daughter came in
with a little silver tray on which there was a small decanter of whisky,
a glass, and a syphon of soda-water.

"Annie has gone to the post, and I thought I might as well bring this
myself," said Miss Nitocris, walking to the table and putting the tray
down on the corner of it.

Beside her stood another figure as familiar now to his eyes as her's
was, dressed and tired and jewelled in a fashion equally familiar. Save
for the difference in dress, Nitocris, the daughter of Rameses, was the
exact counterpart in feature, stature, and colouring of Nitocris, the
daughter of Professor Marmion. In her hands she carried a slender,
long-necked jar of brilliantly enamelled earthenware and a golden flagon
richly chased, and glittering with jewels, and these she put down on the
table in exactly the same place as the other Nitocris had put her tray
on, and as she did so he heard the voice again, saying:

"Time was, is now, and ever shall be to those for whom Time has ceased
to be--which is a riddle that Ma-Rim[=o]n may even now learn, since his
soul has been purified and his spirit strengthened by earnest devotion
through many lives to the search for the True Knowledge."

Both voices had spoken together, the one in English and the other in the
ancient tongue of Khem, yet he had heard each syllable separately and
comprehended both utterances perfectly. He felt a cold grip of fear at
his heart as he looked towards the mummy-case, and, as his fear had
warned him, it was empty. Then he looked at his daughter, and as their
eyes met, she said in the most commonplace tones:

"My dear Dad, what _is_ the matter with you? If advanced people like
ourselves believed in any such nonsense, I should be inclined to say
that you had seen a ghost; but I suppose it's only that silly fourth
dimension puzzle that's worrying you. Now, look here, you must really
take your whisky and go to bed. If you go on bothering any longer about
'N to the fourth,' you will have one of your bad headaches to-morrow and
won't be able to finish your address for the Institute."

She put her hand out and took up the decanter. It passed without any
apparent resistance through the jar. She lifted it from the same place,
and poured out the usual modicum of whisky into the glass, which was
standing just where the flagon was. Then she pressed the trigger of the
syphon, and the familiar hiss of the soda-water brought the Professor,
as he thought, back to his senses.

But no! There could be no doubt about it. There in material form on the
corner of his table was a point-blank, tangible contradiction of the
universally accepted axiom that two bodies cannot occupy the same space,
and that, come from somewhere or nowhere, there were two plainly
material objects through which his daughter's hand, without her even
knowing it, had passed as easily as it would have done through a little
cloud of steam. Happily she had no idea of what he had seen and heard,
and so for her sake he made a strong effort to control himself, and said
as steadily as he could:

"Thank you, Niti, it is very good of you. Yes, I think I am a little
tired to-night. Good-night now, and I promise you that I will be off
very soon; I will just have one more pipe, and drink my whisky, and then
I really will go. Good-night, little woman. We'll have a talk about the
Mummy in the morning."

As soon as his daughter had closed the door, Professor Marmion returned
to his writing-table. The decanter of whisky, the tumbler, and the
syphon of soda-water were still standing on the corner of the table,
occupying the same space as the enamelled flagon of wine and the
drinking goblet which the long-dead other-self of Miss Nitocris had
placed on the little silver salver.

He looked about the room anxiously, with a feeling nearer akin to
physical dread than he had ever experienced before; but his worst fears
were not fulfilled. Nitocris the Queen had vanished and the Mummy was
back in its case, blind, rigid, and silent, as it had been for fifty
centuries.
