


VITTORIA


By Geoerge Meredith



BOOK 8.

XL.       THROUGH THE WINTER
XLI.      THE INTERVIEW
XLII.     THE SHADOW OF CONSPIRACY
XLIII.    THE LAST MEETING IN MILAN
XLIV.     THE WIFE AND THE HUSBAND
XLV.      SHOWS MANY PATHS CONVERGING TO THE END
XLVI.     THE LAST
          EPILOGUE



CHAPTER XL

THROUGH THE WINTER

Weisspriess and Wilfrid made their way toward Milan together, silently
smoking, after one attempt at conversation, which touched on Vittoria's
marriage; but when they reached Monza the officer slapped his degraded
brother in arms upon the shoulder, and asked him whether he had any
inclination to crave permission to serve in Hungary.  For his own part,
Weisspriess said that he should quit Italy at once; he had here to skewer
the poor devils, one or two weekly, or to play the mightily generous; in
short, to do things unsoldierly; and he was desirous of getting away from
the country.  General Schoneck was at Monza, and might arrange the matter
for them both.  Promotion was to be looked for in Hungary; the
application would please the General; one battle would restore the
lieutenant's star to Wilfrid's collar.  Wilfrid, who had been offended
by his companion's previous brooding silence, nodded briefly, and they
stopped at Monza, where they saw General Schoneck in the morning, and
Wilfrid being by extraordinary favour in civilian's dress during his
leave of absence, they were jointly invited to the General's table at
noon, though not to meet any other officer.  General Schoneck agreed with
Weisspriess that Hungary would be a better field for Wilfrid; said he
would do his utmost to serve them in the manner they wished, and
dismissed them after the second cigar.  They strolled about the city,
glad for reasons of their own to be out of Milan as long as the leave
permitted.  At night, when they were passing a palace in one of the dark
streets, a feather, accompanied by a sharp sibilation from above, dropped
on Wilfrid's face.  Weisspriess held the feather up, and judged by its
length that it was an eagle's, and therefore belonging to the Hungarian
Hussar regiment stationed in Milan.  "The bird's aloft," he remarked.
His voice aroused a noise of feet that was instantly still.  He sent a
glance at the doorways, where he thought he discerned men.  Fetching a
whistle in with his breath, he unsheathed his sword, and seeing that
Wilfrid had no weapon, he pushed him to a gate of the palace-court that
had just cautiously turned a hinge.  Wilfrid found his hand taken by a
woman's hand inside.  The gate closed behind him.  He was led up to an
apartment where, by the light of a darkly-veiled lamp, he beheld a young
Hungarian officer and a lady clinging to his neck, praying him not to go
forth.  Her Italian speech revealed how matters stood in this house.  The
officer accosted Wilfrid: "But you are not one of us!"  He repeated it to
the lady: "You see, the man is not one of us!"

She assured him that she had seen the uniform when she dropped the
feather, and wept protesting it.

"Louis, Louis! why did you come to-night! why did I make you come!  You
will be slain.  I had my warning, but I was mad."

The officer hushed her with a quick squeeze of her inter-twisted fingers.

"Are you the man to take a sword and be at my back, sir?" he said; and
resumed in a manner less contemptuous toward the civil costume:
"I request it for the sole purpose of quieting this lady's fears."

Wilfrid explained who and what he was.  On hearing that he was General
Pierson's nephew the officer laughed cheerfully, and lifted the veil from
the lamp, by which Wilfrid knew him to be Colonel Prince Radocky, a most
gallant and the handsomest cavalier in the Imperial service.  Radocky
laughed again when he was told of Weisspriess keeping guard below.

"Aha!  we are three, and can fight like a pyramid."

He flourished his hand above the lady's head, and called for a sword.
The lady affected to search for one while he stalked up and down in the
jaunty fashion of a Magyar horseman; but the sword was not to be
discovered without his assistance, and he was led away in search of it.
The moment he was alone Wilfrid burst into tears.  He could bear anything
better than the sight of fondling lovers.  When they rejoined him,
Radocky had evidently yielded some point; he stammered and worked his
underlip on his moustache.  The lady undertook to speak for him.  Happily
for her, she said, Wilfrid would not compromise her; and taking her
lover's hand, she added with Italian mixture of wit and grace:
"Happily for me, too, he does.  The house is surrounded by enemies; it is
a reign of terror for women.  I am dead, if they slay him; but if they
recognize him, I am lost."

Wilfrid readily leaped to her conclusion.  He offered his opera-hat and
civil mantle to Radocky, who departed in them, leaving his military cloak
in exchange.  During breathless seconds the lady hung kneeling at the
window.  When the gate opened there was a noise as of feet preparing to
rush; Weisspriess uttered an astonished cry, but addressed Radocky as "my
Pierson!" lustily and frequently; and was heard putting a number of
meaningless questions, laughing and rallying Pierson till the two passed
out of hearing unmolested.  The lady then kissed a Cross passionately,
and shivered Wilfrid's manhood by asking him whether he knew what love
was.  She went on:

"Never, never love a married woman!  It's a past practice.  Never!
Thrust a spike in the palm of your hands drink scalding oil, rather than
do that."

"The Prince Radocky is now safe," Wilfrid said.

"Yes, he is safe; and he is there, and I am here: and I cannot follow
him; and when will he come to me?"

The tones were lamentable.  She struck her forehead, after she had mutely
thrust her hand to right and left to show the space separating her from
her lover.

Her voice changed when she accepted Wilfrid's adieux, to whose fate in
the deadly street she appeared quite indifferent, though she gave him one
or two prudent directions, and expressed a hope that she might be of
service to him.

He was set upon as soon as he emerged from the gateway; the cavalry cloak
was torn from his back, and but for the chance circumstance of his
swearing in English, he would have come to harm.  A chill went through
his blood on hearing one of his assailants speak the name of Barto Rizzo.
The English oath stopped an arm that flashed a dagger half its length.
Wilfrid obeyed a command to declare his name, his country, and his rank.
It's not the prince! it's not the Hungarian!" went many whispers; and he
was drawn away by a man who requested him to deliver his reasons for
entering the palace, and who appeared satisfied by Wilfrid's ready
mixture of invention and fact.  But the cloak!  Wilfrid stated boldly
that the cloak was taken by him from the Duchess of Graatli's at Como;
that he had seen a tall Hussar officer slip it off his shoulders; that he
had wanted a cloak, and had appropriated it.  He had entered the gate of
the palace because of a woman's hand that plucked at the skirts of this
very cloak.

"I saw you enter," said the man; "do that no more.  We will not have the
blood of Italy contaminated--do you hear?  While that half-Austrian
Medole is tip-toeing 'twixt Milan and Turin, we watch over his honour,
to set an example to our women and your officers.  You have outwitted us
to-night.  Off with you!"

Wilfrid was twirled and pushed through the crowd till he got free of
them.  He understood very well that they were magnanimous rascals who
could let an accomplice go, though they would have driven steel into the
principal.

Nothing came of this adventure for some time.  Wilfrid's reflections
(apart from the horrible hard truth of Vittoria's marriage, against which
he dashed his heart perpetually, almost asking for anguish) had leisure
to examine the singularity of his feeling a commencement of pride in the
clasping of his musket;--he who on the first day of his degradation had
planned schemes to stick the bayonet-point between his breast-bones: he
thought as well of the queer woman's way in Countess Medole's adjuration
to him that he should never love a married woman;--in her speaking, as it
seemed, on his behalf, when it was but an outcry of her own acute wound.
Did he love a married woman?  He wanted to see one married woman for the
last time; to throw a frightful look on her; to be sublime in scorn of
her; perhaps to love her all the better for the cruel pain, in the
expectation of being consoled.  While doing duty as a military machine,
these were the pictures in his mind; and so well did his routine drudgery
enable him to bear them, that when he heard from General Schoneck that
the term of his degradation was to continue in Italy, and from his sister
that General Pierson refused to speak of him or hear of him until he had
regained his gold shoulder-strap, he revolted her with an ejaculation of
gladness, and swore brutally that he desired to have no advancement;
nothing but sleep and drill; and, he added conscientiously, Havannah
cigars.  "He has grown to be like a common soldier," Adela said to
herself with an amazed contemplation of the family tie.  Still, she
worked on his behalf, having, as every woman has, too strong an instinct
as to what is natural to us to believe completely in any eccentric
assertion.  She carried the tale of his grief and trials and his romantic
devotion to the Imperial flag, daily to Countess Lena; persisting, though
she could not win a responsive look from Lena's face.

One day on the review-ground, Wilfrid beheld Prince Radocky bending from
his saddle in conversation with Weisspriess.  The prince galloped up to
General Pierson, and stretched his hand to where Wilfrid was posted as
marker to a wheeling column, kept the hand stretched out, and spoke
furiously, and followed the General till he was ordered to head his
regiment.  Wilfrid began to hug his musket less desperately.  Little
presents--feminine he knew by the perfumes floating round them,--gloves
and cigars, fine handkerchiefs, and silks for wear, came to his barracks.
He pretended to accuse his sister of sending them.  She in honest delight
accused Lena.  Lena then accused herself of not having done so.

It was winter: Vittoria had been seen in Milan.  Both Lena and Wilfrid
spontaneously guessed her to be the guilty one.  He made a funeral pyre
of the gifts and gave his sister the ashes, supposing that she had
guessed with the same spirited intuition.  It suited Adela to relate this
lover's performance to Lena.  "He did well!" Lena said, and kissed Adela
for the first time.  Adela was the bearer of friendly messages to the
poor private in the ranks.  From her and from little Jenna, Wilfrid heard
that he was unforgotten by Countess Lena, and new hopes mingled with
gratitude caused him to regard his situation seriously.  He confessed to
his sister that the filthy fellows, his comrades, were all but too much
for him, and asked her to kiss him, that he might feel he was not one of
them.  But he would not send a message in reply to Lena.  "That is also
well!"  Lena said.  Her brother Karl was a favourite with General
Pierson.  She proposed that Adela and herself should go to Count Karl,
and urge him to use his influence with the General.  This, however, Adela
was disinclined to do; she could not apparently say why.  When Lena went
to him, she was astonished to hear that he knew every stage of her
advance up to the point of pardoning her erratic lover; and even knew as
much as that Wilfrid's dejected countenance on the night when Vittoria's
marriage was published in the saloon of the duchess on Lake Como, had
given her fresh offence.  He told her that many powerful advocates were
doing their best for the down-fallen officer, who, if he were shot, or
killed, would still be gazetted an officer.  "A nice comfort!"  said
Lena, and there was a rallying exchange of banter between them, out of
which she drew the curious discovery that Karl had one of his strong
admirations for the English lady.  "Surely!" she said to herself;
"I thought they were all so cold."  And cold enough the English lady
seemed when Lena led to the theme.  "Do I admire your brother, Countess
Lena?  Oh! yes;--in his uniform exceedingly."

Milan was now full.  Wilfrid had heard from Adela that Count Ammiani and
his bride were in the city and were strictly watched.  Why did not
conspirators like these two take advantage of the amnesty?  Why were they
not in Rome?  Their Chief was in Rome; their friends were in Rome.  Why
were they here?  A report, coming from Countess d'Isorella, said that
they had quarrelled with their friends, and were living for love alone.
As she visited the Lenkensteins--high Austrians--some believed her; and
as Count Ammiani and his bride had visited the Duchess of Graatli, it was
thought possible.  Adela had refused to see Vittoria; she did not even
know the house where Count Ammiani dwelt; so Wilfrid was reduced to find
it for himself.  Every hour when off duty the miserable sentimentalist
wandered in that direction, nursing the pangs of a delicious tragedy of
emotions; he was like a drunkard going to his draught.  As soon as he had
reached the head of the Corso, he wheeled and marched away from it with a
lofty head, internally grinning at his abject folly, and marvelling at
the stiff figure of an Austrian common soldier which flashed by the
windows as he passed.  He who can unite prudence and madness, sagacity
and stupidity, is the true buffoon; nor, vindictive as were his
sensations, was Wilfrid unaware of the contrast of Vittoria's soul to his
own, that was now made up of antics.  He could not endure the tones of
cathedral music; but he had at times to kneel and listen to it, and be
overcome.

On a night in the month of February, a servant out of livery addressed
him at the barrack-gates, requesting him to go at once to a certain
hotel, where his sister was staying.  He went, and found there, not his
sister, but Countess Medole.  She smiled at his confusion.  Both she and
the prince, she said, had spared no effort to get him reinstated in his
rank; but his uncle continually opposed the endeavours of all his friends
to serve him.  This interview was dictated by the prince's wish,
so that he might know them to be a not ungrateful couple.  Wilfrid's
embarrassment in standing before a lady in private soldier's uniform,
enabled him with very peculiar dignity to declare that his present
degradation, from the General's point of view, was a just punishment, and
he did not crave to have it abated.  She remarked that it must end soon.
He made a dim allusion to the littleness of humanity.  She laughed.
"It's the language of an unfortunate lover," she said, and straightway,
in some undistinguished sentence, brought the name of Countess Alessandra
Ammiani tingling to his ears.  She feared that she could not be of
service to him there; "at least, not just yet," the lady astonished him
by remarking.  "I might help you to see her.  If you take my advice you
will wait patiently.  You know us well enough to understand what patience
will do.  She is supposed to have married for love.  Whether she did or
not, you must allow a young married woman two years' grace."

The effect of speech like this, and more in a similar strain of frank
corruptness, was to cleanse Wilfrid's mind, and nerve his heart, and he
denied that he had any desire to meet the Countess Ammiani, unless he
could perform a service that would be agreeable to her.

The lady shrugged.  "Well, that is one way.  She has enemies, of course."

Wilfrid begged for their names.

"Who are they not?"  she replied.  "Chiefly women, it is true."

He begged most earnestly for their names; he would have pleaded
eloquently, but dreaded that the intonation of one in his low garb might
be taken for a whine; yet he ventured to say that if the countess did
imagine herself indebted to him in a small degree, the mention of two or
three of the names of Countess Alessandra Ammiani's enemies would satisfy
him.

"Countess Lena von Lenkenstein, Countess Violetta d'Isorella, signorina
Irma di Karski."

She spoke the names out like a sum that she was paying down in gold
pieces, and immediately rang the bell for her servant and carriage,
as if she had now acquitted her debt.  Wilfrid bowed himself forth.
A resolution of the best kind, quite unconnected with his interests or
his love, urged him on straight to the house of the Lenkensteins, where
he sent up his name to Countess Lena.  After a delay of many minutes,
Count Lenkenstein accompanied by General Pierson came down, both
evidently affecting not to see him.  The General barely acknowledged his
salute.

"Hey! Kinsky!" the count turned in the doorway to address him by the
title of his regiment; "here; show me the house inhabited by the Countess
d'Isorella during the revolt."

Wilfrid followed them to the end of the street, pointing his finger to
the house, and saluted.

"An Englishman did me the favour--from pure eccentricity, of course--to
save my life on that exact spot, General," said the count.  "Your
countrymen usually take the other side; therefore I mention it."

As Wilfrid was directing his steps to barracks (the little stir to his
pride superinduced by these remarks having demoralized him), Count
Lenkenstein shouted: "Are you off duty?  "Wilfrid had nearly replied that
he was, but just mastered himself in time.  "No, indeed!"  said the
count, "when you have sent up your name to a lady."  This time General
Pierson put two fingers formally to his cap, and smiled grimly at the
private's rigid figure of attention.  If Wilfrid's form of pride had
consented to let him take delight in the fact, he would have seen at once
that prosperity was ready to shine on him.  He nursed the vexations much
too tenderly to give prosperity a welcome; and even when along with Lena,
and convinced of her attachment, and glad of it, he persisted in driving
at the subject which had brought him to her house; so that the veil of
opening commonplaces, pleasant to a couple in their position, was plucked
aside.  His business was to ask her why she was the enemy of Countess
Alessandra Ammiani, and to entreat her that she should not seek to harm
that lady.  He put it in a set speech.  Lena felt that it ought to have
come last, not in advance of their reconciliation.  "I will answer you,"
she said.  "I am not the Countess Alessandra Ammiani's enemy."

He asked her: "Could you be her friend?"

"Does a woman who has a husband want a friend?"

"I could reply, countess, in the case of a man who has a bride."

By dint of a sweet suggestion here and there, love-making crossed the
topic.  It appeared that General Pierson had finally been attacked, on
the question of his resistance to every endeavour to restore Wilfrid to
his rank, by Count Lenkenstein, and had barely spoken the words--that if
Wilfrid came to Countess Lena of his own free-will, unprompted, to beg
her forgiveness, he would help to reinstate him, when Wilfrid's name was
brought up by the chasseur.  All had laughed, "Even I," Lena confessed.
And then the couple had a pleasant petitish wrangle;--he was requested to
avow that he had came solely, or principally, to beg forgiveness of her,
who had such heaps to forgive.  No; on his honour, he had come for the
purpose previously stated, and on the spur of his hearing that she was
Countess Alessandra Ammiani's deadly enemy.  "Could you believe that I
was?" said Lena; "why should I be?" and he coloured like a lad, which
sign of an ingenuousness supposed to belong to her set, made Lena bold to
take the upper hand.  She frankly accused herself of jealousy, though she
did not say of whom.  She almost admitted that when the time for
reflection came, she should rejoice at his having sought her to plead for
his friend rather than for her forgiveness.  In the end, but with a
drooping pause of her bright swift look at Wilfrid, she promised to
assist him in defeating any machinations against Vittoria's happiness,
