to pursue, but feeling that it proceeded from disappointed rivalry, he
wisely said nothing to increase his exasperation. He put the two books
carefully away in his desk, and settled himself quietly to his day's
lessons.

It was not until evening that John and his father met. Both had been
chafed--the first by his disappointment, the second by the failure
of his effort to prevent the town's voting bounties to volunteers.
In particular he was incensed with Mr. Frost, for his imputation
of interested motives, although it was only in return for a similar
imputation brought against himself.

"Well, father, I didn't get the prize," commenced John, in a
discontented voice.

"So much the worse for you," said his father coldly. "You might have
gained it if you had made an effort."

"No, I couldn't. Rathburn was sure to give it to his favorite."

"And who is his favorite?" questioned Squire Haynes, not yet siding with
his son.

"Frank Frost, to be sure."

"Frank Frost!" repeated the squire, rapidly wheeling round to his son's
view of the matter. His dislike of the father was so great that it
readily included the son. "What makes you think he is the teacher's
favorite?"

"Oh, Rathburn is always praising him for something or other. All the
boys know Frank Frost is his pet. You won't catch him praising me, if I
work ever so hard."

John did not choose to mention that he had not yet tried this method of
securing the teacher's approval.

"Teachers should never have favorites," said the squire dogmatically.
"It is highly detrimental to a teacher's influence, and subversive of
the principles of justice. Have you got your essay with you, John?"

"Yes, sir."

"You may sit down and read it to me, and if I think it deserving, I will
take care that you sha'n't lose by the teacher's injustice."

John readily obeyed. He hurried up to his chamber, and, opening his
writing-desk, took out a sheet of foolscap, three sides of which were
written over. This he brought down-stairs with him. He began to hope
that he might get the boat after all.

The squire, in dressing-gown and slippers, sat in a comfortable
armchair, while John in a consequential manner read his rejected
essay. It was superficial and commonplace, and abundantly marked with
pretension, but to the squire's warped judgment it seemed to have
remarkable merit.

"It does you great credit, John," said he emphatically. "I don't know
what sort of an essay young Frost wrote, but I venture to say it was
not as good. If he's anything like his father, he is an impertinent
jackanapes."

John pricked up his ears, and listened attentively.

"He grossly insulted me at the town meeting to-day, and I sha'n't soon
forget it. It isn't for his interest to insult a man who has the power
to annoy him that I possess."

"Haven't you got a mortgage on his farm?"

"Yes, and at a proper time I shall remind him of it. But to come back to
your own affairs. What was the prize given to young Frost?"

"A blue-and-gold copy of Whittier's Poems, in two volumes."

"Plain binding, I suppose."

"Yes, sir."

"Very well. The next time I go to Boston, I will buy you the same thing
bound in calf. I don't intend that you shall suffer by your teacher's
injustice."

"It wasn't so much the prize that I cared for," said John, who felt
like making the most of his father's favorable mood, "but you know you
promised me twenty-five dollars if I gained it."

"And as you have been defrauded of it, I will give you thirty instead,"
said the squire promptly.

John's eyes sparkled with delight. "Oh, thank you, sir!" he said. "I
wouldn't change places with Frank Frost now for all his prize."

"I should think not, indeed," said the squire pompously. "Your position
as the son of a poor farmer wouldn't be quite so high as it is now."

As he spoke he glanced complacently at the handsome furniture which
surrounded him, the choice engravings which hung on the walls, and the
full-length mirror in which his figure was reflected. "Ten years from
now Frank Frost will be only a common laborer on his father's farm--that
is," he added significantly, "if his father manages to keep it; while
you, I hope, will be winning distinction at the bar."

Father and son were in a congenial mood that evening, and a common
hatred drew them more closely together than mutual affection had ever
done. They were very much alike--both cold, calculating, and selfish.
The squire was indeed ambitious for his son, but could hardly be said
to love him, since he was incapable of feeling a hearty love for any one
except himself.

As for John, it is to be feared that he regarded his father chiefly as
one from whom he might expect future favors. His mother had been a good,
though not a strong-minded woman, and her influence might have been of
advantage to her son; but unhappily she had died when John was in his
tenth year, and since then he had become too much like his father.



CHAPTER III. FRANK AT HOME

Mr. Frost's farm was situated about three-quarters of a mile from the
village. It comprised fifty acres, of which twenty were suitable for
tillage, the remainder being about equally divided between woodland and
pasture.

Mr. Frost had for some years before his marriage been a painter, and had
managed to save up from his earnings not far from a thousand dollars.
Thinking, however, that farming would be more favorable to health, he
purchased his fifty-acre farm for twenty-eight hundred dollars, payable
one thousand down, and the rest remaining on mortgage. At the date of
our story he had succeeded in paying up the entire amount within eight
hundred dollars, a mortgage for that amount being held by Squire Haynes.
He had not been able to accomplish this without strict economy, in which
his wife had cheerfully aided him.

But his family had grown larger and more expensive. Besides Frank, who
was the oldest, there were now three younger children--Alice, twelve
years of age; Maggie, ten; and Charlie, seven.

The farmhouse was small but comfortable, and the family had never been
tempted to sigh for a more costly or luxurious home. They were happy and
contented, and this made their home attractive.

On the evening succeeding that of the war meeting, Frank was seated
in the common sitting-room with his father and mother. There was a
well-worn carpet on the floor, a few plain chairs were scattered about
the room, and in the corner ticked one of the old-fashioned clocks such
as used to be the pride of our New England households. In the center
of the room stood a round table, on which had been set a large
kerosene-lamp, which diffused a cheerful light about the apartment.

On a little table, over which hung a small mirror, were several papers
and magazines. Economical in most things, Mr. Frost was considered by
many of his neighbors extravagant in this. He subscribed regularly
for Harper's Magazine and Weekly, a weekly agricultural paper, a daily
paper, and a child's magazine.

"I don't see how you can afford to buy so much reading-matter," said a
neighbor, one day. "It must cost you a sight of money. As for me, I only
take a weekly paper, and I think I shall have to give that up soon."

"All my papers and magazines cost me in a year, including postage,
is less than twenty dollars," said Mr. Frost quietly. "A very slight
additional economy in dress--say three dollars a year to each of us will
pay that. I think my wife would rather make her bonnet wear doubly as
long than give up a single one of our papers. When you think of the
comparative amount of pleasure given by a paper that comes to you
fifty-two times in a year, and a little extra extravagance in dress, I
think you will decide in favor of the paper."

"But when you've read it, you haven't anything to show for your money."

"And when clothes are worn out you may say the same of them. But we
value both for the good they have done, and the pleasure they have
afforded. I have always observed that a family where papers and
magazines are taken is much more intelligent and well informed than
where their bodies are clothed at the expense of their minds. Our daily
paper is the heaviest item; but I like to know what is passing in the
world, and, besides, I think I more than defray the expense by the
knowledge I obtain of the markets. At what price did you sell your
apples last year?"

"At one dollar and seventy-five cents per barrel."

"And I sold forty barrels at two dollars per barrel. I found from my
paper that there was reason to expect an increase in the price, and held
on. By so doing I gained ten dollars, which more than paid the expense
of my paper for the year. So even in a money way I was paid for my
subscription. No, neighbor, though I have good reason to economize, I
don't care to economize in that direction. I want my children to grow up
intelligent citizens. Let me advise you, instead of stopping your only
paper, to subscribe for two or three more."

"I don't know," was the irresolute reply. "It was pretty lucky about the
apples; but it seems a good deal to pay. As for my children, they don't
get much time to read. They've got to earn their livin', and that ain't
done by settin' down and readin'."

"I am not so sure of that," said Mr. Frost. "Education often enables a
man to make money."

The reader may have been surprised at the ease with which Mr. Frost
expressed himself in his speech at the war meeting. No other explanation
is required than that he was in the habit of reading, every day,
well-selected newspapers. "A man is known by the company he keeps."

"So you gained the prize, Frank?" said his father approvingly. "I am
very glad to hear it. It does you great credit. I hope none were envious
of your success."

"Most of the boys seemed glad of it," was the reply; "but John Haynes
was angry because he didn't get it himself. He declared that I succeeded
only because I was a favorite with Mr. Rathburn."

"I am afraid he has not an amiable disposition. However, we must
remember that his home influences haven't been the best. His mother's
death was unfortunate for him."

"I heard at the store that you and Squire Haynes had a discussion at the
war meeting," said Frank inquiringly. "How was it, father?"

"It was on the question of voting a bounty to our volunteers. I felt
that such a course would be only just. The squire objected on the ground
that our taxes would be considerably increased."

"And how did the town vote?"

"They sustained my proposition, much to the squire's indignation. He
doesn't seem to feel that any sacrifices ought to be expected of him."

"What is the prospect of obtaining the men, father?"

"Four have already enlisted, but twenty-one are still required. I fear
there will be some difficulty in obtaining the full number. In a farming
town like ours the young men are apt to go off to other places as soon
as they are old enough; so that the lot must fall upon some who have
families."

Frank sat for some minutes gazing thoughtfully into the wood-fire that
crackled in the fireplace.

"I wish I was old enough to go, father," he said, at length.

"I wish you were," said his father earnestly. "Not that it wouldn't
be hard to send you out into the midst of perils; but our duty to our
country ought to be paramount to our personal preferences."

"There's another reason," he said, after awhile, "why I wish you were
older. You could take my place on the farm, and leave me free to enlist.
I should have no hesitation in going. I have not forgotten that my
grandfather fought at Bunker Hill."

"I know, father," said Frank, nodding; "and that's his musket that hangs
up in your room, isn't it?"

"Yes; it was his faithful companion for three years. I often think with
pride of his services. I have been trying to think all day whether
I couldn't make some arrangement to have the farm carried on in
my absence; but it is very hard to obtain a person in whom I could
confide."

"If I were as good a manager as some," said Mrs. Frost, with a smile,
"I would offer to be your farmer; but I am afraid that, though my
intentions would be the best, things would go on badly under my
administration."

"You have enough to do in the house, Mary," said her husband. "I should
not wish you to undertake the additional responsibility, even if you
were thoroughly competent. I am afraid I shall have to give up the idea
of going."

Mr. Frost took up the evening paper. Frank continued to look
thoughtfully into the fire, as if revolving something in his mind.
Finally he rose, and lighting a candle went up to bed. But he did not
go to sleep for some time. A plan had occurred to him, and he was
considering its feasibility.

"I think I could do it," he said, at last, turning over and composing
himself to sleep. "I'll speak to father the first thing to-morrow
morning."



CHAPTER IV. FRANK MAKES A PROPOSITION

When Frank woke the next morning the sun was shining into his window.
He rubbed his eyes and tried to think what it was that occupied his mind
the night before. It came to him in a moment, and jumping out of bed, he
dressed himself with unusual expedition.

Hurrying down-stairs, he found his mother in the kitchen, busily engaged
in getting breakfast.

"Where's father?" he asked.

"He hasn't come in from the barn yet, Frank," his mother answered. "You
can have your breakfast now, if you are in a hurry to get to studying."

"Never mind, just now, mother," returned Frank. "I want to speak to
father about something."

Taking his cap from the nail in the entry where it usually hung, Frank
went out to the barn. He found that his father was nearly through
milking.

"Is breakfast ready?" asked Mr. Frost, looking up. "Tell your mother she
needn't wait for me."

"It isn't ready yet," said Frank. "I came out because I want to speak to
you about something very particular."

"Very well, Frank, Go on."

"But if you don't think it a good plan, or think that I am foolish in
speaking of it, don't say anything to anybody."

Mr. Frost looked at Frank in some little curiosity.

"Perhaps," he said, smiling, "like our neighbor Holman, you have formed
a plan for bringing the war to a close."

Frank laughed. "I am not quite so presumptuous," he said. "You remember
saying last night, that if I were old enough to take charge of the farm,
you would have no hesitation in volunteering?"

"Yes."

"Don't you think I am old enough?" asked Frank eagerly.

"Why, you are only fifteen, Frank," returned his father, in surprise.

"I know it, but I am strong enough to do considerable work."

"It isn't so much that which is required. A man could easily be found
to do the hardest of the work. But somebody is needed who understands
farming, and is qualified to give directions. How much do you know of
that?"

"Not much at present," answered Frank modestly, "but I think I could
learn easily. Besides, there's Mr. Maynard, who is a good farmer, could
advise me whenever I was in doubt, and you could write home directions
in your letters."

"That is true," said Mr. Frost thoughtfully. "I will promise to give it
careful consideration. But have you thought that you will be obliged to
give up attending school."

"Yes, father."

"And, of course, that will put you back; your class-mates will get in
advance of you."

"I have thought of that, father, and I shall be very sorry for it. But I
think that is one reason why I desire the plan."

"I don't understand you, Frank," said his father, a little puzzled.

"You see, father, it would require a sacrifice on my part, and I should
feel glad to think I had an opportunity of making a sacrifice for the
sake of my country."

"That's the right spirit, Frank," said his father approvingly. "That's
the way my grandfather felt and acted, and it's the way I like to see my
son feel. So it would be a great sacrifice to me to leave you all."

"And to us to be parted from you, father," said Frank.

"I have no doubt of it, my dear boy," said his father kindly. "We have
always been a happy and united family, and, please God, we always shall
be. But this plan of yours requires consideration. I will talk it over
with your mother and Mr. Maynard, and will then come to a decision."

"I was afraid you would laugh at me," said Frank.

"No," said his father, "it was a noble thought, and does you credit. I
shall feel that, whatever course I may think it wisest to adopt."

The sound of a bell from the house reached them. This meant breakfast.
Mr. Frost had finished milking, and with a well-filled pail in either
hand, went toward the house.

"Move the milking:-stool, Frank," he said, looking behind him, "or the
cow will kick it over."

Five minutes later they were at breakfast.

"I have some news for you, Mary," said Mr. Frost, as he helped his wife
to a sausage.

"Indeed?" said she, looking up inquiringly.

"Some one has offered to take charge of the farm for me, in case I wish
to go out as a soldier."

"Who is it?" asked Mrs. Frost, with strong interest.

"A gentleman with whom you are well--I may say intimately acquainted,"
was the smiling response.

"It isn't Mr. Maynard?"

"No. It is some one that lives nearer than he."

"How can that be? He is our nearest neighbor."

"Then you can't guess?"

"No. I am quite mystified."

"Suppose I should say that it is your oldest son?"

"What, Frank?" exclaimed Mrs. Frost, turning from her husband to her
son, whose flushed face indicated how anxious he was about his mother's
favorable opinion.

"You have hit it."

"You were not in earnest, Frank?" said Mrs. Frost inquiringly.

"Ask father."

