shadows, but so far as he could judge, none of them was interested in
him.  Dismissing them from his mind, he moved on.

He had walked less than one-third of the length of the village front,
when the form of a man slipped softly down the incline, following in
his footsteps and moving as silently as a Murhapa warrior tracking his
foe through the forest.

He was dressed similarly to the American, having the same style of
Panama hat, shirt and boots, and he carried a rifle in his hand.  Being
of the same race, he ought to have been a friend, but when the bright
moonlight fell upon his face, it showed the countenance of a demon.

He was Burkhardt, an escaped convict, who had lived for five years
among the Murhapas, and he was seeking the life of Fred Ashman, who, in
his enchanting visions of love, never dreamed of the awful shadow
stealing upon him.




CHAPTER XXIV.

YOUNG LOVE'S DREAM.

What in all the world so sweet as young love's dream?  It is the old,
old story, and yet it is as new and fresh and blissful to the soul as
it will be to the end of time, or until these natures of ours are
changed by the same Hand that framed them.

What more bewitching romance could cast its halo about the divine
passion than that which enshrined the affection of Fred Ashman for the
wonderful Ariel, the only child of the grim Haffgo, king of the
Murhapas?

He had met and chatted and exchanged glances with the beauties of his
own clime, and yet his heart remained unscathed.  He reverenced the sex
to which his adored mother and sister belonged, and yet never had he
felt the thrill that stirred his nature to the profoundest depths, when
his eyes met those of the barbarian princess and the two smiled without
either uttering a word.

"What care I for the gold and the diamonds and the precious stones of
the Matto Grosso?" the ardent lover asked himself; "is not she the
Koh-i-noor of them all?--the one gem whose preciousness is worth more
than all the world?"

He was willing that the Professor and Jared Long should risk their
lives in searching for the enchanted lake, and the burning mountain
where such priceless wealth existed.  Thousands of their kind had done
it before, and countless thousands would follow in their footsteps
through the generations to come.

But as for _him_, a new mission had broken upon his consciousness; he
had a sacred duty to perform.  Somewhere, in this broad world, a human
soul is always waiting for its mate.  Perchance it never comes, and the
weary one may be joined to that which heaven never intended it to be
joined, or it repines and goes to the grave unloved.

Fred Ashman was as sure as if he heard a voice from the stars, telling
him that Ariel, the daughter of Haffgo, was his other self.  He could
never rest, he could not really live until it should be his lot to
carry her from this lonely wilderness to his own home thousands of
miles away.

To the young lover, aglow and happy in his new passion, all things are
possible.  It is he who can appreciate even the days of chivalry, when
the valiant knight went forth, with lance and buckler to win his lady
against all comers, counting it his highest happiness to face the
perils of flood and field if perchance he could but win her smile.

And yet, amid all the roseate dreams which fairly lifted Fred Ashman
from the gross earth, he could not entirely lose sight of his peculiar
situation and the formidable difficulties which environed his path.  He
would not admit they were insurmountable, but they were hard to climb.

To come down to facts, he felt that the first, and, indeed, the
indispensable step was to secure a meeting with the princess that had
taken such complete possession of his heart.

Guarded as she was by her father, who was sure to resent with instant
death any such presumption on his part, he might well shrink from the
appalling attempt; but love has many ways of picking the locks that may
be fastened to keep hearts apart.

"Ziffak!"

That was the name which came to his tongue again and again, with the
question whether his friendship could not be enlisted on the side of
the youth, who had come so strangely to the Murhapa village.  He was a
shrewd fellow who must suspect the truth of those stolen glances.  He
had shown a sudden and strong affection for the explorers, and
especially for Ashman to whom he surrendered.  Was what friendship
strong enough to lead him to a step that would insure a rupture with
his royal brother and probably bring about war in his little kingdom?

"I wonder what revelation he was on the point of making when he sat
down with us in his mother's home," Ashman muttered, as he slowly
walked along the bank of the Upper Xingu, unmindful of the creeping
shadow behind him.

That it bore upon that interview and related to the angry quarrel he
did not doubt, but he could only conjecture its nature which was not
encouraging when he recalled that Ziffak had told him and his friends,
without protest on his part, that they were likely to be compelled to
leave the village that night.

Ashman ceased in his walk, for he saw, in spite of his absorbing
reverie, that he had passed above the uppermost house of the village.
The condition under which he was allowed to stay in peace, even for a
brief time, was that he should not wander beyond the limits of the town.

It was useless to excite resentment without reason, and he was about to
turn and retrace his steps, when a slight rustling of the undergrowth,
which marked the boundary of the forest on the south caused him to turn
his head, stop, and hold his rifle ready for danger.

His old habit of caution came back the instant peril seemed to threaten.

While he debated whether to advance and force the stranger to reveal
himself, the outlines of a form were distinguished and a slight figure
stepped forth in the moonlight.

Ashman's heart seemed to stop beating and life itself hang in suspense,
when he recognized the very being that had taken such full possession
of his thoughts.

Ay, Ariel, daughter of King Haffgo, stood before him.

For a moment, neither spoke or moved.  It was not strange perhaps that
she was the first to recover the power of utterance.

Advancing timidly, she said in a tremulous voice and with an accent
just broken enough to make it all the sweeter:

"You are in danger and I could not help coming to tell you."

"Heaven bless you!" he exclaimed, taking a step toward her, but still
observing a respectful distance.  "You have braved danger yourself to
give me the warning."

"I left my home and waited for a chance to speak to you; I dared not go
to the door of Ziffak's house for I would have been seen.  Then, while
I was wondering what to do, I saw you come forth and walk toward the
river.  I thought you would go to the end of the village, so I hurried
on and hid among the bushes until I could speak to you without any one
seeing me."

Ashman's head was in a swirl.  He was trembling in every limb, while
she seemed to be devoid of any agitation whatever.

"Your father King Haffgo was angry this afternoon, because I looked at
you; but," added the lover, "I could not have helped doing it, if I
knew my life would have paid for the act.  Ziffak told me about you, so
you see I did not feel that you were a stranger, even though I then saw
you for the first time and never heard the music of your voice until
now."

"The king is angry," said she, withdrawing a little as the happy fellow
took another step; "he says you shall be killed, but Ziffak persuaded
him to say your life should be spared if you went away to-night."

Ashman felt another delicious thrill as he reflected that if such were
the understanding, there would seem to be no cause for the lovely Ariel
to come thus far out of her way to repeat what Ziffak was sure to
explain before the departure of the explorers.

Ah, it must have been because of her interest in him that she had
sought this perilous stolen interview.

"Well, then," said he mournfully, "I must depart and never see you
again.  Death would be preferable to _that_!"

"But you may come back some time," said she in such a tremulous,
hesitating voice, that he impulsively sprang forward and caught her
dainty hand before she could escape him.

"O don't!" she plead like a timid bird, striving to withdraw the
imprisoned fingers which he still held fast.

"Nay, but you must, if I am never to see you again," he exclaimed
vehemently; "O, Ariel, I had hoped that I might stay here until I could
see and talk with you and tell you that I can never, never leave you;
that if I go, you must go with me; I will take you to my home which is
many many long miles away, but I will be your slave; I will love you; I
will make you happy; you shall never sigh for the land and the people
you leave behind you----"

There is no saying when the impetuous lover would have stopped his
wooing in this cyclone-like fashion hut for an alarming interruption.
He had been smitten profoundly, and the urgency of the case impelled
him to an ardor which could not have found expression under any other
conditions; but, all the time the frightened maiden was striving to
free her imprisoned hand, and the lover felt he ought to release it but
could not.

Suddenly she ceased her efforts and looked beyond him with a gasp and
such a startled expression, that he knew some unusual cause had
produced it.




CHAPTER XXV.

ZIFFAK'S BLOW.

Ziffak, head chieftain of the Murhapas, was a shrewder and more
far-seeing man than even his white friends suspected.

He had been the first to observe the significant glances of Fred Ashman
at the hanging curtains, as he was the first to detect the presence of
his beloved niece behind them.

Although King Haffgo saw not the smile which flitted over the face of
his daughter, when her eyes met those of the young American, yet Ziffak
observed it, and he could not have translated it wrongly had he wished
to do so.

An intimation has been given of the nature of the quarrel between
Ziffak and his royal brother.  The latter was so infuriated that he
declared that every one of the white men should die.  Ziffak reminded
him of his pledge that they should be safe for two days, a pledge that
he had repeated in their presence.

But in his hot anger, Ziffak said, he would break that pledge.  One of
the explorers had dared to look upon the face of Ariel and smile.  Had
he detected her returning it, he would have driven his javelin through
her body as she stood beside him.

Ziffak gave no hint of what he had observed.

The head chieftain was not afraid to brave his brother to his face; but
he wisely forbore carrying the quarrel beyond the point of
reconciliation.  He told his brother that he was so beside himself that
he forgot he was a Murhapa who never broke his word.  But if the king
insisted, he would see that the white men took their departure before
the rising of the morrow's sun.

King Haffgo consented that if that was done, he would permit them to go
in peace.  It was Ziffak's hope that his brother, after his anger had
time to cool, would modify his last declaration still further and allow
them to stay their two days, that led him to qualify his remark about
the necessity of their withdrawing that night.

The same cunning which stood the head chieftain so well during this
stormy interview remained with him to the end.  While he and his
brother were wrangling, Ariel stood mute and with bowed head.  She
durst not speak, but withdrew only a minute or two before her parent.

Ziffak was still warmly attached to Ashman, and was willing to risk his
life in his behalf.  Knowing that Waggaman and Burkhardt had had much
to do with stirring the resentment of the king, he was angry enough to
slay both of them.

When the most peculiar situation is considered, however, it is hardly
safe to believe the head chieftain was ready to go to the length of
helping to bring about a meeting between the lovers.

He understood his niece well enough to know that despite the fury of
her parent, she would brave a good deal to exchange words with the
handsome stranger that had made such an impression on his heart.

So long as this young man remained in Ziffak's house, so long was it
impossible for such meeting to take place; but, when Ashman sprang up
and announced his intention of taking a stroll, Ziffak believed that it
was with the intention of trying to see Ariel.  That is to say, he
suspected what really came to pass, though it was not in the mind of
the youth.

Ashman had not been gone long, when Ziffak made an excuse to withdraw,
saying he meant to find out, if he could, where Waggaman and Burkhardt
were hiding.  He counselled the Professor and the New Englander to stay
where they were until his return, which he promised should not be long
deferred.

Neither Grimcke nor Long dreamt of the object of their dusky friend in
leaving, and as the mother of the Murhapa reappeared about that time
and started a fire, with a view of preparing their evening meal, they
concluded that the best thing for them was to follow the advice of the
brave fellow.

The instant Ziffak was on the outside of his own house, he became as
alert as a cat scenting a mouse.  He held his ponderous javelin with
its poisoned tip in his right hand, and he looked keenly about in the
gathering gloom.

A warrior stopped in front of him and made a respectful inquiry about
the white men.  Ziffak uttered such an angry reply and raised his
weapon so menacingly that the native skurried away in terror of his
life.

All at once the keen black eyes caught sight of a small, petite figure
as it vanished in the darkness.  He smiled, for he recognized Ariel on
her way to the upper end of the village.  He knew on the instant what
_that_ meant.

Then the penetrating gaze outlined the figure of a man, sneaking like a
wild animal, down the river bank.  He was seen only faintly, but he was
equally sure of _his_ identity.  It was Burkhardt, one of the hated
white men that had poisoned the mind of his brother and caused him to
forget he was a Murhapa, whose word should be sacred.

An exultant gleam came into the dusky face, as he stole forward in the
same direction that the convict took.  The action of the miscreant
showed that he was following some prey, and who was it as likely to be
as the white man that was abroad and was held in such detestation by
the scoundrel?

Burkhardt, in one respect, acted precisely as did his intended victim.
The latter was so absorbed in his own delicious thoughts, that, after
that hurried glance around him, he did not once again look to the rear.
So Burkhardt, never once dreaming that he was under surveillance, kept
his gloating eyes fixed on the shadowy figure in front, without looking
to see that while the man was hunting the tiger another tiger was not
hunting him.

Being a slight distance to the rear of the convict, Ziffak could not
see the form in front of him with equal distinctness, but the faint
glimpse which he caught was all he needed.

Thus the strange procession passed up the western bank of the calmly
flowing Xingu.  Fred Ashman moving slowly and lost in reverie,
Burkhardt prowling like a wild beast behind him, with Ziffak clinging
to the heels of the wretch as if he were his very shadow.

The moon, which gave but faint light at the beginning, increased in
power as the minutes passed.  Ziffak fell back, so that if Burkhardt
should look around, he would not recognize though he might see him.

But the ruffian did not turn his head: he was too intent on the fearful
task before him.

Suddenly he stopped.  Instantly Ziffak crouched down into the smallest
possible space and clutched his javelin.  The increasing moonlight
showed that he had passed beyond the upper end of the village and was
watching the lovers on the fringe of the forest beyond.

A movement on the part of Burkhardt, as if he were making preparation
to fire his rifle, caused Ziffak to move swiftly and silently forward
until he was within twenty paces.  Then he paused, for he was close
enough.

The change of position on the part of the pursuer enabled him to catch
the outlines of the lovers, so absorbed in each other's presence that
they forgot to keep within the sheltering shadow of the trees.

Burkhardt could ask for no better opportunity than that which was now
before him.  He knew the inextinguishable hatred of King Haffgo for
this white man, and no greater favor could be done the ruler than to
slay him.

Sinking on one knee, he carefully brought his gun to a level.  The
gleam of the moonlight on the barrel insured unerring aim.

But a moment before it was perfected, Ashman stepped forward and seized
the hand of his adored one.  This caused such a change of the relative
situation of the two that the weapon could not be fired without
endangering the life of the maiden.

That would never do, and waiting a moment in the hope that another
charge would take place, Burkhardt began stealthily moving to the right
to secure the advantage.  A few steps up the slope were all that was
required, when he again knelt on one knee and pointed his rifle at the
unsuspicious American.

It was but an instant before that Ariel caught sight of the crouching
figure and was transfixed with terror.  The moonlight enabled her to
identify the person, who was aiming his gun either at her or her
companion.

Before she could speak, and at the moment Ashman turned his head, a
giant figure was seen to rise as if out of the very earth, directly
behind the miscreant.  He held his prodigious javelin poised over his
bead.  He was seen to make a sudden onward movement and then the weapon
vanished.

Speeding toward the couple with such amazing velocity it was invisible;
but, ere the crouching convict could press the trigger of his rifle, he
was seen to sprawl forward, his gun flying from his grasp.  The
terrible javelin had gone entirely through his body as though it were
tissue paper, and pinned him like an impaled insect to the earth!

"The scoundrel!" exclaimed Ashman, who was just too late to anticipate
their friend.

"It is Ziffak who has saved us!" gasped Ariel, shrinking against the
side of her lover.

The herculean chieftain towered aloft in more imposing proportions than
ever as he strode toward the startled couple.  Whether he was advancing
to regain his weapon, or whether he meant to join them could not be
known; for, before he reached the body of the assassin, he abruptly
stopped and looked in the direction of the village.

He had caught an ominous sound: it was that made by the discharge of
firearms!

"Great heaven!" exclaimed Ashman; "they have attacked my friends in
Ziffak's house; I must go to their help; dearest Ariel, what will
become of you?" added the distracted lover.
