The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moon Destroyers, by Monroe K. Ruch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Moon Destroyers

Author: Monroe K. Ruch

Release Date: October 11, 2012 [EBook #41029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOON DESTROYERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                          The Moon Destroyers

                           By MONROE K. RUCH

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: The tremendous speed of the dive brought them so close
that they could see the skeletons of wrecked ships piled up at the base
of the precipice.]

       *       *       *       *       *


                            MONROE K. RUCH

     The moon is not only the most prominent object in our heavens, but
     also an integral part of the earth. We are, so to speak, an
     astronomical unit, and we affect each other for better or for
     worse.

     We know that the gravitational attraction of the moon causes our
     tides, and tends to slow up the earth in her daily rotation. It has
     also been deemed responsible for earthquakes, causing untold
     suffering among earth's people.

     But so far the effect of the moon has been rather an inhuman
     affair. No man has gone to the moon to see just what conditions are
     there, and to observe accurately the influence that the moon and
     earth exercise over each other. But when interplanetary travel does
     come, when commerce between moon and earth may possibly assume
     importance in our lives, the influence of the moon upon us may be
     more accurately determined. And when it is, the amazing series of
     incidents, pictured in this story, may yet come true.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Erickson, head of the International Seismographical Institute,
sat with bowed head and pale face, watching the stylus of the instrument
before him trace its path on the slowly revolving drum. The laboratory,
situated high in the Himalayas, trembled slightly as mid-winter storms
roared and whistled around it, but something quite different, and
infinitely more sinister, was causing the needle to wander from its
ordinarily straight path.

Suddenly, with horrible certainty, it jumped, wavered back and forth,
and then moved rapidly to the right, until its black ink no longer
traced a line on the white paper.

"Holden," shouted Erickson to his assistant, "what does the direction
and distance finder tell us? The stylus has run clear off the graph."

Young Jack Holden was working feverishly over the dials and levers of
the panel before him. Slender yet strong, he looked like a long-bow of
stout old yew as he bent to the task. His steel gray eyes focused
intently on the verniers, taking the readings. The muscles in his tanned
cheeks were tight as he turned toward his superior. For a moment the
very storm seemed to hush, awaiting the words. Then he spoke.

"It's the Laurentian fault!"

For a moment both men stared at each other, stunned and helpless.

"That means," Holden managed to say, "that New York is a mass of ruins."

Pictures were forming in his mind; he saw the huge steel and glass
towers of the city, tossed and torn by the convulsive writhings of the
earth beneath. Great engineers had said that the city was safe, that no
tremors would ever disturb it, but they knew nothing of the terrific
force of such a shock as this. Those massive buildings, thousands of
feet high, would now be mere heaps of twisted junk. Holden closed his
eyes to shut out the picture, but to no avail. His sister! God! She was
probably one of the millions who now lay, crushed, bleeding and helpless
beneath the wreckage of the too-proud metropolis.

"My boy," the professor was speaking, "we must stay with our work, no
matter what happens." His voice was low; his entire family had been
wiped out, without doubt, but Science must be served.

For hours the two sat before their instruments, as shock after shock was
recorded. Jones came down from the television room above, and his report
confirmed their observations in horrible detail.

"All communications from the city itself are cut off, but an airliner
from England, which was about to dock, has broadcast the scene. Aid is
being rushed from all over the world, but at a conservative estimate ten
million are already dead, and millions more will probably die, buried
and hidden as they are beneath the wreckage."

At last, nearly five hours after the first shock, the Professor stood
up.

"I think that is all. My prophecies have come true, and at last my
theories will be needed. But the cost of it all, the horrible cost!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Two weeks later a group of men were seated around the conference table
in the spacious offices of the Department of Public Safety of the World
Union. All faces were turned toward the stooped figure of Professor
Erickson, who was speaking from the head of the table.

"Gentlemen, I have outlined to you, only too briefly, the damage caused
by the quake a few days ago. I now state that a repetition of such a
disaster is imminent. Great faults have formed in the basic granites
throughout the entire globe. Observations recorded during five centuries
since the first conception of the idea by Dr. Maxwell Allen in 1931,
show conclusively that Earth-tides, set up by the attraction of the
moon, cause a sweeping series of stresses and strains. These, coming to
a fault, produce earthquakes. Now that there are huge faults in the
basic rock, these quakes will be of a tremendous force and range which
the most modern structures will be unable to resist."

"Professor," spoke John Dorman, Secretary of Public Safety, "if all this
is true, and we are assured that it is, what on earth can be done about
it?"

"Gentlemen, during nearly seventy years I have studied that problem,
and I have come to only one conclusion. Nothing on earth can be done
about it, if you permit the remark, but men from earth can do something.
_Destroy the moon!_"
