
Within a minute Grantline was ready. The duty-man called from the
window:

"Still at it! By the infernal, such fools! They'll kill themselves!"

The figures had swayed back into view, then out of sight again.

"Franck, let me out."

Grantline was ready. He stood, helmet in hand.

"I'll go with you, Commander."

But the volunteer was not equipped. Grantline would not wait.

"I'm going at once. Hurry, Franck."

The duty-man turned to his panel. The volunteer shoved a weapon at
Grantline. "Here, take this."

Grantline jammed on his helmet.

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved the few steps into the small air-chamber which was the first
of the three pressure locks. Its interior door-panel swung open for
him. But the door did not close after him!

Cursing the duty-man's slowness, he waited a few seconds. Then he
turned to the corridor. The duty-man came running.

Grantline took off his helmet. "What in hell--"

"Broken! Dead!"

"What!"

"Smashed from outside," gasped the duty-man. "Look there--my tubes--"

The control-tubes of the portes had flashed into a close-circuit and
burned out. The admission portes would not open!

"And the pressure controls smashed! Broken from outside--!"

There was no way now of getting out through these pressure-locks. The
doors, the entire pressure-lock system, was dead. Had it been tampered
with from outside?

As though to answer Grantline's amazed question there came a chorus of
shouts from the men at the corridor windows.

"Commander! By God--look!"

A figure was outside, close to the building! Clothed in suit and
helmet, it stood, bloated and gigantic. It had evidently been lurking
at the porte-entrance, had ripped out the wires there.

It moved past the windows, saw the staring faces of the men, and made
off with giant bounds. Grantline reached the window in time to see it
vanish around the building corner.

It was a giant figure, larger than a normal Earthman. A Martian?

       *       *       *       *       *

Up on the summit of the crater the two small figures were still
fighting. All this turmoil had taken no more than a minute or two.

A lurking Martian outside? The brigand, Miko? More than ever,
Grantline was determined to get out. He shouted to his men to don some
of the other suits, and called for some of the hand bullet projectors.

But he could not get out through these main admission portes. He could
have forced the panels open perhaps; but with the pressure-changing
mechanisms broken, it would merely let the air out of the corridor. A
rush of air, probably uncontrollable. How serious the damage was no
one could tell as yet. It would perhaps take hours to repair it.

Grantline was shouting. "Get those weapons! That's a Martian outside!
The brigand leader, probably! Get into your suits, anyone who wants to
go with me! We'll go by the manual emergency exit!"

But the prowling Martian had found it! Within a minute Grantline was
there. It was a smaller, two-lock gateway of manual control, so that
the person going out could operate it himself. It was in a corridor at
the other end of the main building. But Grantline was too late! The
lever would not open the panels!

Had someone gone out this way and broken the mechanisms after him? A
traitor in the camp? Or had someone come in from outside? Or had the
skulking Martian outside broken this lock as he had broken the other?

The questions surged on Grantline. His men crowded around him. The
news spread. The camp was a prison. No one could get out.

And outside, the skulking Martian had disappeared. But Wilks and
Haljan were still fighting. Grantline could see the two figures up on
the observatory platform. They bounded apart, then together again.
Crazily swaying--bouncing--striking the rail.

       *       *       *       *       *

They went together in a great leap off the platform onto the rocks,
and rolled in a bright patch of Earthlight. First one on top, then the
other, they rolled, unheeding, to the brink. Here, beyond the midway
ledge which held the camp, it was a sheer drop of a thousand feet, on
down to the crater-floor.

The figures were rolling: then one shook himself loose, rose up,
seized the other and, with a desperate lunge, shoved him--

The victorious figure drew back to safety. The other fell, hurtling
down into the shadows past the camp-level--down out of sight in the
darkness of the crater-floor.

Snap, who was in the group near Grantline at the windows, gasped.

"God! Was that Gregg Haljan who fell?"

No one could say. No one answered. Outside, on the camp-ledge, another
helmeted figure now became visible. It was not far from the main
building when Grantline first noticed it. It was running fast,
bounding toward the spider-staircase. It began mounting.

And now still another figure became visible--the giant Martian again.
He appeared from around the corner of the main Grantline building. He
evidently saw the winner of the combat on the cliff, who now was
standing in the Earthlight, gazing down. And he saw, too, no doubt,
the second figure mounting the stairs. He stood quite near the window
through which Grantline and his men were gazing, with his back to the
building, looking up to the summit. Then he ran with tremendous leaps
toward the ascending staircase.

Was it Haljan standing up there on the summit? Who was it climbing the
staircase? And was the third figure Miko?

Grantline's mind framed the questions. But his attention was torn from
them, and torn even from the swift silent drama outside. The corridor
was ringing with shouts.

"We're imprisoned! Can't get out! Was Haljan killed? The brigands are
outside!"

And then an interior audiphone blared a call for Grantline. Someone in
the instrument room of the adjoining building was talking:

"Commander, I tried the telescope to see who got killed--"

But he did not say who got killed, for he had greater news.

"Commander! The brigand ship!"

Miko's reinforcements from Mars had come.


CHAPTER XXV

_The Combat on the Crater-top_

Not Wilks, but Coniston! His drawling, British voice:

"You, Gregg Haljan! How nice!"

His voice broke off as he jerked his arm from me. My hand with the
bullet-protector came up, but with a sweeping blow he struck my
wrist. The weapon dropped to the rocks.

I fought instinctively, those first moments; my mind was whirling with
the shock of surprise. This was not Wilks, but the brigand Coniston.

His blow wrenched him around. Awkward, fighting in the air-puffed
suits, with only a body-weight of some thirty pounds! Coniston
stumbled over the rocks. I had still scarce recovered my wits, but I
avoided his outflung arms, and, stooping, tried to recover my
revolver. It lay nearby. But Coniston followed my scrambling steps and
fell upon me. My foot struck the weapon; it slid away and fell down a
crag into a six-foot pit.

We locked together, and when I rose erect he had me around the middle.
His voice jangled with broken syllables in my receiver.

"Do for you now, Haljan--"

It was an eery combat. We swayed, shoving, kicking, wrestling. His
hold around my middle shut off the Erentz circulation; the warning
buzz rang in my ears to mingle with the rasp of his curses. I flung
him off, and my tiny Erentz motors recovered. He staggered away, but
in a great leap came at me again.

I was taller, heavier and far stronger than Coniston. But I found him
crafty, and where I was awkward in handling my lightness, he seemed
more skilfully agile.

       *       *       *       *       *

I became aware that we were on the twenty-foot square grid of the
observatory platform. It had a low metal railing. We surged against
it. I caught a dizzying glimpse of the abyss. Then it receded as we
bounced the other way. And then we fell to the grid. His helmet bashed
against mine, striking as though butting with the side of his head to
puncture my visor-panel. His gloved fingers were trying to rip at the
fabric around my throat.

As we regained our feet, I flung him off, and bounded, like a diver,
head-first into him. He went backward, but skilfully kept his feet,
gripped me again and shoved me.

I was tottering at the head of the staircase--falling. But I clutched
at him.

We fell some twenty or thirty feet to the next lower spider landing.
The impact must have dazed us both. I recall my vague idea that we had
fallen down the cliff--my Erentz motors smashed--my air shut off. Then
the air came again. The roaring in my ears was stilled; my head
cleared, and I found that we were on the landing--fighting.

He presently broke away from me, bounded to the summit, with me after
him. In the close confines of the suit I was bathed in sweat, and
gasping. I had had no thought to increase the oxygen content of my
air. But I sorely needed more oxygen for my laboring, pounding heart
and my panting breath. I fumbled for the oxygen control-lever. I could
not find it; or it would not operate.

I realized I was fighting sluggishly, almost aimlessly. But so was
Coniston!

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed dreamlike. A phantasmagoria of blows and staggering steps. A
nightmare with only the horrible vision of this goggled helmet always
before my eyes.

It seemed that we were rolling on the ground, back on the summit. The
unshadowed Earthlight was clear and bright. The abyss was beside me.
Coniston, rolling, was now on top, now under me, trying to shove me
over the brink. It was all like a dream--as though I were asleep,
dreaming that I did not have enough air.

I strove to keep my senses. He was struggling to roll me over the
brink. Ah, that would not do! But I was so tired. One cannot fight
without oxygen!

I suddenly knew that I had shaken him off and gained my feet. He rose
up, swaying. He was as tired, confused, half-asphyxiated as I.

The brink of the abyss was behind us. I lunged, desperately shoving,
avoiding his clutch.

He went over, and fell soundlessly, his body whirling end over end
down into the shadows, far down.

I drew back. My senses faded as I sank panting to the rocks. But with
inactivity, my thumping heart quieted. My respirations slowed. The
Erentz circulation gained on my poisoned air. It purified.

That blessed oxygen! My head cleared again. Strength came to me. I
felt better.

Coniston had fallen to his death. I was victor. I went to the brink,
cautiously, for I was still dizzy. I could see, far down there on the
crater-floor, a little patch of Earthlight in which a mashed human
figure was lying.

       *       *       *       *       *

I staggered back again. A moment or two must have passed while I stood
there on the summit, with my senses clearing and my strength renewed
as the blood-stream cleared in my veins.

I was victor. Coniston was dead. I saw now, down on the lower
staircase below the camp-ledge, another goggled figure lying huddled.
That was Wilks, no doubt. Coniston had doubtless caught him there,
surprised him, killed him.

My attention, as I stood gazing, went down to the camp-buildings.
Another figure was outside! It bounded along the ledge, reached the
foot of the ascending staircase at the top of which I was standing.
With agile leaps, it came mounting at me!

Another brigand! Miko? No, it was not large enough to be Miko, not
nearly large enough. I was still confused. I thought of Hahn. But that
was absurd. Hahn was in the wreck of the _Planetara_. One of the
stewards then....

The figure came up the staircase recklessly, to assail me. I took a
step backward, bracing myself to receive this new antagonist.

And then I saw Miko! Unquestionably he: for there was no mistaking
his giant figure. He was down on the camp-ledge, running toward the
foot of the staircase, coming up to help this other man in advance of
him.

I thought of my revolver. I turned to try and find it. I was aware
that the first of my assailants was at the stairhead. I could not
locate at once where the revolver had fallen. I would be caught,
leaped upon from behind. Should I run?

I swung back to see what the oncoming brigand was doing. He had
reached the summit. His arms went up, legs bent under him. With a
sailing leap he launched for me. I could have bounded way, but with a
last look to locate the revolver, I braced myself for the shock.

The figure hit me. It was small and light in my clutching arms. I
recall I saw that Miko was half-way up the staircase. I gripped my
assailant. The audiphone contact brought a voice.

"Gregg! Is it you?"

It was Anita clutching at me!


CHAPTER XXVI

_At Bay_

"Gregg, you're safe!"

She had heard the camp corridors resounding with the shouts that Wilks
and Haljan were fighting. She had come upon a suit and helmet by the
manual emergency lock, had run out through the lock, confused, with
her only idea to stop Wilks and me from fighting. Then she had seen
one of us killed. Impulsive, barely knowing what she was doing, she
mounted the stairs, frantic to find if I were alive.

"Anita!"

Miko was coming! She had not seen him: for she had no thought of
brigands--only the belief that either Wilks or I had been killed.

But now, as for an instant we stood together on the rocks near the
observation platform, I could see the towering figure of Miko nearing
the top of the stairs.

"Anita, that's Miko! We must run."

Then I saw my bullet projector. It lay in a bowl-like depression quite
near us. I jumped for it. And as I tore loose from Anita, she leaped
down after me. It was a broken bowl in the rocks, some six feet deep.
It was open on the side facing the staircase--a narrow, ravinelike
gully, full of gray, broken, tumbled rock-masses. The little gully was
littered with crags and boulders. But I could see out through it.

Miko had come to the head of the staircase. He stopped there, his
great figure etched sharply by the Earthlight. I think he must have
known that Coniston was the one who had fallen over the cliff, as my
helmet and Coniston's were different enough for him to recognize which
was which. He did not know who I was, but he did know me for an enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood now at the summit, peering to see where we had gone. He was
no more than fifty feet from us.

"Anita, lie down."

I pulled her down on the rocks. I took aim with the bullet projector.
But I had forgotten our helmet-lights. Miko must have seen them just
as I pulled the trigger. The flying bullet missed him as he jumped
sidewise. He dropped, but I could see him moving in the shadows to
where a jutting rock gave him shelter. I fired again.

"Gregg."

