

EARLY ARRIVALS AT PIER

Among the first to arrive at the pier was a committee from the Stock
Exchange, headed by R. H. Thomas, and composed of Charles Knoblauch, B.
M. W. Baruch, Charles Holzderber and J. Carlisle. Mr. Thomas carried
a long black box which contained $5000 in small bills, which was to
be handed out to the needy steerage survivors of the Titanic as they
disembarked.

With the early arrivals at the pier were the relatives of Frederick
White, who was not reported among the survivors, though Mrs. White
was; Harry Mock, who came to look for a brother and sister; and Vincent
Astor, who arrived in a limousine with William A. Dobbyn, Colonel
Astor's secretary, and two doctors. The limousine was kept waiting
outside to take Mrs. Astor to the Astor home on Fifth Avenue.

EIGHT LIMOUSINE CARS

The Waldorf-Astoria had sent over eight limousine car to convey to the
hotel these survivors:

Mrs. Mark Fortune and three daughters, Mrs. Lucien P. Smith, Mrs. J.
Stewart White, Mrs. Thornton Davidson, Mrs. George C. Douglass, Mrs.
George D. Widener and maid, Mrs. George Wick, Miss Bonnell, Miss E.
Ryerson, Mrs. Susan P. Ryerson, Mrs. Arthur Ryerson, Miss Mary Wick, the
Misses Howell, Mrs. John P. Snyder and Mr. and Mrs. D. H. Bishop.


THIRTY-FIVE AMBULANCES AT THE PIER

At one time there were thirty-five ambulances drawn up; outside the
Cunard pier. Every hospital in Manhattan, Brooklyn and the Bronx was
represented. Several of the ambulances came from as far north as the
Lebanon Hospital, in the Bronx, and the Brooklyn Hospital, in Brooklyn.

Accompanying them were seventy internes and surgeons from the staffs of
the hospitals, and more than 125 male and female nurses.

St. Vincent's sent the greatest number of ambulances, at one time, eight
of them from this hospital being in line at the pier.

Miss Eva Booth, direct head of the Salvation Army, was at the pier,
accompanied by Miss Elizabeth Nye and a corps of her officers, ready
to aid as much as possible. The Sheltering Society and various other
similar organizations also were represented, all ready to take care of
those who needed them.

An officer of the Sixty-ninth Regiment, N. G. N. Y., offered the White
Star Line officials, the use of the regiment's armory for any of the
survivors.

Mrs. Thomas Hughes, Mrs. August Belmont and Mgrs. Lavelle and McMahon,
of St. Patrick's Cathedral, together with a score of black-robed Sisters
of Charity, representing the Association of Catholic Churches, were
on the pier long before the Carpathia was made fast, and worked
industriously in aiding the injured and ill.

The Rev. Dr. William Carter, pastor of the Madison Avenue Reformed
Church, was one of those at the pier with a private ambulance awaiting
Miss Sylvia Caldwell, one of the survivors, who is known in church
circles as a mission worker in foreign fields


FREE RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION

The Pennsylvania Railroad sent representatives to the pier, who said
that the railroad had a special train of nine cars in which it would
carry free any passenger who wanted to go immediately to Philadelphia
or points west. The Pennsylvania also had eight taxicabs at the pier for
conveyance of the rescued to the Pennsylvania Station, in Thirty-third
Street.

Among those who later arrived at the pier before the Carpathia docked
were P. A. B. Widener, of Philadelphia, two women relatives of J. B.
Thayer, William Harris, Jr., the theatrical man, who was accompanied by
Dr Dinkelspiel, and Henry Arthur Jones, the playwright.

RELATIVES OF SAVED AND LOST

Commander Booth, of the Salvation Army, was there especially to meet
Mrs. Elizabeth Nye and Mrs. Rogers Abbott, both Titanic survivors. Mrs.
Abbott's two sons were supposed to be among the lost. Miss Booth had
received a cablegram from London saying that other Salvation Army people
were on the Titanic. She was eager to get news of them.

Also on the pier was Major Blanton, U. S. A., stationed at Washington,
who was waiting for tidings of Major Butt, supposedly at the instance of
President Taft.

Senator William A. Clark and Mrs. Clark were also in the company. Dr.
John R. MacKenty was waiting for Mr. and Mrs. Henry S. Harper. Ferdinand
W. Roebling and Carl G. Roebling, cousins of Washington A. Roebling,
Jr., whose name is among the list of dead, went to the pier to see what
they could learn of his fate.

J. P. Morgan, Jr., arrived at the pier about half an hour before the
Carpathia docked. He said he had many friends on the Titanic and was
eagerly awaiting news of all of them.

Fire Commissioner Johnson was there with John Peel, of Atlanta, Gal, a
brother of Mrs. Jacques Futrelle. Mrs. Futrelle has a son twelve years
old in Atlanta, and a daughter Virginia, who has been in school in
the North and is at present with friends in this city, ignorant of her
father's death.


A MAN IN HYSTERICS

There was one man in that sad waiting company who startled those near
him about 9 o'clock by dancing across the pier and back. He seemed to be
laughing, but when he was stopped it was found that he was sobbing. He
said that he had a relative on the Titanic and had lost control of his
nerves.

H. H. Brunt, of Chicago, was at the gangplank waiting for A. Saalfeld,
head of the wholesale drug firm of Sparks, White & Co., of London, who
was coming to this country on the Titanic on a business trip and whose
life was saved.


WAITING FOR CARPATHIA

During the afternoon and evening tugboats, motor boats and even sailing
craft, had been waiting off the Ambrose Light for the appearance of the
Carpathia.

Some of the waiting craft contained friends and anxious relatives of the
survivors and those reported as missing.

The sea was rough and choppy, and a strong east wind was blowing. There
was a light fog, so that it was possible to see at a distance of only a
few hundred yards. This lifted later in the evening.

First to discover the incoming liner with her pitiful cargo was one
of the tugboats. From out of the mist there loomed far out at sea the
incoming steamer.


RESCUE BOAT SIGHTED

"Liner ahead!" cried the lookout on the tug to the captain.

"She must be the Carpathia," said the captain, and then he turned the
nose of his boat toward the spot on t he horizon.

Then the huge black hull and one smokestack could be distinguished.

"It's the Carpathia," said the captain. "I can tell her by the stack."

The announcement sent a thrill through those who heard it. Here, at the
gate of New York, was a ship whose record for bravery and heroic work
would be a famuliar{sic} name in history.


{illust. caption = Copyright by G. V. Buck. MRS. LUCIEN P. SMITH

Formerly Miss Eloise Hughes, daughter of Representative and Mrs. James
A. Hughes, of West Virginia. Mrs. Smith and her husband were passengers
on the Titanic. Mrs. Smith was saved, but her husband went to a watery
grave. Mr. and Mrs. Smith were married only a few months ago.}


{illust. caption = MAJOR ARCHIBALD BUTT

Military Aide to President Taft. Of Major Butt, who was one of the
victims of the Titanic, one of the survivors said: "Major Butt was the
real leader in all of that rescue work. He made the men stand back and
helped the women and children into the boats. He was surely one of God's
noblemen."}



CHAPTER XII. THE TRAGIC HOME-COMING

THE CARPATHIA REACHES NEW YORK--AN INTENSE AND DRAMATIC
MOMENT--HYSTERICAL REUNIONS AND CRUSHING DISAPPOINTMENTS AT THE
DOCK--CARING FOR THE SUFFERERS--FINAL REALIZATION THAT ALL HOPE FOR
OTHERS IS FUTILE--LIST OF SURVIVORS--ROLL OF THE DEAD

IT was a solemn moment when the Carpathia heaved in sight. There
she rested on the water, a blur of black--huge, mysterious,
awe-inspiring--and yet withal a thing to send thrills of pity and then
of admiration through the beholder.

It was a few minutes after seven o'clock when she arrived at the
entrance to Ambrose Channel. She was coming fast steaming at better than
fifteen knots an hour, and she was sighted long before she was expected.
Except for the usual side and masthead lights she was almost dark, only
the upper cabins showing a glimmer here and there.

Then began a period of waiting, the suspense of which proved almost too
much for the hundreds gathered there to greet friends and relatives or
to learn with certainty at last that those for whom they watched would
never come ashore.

There was almost complete silence on the pier. Doctors and nurses,
members of the Women's Relief Committee, city and government officials,
as well as officials of the line, moved nervously about.

Seated where they had been assigned beneath the big customs letters
corresponding to the initials of the names of the survivors they came to
meet, sat the mass of 2000 on the pier.

Women wept, but they wept quietly, not hysterically, and the sound of
the sobs made many times less noise than the hum and bustle which is
usual on the pier among those awaiting an incoming liner.

Slowly and majestically the ship slid through the water, still bearing
the details of that secret of what happened and who perished when the
Titanic met her fate.

Convoying the Carpathia was a fleet of tugs bearing men and women
anxious to learn the latest news. The Cunarder had been as silent for
days as though it, too, were a ship of the dead. A list of survivors
had been given out from its wireless station and that was all. Even the
approximate time of its arrival had been kept a secret.


NEARING PORT

There was no response to the hail from one tug, and as others closed in,
the steamship quickened her speed a little and left them behind as she
swung up the channel.

There was an exploding of flashlights from some of the tugs, answered
seemingly by sharp stabs of lightning in the northwest that served to
accentuate the silence and absence of light aboard the rescue ship. Five
or six persons, apparently members of the crew or the ship's officers,
were seen along the rail; but otherwise the boat appeared to be
deserted.

Off quarantine the Carpathia slowed down and, hailing the immigration
inspection boat, asked if the health officer wished to board. She
was told that he did, and came to a stop while Dr. O'Connell and two
assistants climbed on board. Again the newspaper men asked for some
word of the catastrophe to the Titanic, but there was no answer, and the
Carpathia continued toward her pier.

As she passed the revenue cutter Mohawk and the derelict destroyer
Seneca anchored off Tompkinsville the wireless on the Government vessels
was seen to flash, but there was no answering spark from the Carpathia.
Entering the North River she laid her course close to the New Jersey
side in order to have room to swing into her pier.

By this time the rails were lined with men and women. They were very
silent. There were a few requests for news from those on board and a few
answers to questions shouted from the tugs.

The liner began to slacken her speed, and the tugboat soon was
alongside. Up above the inky blackness of the hull figures could be made
out, leaning over the port railing, as though peering eagerly at the
little craft which was bearing down on the Carpathia.

Some of them, perhaps, had passed through that inferno of the deep sea
which sprang up to destroy the mightiest steamship afloat.

"Carpathia, ahoy!" was shouted through a megaphone.

There was an interval of a few seconds, and then, "Aye, aye," came the
reply.

"Is there any assistance that can be rendered?" was the next question.

"Thank you, no," was the answer in a tone that carried emotion with it.
Meantime the tugboat was getting nearer and nearer to the Carpathia, and
soon the faces of those leaning over the railing could be distinguished.


TALK WITH SURVIVORS

More faces appeared, and still more.

A woman who called to a man on the tugboat was asked? "Are you one the
Titanic survivors?"

"Yes," said the voice, hesitatingly.

"Do you need help?"

"No," after a pause.

"If there is anything you want done it will be attended to."

"Thank you. I have been informed that my relatives will meet me at the
pier."

"Is it true that some of the life-boats sank with the Titanic?"

"Yes. There was some trouble in manning them. They were not far enough
away from her."

All of this questioning and receiving replies was carried on with the
greatest difficulty. The pounding of the liner's engines, the washing of
the sea, the tugboat's engines, made it hard to understand the woman's
replies.


ALL CARED FOR ON BOARD

"Were the women properly cared for after the crash?" she was asked.

"Oh, yes," came the shrill reply. "The men were brave--very brave." Here
her voice broke and she turned and left the railing, to reappear a few
moments later and cry:

"Please report me as saved."

"What name?" was asked. She shouted a name that could not be understood,
and, apparently believing that it had been, turned away again and
disappeared.

"Nearly all of us are very ill," cried another woman. Here several other
tugboats appeared, and those standing at the railing were besieged with
questions.

"Did the crash come without warning?" a voice on one of the smaller
boats megaphoned.

"Yes," a woman answered. "Most of us had retired. We saved a few of our
belongings."

"How long did it take the boat to sink?" asked the voice.


TITANIC CREW HEROES

"Not long," came the reply? "The crew and the men were very brave. Oh,
it is dreadful--dreadful to think of!"

"Is Mr. John Jacob Astor on board?"
