"I am glad to hear you say so: I was afraid you had known too much of
Tim Bunker," said the director, as he walked towards his house.

Charles entered the hall, and took his seat.

"Those in favor of admitting Samuel Preston to the club will signify
it," said William, as soon as he was in his place.

Eleven hands were raised, and the new member, who stood by the window
waiting the result, was declared to be admitted. The constitution was
then read to him, and he signed it; after which the club embarked for an
excursion up to the strait, where they had agreed to meet the Butterfly.

The particular object of this visit was to erect a lighthouse on Curtis
Island, a small, rocky place, separated from the main shore by "Calrow
Strait," which the readers of "The Boat Club" will remember. The
navigation of this portion of the lake was considered very difficult,
especially through the narrow passage, and it was thought to be
absolutely necessary to have a lighthouse, mauger the fact that the
boats always sailed by day. But as neither craft was insured, it was
necessary to use extraordinary precautions!

A working party of half a dozen was detailed from each boat, consisting
of the stoutest boys, who were landed upon the island. Materials were
immediately gathered and the foundation laid. The structure was to be a
simple round tower, as high as the patience of the workmen would permit
them to build it.

In a short time all the rocks on the island had been used up, and the
lighthouse was only two feet high; but this contingency had been
anticipated, and provisions made for supplying more stone. A large rock
was attached to the long painter of the Butterfly, and she was moored at
a safe distance from the island, while her remaining crew were
transferred to the Zephyr.

A rude raft, which had been provided by Tony, was towed to the shore,
where an abundance of rocks were to be had. It was their intention to
load it with "lighthouse material," and tow it to the island. It
required all their skill to accomplish this object, for the raft was a
most ungainly thing to manage. The Zephyr was so long that they could
not row round so as to bring the raft alongside the bank, and when they
attempted to push it in, the paint, and even the planks of the boat,
were endangered.

"Can't get it in--can we?" said Charles Hardy, after several
unsuccessful attempts.

"There is no such word as fail," replied William. "Bring me the long
painter."

The coxswain unfastened the tow line of the raft, and tied the painter
to it.

"Bowman, stand by with the boat-hook, ready to land."

"Ay, ay!"

"Now, pull steady; be careful she does not grind on the rocks; easy,
there. Four of you jump ashore."

The four forward rowers obeyed the command.

"Now pass this line ashore, and let them pull in on the raft," continued
William.

"Hurrah! there she is!" shouted Frank. "That was done handsomely!"

"We could have done it before, if we had only thought of it," replied
William, laughing. "Now put out the fenders, and haul the boat alongside
the raft."

Four more of the boys were sent on shore to help roll down the rocks,
and two were ordered upon the raft to place them. A great deal of hard
work was done in a very short time; but, as it was play, no one minded
it, as probably some of them would if the labor had been for any useful
purpose. In due time the raft was loaded with all it would carry, and
the boys were ordered into the boat again.

The raft proved to be a very obstinate sailer. After a deal of hard
tugging at the oars, they succeeded in getting it under a tolerable
headway; but the tow line was not properly attached, and it "heeled
over" so as to be in danger of "spilling" its load into the lake.
Prudence and good management, however, on the part of the coxswain,
conveyed it in safety to the island, and its freight soon became "part
and parcel" of the lighthouse.

Two or three loads more were brought, after the lesson of experience
obtained in getting the first, with but comparatively little difficulty;
and at six o'clock the tower received its capstone at a height of six
feet from the ground, and twelve from the water.

The lighthouse was then inaugurated by a volley of cheers. A hollow
pumpkin of last year's growth, containing a lighted candle, was placed
upon the apex; and then the boats departed for home. At eight o'clock,
when the darkness had gathered upon the lake, they saw the light from
their homes, and had the satisfaction of knowing that the light-keeper
was watchful of the safety of vessels in those waters.

As Charles Hardy passed through the grove on his way home, after the
club separated, he met Tim Bunker, who was apparently awaiting his
coming.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE CONSPIRACY.


"Well, Charley, my pipe is out," said Tim Bunker, as he joined his late
associate in the club.

"It was rather sudden," replied Charles, disconcerted by the meeting,
for he had actually made up his mind to keep out of Tim's way. "I didn't
expect any such thing."

"I did; I knew old Sedley meant to get rid of me."

Tim always knew everything after it was done. He was a very profound
prophet, but he had sense enough to keep his predictions to himself.

"You did not say so," added Charles, who gave the Bunker credit for all
the sagacity he claimed.

"It was no use; it would only have frightened you, and you are
chickenish enough without any help. But no matter, Charley; for my part,
I am glad he turned me out. He only saved me the trouble of getting out
myself."

"Did you really mean to leave?"

"To be sure I did."

"What for?"

"Because I didn't like the company, to say nothing of being nosed round
by Frank Sedley, Bill Bright, or whoever happened to be coxswain. If
you had been coxswain, Charley, I wouldn't minded it," replied Tim,
adroitly.

"But I wouldn't nose the fellows round," replied Charles, tickled with
Tim's compliment.

"I know you wouldn't; but they wouldn't make you the coxswain. They hate
you too much for that."

"It is strange they haven't elected me," said Charles, musing.

"That's a fact! You know more about a boat than three quarters of them."

"I ought to."

"And you do."

Charles had by this time forgotten the promise he had made to Captain
Sedley--forgotten the good resolution he had made to himself. Tim's
flattery had produced its desired effect, and all the ground which the
Bunker had lost was now regained.

"I am sorry they turned you out, Tim," said he.

"I am glad of it. They will turn you out next, Charley."

"Me!"

"Yes."

"Why should they?"

"Because they don't like you."

"They wouldn't do that."

"Don't you believe it," replied Tim, shaking his head, and putting on a
very wise look. "I'll bet they'll turn you out in less than a month."

"Do you know anything about it?"

"Not much."

They had now reached the end of the grove, and Tim suggested that they
should take seats and "talk over matters." Charles readily assented,
and they seated themselves by the margin of the lake.

"What do you know, Tim?" asked Charles, his curiosity very much excited.

"I only know that they don't like you, and they mean to turn you out."

"I don't believe it."

"Do you mean to tell me I lie?"

"No, no; only I can't think they would turn _me_ out."

"I heard Frank say as much," replied Tim, indifferently.

"Did you."

"To be sure I did."

Charles stopped to think how mean it was of Frank to try to get him out
of the club; how hypocritical he was, to treat him as a friend when he
meant to injure him. It did not occur to him that Tim had told a
falsehood, though it was generally believed that he had as lief tell a
lie as the truth.

"You are a fool if you let them kick you out, as they did me," continued
Tim.

"What can I do?"

"Leave yourself."

"Next week is vacation; and we have laid out some first-rate fun."

"There will be no fun, let me tell you."

"What do you mean, Tim?"

"If you want to be the coxswain of a boat as good as the Zephyr next
week, only say the word," replied Tim, slapping him on the back.

"How can that be?" asked Charles, looking with surprise at his
companion.

"And you shall have as good a crew as the Zephyr; better fellers than
they are, too."

"I don't understand you."

"You shall in due time."

"Tell me what you mean, Tim."

"Will you join us?"

"Tell me about it, first."

"And let you blow the whole thing?"

"I won't say a word."

"Will you promise not to say anything?"

"Yes."

"Will you swear it?"

Tim had read a great many "yellow-covered" books in his time, in which
tall buccaneers with long beards and bloodshot eyes required their
victims to "swear," and he seemed to attach some importance to the
ceremony. Charles "swore," though with considerable reluctance, not to
reveal the secret, when it should be imparted to him.

"You must join our society, now."

"Society?"

"Yes; we meet to-night at eight o'clock, in the woods back of my house."

"What sort of a society is it, Tim?" asked Charles, with a great many
misgivings.

"That you shall learn when we meet. Will you come?"

"My father won't let me go out in the evening."

"Run out, then."

Tim suggested various expedients for deceiving his parents, and finally
Charles promised to attend the meeting.

"You haven't told me the secret yet."

"The society is going to camp on Center Island next week, and we are
going to take the Zephyr and the Butterfly along with us."

"Take them? How are you going to get them?"

"Why, take them, you fool!"

"Do you mean to steal them?"

"Humph! We mean to _take_ them."

"But do you suppose Captain Sedley and George Weston will let you keep
them?"

"They can't help themselves. We shall take the Sylph, and every other
boat on the lake, with us, so that no one can reach us. Do you
understand it?"

"I do; but how long do you mean to stay there?"

"All the week."

"And sleep on the ground?"

"We can have a tent."

"How will you live?"

"We shall carry off enough to eat beforehand." Then you see, we can sail
as much as we please, and have a first-rate time on the island. I shall
be coxswain of one boat, and you shall of the other if you like."

"But we shall have to come home some time."

"In about a week."
