gingerly about in the area where the handbag had been.

"Come, Fido!" she said.

Nothing happened. She drew the ruler back.

"Come, Fido!"

Handbag and strap materialized in mid-air and thumped to the floor.

"Convinced?" Holati asked. He picked up the handbag and gave it back to
her.

"It seems to work. How long will that little plasmoid last if it's left
in subspace like that?"

He shrugged. "Indefinitely, probably. They're tough. We know that
twenty-four hours at a stretch won't bother it in the least, so we've
set that as the limit it's to stay rotated except in emergencies."

"And you--and one other person I'm not to know about, but who isn't
anywhere near here--can also bring it back?"

"Yes. If we know the place from which it's been rotated. So the
agreement is that--again except in absolute emergencies--it will be
rotated only from one of the six points specified and known to all three
of us."

Trigger nodded. She opened the container and went over to the table
where the plasmoid still lay on its towel. It was dry by now. She picked
it up.

"You're a lot of trouble, Repulsive!" she told it. "But these people
think you must be worth it." She slipped it into the container, and it
seemed to snuggle down comfortably inside. Trigger closed the handbag,
lightened it to half its normal weight, slipped the strap back over her
left shoulder. "And now," she inquired, "what am I to do with the stuff
I usually keep in a purse?"

"You'll be in Precol uniform while you're here. We've had a special
uniform made for you. Extra pockets."

Trigger sighed.

"Oh, they're quite inconspicuous and convenient," he assured her. "We
checked with the girls on that."

"I'll bet!" she said. "Did they okay the porgee pouch too?"

"Sure. Porgee doping is a big thing all over the Hub at the moment.
Among the ladies anyway. Shows you're the delicate sort, or something
like that. I forget what they said. Want to start carrying it?"

"Hand it over," Trigger said resignedly. "I did see quite a few pouches
on the ship. Might as well get people used to thinking I've turned into
a porgee sniffer."

Holati went back to the desk safe and took out a flat pouch, the length
of his hand but narrower. He gave it to her. It appeared to be worked of
gold thread; one side was studded with tiny pearls, the opposite surface
was plain. Trigger laid the plain side against the cloth of her skirt,
just below the right hip, and let go. It adhered there. She stretched
her right leg out to the side and considered the porgee pouch.

"Doesn't look too bad," she conceded. "That's real porgee in the top
section?"

"The real article. Close to nine hundred and fifty credits worth."

"Suppose somebody wants to borrow a sniff? Wouldn't be good to have them
fumbling around the pouch very much!"

"They can't," said the Commissioner. "That's why we made it porgee. When
you buy a supply, it has to be adjusted to your individual chemistry,
exactly. That's mainly what makes it expensive. Try using someone
else's, and it'll flip you across the room."

"Better get this adjusted to my chemistry then. I might have to take a
demonstration sniff now and then to make it look right."

"We've already done that," he said.

"Good," said Trigger. "Now let's see!" She straightened up, left hand
closed lightly around the bottom of the purse, right hand loose at her
side. Her eyes searched the office briefly. "Some object around here you
don't particularly value?" she asked. "Something largish?"

"Several," the Commissioner said. He glanced around. "That overgrown
flower pot in the corner is one. Why?"

"Just practicing," said Trigger. She turned to face the flower pot.
"That will do. Now--here I come along, thinking of nothing." She started
walking toward the flower pot. "Then, suddenly, in front of me, there
stands a plasmoid snatcher."

She stopped in mid-stride. Handbag and strap vanished, as her right hand
slapped the porgee pouch. The Denton popped into her palm. The flower
pot screeched and flew apart.

"Golly!" she said, startled. "Come, Fido!" Handbag and strap reappeared
and she reached out and caught the strap. She looked around at
Commissioner Tate.

"Sorry about your pot, Holati. I was just going to shake it up a little.
I forgot you people had been handling my gun. I keep it switched to
stunner myself when I'm carrying it," she added pointedly.

"Perfectly all right about the pot," the Commissioner said. "I should
have warned you. Otherwise, I'd say all you'd need is a moment to see
them coming."

Trigger spun the Denton to its stunner setting and laid it back inside
the slit which had appeared along the side of the porgee pouch. She ran
thumb and finger tip along the length of the slit, and the pouch was
sealed again.

"That's the part that's worrying me," she admitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Trigger presented herself at Commissioner Tate's personal quarters
early that evening, she found him alone.

"Sit down," he said. "I've been trying to get hold of Mantelish for the
past hour. He's over on the other side of the planet again."

Trigger sat down and lifted an eyebrow. "Should he be?"

"I don't think so," said Holati. "But I've been overruled on that. He's
still the best man the Federation has working on the various plasmoid
problems, so I'm not to interfere with his investigations any more than
I can show is absolutely necessary. It's probably all right. Those
U-League guards of his aren't a bad group."

"If they compare with the boys the League had watching the Plasmoid
Project, they should be just about tops," Trigger said.

"The Space Scouts thank you for those kind words," the Commissioner told
her. "Those weren't League guards. When it came to deciding who was to
keep an eye on you, I overruled everybody."

She smiled. "I might have guessed it. What's there for the professor to
be investigating on the other side of Manon?"

"He's hunting for some theoretical creatures he calls wild plasmoids."

"_Wild_ plasmoids?"

"Uh-huh. His idea is that some of the plasmoids the Old Galactics were
using on Manon might have got away from them, or just been left lying
around, so to speak, and could have survived till now. He thinks they
might even be reproducing themselves. He's looking for them with a
special detector he built."

Trigger held up a finger on which was a slim gold ring with a small
green stone in it. "Like this one?" she asked.

"He's got a large version of that type of detector with him too. But he
thinks that if any wild plasmoids are around, they're likely to be along
the lines of 113-A. So he's also constructed a detector which reacts to
113-A."

"I see." Trigger was silent a moment. "Does Mantelish have any idea why
Repulsive is the only plasmoid known to which our ring detectors don't
react?"

"Apparently he does," Holati said. "But when he starts in on those
subjects, I find him difficult to follow." He looked soberly at Trigger.
"There are times," he confessed, "when I suspect Professor Mantelish is
somewhat daft. But probably he's just so brilliant that he keeps fading
beyond my mental range."

Trigger laughed. "My father used to come home from a session with
Mantelish muttering the same sort of thing." She glanced at the ring
again. "By the way, have any plasmoids actually been stolen around here
for us to detect?"

He nodded. "Quite a few have been snitched from Harvest Moon and various
storage points by now. I wouldn't be surprised if some of them turn up
here in the dome eventually. Not that it's a serious loss. What the
thieves have been getting away with is small stuff--plasmoid nuts and
bolts, so to speak. Still, each of those would still fetch around a
hundred thousand credits, if you offered them to the right people.
Incidentally, if asking you to this conference has interfered with any
personal plans, just say so. We can put it off till tomorrow. Especially
since it's beginning to look as if Mantelish won't make it here either."

"Either?" Trigger said.

"Quillan's already had to cancel. He got involved with something during
the afternoon."

"Oh," she said coolly. She looked at her watch. "I do have a dinner date
with Brule Inger in an hour and a half. But you said this meeting wasn't
to take more than an hour anyway, didn't you?"

He nodded.

"Then I'm free. My quarters are arranged, and I'm ready to go back on my
old job in the morning."

"Fine," said the Commissioner. "There are things I wanted to discuss
with you privately anyway. If we can't get through to Mantelish in
another ten minutes, we'll go ahead with that. I would have liked to
have Quillan here to fill us in with data about some of the top-level
crooks in the Hub. They're a specialty of his. I don't know too much
about them myself."

He paused. "That Lyad Ermetyne now," he said, "looks as if she either
already is part of the main problem or is working very hard to get
there. She's had a Tranest warship stationed here for the past two
weeks. A thing called the Aurora."

Trigger was startled. "But warships aren't allowed in Manon System!"

"It isn't in the system. It's stationed a half light-year away, where it
has a legal right to be. Nothing to worry about as such. It's just a
heavy armed frigate, which is the limit Tranest is allowed to build.
Since it's Lyad's private boat, I imagine it's been souped up with
everything they could throw in. Anyway, the fact that she sent it here
ahead of her indicates she isn't just dropping in for a casual visit."

"She made that pretty clear herself!" Trigger said. "Why do you think
she's being so open about it?"

He shrugged. "Might have a number of reasons. One could be that she'd
get the beady eye anyway as soon as she showed up here. When Lyad goes
anywhere, it's usually on business. After Quillan reported on your
dinner party, I got all the information I could on her. The First Lady
stacks up as a tough cookie! Also smart. Most of those Ermetynes wind up
being dead-brained by some loving relative, and apparently they have to
know how to whip up a sharp brew of poison before they're let into
kindergarten. Lyad's been top dog among them since she was eighteen--"

His head turned. A bell had begun pinging in the next room. He stood up.

"Probably Mantelish's outfit on the transmitter," he said. "I told them
to call as soon as they located him." He stopped at the door. "Care for
a drink, Trigger girl? You know where the stuff is."

"Not just now, thanks."

The Commissioner came back in a couple of minutes. "Darn fool got lost
in a swamp! They found him finally, but he's too tired to come over
now."

He sat down and scratched his chin thoughtfully. "Do you remember the
time you passed out on the Harvest Moon?" he asked.

Trigger looked at him, puzzled. "The time I what?"

"Passed out. Fainted. Went out cold."

"I? You're out of your mind, Holati! I never fainted in my life."

"Reason I asked," he said, "is that I've been told a spell in a rest
cubicle--same thing as a rest cubicle anyway, only it's used for
therapy--sometimes resolves amnesias."

"Amnesias! What _are_ you talking about?"

The Commissioner said. "I'm talking about you. This is bound to be a
jolt, Trigger girl. Might have been easier after a drink. But I'll just
give it to you straight. About a week after Mantelish and his U-League
crew first arrived here, you did pass out on one occasion while we were
on the Harvest Moon with them. And afterwards you didn't remember doing
it."

"I didn't?" Trigger said weakly.

"No. I thought it might have cleared up, and you just had some reason
for not wanting to mention it." He got to his feet. "Like that drink
now--before I go on with the details?"

She nodded.




17


Holati Tate brought her the drink and went on with the details.

Trigger and he and a dozen or so of the first group of U-League
investigators had been in what was now designated as Section 52 of
Harvest Moon. The Commissioner was by himself, checking over some
equipment which had been installed in one of the compartments. After a
while Doctor Azol joined him and told him Mantelish and the others had
gone on to another section. Holati and Azol finished the check-up
together and were about to leave the area to catch up with the group,
when Holati saw Trigger lying on the floor in an adjoining compartment.

"You seemed to be in some kind of coma," he said. "We picked you up and
put you into a chair by one of the survey screens, and were trying to
get out a call on Azol's suit communicator to the ambulance boat when
you suddenly opened your eyes. You looked at me and said, 'Oh, there you
are! I was just going to go looking for you.'"

"It was obvious that you didn't realize anything unusual had happened.
Azol started to say something, but I stepped on his foot, and he caught
on. In fact, he caught on so fast that I became a little suspicious of
him."

"Poor Azol!" Trigger said.

"Poor nothing!" the Commissioner said cryptically. "I'll tell you about
that some other time. I cautioned Doctor Azol to say nothing to anybody
until the incident had been clarified, in view of the stringent security
precautions being practiced ... supposedly being practiced," he amended.
Then he'd returned to Manon Planet with Trigger immediately, where she
was checked over by Precol's medical staff. Physically there wasn't a
thing wrong with her.

"And that," said Trigger, feeling a little frightened, "is something
else I don't remember!"

"Well, you wouldn't," the Commissioner said. "You were fed a hypno-spray
first. You went out for three hours. When you woke up, you thought you'd
been having a good nap. Since the medics were sure you hadn't picked up
some odd plasmoid infection, I wanted to know just what else had
happened on Harvest Moon. One of those scientific big shots might also
have used a hypno-spray on you, with the idea of turning you into a
conditioned assistant for future shenanigans."

Trigger grinned faintly. "You do have a suspicious mind!" The grin
faded. "Was that what they were going to find out in that mind-search
interview on Maccadon I skipped out on?"

"It's one of the things they might have looked for," he agreed.

Trigger gazed at him very thoughtfully for a moment. "Well, I loused
that deal up!" she remarked. "But why is everybody--" She shook her
head. "Excuse me. Go on."

The Commissioner went on. "Old Doc Leeharvis was handling the hypnosis
herself. She hit what she thought might be a mind-block when she tried
to get you to remember what happened. We know now it wasn't a
mind-block. But she wouldn't monkey with you any farther, and told me to
get in an expert. So I called the Psychology Service's headquarters on
Orado."

Trigger looked startled, then laughed. "The eggheads? You went right to
the top there, didn't you?"

"Tried to," said Holati Tate. "It's a good idea when you want real
service. They told me to stay calm and to say nothing to you. An expert
would be shipped out promptly."

"Was he?"

"Yes."

Trigger's eyes narrowed a little. "Same old hypno-spray treatment?"

"Right," said Commissioner Tate. "He came, sprayed, investigated. Then
he told me to stay calm, and went off looking puzzled."

"Puzzled?" she said.

"If I hadn't known before that experts come in all grades," the
Commissioner said, "I'd know it now. That first one they sent was just
sharp enough to realize there might be something involved in the case he
wasn't getting. But that was all."

Trigger was silent a moment. "So there've been more of those
investigations I don't know about!" she observed, her voice taking on an
edge.

"Uh-huh," the Commissioner said cautiously.
