week?"

"Four dollars salary, and a dollar and a half in extra tips."

"Hereafter you must save your rent money for clothes. We must have you
looking respectable."

"Won't you adopt me, Rodney?" asked Mike with a laughing face.

"That's a good idea. Perhaps I will. In that case you must obey all
my orders. In the first place, what are you most in want in the way of
clothing?"

"I haven't got but two shirts."

"That is hardly enough for a gentleman of your social position. Anything
else."

"I'm short on collars and socks."

"Then we'll go out shopping. I'll buy you a supply of each."

"But you haven't begun to work yet."

"No, but Mrs. Harvey made me a present of twenty five dollars. We'll go
to some of the big stores on Sixth Avenue where we can get furnishing
goods cheap."

Rodney carried out his purpose, and at the cost of four dollars supplied
his room mate with all he needed for the present.

"See what it is to be rich, Mike," he said. "It seems odd for me to be
buying clothes for my adopted son."

"You're in luck, Rodney, and so am I. I hope some time I can do you a
favor."

"Perhaps you can, Mike. If I should get sick, you might take my place as
tutor."

"You must know an awful lot, Rodney," said Mike, regarding his companion
with new respect.

"Thank you for the compliment, Mike. I hope Mr. Sargent will have the
same opinion."

The next day it is needless to say that Rodney did not resume the
business of newsboy. He was very glad to give it up. He dressed with
unusual care and took a walk down town.

As he passed Reade Street by chance Jasper was coming around the
corner. His face lighted up first with pleasure at seeing Rodney, for
it gratified his mean nature to triumph over the boy whom he had ousted
from his position, and next with surprise at his unusually neat and
well dressed appearance. Rodney looked far from needing help. He might
readily have been taken for a boy of aristocratic lineage.

"Hallo!" said Jasper, surveying Rodney curiously.

"How are you this morning, Jasper?" returned Rodney quietly.

"Why ain't you selling papers?"

"I don't like the business."

"But you've got to make a living."

"Quite true."

"Are you going to black boots?"

"Why should I? Is it a desirable business?"

"How should I know?" asked Jasper, coloring.

"I didn't know but you might have had some experience at it. I haven't."

"Do you mean to insult me?" demanded Jasper hotly.

"I never insult anybody. I will only say that you are as likely to take
up the business as I."

"I've got a place."

"How do you know but I have?"

"Because you were selling papers yesterday and are walking the street
today."

"That is true. But I have a place engaged for all that. I shall go to
work on Monday."

Jasper pricked up his ears.

"Where is it?" he asked.

"I don't care to tell at present."

"Is it true? Have you got a place?"

"Yes."

"I don't see how you could. Mr. Goodnow wouldn't give you a
recommendation."

"There is no reason why he should not."

"What, after your taking cloaks and dress patterns from the store?"

"I did nothing of the kind. Sooner or later Mr. Goodnow will find out
his mistake. Probably the real thief is still in his employ."

Jasper turned pale and regarded Rodney searchingly, but there was
nothing in his manner or expression to indicate that his remark had been
personal. He thought it best to turn the conversation.

"How much pay do you get--four dollars?"

"More than that."

"You don't get as much as you did at our store?"

"Yes; I get more."

Now it was Jasper's turn to show surprise. He did not know whether
to believe Rodney or not, but there was something in his face which
commanded belief.

"How much do you get?" he asked.

"You would not believe me if I told you."

"Try me," returned Jasper, whose curiosity was aroused.

"I am to get fifteen dollars a week."

Jasper would not have looked more surprised if Rodney had informed him
that he was to become a Cabinet minister.

"You're joking!" he ejaculated.

"Not at all."

"How could you have the face to ask such a price. Did you pass yourself
off as an experienced salesman?"

"No."

"I don't understand it at all, that is, if you are telling the truth."

"I have told you the truth, Jasper. I have no object in deceiving you.
The salary was fixed by my employer."

"Who did you say it was?"

"I didn't say."

Jasper's cunning scheme was defeated. He felt disturbed to hear of
Rodney's good fortune, but he had a shot in reserve.

"I don't think you will keep your place long," he said in a malicious
tone.

"Why not?"

"Your employer will hear under what circumstances you left our store,
and then of course he will discharge you."

"You will be sorry for that won't you?" asked Rodney pointedly.

"Why of course I don't want you to have bad luck."

"Thank you. You are very considerate."

"Suppose you lose your place, shall you go back to selling papers?"

"I hope to find something better to do."

"Where are you going now?"

"To get some lunch."

"So am I. Suppose we go together."

"Very well, providing you will lunch with me."

"I don't want to impose upon you."

"You won't. We may not meet again for some time, and we shall have this
meal to remind us of each other."

They went to a well known restaurant on Park Row. Rodney ordered a
liberal dinner for himself, and Jasper followed his example nothing
loath. He was always ready to dine at the expense of others, but even as
he ate he could not help wondering at the strange chance that had made
him the guest of a boy who was selling papers the day before.

He had nearly finished eating when a disturbing thought occurred to him.
Suppose Rodney didn't have money enough to settle the bill, and threw it
upon him.

When Rodney took the checks and walked up to the cashier's desk he
followed him with some anxiety. But his companion quietly took out a
five dollar bill, from his pocket and tendered it to the cashier. The
latter gave him back the right change and the two boys went out into the
street.

"You seem to have plenty of money," said Jasper.

"There are very few who would admit having that," smiled Rodney.

"I don't see why you sold papers if you have five dollar bills in your
pocket."

"I don't want to be idle."

"May I tell my uncle and Mr. Goodnow that you have got a place?"

"If you like."

"Well, good by, I must be hurrying back to the store."

Rodney smiled. He rather enjoyed Jasper's surprise and perplexity.



CHAPTER XVIII.


RODNEY'S SECRET IS DISCOVERED.


Jasper lost no time in acquainting his uncle with Rodney's extraordinary
good fortune. James Redwood was surprised, but not all together
incredulous.

"I don't understand it," he said, "but Ropes appears to be a boy of
truth. Perhaps he may have exaggerated the amount of his salary."

"I hardly think so, uncle. He gave me a tip top dinner down on Park
Row."

"He may have been in funds from selling the articles taken from the
store."

"That's so!" assented Jasper, who had the best possible reason for
knowing that it was not so.

"I wish the boy well," said his uncle. "He always treated me
respectfully, and I never had anything against him except the loss of
stock, and it is not certain that he is the thief."

"I guess there isn't any doubt about that."

"Yet, believing him to be a thief, you did not hesitate to accept a
dinner from him."

"I didn't want to hurt his feelings," replied Jasper, rather sheepishly.

"Do you know what sort of a place he has got, or with what house?"

"No; he wouldn't tell me."

"He thought perhaps you would inform the new firm of the circumstances
under which he left us. I don't blame him, but I am surprised that he
should have been engaged without a recommendation."

"Shall you tell Mr. Goodnow?"

"Not unless he asks about Ropes. I don't want to interfere with the boy
in any way."

In the store, as has already been stated, Jasper succeeded to Rodney's
place, and in consequence his pay was raised to seven dollars a week.
Still it was not equal to what it had been when he was receiving
additional money from the sale of the articles stolen by Philip Carton
and himself.

The way in which they had operated was this: Philip would come in and
buy a cloak or a dress pattern from Jasper, and the young salesman would
pack up two or three instead of one. There was a drawback to the profit
in those cases, as Carton would be obliged to sell both at a reduced
price. Still they had made a considerable sum from these transactions,
though not nearly as much as Mr. Goodnow had lost.

After the discovery of the theft and the discharge of Rodney, the two
confederates felt that it would be imprudent to do any more in that
line. This suspension entailed heavier loss on Carton than on Jasper.
The latter had a fixed income and a home at his uncle's house, while
Philip had no regular income, though he occasionally secured a little
temporary employment.

In the meantime Rodney had commenced his tutorship. His young pupil
became very fond of him, and being a studious boy, made rapid progress
in his lessons.

Mr. Sargent felt that his experiment, rash as it might be considered,
vindicated his wisdom by its success. At the end of a month he
voluntarily raised Rodney's salary to twenty dollars a week.

"I am afraid you are overpaying me, Mr. Sargent," said Rodney.

"That's my lookout. Good service is worth a good salary, and I am
perfectly satisfied with you."

"Thank you, sir. I prize that even more than the higher salary."

Only a portion of Rodney's time was spent in teaching. In the afternoon
he and his charge went on little excursions, generally to Central Park.

One holiday, about four months after the commencement of Rodney's
engagement, he was walking in the Park when he fell in with Jasper.
Jasper's attention was at once drawn to the little boy, whose dress and
general appearance indicated that he belonged to a wealthy family. This
excited Jasper's curiosity.

"How are you, Rodney?" said Jasper adroitly. "It is a good while since I
met you."

"Yes."

"Who is the little boy with you?"

"His name is Arthur Sargent."

