
The less Barine had expected such a reception the more deeply it moved
her; nay, her eyes grew dim with grateful emotion, which lent them so
beautiful a lustre, she looked so lovely in her glad surprise, that
Cleopatra thought the months which had elapsed since her first meeting
with the singer had enhanced her charms. And how young she was! The
Queen swiftly computed the years which Barine must have lived as the
wife of Philostratus, and afterwards as the attractive mistress of a
hospitable house, and found it difficult to reconcile the appearance of
this blooming young creature with the result of the calculation.

She was surprised, too, to note the aristocratic bearing whose
possession no one could deny the artist's daughter. This was apparent
even in her dress, yet Iras had roused her in the middle of the night,
and certainly had given her no time for personal adornment.

She had expected lack of refinement and boldness, in the woman who was
said to have attracted so many men, but even the most bitter prejudice
could have detected no trace of it. On the contrary, the embarrassment
which she could not yet wholly subdue lent her an air of girlish
timidity. All in all, Barine was a charming creature, who bewitched men
by her vivacity, her grace, and her exquisite voice, not by coquetry and
pertness. That she possessed unusual mental endowments Cleopatra did not
believe. Barine had only one advantage over her--youth.

Time had not yet robbed the former of a single charm, while from the
Queen he had wrested many; their number was known only to herself and
her confidantes, but at this hour she did not miss them.

Barine, with a low, modest bow, advanced towards the Queen, who
commenced the conversation by graciously apologizing for the late hour
at which she had summoned her. "But," she added, "you belong to the
ranks of the nightingales, who during the night most readily and
exquisitely reveal to us what stirs their hearts--"

Barine gazed silently at the floor a moment, and when she raised her
eyes her voice was faint and timid. "I sing, it is true, your Majesty,
but I have nothing else in common with the birds. The wings which, when
a child, bore me wherever I desired, have lost their strength. They do
not wholly refuse their service, but they now require favourable hours
to move."

"I should not have expected that in the time of your youth, your most
beautiful possession," replied the Queen. "Yet it is well. I too--how
long ago it seems!--was a child, and my imagination outstripped even the
flight of the eagle. It could dare the risk unpunished. Now----Whoever
has reached mature life is wise to let these wings remain idle. The
mortal who ventures to use them may easily approach too near the sun,
and, like Icarus, the wax will melt from his pinions. Let me tell you
this: To the child the gift of imagination is nourishing bread. In later
years we need it only as salt, as spice, as stimulating wine. Doubtless
it points out many paths, and shows us their end; but, of a hundred
rambles to which it summons him, scarcely one pleases the mature man. No
troublesome parasite is more persistently and sharply rebuffed. Who
can blame the ill-treated friend if it is less ready to serve us as the
years go on? The wise man will keep his ears ever open, but rarely lend
it his active hand. To banish it from life is to deprive the plant of
blossoms, the rose of its fragrance, the sky of its stars."

"I have often said the same things to myself, though in a less clear
and beautiful form, when life has been darkened," replied Barine, with
a faint blush; for she felt that these words were doubtless intended
to warn her against cherishing too aspiring wishes. "But, your Majesty,
here also the gods place you, the great Queen, far above us. We should
often find existence bare indeed but for the fancy which endows us with
imaginary possessions. You have the power to secure a thousand things
which to us common mortals only the gift of imagination pictures as
attainable."

"You believe that happiness is like wealth, and that the happiest person
is the one who receives the largest number of the gifts of fortune,"
answered the Queen. "The contrary, I think, can be easily proved. The
maxim that the more we have the less we need desire, is also false,
though in this world there are only a certain number of desirable
things. He who already possesses one of ten solidi which are to be
divided, ought really to desire only nine, and therefore would be poorer
by a wish than another who has none. True, it cannot be denied that the
gods have burdened or endowed me with a greater number of perishable
gifts than you and many others. You seem to set a high value upon them.
Doubtless there may be one or another which you could appropriate only
by the aid of the imagination. May I ask which seems to you the most
desirable?"

"Spare me the choice, I beseech you," replied Barine in an embarrassed
tone. "I need nothing from your treasures, and, as for the other
possessions I lack many things; but it is uncertain how the noblest and
highest gifts in the possession of the marvellously endowed favourite of
the gods would suit the small, commonplace ones I call mine, and I know
not--"

"A sensible doubt!" interrupted the Queen. "The lame man, who desired
a horse, obtained one, and on his first ride broke his neck. The only
blessing--the highest of all--which surely bestows happiness can neither
be given away nor transferred from one to another. He who has gained it
may be robbed of it the next moment."

The last sentence had fallen from the Queen's lips slowly and
thoughtfully, but Barine, remembering Archibius's tale, said modestly,
"You are thinking of the chief good mentioned by Epicurus--perfect peace
of mind."

Cleopatra's eyes sparkled with a brighter light as she asked eagerly,
"Do you, the granddaughter of a philosopher, know the system of the
master?"

"Very superficially, your Majesty. My intellect is far inferior to
yours. It is difficult for me thoroughly to comprehend all the details
of any system of philosophy."

"Yet you have attempted it?"

"Others endeavoured to introduce me into the doctrines of the Stoics.
I have forgotten most of what I learned; only one thing lingered in my
memory, and I know why--because it pleased me."

"And that?"

"Was the wise law of living according to the dictates of our own
natures. The command to shun everything contradictory to the simple
fundamental traits of our own characters pleased me, and wherever I saw
affectation, artificiality, and mannerism I was repelled, while from
my grandfather's teaching I drew the principle that I could do nothing
better than to remain, so far as life would permit, what I had been as
a child ere I had heard the first word of philosophy, or felt the
constraint which society and its forms impose."

"So the system of the Stoics leads to this end also!" cried the Queen
gaily, and, turning to the companion of her own studies, she added: "Did
you hear, Charmian? If we had only succeeded in perceiving the wisdom
and calm, purposeful order of existence which the Stoics, amid so
much that is perverse, unhealthy, and provocative of contradiction,
nevertheless set above everything else! How can I, in order to live
wisely, imitate Nature, when in her being and action I encounter so
much that is contradictory to my human reason, which is a part of the
divine?"

Here she hesitated, and the expression of her face suddenly changed.

She had advanced close to Barine and, while standing directly in front
of her, her eyes had rested on the gem which adorned her arm above the
elbow.

Was it this which agitated Cleopatra so violently that her voice lost
its bewitching melody, as she went on in a harsh, angry tone?--"So that
is the source of all this misfortune. Even as a child I detested
that sort of arbitrary judgment which passes under the mask of stern
morality. There is an example! Do you hear the howling of the storm? In
human nature, as well as in the material world, there are tempests and
volcanoes which bring destruction, and, if the original character of any
individual is full of such devastating forces, like the neighbourhood
of Vesuvius or Etna, the goal to which his impulses would lead him is
clearly visible. Ay, the Stoic is not allowed to destroy the harmony and
order of things in existence, any more than to disturb those which are
established by the state. But to follow our natural impulses wherever
they lead us is so perilous a venture, that whoever has the power to fix
a limit to it betimes is in duty bound to do so. This power is mine, and
I will use it!"

Then, with iron severity, she asked: "As it seems to be one of the
demands of your nature, woman, to allure and kindle the hearts of all
who bear the name of man, even though they have not yet donned the garb
of the Ephebi, so, too, you seem to appear to delight in idle ornaments.
Or," and as she spoke she touched Barine's shoulder"--or why should you
wear, during the hours of slumber, that circlet on your arm?"

Barine had watched with increasing anxiety the marked change in the
manner and language of the Queen. She now beheld a repetition of what
she had experienced at the Adonis festival, but this time she knew what
had roused Cleopatra's jealousy. She, Barine, wore on her arm a gift
from Antony. With pallid face she strove to find a fitting answer, but
ere she could do so Iras advanced to the side of the incensed Queen,
saying: "That circlet is the counterpart of the one your august husband
bestowed upon you. The singer's must also be a gift from Mark Antony.
Like every one else in the world, she deems the noble Imperator the
greatest man of his day. Who can blame her for prizing it so highly that
she does not remove it even while she sleeps?"

Again Barine felt as if a thorn had pierced her; but though the
resentment which she had previously experienced once more surged
hotly within her heart, she forced herself to maintain seemly external
composure, and struggled for some word in answer; but she found none
suitable, and remained silent.

She had told the truth. From early youth she had followed the impulses
of her own nature without heeding the opinion of mortals, as the
teachings of the Stoics directed, and she had been allowed to do so
because this nature was pure, truthful, alive to the beautiful, and,
moreover, free from those unbridled, volcanic impulses to which the
Queen alluded. The cheerful patience of her soul had found ample
satisfaction in the cultivation of her art, and in social intercourse
with men who permitted her to share their own intellectual life. Today
she had learned that the first great passion of her heart had met with
a response. Now she was bound to her lover, and knew herself to be pure
and guiltless, far better entitled to demand respect from sterner judges
of morality than the woman who condemned her, or the spiteful Iras, who
had not ceased to offer her love to Dion.

The sorrowful feeling of being misunderstood and unjustly condemned,
mingled with fear of the terrible fate to which she might be sentenced
by the omnipotent sovereign, whose clear intellect was clouded by
jealousy and the resentment of a mother's wounded heart, paralyzed her
tongue. Besides, she was confused by the angry emotion which the sight
of Iras awakened. Twice, thrice she strove to utter a few words of
explanation, defence, but her voice refused to obey her will.

When Charmian at last approached to encourage her, it was too late; the
indignant Queen had turned away, exclaiming to Iras: "let her be taken
back to Lochias. Her guilt is proved; but it does not become the injured
person, the accuser, to award the punishment. This must be left to the
judges before whom we will bring her."

Then Barine once more recovered the power of speech. How dared Cleopatra
assert that she was convicted of a crime, without hearing her defence?

As surely as she felt her own innocence she must succeed in proving
it, and with this consciousness she cried out to the Queen in a tone of
touching entreaty: "O your Majesty, do not leave me without hearing me!
As truly as I believe in your justice, I can ask you to listen to me
once more. Do not give me up to the woman who hates me because the man
whom she--"

Here Cleopatra interrupted her. Royal dignity forbade her to hear one
woman's jealous accusation of another, but, with the subtle discernment
with which women penetrate one another's moods, she heard in Barine's
piteous appeal a sincere conviction that she was too severely condemned.
Doubtless she also had reason to believe in Iras's hate, and Cleopatra
knew how mercilessly she pursued those who had incurred her displeasure.
She had rejected and still shuddered at her advice to remove the singer
from her path; for an inner voice warned her not to burden her soul now
with a fresh crime, which would disturb its peace. Besides, she had at
first been much attracted by this charming, winning creature; but the
irritating thought that Antony had bestowed the same gift upon the
sovereign and the artist's daughter still so incensed her, that it taxed
to the utmost her graciousness and self-control as, without addressing
any special person, she exclaimed, glancing back into the hall: "This
examination will be followed by another. When the time comes, the
accused must appear before the judges; therefore she must remain at
Lochias and in custody. It is my will that no harm befalls her. You are
her friend, Charmian. I will place her in your charge. Only"--here
she raised her voice--"on pain of my anger, do not allow her by
any possibility to leave the palace, even for a moment, or to hold
intercourse with any person save yourself."

With these words she passed out of the hall and went into her own
apartments. She had turned the night into day, not only to despatch
speedily matters which seemed to her to permit of no delay, but even
more because, since the battle of Actium, she dreaded the restless hours
upon her lonely couch. They seemed endless; and though before she had
remembered with pleasure the unprecedented display and magnificence with
which she had surrounded her love-life with Antony, she now in these
hours reproached herself for having foolishly squandered the wealth of
her people. The present appeared unbearable, and from the future a host
of black cares pressed upon her.

The following days were overcrowded with business details.

Half of her nights were spent in the observatory. She had not asked
again for Barine. On the fifth night she permitted Alexas to conduct
her once more to the little observatory which had been erected for her
father at Lochias, and Antony's favourite knew how to prove that a star
which had long threatened her planet was that of the woman whom she
seemed to have forgotten as completely as she had ignored his former
warning against this very foe.

The Queen denied this, but Alexas eagerly continued: "The night after
your return home your kindness was again displayed in its inexhaustible
and--to us less noble souls--incomprehensible wealth. Deeply agitated,
we watched during the memorable examination the touching spectacle of
the greatest heart making itself the standard by which to measure what
is petty and ignoble. But ere the second trial takes place the wanderers
above, who know the future, bid me warn you once more; for that woman's
every look was calculated, every word had its fixed purpose, every tone
of her voice was intended to produce a certain effect. Whatever she said
or may yet say had no other design than to deceive my royal mistress. As
yet there have been no definite questions and answers. But you will have
her examined, and then----What may she not make of the story of Mark
Antony, Barine, and the two armlets? Perhaps it will be a masterpiece."

"Do you know its real history?" asked Cleopatra, clasping her fingers
more closely around the pencil in her hand.

"If I did," replied Alexas, smiling significantly, "the receiver of
stolen goods should not betray the thief."

"Not even if the person who has been robbed--the Queen--commands you to
give up the dishonestly acquired possession?"

"Unfortunately, even then I should be forced to withhold obedience; for
consider, my royal mistress, there are but two great luminaries around
which my dark life revolves. Shall I betray the moon, when I am sure of
gaining nothing thereby save to dim the warm light of the sun?"

"That means that your revelations would wound me, the sun?"

"Unless your lofty soul is too great to be reached by shadows which
surround less noble women with an atmosphere of indescribable torture."

"Do you intend to render your words more attractive by the veil with
which you shroud them? It is transparent, and dims the vision very
little. My soul, you think, should be free from jealousy and the other
weaknesses of my sex. There you are mistaken. I am a woman, and wish to
remain one. As Terence's Chremes says he is a human being, and nothing
human is unknown to him, I do not hesitate to confess all feminine
frailties. Anubis told me of a queen in ancient times who would not
permit the inscriptions to record 'she,' but 'he came,' or 'he, the
ruler, conquered.' Fool! Whatever concerns me, my womanhood is not
less lofty than the crown. I was a woman ere I became Queen. The people
prostrate themselves before my empty litters; but when, in my youth, I
wandered in disguise with Antony through the city streets and visited
some scene of merrymaking, while the men gazed admiringly at me, and we
heard voices behind us murmur, 'A handsome couple!' I returned home full
of joy and pride. But there was something greater still for the woman
to learn, when the heart in the breast of the Queen forgot throne and
sceptre and, in the hours consecrated to Eros, tasted joys known
to womanhood alone. How can you men, who only command and desire,
understand the happiness of sacrifice? I am a woman; my birth does not
exalt me above any feeling of my sex; and what I now ask is not as Queen
but as woman."

"If that is the case," Alexas answered with his hand upon his heart,
"you impose silence upon me; for were I to confess to the woman
Cleopatra what agitates my soul, I should be guilty of a double crime--I
would violate a promise and betray the friend who confided his noble
wife to my protection."

"Now the darkness is becoming too dense for me," replied Cleopatra,
raising her head with repellent pride. "Or, if I choose to raise the
veil, I must point out to you the barriers--

"Which surround the Queen," replied the Syrian with an obsequious bow.
"There you behold the fact. It is an impossibility to separate the woman
from the princess. So far as I am concerned, I do not wish to anger the
former against the presumptuous adorer, and I desire to yield to the
latter the obedience which is her due. Therefore I entreat you to
forget the armlet and its many painful associations, and pass to the
consideration of other matters. Perhaps the fair Barine will voluntarily
confess everything, and even add how she managed to ensnare the amiable
son of the greatest of men, and the most admirable of mothers, the young
King Caesarion."

Cleopatra's eyes flashed more brightly, and she angrily exclaimed: "I
found the boy just now as though he were possessed by demons. He was
ready to tear the bandage from his wound, if he were refused the woman
whom he loved. A magic potion was the first thought, and his tutor of
course attributes everything to magic arts. Charmian, on the contrary,
declares that his visits annoyed and even alarmed Barine. Nothing except
a rigid investigation can throw light upon this subject. We will await
the Imperator's return. Do you think that he will again seek the singer?
You are his most trusted confidant. If you desire his best good, and
care for my favour, drop your hesitation and answer this question."

The Syrian assumed the manner of a man who had reached a decision,
and answered firmly: "Certainly he will, unless you prevent him. The
simplest way would be--"

"Well?"

"To inform him, as soon as he lands, that she is no longer to be found.
I should be especially happy to receive this commission from my royal
sun."

"And do you think it would dim the light of your moon a little, were he
to seek her here in vain?"

"As surely as that the contrary would be the case if he were always as
gratefully aware of the peerless brilliancy of his sun as it deserves.
Helios suffers no other orb to appear so long as he adorns the heavens.
His lustre quenches all the rest. Let my sun so decree, and Barine's
little star will vanish."

"Enough! I know your aim now. But a human life is no small thing, and
this woman, too, is the child of a mother. We must consider, earnestly
consider, whether our purpose cannot be gained without proceeding
to extremes. This must be done with zeal and a kindly intention--But
I--Now, when the fate of this country, my own, and the children's is
hanging in the balance, when I have not fifteen minutes at my command,
and there is no end of writing and consulting, I can waste no time on
such matters."

"The reflective mind must be permitted to use its mighty wings
unimpeded," cried the Syrian eagerly. "Leave the settlement of minor
matters to trustworthy friends."

Here they were interrupted by the "introducer," who announced the
eunuch Mardion. He had come on business which, spite of the late hour,
permitted no delay.

Alexas accompanied the Queen to the tablinum, where they found the
eunuch. A slave attended him, carrying a pouch filled with letters which
had just been brought by two messengers from Syria. Among them were some
which must be answered without delay. The Keeper of the Seal and the
Exegetus were also waiting. Their late visit was due to the necessity of
holding a conference in relation to the measures to be adopted to calm
the excited citizens. All the galleys which had escaped from the battle
had entered the harbour the day before, wreathed with garlands as if a
great victory had been won. Loud acclamations greeted them, yet tidings
of the defeat at Actium spread with the swiftness of the wind. Crowds
were now gathering, threatening demonstrations had been made in front
of the Sebasteum, and on the square of the Serapeum the troops had been
compelled to interfere, and blood had flowed.

There lay the letters. Zeno remarked that more papers conferring
authority were required for the work on the canal, and the Exegetus
earnestly besought definite instruction.

"It is much--much," murmured Cleopatra. Then, drawing herself up to her
full height, she exclaimed, "Well, then, to work!"

But Alexas did not permit her to do this at once. Humbly advancing as
she took her seat at the large writing-table, he whispered: "And
with all this, must my royal mistress devote time and thought to the
destroyer of her peace. To disturb your Majesty with this trifle is a
crime; yet it must be committed, for should the affair remain unheeded
longer, the trickling rivulet may become a mountain torrent--"

Here Cleopatra, whose glance had just rested upon a fateful letter
from King Herod, turned her face half towards her husband's favourite,
exclaiming curtly, with glowing cheeks, "Presently."

Then she glanced rapidly over the letter, pushed it excitedly aside, and
dismissed the waiting Syrian with the impatient words: "Attend to the
trial and the rest. No injustice, but no untimely mildness. I will look
into this unpleasant matter myself before the Imperator returns."

"And the authority?" asked the Syrian, with another low bow.

"You have it. If you need a written one, apply to Zeno. We will discuss
the affair further at some less busy hour."

The Syrian retired; but Cleopatra turned to the eunuch and, flushed with
emotion, cried, pointing to the King of Judea's letter: "Did you ever
witness baser ingratitude? The rats think the ship is sinking, and it is
time to leave it. If we succeed in keeping above water, they will return
in swarms; and this must, must, must be done, for the sake of this
beloved country and her independence. Then the children, the children!
All our powers must now be taxed, every expedient must be remembered and
used. We will hammer each feeble hope until it becomes the strong steel
of certainty. We will transform night into day. The canal will save the
fleet. Mark Antony will find in Africa Pinarius Scarpus with untouched
loyal legions. The gladiators are faithful to us. We can easily make
them ours, and my brain is seething with other plans. But first we will
attend to the Alexandrians. No violence!"

This exclamation was followed by order after order, and the promise
that, if necessary, she would show herself to the people.

The Exegetus was filled with admiration as he received the clear,
sagacious directions. After he had retired with his companions, the
Queen again turned to the Regent, saying: "We did wisely to make the
people happy at first with tidings of victory. The unexpected news of
terrible disaster might have led them to some unprecedented deed of
madness. Disappointment is a more common pain, for which less powerful
remedies will suffice. Besides, many things could be arranged ere they
knew that I was here. How much we have accomplished already, Mardion!
But I have not even granted myself the joy of seeing my children. I was
forced to defer the pleasure of the companionship of my oldest friends,
even Archibius. When he comes again he will be admitted. I have given
the order. He knows Rome thoroughly. I must hear his opinion of pending
negotiations."

She shivered as she spoke, and pressing her hand upon her brow,
exclaimed: "Octavianus victor, Cleopatra vanquished! I, who was
everything to Caesar, beseeching mercy from his heir. I, a petitioner
to Octavia's brother! Yet, no, no! There are still a hundred chances of
avoiding the horrible doom. But whoever wishes to compel the field to
bear fruits must dig sturdily, draw the buckets from the well, plough,
and sow the seed. To work, then, to work! When Antony returns he must
find all things ready. The first success will restore his lost energy.
I glanced through yonder letter while talking with the Exegetus; now I
will dictate the answer."

So she sat reading, writing, and dictating, listening, answering, and
giving orders, until the east brightened with the approach of dawn, the
morning star grew pale, and the Regent, utterly exhausted, entreated her
to consider her own health and his years, and permit him a few hours'
rest.

Then she, too, allowed herself to be led into her darkened chamber, and
this time a friendly, dreamless slumber closed her weary eyes and held
her captive until roused by the loud shouts of the multitude, who had
heard of the Queen's return and flocked to Lochias.




CHAPTER XIII.

During these hours of rest Iras and Charmian had watched in turn
beside Cleopatra. When she rose, the younger attendant rendered her the
necessary services. She was to devote herself to her mistress until the
evening; for her companion, who now stood in her way, was not to return
earlier. Before Charmian left, she had seen that her apartments--in
which Barine, since the Queen had placed her in her charge, had been a
