activity content, line by line, _i.e._, Yankee Doodle; Pat-a-cake, etc.

4. Be sure the rhyme and activity has been thoroughly mastered before
adding the song element.

5. If a dancing movement is involved, present same to the class as a
unit before combining with other movements, _i.e._, Fly Away Jack and
Jill; Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling, etc.

_The author wishes to express thanks to Miss Louise Westwood, Director
of Music of the Newark Public Schools, for the following suggestions as
to the teaching of the song element:_

_1. Pitch-pipes:_

No song under any condition should be sung without the pitch of the
first word being given; using the pitch-pipe to get the key in which the
song is written.

_2. Range of Songs:_

All songs should be sung not lower than the first line E or higher than
the fifth line F of the staff. If songs are scored in another range,
transpose the song by changing the pitch of the _first_ word.

_3. Quality of Tone:_

All singing should be in a soft, light, head tone. Half-tone quality.

  _No loud singing should be allowed at any time._


PROCEDURE IN TEACHING

  1. Teach the rhyme.
  2. Combine rhyme with the gymnastic activity.
  3. Teach the song.
  4. Combine No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3.


COMMANDS USED TO PRESENT THE GYMNASTIC ACTIVITY AND SONG

  1. Determine key in which the song is written and find starting note.
  2. Teacher sounds keynote of first syllable or word.

    Command:-- Pitch-- Sing!

_Examples:_

(_a_) Yankee Doodle. The first syllable of the word, "Yankee," which is
"Yank," is sung to establish the pitch.

(_b_) Oh, where, oh where has my little dog gone? The first word, "Oh,"
is sung to establish the pitch.

3. In order to insure united action, the following command is used:

    Ready-- Begin!




RHYTHMIC STEPS

_1. The Point Step, Forward:_

Point foot forward with outside edge of toes touching the floor; the
heel is raised and turned inward toward the other foot. (No weight
transference, the weight being on the stationary foot.)

_2. Closing Step, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right, maintaining the weight equally to both feet (1).
Close left foot to right (2).

NOTE.-- Counterlike for movement in the forward and backward direction.

_3. Chasse or Gliding Step, Sideward:_

Raise heels and slide sideward, right, immediately closing left to
right. A light, quick movement requiring only one count for completion.

_4. Step Throw or Step Hop Swing, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right (1). Hop on right, and swing left leg diagonally
forward across (2). (Knee slightly flexed with ankle extended.)

_5. Schottische Step, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right (1). Cross step left to rear of right (2). Step
sideward, right (3). Hop on right, swinging left leg diagonally forward
across (4). (Knee slightly flexed with ankle extended.)

_6. Two Step or Change Step, Forward:_

Step forward, right (1). Close left instep to right heel (and) Step
forward, right (2).

_7. The Step Dip, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right, with transference of body weight to the right foot
(1). Place left toe behind right heel (heel raised) with the knee turned
sideward (and) Bend and stretch right knee slightly with trunk bending
sideward, left (2).

Hand clapping occurs on counts _one_ and _two_.

_8. Encircle to left with partner kneeling._ (_Partners._)

_Stationary pupil._-- Pupil extends leg backward, lowering knee to
floor. The trunk is erect; left hand on hip with the right arm stretched
upward, supporting encircling partner's left hand.

_Dancing pupil._-- The encircling pupil grasps with the left hand the
kneeling partner's right hand and performs the dance movement in given
direction.




DIAGRAMMATIC FORMATIONS

  [All diagrams are in the "files" directory associated with the html
  version of this e-text. They are named in the form "page15a1".]

Classroom

  [Illustration: Standing in the right aisle facing front of room.
  Six rows of seats; six pupils per row.]

Classroom

  [Illustration: Standing in the right aisle in OPEN LINE FORMATION,
  partners facing.
  Seven rows of seats; six pupils per row.
  NOTE:-- When executing partner plays, children in extreme row on the
  right (odd row) form in partner formation in open area.]


Circular

SINGLE

  [Illustration: Facing, line of direction.
  _Counter-clockwise_]

  [Illustration: Facing, inward.]

  [Illustration: Facing, reverse line of direction.
  _Clockwise_]

DOUBLE

  [Illustration: Facing, line of direction.]

  [Illustration: Facing, reverse line of direction.]

  [Illustration: Partner formation, facing each other.]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


CLASSROOM

Aisle Alignment:-- Single and partner formation.

  [Transcriber's Note:
  The above line was printed in the center of an empty page. It was
  probably intended that teachers use the blank space to draw in their
  own classroom arrangement.]

NOTE:-- May also be used to advantage in any open area or gymnasium with
exception of several in the First Grade which are essentially classroom
in type. (Desks are used as part of the rhythmic action.)


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


THE BAND

[Music:
  Oh I can play on a big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth.+

Formation;-- Children seated in their seats.


1st Line;-- Oh I can play on a big bass drum,

  Interpretation;-- No activity.

2nd Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,

  Inter.;-- Beat hands vigorously upon top of desks, suiting action
  to the words.

4th Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the third line.

5th Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the fourth line.


Introduce the following activities, suiting the action to the words in
imitation of the suggested activity.

  Little Snare Drum ("Trum")
  Big Brass Horn ("Toot")
  Little Gay Flute ("Whistle")


[Illustration: OH I CAN PLAY ON A BIG BRASS HORN]




LITTLE JACK HORNER


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
  Eating a Christmas pie;
  He put in his thumb, and pulled out a plum,
  And said, "What a good boy am I!"
  Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Children remain seated and move to the right side of seat.


1st Line;-- Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils move to the left side
  of seat.

2nd Line;-- Eating a Christmas pie;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "eating," pupils encircle imaginary plate
  with the left arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," pupil imitates the action of putting
  thumb in pie and pulling out a plum, making the action vigorous upon
  the word, "pulled," stretching the arm overhead. Looks at the plum.

4th Line;-- And said, "What a good boy am I!"

  Inter.;-- Proudly pats the chest with the left hand.

Conclusion;-- Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!

  Inter.;-- Lowers plum until it disappears in the mouth, imitating
  eating, tapping his chest the while.


[Illustration: HE PUT IN HIS THUMB, AND PULLED OUT A PLUM]




ROCK-A-BYE, BABY


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Rockabye, baby in the tree top,
  When the wind blows the cradle will rock;
  When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,
  And down will come baby cradle and all.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Rock-a-bye, baby in the tree top,

  Interpretation;-- Hold baby in the arms, looking down at it, and sway
  gently to and fro. (Right; left; right and left.)

2nd Line;-- When the wind blows the cradle will rock;

  Inter.;-- Rock more vigorously.

3rd Line;-- When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "breaks," children clap hands overhead--
  partially dropping the baby.

4th Line;-- And down will come baby, cradle and all.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "down," children spring into the air and
  immediately assume deep knee bending position.

Position.


[Illustration: ROCKING THE BABY]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 1


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;
  Jack jump'd over the candle stick.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;

  Interpretation;-- Marking time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- Jack jumped over the candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "jumped," the children face to the left and
  vault over their own seats; finish facing the front of room with hands
