"Don't you dare to touch me," she almost shouted. "This is some more
of your children's doings, I suppose. This is no fit place for a decent
woman. Give me my umbrella and let me go. I'll never darken the doors of
your manse or your church again."

Mr. Meredith picked up the gorgeous parasol meekly enough and gave it to
her. Mrs. Davis seized it and marched out. Jerry and Carl had given up
banister sliding and were sitting on the edge of the veranda with Faith.
Unfortunately, all three were singing at the tops of their healthy young
voices "There'll be a hot time in the old town to-night." Mrs. Davis
believed the song was meant for her and her only. She stopped and shook
her parasol at them.

"Your father is a fool," she said, "and you are three young varmints
that ought to be whipped within an inch of your lives."

"He isn't," cried Faith. "We're not," cried the boys. But Mrs. Davis was
gone.

"Goodness, isn't she mad!" said Jerry. "And what is a 'varmint' anyhow?"

John Meredith paced up and down the parlour for a few minutes; then he
went back to his study and sat down. But he did not return to his German
theology. He was too grievously disturbed for that. Mrs. Davis had
wakened him up with a vengeance. WAS he such a remiss, careless father
as she had accused him of being? HAD he so scandalously neglected the
bodily and spiritual welfare of the four little motherless creatures
dependent on him? WERE his people talking of it as harshly as Mrs. Davis
had declared? It must be so, since Mrs. Davis had come to ask for Una in
the full and confident belief that he would hand the child over to her
as unconcernedly and gladly as one might hand over a strayed, unwelcome
kitten. And, if so, what then?

John Meredith groaned and resumed his pacing up and down the dusty,
disordered room. What could he do? He loved his children as deeply as
any father could and he knew, past the power of Mrs. Davis or any of her
ilk, to disturb his conviction, that they loved him devotedly. But WAS
he fit to have charge of them? He knew--none better--his weaknesses and
limitations. What was needed was a good woman's presence and influence
and common sense. But how could that be arranged? Even were he able
to get such a housekeeper it would cut Aunt Martha to the quick. She
believed she could still do all that was meet and necessary. He could
not so hurt and insult the poor old woman who had been so kind to him
and his. How devoted she had been to Cecilia! And Cecilia had asked
him to be very considerate of Aunt Martha. To be sure, he suddenly
remembered that Aunt Martha had once hinted that he ought to marry
again. He felt she would not resent a wife as she would a housekeeper.
But that was out of the question. He did not wish to marry--he did
not and could not care for anyone. Then what could he do? It suddenly
occurred to him that he would go over to Ingleside and talk over his
difficulties with Mrs. Blythe. Mrs. Blythe was one of the few women he
never felt shy or tongue-tied with. She was always so sympathetic and
refreshing. It might be that she could suggest some solution of his
problems. And even if she could not Mr. Meredith felt that he needed
a little decent human companionship after his dose of Mrs.
Davis--something to take the taste of her out of his soul.

He dressed hurriedly and ate his supper less abstractedly than usual. It
occurred to him that it was a poor meal. He looked at his children; they
were rosy and healthy looking enough--except Una, and she had never been
very strong even when her mother was alive. They were all laughing and
talking--certainly they seemed happy. Carl was especially happy because
he had two most beautiful spiders crawling around his supper plate.
Their voices were pleasant, their manners did not seem bad, they were
considerate of and gentle to one another. Yet Mrs. Davis had said their
behaviour was the talk of the congregation.

As Mr. Meredith went through his gate Dr. Blythe and Mrs. Blythe drove
past on the road that led to Lowbridge. The minister's face fell. Mrs.
Blythe was going away--there was no use in going to Ingleside. And
he craved a little companionship more than ever. As he gazed rather
hopelessly over the landscape the sunset light struck on a window of the
old West homestead on the hill. It flared out rosily like a beacon of
good hope. He suddenly remembered Rosemary and Ellen West. He thought
that he would relish some of Ellen's pungent conversation. He thought it
would be pleasant to see Rosemary's slow, sweet smile and calm,
heavenly blue eyes again. What did that old poem of Sir Philip Sidney's
say?--"continual comfort in a face"--that just suited her. And he needed
comfort. Why not go and call? He remembered that Ellen had asked him to
drop in sometimes and there was Rosemary's book to take back--he ought
to take it back before he forgot. He had an uneasy suspicion that there
were a great many books in his library which he had borrowed at sundry
times and in divers places and had forgotten to take back. It was surely
his duty to guard against that in this case. He went back into his
study, got the book, and plunged downward into Rainbow Valley.



CHAPTER XV. MORE GOSSIP

On the evening after Mrs. Myra Murray of the over-harbour section had
been buried Miss Cornelia and Mary Vance came up to Ingleside. There
were several things concerning which Miss Cornelia wished to unburden
her soul. The funeral had to be all talked over, of course. Susan and
Miss Cornelia thrashed this out between them; Anne took no part or
delight in such goulish conversations. She sat a little apart and
watched the autumnal flame of dahlias in the garden, and the dreaming,
glamorous harbour of the September sunset. Mary Vance sat beside her,
knitting meekly. Mary's heart was down in the Rainbow Valley, whence
came sweet, distance-softened sounds of children's laughter, but her
fingers were under Miss Cornelia's eye. She had to knit so many rounds
of her stocking before she might go to the valley. Mary knit and held
her tongue, but used her ears.

"I never saw a nicer looking corpse," said Miss Cornelia judicially.
"Myra Murray was always a pretty woman--she was a Corey from Lowbridge
and the Coreys were noted for their good looks."

"I said to the corpse as I passed it, 'poor woman. I hope you are as
happy as you look.'" sighed Susan. "She had not changed much. That dress
she wore was the black satin she got for her daughter's wedding fourteen
years ago. Her Aunt told her then to keep it for her funeral, but Myra
laughed and said, 'I may wear it to my funeral, Aunty, but I will have a
good time out of it first.' And I may say she did. Myra Murray was not a
woman to attend her own funeral before she died. Many a time afterwards
when I saw her enjoying herself out in company I thought to myself, 'You
are a handsome woman, Myra Murray, and that dress becomes you, but it
will likely be your shroud at last.' And you see my words have come
true, Mrs. Marshall Elliott."

Susan sighed again heavily. She was enjoying herself hugely. A funeral
was really a delightful subject of conversation.

"I always liked to meet Myra," said Miss Cornelia. "She was always so
gay and cheerful--she made you feel better just by her handshake. Myra
always made the best of things."

"That is true," asserted Susan. "Her sister-in-law told me that when the
doctor told her at last that he could do nothing for her and she would
never rise from that bed again, Myra said quite cheerfully, 'Well, if
that is so, I'm thankful the preserving is all done, and I will not
have to face the fall house-cleaning. I always liked house-cleaning in
spring,' she says, 'but I always hated it in the fall. I will get clear
of it this year, thank goodness.' There are people who would call that
levity, Mrs. Marshall Elliott, and I think her sister-in-law was a
little ashamed of it. She said perhaps her sickness had made Myra a
little light-headed. But I said, 'No, Mrs. Murray, do not worry over it.
It was just Myra's way of looking at the bright side.'"

"Her sister Luella was just the opposite," said Miss Cornelia. "There
was no bright side for Luella--there was just black and shades of gray.
For years she used always to be declaring she was going to die in a week
or so. 'I won't be here to burden you long,' she would tell her family
with a groan. And if any of them ventured to talk about their little
future plans she'd groan also and say, 'Ah, _I_ won't be here then.'
When I went to see her I always agreed with her and it made her so mad
that she was always quite a lot better for several days afterwards. She
has better health now but no more cheerfulness. Myra was so different.
She was always doing or saying something to make some one feel good.
Perhaps the men they married had something to do with it. Luella's man
was a Tartar, believe ME, while Jim Murray was decent, as men go. He
looked heart-broken to-day. It isn't often I feel sorry for a man at his
wife's funeral, but I did feel for Jim Murray."

"No wonder he looked sad. He will not get a wife like Myra again in a
hurry," said Susan. "Maybe he will not try, since his children are all
grown up and Mirabel is able to keep house. But there is no predicting
what a widower may or may not do and I, for one, will not try."

"We'll miss Myra terrible in church," said Miss Cornelia. "She was
such a worker. Nothing ever stumped HER. If she couldn't get over a
difficulty she'd get around it, and if she couldn't get around it she'd
pretend it wasn't there--and generally it wasn't. 'I'll keep a stiff
upper lip to my journey's end,' said she to me once. Well, she has ended
her journey."

"Do you think so?" asked Anne suddenly, coming back from dreamland. "I
can't picture HER journey as being ended. Can YOU think of her sitting
down and folding her hands--that eager, asking spirit of hers, with its
fine adventurous outlook? No, I think in death she just opened a gate
and went through--on--on--to new, shining adventures."

"Maybe--maybe," assented Miss Cornelia. "Do you know, Anne dearie, I
never was much taken with this everlasting rest doctrine myself--though
I hope it isn't heresy to say so. I want to bustle round in heaven the
same as here. And I hope there'll be a celestial substitute for pies and
doughnuts--something that has to be MADE. Of course, one does get awful
tired at times--and the older you are the tireder you get. But the
very tiredest could get rested in something short of eternity, you'd
think--except, perhaps, a lazy man."

"When I meet Myra Murray again," said Anne, "I want to see her coming
towards me, brisk and laughing, just as she always did here."

"Oh, Mrs. Dr. dear," said Susan, in a shocked tone, "you surely do not
think that Myra will be laughing in the world to come?"

"Why not, Susan? Do you think we will be crying there?"

"No, no, Mrs. Dr. dear, do not misunderstand me. I do not think we shall
be either crying or laughing."

"What then?"

"Well," said Susan, driven to it, "it is my opinion, Mrs. Dr. dear, that
we shall just look solemn and holy."

"And do you really think, Susan," said Anne, looking solemn enough,
"that either Myra Murray or I could look solemn and holy all the
time--ALL the time, Susan?"

"Well," admitted Susan reluctantly, "I might go so far as to say that
you both would have to smile now and again, but I can never admit that
there will be laughing in heaven. The idea seems really irreverent, Mrs.
Dr. dear."

"Well, to come back to earth," said Miss Cornelia, "who can we get to
take Myra's class in Sunday School? Julia Clow has been teaching it
since Myra took ill, but she's going to town for the winter and we'll
have to get somebody else."

"I heard that Mrs. Laurie Jamieson wanted it," said Anne. "The Jamiesons
have come to church very regularly since they moved to the Glen from
Lowbridge."

"New brooms!" said Miss Cornelia dubiously. "Wait till they've gone
regularly for a year."

"You cannot depend on Mrs. Jamieson a bit, Mrs. Dr. dear," said Susan
solemnly. "She died once and when they were measuring her for her
coffin, after laying her out just beautiful, did she not go and come
back to life! Now, Mrs. Dr. dear, you know you CANNOT depend on a woman
like that."

"She might turn Methodist at any moment," said Miss Cornelia. "They tell
me they went to the Methodist Church at Lowbridge quite as often as to
the Presbyterian. I haven't caught them at it here yet, but I would not
approve of taking Mrs. Jamieson into the Sunday School. Yet we must not
offend them. We are losing too many people, by death or bad temper. Mrs.
Alec Davis has left the church, no one knows why. She told the managers
that she would never pay another cent to Mr. Meredith's salary. Of
course, most people say that the children offended her, but somehow I
don't think so. I tried to pump Faith, but all I could get out of her
was that Mrs. Davis had come, seemingly in high good humour, to see her
father, and had left in an awful rage, calling them all 'varmints!'"

"Varmints, indeed!" said Susan furiously. "Does Mrs. Alec Davis forget
that her uncle on her mother's side was suspected of poisoning his
wife? Not that it was ever proved, Mrs. Dr. dear, and it does not do to
believe all you hear. But if _I_ had an uncle whose wife died without
any satisfactory reason, _I_ would not go about the country calling
innocent children varmints."

"The point is," said Miss Cornelia, "that Mrs. Davis paid a large
subscription, and how its loss is going to be made up is a problem.
And if she turns the other Douglases against Mr. Meredith, as she will
certainly try to do, he will just have to go."

"I do not think Mrs. Alec Davis is very well liked by the rest of the
clan," said Susan. "It is not likely she will be able to influence
them."

"But those Douglases all hang together so. If you touch one, you touch
all. We can't do without them, so much is certain. They pay half the
salary. They are not mean, whatever else may be said of them. Norman
Douglas used to give a hundred a year long ago before he left."

"What did he leave for?" asked Anne.

"He declared a member of the session cheated him in a cow deal. He
hasn't come to church for twenty years. His wife used to come regular
while she was alive, poor thing, but he never would let her pay
anything, except one red cent every Sunday. She felt dreadfully
humiliated. I don't know that he was any too good a husband to her,
though she was never heard to complain. But she always had a cowed look.
Norman Douglas didn't get the woman he wanted thirty years ago and the
Douglases never liked to put up with second best."

"Who was the woman he did want."

"Ellen West. They weren't engaged exactly, I believe, but they went
about together for two years. And then they just broke off--nobody
ever know why. Just some silly quarrel, I suppose. And Norman went and
married Hester Reese before his temper had time to cool--married her
just to spite Ellen, I haven't a doubt. So like a man! Hester was a nice
little thing, but she never had much spirit and he broke what little she
had. She was too meek for Norman. He needed a woman who could stand up
to him. Ellen would have kept him in fine order and he would have liked
her all the better for it. He despised Hester, that is the truth, just
because she always gave in to him. I used to hear him say many a time,
long ago when he was a young fellow 'Give me a spunky woman--spunk for
me every time.' And then he went and married a girl who couldn't say boo
to a goose--man-like. That family of Reeses were just vegetables. They
went through the motions of living, but they didn't LIVE."

"Russell Reese used his first wife's wedding-ring to marry his second,"
said Susan reminiscently. "That was TOO economical in my opinion, Mrs.
Dr. dear. And his brother John has his own tombstone put up in the
over-harbour graveyard, with everything on it but the date of death, and
he goes and looks at it every Sunday. Most folks would not consider that
much fun, but it is plain he does. People do have such different ideas
of enjoyment. As for Norman Douglas, he is a perfect heathen. When the
last minister asked him why he never went to church he said 'Too many
ugly women there, parson--too many ugly women!' I should like to go to
such a man, Mrs. Dr. dear, and say to him solemnly, 'There is a hell!'"

"Oh, Norman doesn't believe there is such a place," said Miss Cornelia.
"I hope he'll find out his mistake when he comes to die. There, Mary,
you've knit your three inches and you can go and play with the children
for half an hour."

Mary needed no second bidding. She flew to Rainbow Valley with a heart
as light as her heels, and in the course of conversation told Faith
Meredith all about Mrs. Alec Davis.

"And Mrs. Elliott says that she'll turn all the Douglases against your
father and then he'll have to leave the Glen because his salary won't
be paid," concluded Mary. "_I_ don't know what is to be done, honest to
