Project Gutenberg's The Love of Frank Nineteen, by David Carpenter Knight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Love of Frank Nineteen

Author: David Carpenter Knight

Release Date: January 28, 2009 [EBook #27921]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOVE OF FRANK NINETEEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _What will happen to love in that far off Day after Tomorrow? David
    C. Knight, editor with a New York trade publisher, agrees with the
    many impressed by "the range of possible subjects and situations" in
    science fiction. The result is a unique love story from that same
    Tomorrow._


 the
 love
 of
 frank
 nineteen

 _by DAVID C. KNIGHT_


 Minor Planets was the one solid account they had.
 At first they naturally wanted to hold on to it.


I didn't worry much about the robot's leg at the time. In those days I
didn't worry much about anything except the receipts of the spotel Min
and I were operating out in the spacelanes.

Actually, the spotel business isn't much different from running a plain,
ordinary motel back on Highway 101 in California. Competition gets
stiffer every year and you got to make your improvements. Take the Io
for instance, that's our place. We can handle any type rocket up to and
including the new Marvin 990s. Every cabin in the wheel's got TV and
hot-and-cold running water _plus_ guaranteed Terran _g_. One look at our
refuel prices would give even a Martian a sense of humor. And meals?
Listen, when a man's been spacing it for a few days on those synthetic
foods he really laces into Min's Earth cooking.

Min and I were just getting settled in the spotel game when the leg
turned up. That was back in the days when the Orbit Commission would
hand out a license to anybody crazy enough to sink his savings into
construction and pay the tows and assembly fees out into space.

A good orbit can make you or break you in the spotel business. That's
where we were lucky. The one we applied for was a nice low-eccentric
ellipse with the perihelion and aphelion figured just right to intersect
the Mars-Venus-Earth spacelanes, most of the holiday traffic to the
Jovian Moons, and once in a while we'd get some of the Saturnian trade.

But I was telling you about the leg.

It was during the non-tourist season and Min--that's the little
woman--was doing the spring cleaning. When she found the leg she brought
it right to me in the Renting Office. Naturally I thought it belonged to
one of the servos.

"Look at that leg, Bill," she said. "It was in one of those lockers in
22A."

That was the cabin our robot guests used. The majority of them were
servo-pilots working for the Minor Planets Co.

"Honey," I said, hardly looking at the leg, "you know how mechs are.
Blow their whole paychecks on parts sometimes. They figure the more
spares they have the longer they'll stay activated."

"Maybe so," said Min. "But since when does a male robot buy himself a
_female_ leg?"

I looked again. The leg was long and graceful and it had an ankle as
good as Miss Universe's. Not only that, the white Mylar plasti-skin was
a lot smoother than the servos' heavy neoprene.

"Beats me," I said. "Maybe they're building practical-joke circuits into
robots these days. Let's give 22A a good going-over, Min. If those robes
are up to something I want to know about it."

We did--and found the rest of the girl mech. All of her, that is, except
the head. The working parts were lightly oiled and wrapped in cotton
waste while the other members and sections of the trunk were neatly
packed in cardboard boxes with labels like Solenoids FB978 or
Transistors Lot X45--the kind of boxes robots bought their parts in. We
even found a blue dress in one of them.

"Check her class and series numbers," Min suggested.

I could have saved myself the trouble. They'd been filed off.

"Something's funny here," I said. "We'd better keep an eye on every
servo guest until we find out what's going on. If one of them is
