The Project Gutenberg EBook of Noble Redman, by Jesse Franklin Bone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Noble Redman

Author: Jesse Franklin Bone

Illustrator: Grayam

Release Date: March 19, 2010 [EBook #31701]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOBLE REDMAN ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Science Fiction Stories July
    1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


     _It was a big joke on all concerned. When you look back, the
      whole thing really began because his father had a sense of
      humor. Oh, the name fit all right, but can you imagine
      naming your son...._


                             NOBLE REDMAN


                            By J. F. BONE


                        ILLUSTRATED by GRAYAM

       *       *       *       *       *




A pair of words I heartily detest are _noble_ and _redman_,
particularly when they occur together. Some of my egghead friends from
the Hub tell me that I shouldn't, since they're merely an ancient
colloquialism used to describe a race of aborigines on the American
land mass.

The American land mass? Where? Why--on Earth, of course--where would
ancestors come from? Yes--I know it's not nice to mention that word.
It's an obscenity. No one likes to be reminded that his ancestors came
from there. It's like calling a man a son of a sloat. But it's the
truth. Our ancestors came from Earth and nothing we can do is going to
change it. And despite the fact that we're the rulers of a good sized
segment of the galaxy, we're nothing but transplanted Earthmen.

I suppose I'm no better than most of the citizens you find along the
peripheral strips of Martian dome cities. But I might have been if it
hadn't been for Noble Redman. No--not _the_ noble redman--just Noble
Redman. It's a name, not a description, although as a description his
surname could apply, since he _was_ red. His skin was red, his hair
was red, his eyes had reddish flecks in their irises, and their whites
were red like they were inflamed. Even his teeth had a reddish tinge.
Damndest guy I ever saw. Redman was descriptive enough--but Noble! Ha!
that character had all the nobility of a Sand Nan--.

I met him in Marsport. I was fairly well-heeled, having just finished
guiding a couple of Centaurian tourists through the ruins of K'nar.
They didn't believe me when I told them to watch out for Sand Nans.
Claimed that there were no such things. They were kinda violent about
it. Superstition--they said. So when the Nan heaved itself up out of
the sand, they weren't ready at all. They froze long enough for it to
get in two shots with its stingers. They were paralyzed of course, but
I wasn't, and a Nan isn't quick enough to hit a running target. So I
was out of range when the Nan turned its attention to the Centaurians
and started to feed. I took a few pictures of the Nan finishing off
the second tourist--the female one. It wasn't very pretty, but you
learn to keep a camera handy when you're a guide. It gets you out of
all sorts of legal complications later. The real bad thing about it
was that the woman must have gotten stuck with an unripe stinger
because she didn't go quietly like her mate. She kept screaming right
up to the end. I felt bad about it, but there wasn't anything I could
do. You don't argue with a Nan without a blaster, and the Park Service
doesn't allow weapons in Galactic Parks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Despite the fact that I had our conversation on tape and pictures to
prove what happened, the Park cops took a dim view of the whole
affair. They cancelled my license, but what the hell--I wasn't cut out
for a guide. So when I got back to Marsport, I put in a claim for my
fee, and since their money had gone into the Nan with them, the Claims
Court allowed that I had the right to garnishee the deceaseds'
personal property, which I did. So I was richer by one Starflite class
yacht, a couple of hundred ounces of industrial gold, and a lot of
personal effects which I sold to Abe Feldstein for a hundred and fifty
munits.

Abe wasn't very generous, but what's a Martian to do with Centaurian
gear? Nothing those midgets use is adaptable to us. Even their yacht,
a six passenger job, would barely hold three normal-sized people and
they'd be cramped as kampas in a can. But the hull and drives were in
good shape and I figured that if I sunk a couple of thousand munits
into remodelling, the ship'd sell for at least twenty thousand--if I
could find someone who wanted a three passenger job. That was the
