flickering brazier.

'Is it any good, do you think, calling on the name when we haven't got
the charm?' suggested Anthea.

'I shouldn't think so. But we might try.'

So they tried. But the blank silence of the damp dungeon remained
unchanged.

'What was the name the Queen said?' asked Cyril suddenly.
'Nisbeth--Nesbit--something? You know, the slave of the great names?'

'Wait a sec,' said Robert, 'though I don't know why you want it.
Nusroch--Nisrock--Nisroch--that's it.'

Then Anthea pulled herself together. All her muscles tightened, and the
muscles of her mind and soul, if you can call them that, tightened too.

'UR HEKAU SETCHEH,' she cried in a fervent voice. 'Oh, Nisroch, servant
of the Great Ones, come and help us!'

There was a waiting silence. Then a cold, blue light awoke in the corner
where the straw was--and in the light they saw coming towards them a
strange and terrible figure. I won't try to describe it, because the
drawing shows it, exactly as it was, and exactly as the old Babylonians
carved it on their stones, so that you can see it in our own British
Museum at this day. I will just say that it had eagle's wings and an
eagle's head and the body of a man.

It came towards them, strong and unspeakably horrible.

'Oh, go away,' cried Anthea; but Cyril cried, 'No; stay!'

The creature hesitated, then bowed low before them on the damp floor of
the dungeon.

'Speak,' it said, in a harsh, grating voice like large rusty keys being
turned in locks. 'The servant of the Great Ones is YOUR servant. What is
your need that you call on the name of Nisroch?'

'We want to go home,' said Robert.

'No, no,' cried Anthea; 'we want to be where Jane is.'

Nisroch raised his great arm and pointed at the wall of the dungeon.
And, as he pointed, the wall disappeared, and instead of the damp,
green, rocky surface, there shone and glowed a room with rich hangings
of red silk embroidered with golden water-lilies, with cushioned couches
and great mirrors of polished steel; and in it was the Queen, and
before her, on a red pillow, sat the Psammead, its fur hunched up in
an irritated, discontented way. On a blue-covered couch lay Jane fast
asleep.

'Walk forward without fear,' said Nisroch. 'Is there aught else that the
Servant of the great Name can do for those who speak that name?'

'No--oh, no,' said Cyril. 'It's all right now. Thanks ever so.'

'You are a dear,' cried Anthea, not in the least knowing what she was
saying. 'Oh, thank you thank you. But DO go NOW!'

She caught the hand of the creature, and it was cold and hard in hers,
like a hand of stone.

'Go forward,' said Nisroch. And they went.


'Oh, my good gracious,' said the Queen as they stood before her. 'How
did you get here? I KNEW you were magic. I meant to let you out the
first thing in the morning, if I could slip away--but thanks be to
Dagon, you've managed it for yourselves. You must get away. I'll wake
my chief lady and she shall call Ritti-Marduk, and he'll let you out the
back way, and--'

'Don't rouse anybody for goodness' sake,' said Anthea, 'except Jane, and
I'll rouse her.'

She shook Jane with energy, and Jane slowly awoke.

'Ritti-Marduk brought them in hours ago, really,' said the Queen, 'but
I wanted to have the Psammead all to myself for a bit. You'll excuse the
little natural deception?--it's part of the Babylonish character, don't
you know? But I don't want anything to happen to you. Do let me rouse
someone.'

'No, no, no,' said Anthea with desperate earnestness. She thought she
knew enough of what the Babylonians were like when they were roused.
'We can go by our own magic. And you will tell the King it wasn't the
gaoler's fault. It was Nisroch.'

'Nisroch!' echoed the Queen. 'You are indeed magicians.'

Jane sat up, blinking stupidly.

'Hold It up, and say the word,' cried Cyril, catching up the Psammead,
which mechanically bit him, but only very slightly.

'Which is the East?' asked Jane.

'Behind me,' said the Queen. 'Why?'

'Ur Hekau Setcheh,' said Jane sleepily, and held up the charm.

And there they all were in the dining-room at 300, Fitzroy Street.

'Jane,' cried Cyril with great presence of mind, 'go and get the plate
of sand down for the Psammead.'

Jane went.

'Look here!' he said quickly, as the sound of her boots grew less loud
on the stairs, 'don't let's tell her about the dungeon and all that.
It'll only frighten her so that she'll never want to go anywhere else.'

'Righto!' said Cyril; but Anthea felt that she could not have said a
word to save her life.

'Why did you want to come back in such a hurry?' asked Jane, returning
with the plate of sand. 'It was awfully jolly in Babylon, I think! I
liked it no end.'

'Oh, yes,' said Cyril carelessly. 'It was jolly enough, of course, but I
thought we'd been there long enough. Mother always says you oughtn't to
wear out your welcome!'



CHAPTER 8. THE QUEEN IN LONDON

'Now tell us what happened to you,' said Cyril to Jane, when he and the
others had told her all about the Queen's talk and the banquet, and the
variety entertainment, carefully stopping short before the beginning of
the dungeon part of the story.

'It wasn't much good going,' said Jane, 'if you didn't even try to get
the Amulet.'

'We found out it was no go,' said Cyril; 'it's not to be got in Babylon.
It was lost before that. We'll go to some other jolly friendly place,
where everyone is kind and pleasant, and look for it there. Now tell us
about your part.'

'Oh,' said Jane, 'the Queen's man with the smooth face--what was his
name?'

'Ritti-Marduk,' said Cyril.

'Yes,' said Jane, 'Ritti-Marduk, he came for me just after the Psammead
had bitten the guard-of-the-gate's wife's little boy, and he took me to
the Palace. And we had supper with the new little Queen from Egypt. She
is a dear--not much older than you. She told me heaps about Egypt. And
we played ball after supper. And then the Babylon Queen sent for me. I
like her too. And she talked to the Psammead and I went to sleep. And
then you woke me up. That's all.'

The Psammead, roused from its sound sleep, told the same story.

'But,' it added, 'what possessed you to tell that Queen that I could
give wishes? I sometimes think you were born without even the most
rudimentary imitation of brains.'

The children did not know the meaning of rudimentary, but it sounded a
rude, insulting word.

'I don't see that we did any harm,' said Cyril sulkily.

'Oh, no,' said the Psammead with withering irony, 'not at all! Of course
not! Quite the contrary! Exactly so! Only she happened to wish that she
might soon find herself in your country. And soon may mean any moment.'

'Then it's your fault,' said Robert, 'because you might just as well
have made "soon" mean some moment next year or next century.'

'That's where you, as so often happens, make the mistake,' rejoined the
Sand-fairy. '_I_ couldn't mean anything but what SHE meant by "soon". It
wasn't my wish. And what SHE meant was the next time the King happens to
go out lion hunting. So she'll have a whole day, and perhaps two, to
do as she wishes with. SHE doesn't know about time only being a mode of
thought.'

'Well,' said Cyril, with a sigh of resignation, 'we must do what we can
to give her a good time. She was jolly decent to us. I say, suppose we
were to go to St James's Park after dinner and feed those ducks that we
never did feed. After all that Babylon and all those years ago, I
feel as if I should like to see something REAL, and NOW. You'll come,
Psammead?'

'Where's my priceless woven basket of sacred rushes?' asked the Psammead
morosely. 'I can't go out with nothing on. And I won't, what's more.'

And then everybody remembered with pain that the bass bag had, in the
hurry of departure from Babylon, not been remembered.

'But it's not so extra precious,' said Robert hastily. 'You can get them
given to you for nothing if you buy fish in Farringdon Market.'

'Oh,' said the Psammead very crossly indeed, 'so you presume on my
sublime indifference to the things of this disgusting modern world, to
fob me off with a travelling equipage that costs you nothing. Very well,
I shall go to sand. Please don't wake me.'

And it went then and there to sand, which, as you know, meant to bed.
The boys went to St James's Park to feed the ducks, but they went alone.

Anthea and Jane sat sewing all the afternoon. They cut off half a yard
from each of their best green Liberty sashes. A towel cut in two formed
a lining; and they sat and sewed and sewed and sewed. What they were
making was a bag for the Psammead. Each worked at a half of the bag.
jane's half had four-leaved shamrocks embroidered on it. They were the
only things she could do (because she had been taught how at school,
and, fortunately, some of the silk she had been taught with was left
over). And even so, Anthea had to draw the pattern for her. Anthea's
side of the bag had letters on it--worked hastily but affectionately in
chain stitch. They were something like this:

PSAMS TRAVEL CAR

She would have put 'travelling carriage', but she made the letters too
big, so there was no room. The bag was made INTO a bag with old Nurse's
sewing machine, and the strings of it were Anthea's and Jane's best
red hair ribbons. At tea-time, when the boys had come home with a most
unfavourable report of the St james's Park ducks, Anthea ventured to
awaken the Psammead, and to show it its new travelling bag.

'Humph,' it said, sniffing a little contemptuously, yet at the same time
affectionately, 'it's not so dusty.'

The Psammead seemed to pick up very easily the kind of things that
people said nowadays. For a creature that had in its time associated
with Megatheriums and Pterodactyls, its quickness was really wonderful.

'It's more worthy of me,' it said, 'than the kind of bag that's given
away with a pound of plaice. When do you propose to take me out in it?'

'I should like a rest from taking you or us anywhere,' said Cyril. But
Jane said--

'I want to go to Egypt. I did like that Egyptian Princess that came
to marry the King in Babylon. She told me about the larks they have in
Egypt. And the cats. Do let's go there. And I told her what the bird
things on the Amulet were like. And she said it was Egyptian writing.'

The others exchanged looks of silent rejoicing at the thought of their
cleverness in having concealed from Jane the terrors they had suffered
in the dungeon below the Euphrates.

'Egypt's so nice too,' Jane went on, 'because of Doctor Brewer's
Scripture History. I would like to go there when Joseph was dreaming
those curious dreams, or when Moses was doing wonderful things with
snakes and sticks.'

'I don't care about snakes,' said Anthea shuddering.

'Well, we needn't be in at that part, but Babylon was lovely! We had
cream and sweet, sticky stuff. And I expect Egypt's the same.'

There was a good deal of discussion, but it all ended in everybody's
agreeing to Jane's idea. And next morning directly after breakfast
(which was kippers and very nice) the Psammead was invited to get into
his travelling carriage.

The moment after it had done so, with stiff, furry reluctance, like that
of a cat when you want to nurse it, and its ideas are not the same as
yours, old Nurse came in.

'Well, chickies,' she said, 'are you feeling very dull?'

'Oh, no, Nurse dear,' said Anthea; 'we're having a lovely time. We're
just going off to see some old ancient relics.'

'Ah,' said old Nurse, 'the Royal Academy, I suppose? Don't go wasting
your money too reckless, that's all.'

She cleared away the kipper bones and the tea-things, and when she had
swept up the crumbs and removed the cloth, the Amulet was held up and
the order given--just as Duchesses (and other people) give it to their
coachmen.

'To Egypt, please!' said Anthea, when Cyril had uttered the wonderful
Name of Power.

'When Moses was there,' added Jane.

And there, in the dingy Fitzroy Street dining-room, the Amulet grew
big, and it was an arch, and through it they saw a blue, blue sky and a
running river.

'No, stop!' said Cyril, and pulled down jane's hand with the Amulet in
it.

'What silly cuckoos we all are,' he said. 'Of course we can't go. We
daren't leave home for a single minute now, for fear that minute should
be THE minute.'

'What minute be WHAT minute?' asked Jane impatiently, trying to get her
hand away from Cyril.

'The minute when the Queen of Babylon comes,' said Cyril. And then
everyone saw it.


For some days life flowed in a very slow, dusty, uneventful stream.

The children could never go out all at once, because they never knew
when the King of Babylon would go out lion hunting and leave his Queen
free to pay them that surprise visit to which she was, without doubt,
eagerly looking forward.

