
"Then the passenger will have to wait for the next ship," he pronounced.
"The _Vanderdecken_ has to blast off in thirty hours to catch Earth at
the right orbital spot, and the G-boat has to blast off in ten hours to
catch the _Vanderdecken_."

"This passenger can't wait," said Dekker. "He needs to be evacuated to
Earth immediately. He's suffering from the Venus Shadow."

Jan whistled softly. He had seen the effects of that disease. Dekker was
right.

"Jan, you're the best driver in Oostpoort," said Dekker. "You will have
to take a groundcar to Rathole and bring the fellow back."

       *       *       *       *       *

So now Jan gripped his clay pipe between his teeth and piloted the
groundcar into the teeth of the Twilight Gale.

Den Hoorn was a comparatively flat desert sweep that ran along the
western side of the Oost Mountains, just over the mountain from
Oostpoort. It was a thin fault area of a planet whose crust was
peculiarly subject to earthquakes, particularly at the beginning and end
of each long day when temperatures of the surface rocks changed. On the
other side of it lay Rathole, a little settlement that eked a precarious
living from the Venerian vegetation. Jan never had seen it.

He had little difficulty driving up and over the mountain, for the Dutch
settlers had carved a rough road through the ravines. But even the
2-1/2-meter wheels of the groundcar had trouble amid the tumbled rocks
of Den Hoorn. The wind hit the car in full strength here and, though the
body of the groundcar was suspended from the axles, there was constant
danger of its being flipped over by a gust if not handled just right.

The three earthshocks that had shaken Den Hoorn since he had been
driving made his task no easier, but he was obviously lucky, at that.
Often he had to detour far from his course to skirt long, deep cracks in
the surface, or steep breaks where the crust had been raised or dropped
several meters by past quakes.

The groundcar zig-zagged slowly westward. The tattered violet-and-indigo
clouds boiled low above it, but the wind was as dry as the breath of an
oven. Despite the heavy cloud cover, the afternoon was as bright as an
Earth-day. The thermometer showed the outside temperature to have
dropped to 40 degrees Centigrade in the west wind, and it was still
going down.

Jan reached the edge of a crack that made further progress seem
impossible. A hundred meters wide, of unknown depth, it stretched out of
sight in both directions. For the first time he entertained serious
doubts that Den Hoorn could be crossed by land.

After a moment's hesitation, he swung the groundcar northward and raced
along the edge of the chasm as fast as the car would negotiate the
terrain. He looked anxiously at his watch. Nearly three hours had passed
since he left Oostpoort. He had seven hours to go and he was still at
least 16 kilometers from Rathole. His pipe was out, but he could not
take his hands from the wheel to refill it.

He had driven at least eight kilometers before he realized that the
crack was narrowing. At least as far again, the two edges came together,
but not at the same level. A sheer cliff three meters high now barred
his passage. He drove on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apparently it was the result of an old quake. He found a spot where
rocks had tumbled down, making a steep, rough ramp up the break. He
drove up it and turned back southwestward.

He made it just in time. He had driven less than three hundred meters
when a quake more severe than any of the others struck. Suddenly behind
him the break reversed itself, so that where he had climbed up coming
westward he would now have to climb a cliff of equal height returning
eastward.

The ground heaved and buckled like a tempestuous sea. Rocks rolled and
leaped through the air, several large ones striking the groundcar with
ominous force. The car staggered forward on its giant wheels like a
drunken man. The quake was so violent that at one time the vehicle was
hurled several meters sideways, and almost overturned. And the wind
smashed down on it unrelentingly.

The quake lasted for several minutes, during which Jan was able to make
no progress at all and struggled only to keep the groundcar upright.
Then, in unison, both earthquake and wind died to absolute quiescence.

Jan made use of this calm to step down on the accelerator and send the
groundcar speeding forward. The terrain was easier here, nearing the
western edge of Den Hoorn, and he covered several kilometers before the
wind struck again, cutting his speed down considerably. He judged he
must be nearing Rathole.

Not long thereafter, he rounded an outcropping of rock and it lay before
him.

A wave of nostalgia swept over him. Back at Oostpoort, the power was
nuclear, but this little settlement made use of the cheapest, most
obviously available power source. It was dotted with more than a dozen
windmills.

Windmills! Tears came to Jan's eyes. For a moment, he was carried back
to the flat lands around 's Gravenhage. For a moment he was a
tow-headed, round-eyed boy again, clumping in wooden shoes along the
edge of the tulip fields.

But there were no canals here. The flat land, stretching into the
darkening west, was spotted with patches of cactus and leather-leaved
Venerian plants. Amid the windmills, low domes protruded from the earth,
indicating that the dwellings of Rathole were, appropriately, partly
underground.

       *       *       *       *       *

He drove into the place. There were no streets, as such, but there were
avenues between lines of heavy chains strung to short iron posts,
