to turn thumbs down on the whole deal. Besides, Arcot's dad has a lot of
influence around here, too, and I have a healthy hunch he won't like the
idea, either."

"I rather fear he won't," agreed Arcot gloomily.

A silence hung over the room that felt almost as heavy as the pall of
pipe smoke the air conditioners were trying frantically to disperse.

The elder Mr. Morey had full control of their finances. A ship that
would cost easily hundreds of millions of dollars was well beyond
anything the four men could get by themselves. Their inventions were the
property of Transcontinental, but even if they had not been, not one of
the four men would think of selling them to another company.

Finally, Wade said: "I think we'll stand a much better chance if we show
them a big, spectacular exhibition; something really impressive. We'll
point out all the advantages and uses of the apparatus. Then we'll show
them complete plans for the ship. They might consent."

"They might," replied Morey smiling. "It's worth a try, anyway. And
let's get out of the city to do it. We can go up to my place in Vermont.
We can use the lab up there for all we need. We've got everything
worked out, so there's no need to stay here.

"Besides, I've got a lake up there in which we can indulge in a little
atavism to the fish stage of evolution."

"Good enough," Arcot agreed, grinning broadly. "And we'll need that
lake, too. Here in the city it's only eighty-five because the aircars
are soaking up heat for their molecular drive, but out in the country
it'll be in the nineties."

"To the mountains, then! Let's pack up!"




II


The many books and papers they had collected were hastily put into the
briefcases, and the four men took the elevator to the landing area on
the roof.

"We'll take my car," Morey said. "The rest of you can just leave yours
here. They'll be safe for a few days."

They all piled in as Morey slid into the driver's seat and turned on the
power.

They rose slowly, looking below them at the traffic of the great city.
New York had long since abandoned her rivers as trade routes; they had
been covered solidly by steel decks which were used as public landing
fields and ground car routes. Around them loomed titanic structures of
glistening colored tile. The sunlight reflected brilliantly from them,
and the contrasting colors of the buildings seemed to blend together
into a great, multicolored painting.

The darting planes, the traffic of commerce down between the great
buildings, and the pleasure cars above, combined to give a series of
changing, darting shadows that wove a flickering pattern over the city.
The long lines of ships coming in from Chicago, London, Buenos Aires
and San Francisco, and the constant flow from across the Pole--from
Russia, India, and China, were like mighty black serpents that wound
their way into the city.

Morey cut into a Northbound traffic level, moved into the high-speed
lane, and eased in on the accelerator. He held to the traffic pattern
for two hundred and fifty miles, until he was well past Boston, then he
turned at the first break and fired the ship toward their goal in
Vermont.

Less than forty-five minutes since they had left New York, Morey was
dropping the car toward the little mountain lake that offered them a
place for seclusion. Gently, he let the ship glide smoothly into the
shed where the first molecular motion ship had been built. Arcot jumped
out, saying:

"We're here--unload and get going. I think a swim and some sleep is in
order before we start work on this ship. We can begin tomorrow." He
looked approvingly at the clear blue water of the little lake.

Wade climbed out and pushed Arcot to one side. "All right, out of the
way, then, little one, and let a man get going." He headed for the house
with the briefcases.

Arcot was six feet two and weighed close to two hundred, but Wade was
another two inches taller and weighed a good fifty pounds more. His arms
and chest were built on the same general plan as those of a gorilla. He
had good reason to call Arcot little.

Morey, though still taller, was not as heavily formed, and weighed only
a few pounds more than Arcot, while Fuller was a bit smaller than Arcot.

Due to several factors, the size of the average human being had been
steadily increasing for several centuries. Only Wade would have been
considered a "big" man by the average person, for the average man was
over six feet tall.

They relaxed most of the afternoon, swimming and indulging in a few
wrestling matches. At wrestling, Wade consistently proved himself not
only built like a gorilla but muscled like one; but Arcot proved that
skill was not without merit several times, for he had found that if he
could make the match last more than two minutes, Wade's huge muscles
would find an insufficient oxygen supply and tire quickly.

That evening, after dinner, Morey engaged Wade in a fierce battle of
chess, with Fuller as an interested spectator. Arcot, too, was watching,
but he was saying nothing.

After several minutes of uneventful play, Morey stopped suddenly and
glared at the board. "Now why'd I make that move? I intended to move my
queen over there to check your king on the red diagonal."

"Yeah," replied Wade gloomily, "that's what I wanted you to do. I had a
sure checkmate in three moves."

Arcot smiled quietly.

They continued play for several moves, then it was Wade who remarked
that something seemed to be influencing his play.

"I had intended to trade queens. I'm glad I didn't, though; I think this
leaves me in a better position."

"It sure does," agreed Morey. "I was due to clean up on the queen trade.
You surprised me, too; you usually go in for trades. I'm afraid my
position is hopeless now."

It was. In the next ten moves, Wade spotted the weak points in every
attack Morey made; the attack crumbled disastrously and white was forced
to resign, his king in a hopeless position.

Wade rubbed his chin. "You know, Morey, I seemed to know exactly why you
made every move, and I saw every possibility involved."

"Yeah--so I noticed," said Morey with a grin.

"Come on, Morey, let's try a game," said Fuller, sliding into the chair
Wade had vacated.

Although ordinarily equally matched with Fuller, Morey again went down
to disastrous defeat in an amazingly short time. It almost seemed as if
Fuller could anticipate every move.

"Brother, am I off form today," he said, rising from the table. "Come
on, Arcot--let's see you try Wade."

Arcot sat down, and although he had never played chess as extensively as
the others, he proceeded to clean Wade out lock, stock, and barrel.

"Now what's come over you?" asked Morey in astonishment as he saw a very
complicated formation working out, a formation he knew was far better
than Arcot's usual game. He had just worked it out and felt very proud
of it.

Arcot looked at him and smiled. "That's the answer, Morey!"

Morey blinked. "What--what's the answer to what?"

"Yes--I meant it--don't be so surprised--you've seen it done before. I
have--no, not under him, but a more experienced teacher. I figured it
would come in handy in our explorations."

Morey's face grew more and more astonished as Arcot's strange monologue
continued.

Finally, Arcot turned to Wade, who was looking at him and Morey in
wide-eyed wonder. And this time, it was Wade who began talking in a
monologue.

"You _did_?" he said in a surprised voice. "When?" There was a long
pause, during which Arcot stared at Wade with such intensity that Fuller
began to understand what was happening.

"Well," said Wade, "if you've learned the trick so thoroughly, try it
out. Let's see you project your thoughts! Go ahead!"

Fuller, now understanding fully what was going on, burst out laughing.
"He _has_ been projecting his thoughts! He hasn't said a word to you!"
Then he looked at Arcot. "As a matter of fact, you've said so little
that I don't know how you pulled this telepathic stunt--though I'm quite
convinced that you did."

"I spent three months on Venus a while back," said Arcot, "studying with
one of their foremost telepathists. Actually, most of that time was
spent on theory; learning how to do it isn't a difficult proposition. It
just takes practice.

"The whole secret is that everyone has the power; it's a very ancient
power in the human brain, and most of the lower animals possess it to a
greater degree than do humans. When Man developed language, it gave his
thoughts more concreteness and permitted a freer and more clearly
conceived type of thinking. The result was that telepathy fell into
disuse.

"I'm going to show you how to do it because it will be invaluable if we
meet a strange race. By projecting pictures and concepts, you can
dispense with going to the trouble of learning the language.

"After you learn the basics, all you'll need is practice, but watch
yourself! Too much practice can give you the great-granddaddy of all
headaches! Okay, now to begin with ..."

Arcot spent the rest of the evening teaching them the Venerian system of
telepathy.

       *       *       *       *       *

They all rose at nine. Arcot got up first, and the others found it
expedient to follow his example shortly thereafter. He had brought a
large Tesla coil into the bedroom from the lab and succeeded in inducing
sufficient voltage in the bedsprings to make very effective, though
harmless, sparks.

"Come on, boys, hit the deck! Wade, as chief chemist, you are to
synthesize a little coffee and heat-treat a few eggs for us. We have
work ahead today! Rise and shine!" He didn't shut off the coil until he
was assured that each of them had gotten a considerable distance from
his bed.

"Ouch!" yelled Morey. "Okay! Shut it off! I want to get my pants! We're
all up! You win!"

After breakfast, they all went into the room they used as a calculating
room. Here they had two different types of integraph calculators and
plenty of paper and equipment to do their own calculations and draw
graphs.

"To begin with," said Fuller, "let's decide what shape we want to use.
As designer, I'd like to point out that a sphere is the strongest, a
cube easiest to build, and a torpedo shape the most efficient
aerodynamically. However, we intend to use it in space, not air.

"And remember, we'll need it more as a home than as a ship during the
greater part of the trip."

"We might need an aerodynamically stable hull," Wade interjected. "It
came in mighty handy on Venus. They're darned useful in emergencies.
What do you think, Arcot?"

"I favor the torpedo shape. Okay, now we've got a hull. How about some
engines to run it? Let's get those, too. I'll name the general things
first; facts and figures can come later.

"First: We must have a powerful mass-energy converter. We could use the
cavity radiator and use cosmic rays to warm it, and drive the individual
power units that way, or we can have a main electrical power unit and
warm them all electrically. Now, which one would be the better?"

Morey frowned. "I think we'd be safer if we didn't depend on any one
plant, but had each as separate as possible. I'm for the individual
cavity radiators."

"Question," interjected Fuller. "How do these cavity radiators work?"

"They're built like a thermos bottle," Arcot explained. "The inner shell
will be of rough relux, which will absorb the heat efficiently, while
the outer one will be of polished relux to keep the radiation inside.
Between the two we'll run a flow of helium at two tons per square inch
pressure to carry the heat to the molecular motion apparatus. The neck
of the bottle will contain the atomic generator."

Fuller still looked puzzled. "See here; with this new space strain
drive, why do we have to have the molecular drive at all?"

"To move around near a heavy mass--in the presence of a strong
gravitational field," Arcot said. "A gravitational field tends to warp
space in such a way that the velocity of light is lower in its presence.
Our drive tries to warp or strain space in the opposite manner. The two
would simply cancel each other out and we'd waste a lot of power going
nowhere. As a matter of fact, the gravitational field of the sun is so
intense that we'll have to go out beyond the orbit of Pluto before we
can use the space strain drive effectively."

"I catch," said Fuller. "Now to get back to the generators. I think the
power units would be simpler if they were controlled from one electrical
power source, and just as reliable. Anyway, the molecular motion power
is controlled, of necessity, from a single generator, so if one is apt
to go bad, the other is, too."

"Very good reasoning," smiled Morey, "but I'm still strong for
decentralization. I suggest a compromise. We can have the main power
unit and the main verticals, which will be the largest, controlled by
individual cosmic ray heaters, and the rest run by electric power units.
They'd be just heating coils surrounded by the field."

"A good idea," said Arcot. "I'm in favor of the compromise. Okay,
Fuller? Okay. Now the next problem is weapons. I suggest we use a
separate control panel and a separate generating panel for the power
tubes we'll want in the molecular beam projectors."

The molecular beam projector simply projected the field that caused
molecular motion to take place as wanted. As weapons, they were
terrifically deadly. If half a mountain is suddenly thrown into the air
because all the random motion of its molecules becomes concentrated in
one direction, it becomes a difficult projectile to fight. Or touch the
bow of a ship with the beam; the bow drops to absolute zero and is
driven back on the stern, with all the speed of its billions of
molecules. The general effect is similar to that produced by two ships
having a head-on collision at ten miles per second.

Anything touched by the beam is broken by its own molecules, twisted by
its own strength, and crushed by its own toughness. Nothing can resist
it.

"My idea," Arcot went on, "was that since the same power is used for
both the beams and the drive, we'll have two separate power-tube banks
to generate it. That way, if one breaks down, we can switch to the
other. We can even use both at once on the drive, if necessary; the
molecular motion machines will stand it if we make them of relux and
anchor them with lux metal beams. The projectors would be able to handle
the power, too, using Dad's new system.

"That will give us more protection, and, at the same time, full power.
Since we'll have several projectors, the power needed to operate the
ship will be about equal to the power required to operate the
projectors.

"And I also suggest we mount some heat beam projectors."

"Why?" objected Wade. "They're less effective than the molecular rays.
The molecular beams are instantly irresistible, while the heat beams
take time to heat up the target. Sure, they're unhealthy to deal with,
but no more so than the molecular beam."

"True enough," Arcot agreed, "but the heat beam is more spectacular, and
we may find that a mere spectacular display will accomplish as much as
actual destruction. Besides, the heat beams are more local in effect. If
we want to kill an enemy and spare his captive, we want a beam that will
be deadly where it hits, not for fifty yards around."

"Hold it a second," said Fuller wearily. "Now it's heat beams. Don't you
guys think you ought to explain a little bit to the poor goon who's
designing this flying battlewagon? How did you get a heat beam?"

Arcot grinned. "Simple. We use a small atomic cavity radiator at one end
of which is a rough relux parabolic filter. Beyond that is a lux metal
lens. The relux heats up tremendously, and since there is no polished
relux to reflect it back, the heat is radiated out through the lux metal
lens as a powerful heat beam."

"Okay, fine," said Fuller. "But stop springing new gadgets on me, will
you?"

"I'll try not to," Arcot laughed. "Anyway, let's get on to the main
power plant. Remember that our condenser coil is a gadget for storing
energy in space; we are therefore obliged to supply it with energy to
store. Just forming the drive field alone will require two times ten to
the twenty-seventh ergs, or the energy of about _two and a half tons_
of matter. That means a whale of a lot of lead wire will have to be fed
into our conversion generators; it would take several hours to charge
the coils. We'd better have two big chargers to do the job.

"The controls we can figure out later. How about it? Any suggestions?"

"Sounds okay to me," said Morey, and the others agreed.

"Good enough. Now, as far as air and water go, we can use the standard
spacecraft apparatus, Fuller, so you can figure that in any way you want
to."

"We'll need a lab, too," Wade put in. "And a machine shop with plenty of
spare parts--everything we can possibly think of. Remember, we may want
to build some things out in space."

"Right. And I wonder--" Arcot looked thoughtful. "How about the
invisibility apparatus? It may prove useful, and it won't cost much.
Let's put that in, too."

The apparatus he mentioned was simply a high-frequency oscillator tube
of extreme power which caused vibrations approaching light frequency to
be set up in the molecules of the ship. As a result, the ship became
transparent, since light could easily pass through the vibrating
molecules.

There was only one difficulty; the ship was invisible, all right, but it
became a radio sender and could easily be detected by a directional
radio. However, if the secret were unknown, it was a very effective
method of disappearing. And, since the frequency was so high, a special
detector was required to pick it up.

"Is that all you need?" asked Fuller.

"Nope," said Arcot, leaning back in his chair. "Now comes the kicker. I
suggest that we make the hull of foot-thick lux metal and line it on the
inside with relux wherever we want it to be opaque. And we want relux
shutters on the windows. Lux is too doggone transparent; if we came too
close to a hot star, we'd be badly burned."

Fuller looked almost goggle-eyed. "_A--foot--of--lux!_ Good Lord,
Arcot! This ship would weigh a quarter of a million tons! That stuff is
_dense_!"

"Sure," agreed Arcot, "but we'll need the protection. With a ship like
that, you could run through a planetoid without hurting the hull. We'll
make the relux inner wall about an inch thick, with a vacuum between
them for protection in a warm atmosphere. And if some tremendous force
did manage to crack the outer wall, we wouldn't be left without
protection."

"Okay, you're the boss," Fuller said resignedly. "It's going to have to
be a big ship, though. I figure a length of about two hundred feet and a
diameter of around thirty feet. The interior I'll furnish with aluminum;
