told him you'd have him shot if he ran."

"Well, he went right in," remarked the General, "and I expected him to
go over to the Yankees. Maybe he'd 'a' gone if it hadn't been for the
water."

At that moment we heard Whistling Jim calling, "Marse Harry! Marse
Cally Shannon!" I answered him so that he could find us, and he came up
puffing and blowing. A red handkerchief was tied under his chin and
over his head.

"Marse Harry!" he exclaimed, "kin I see you an' Marse Cally Shannon by
yo'se'f? I done done sump'n dat you'll sho kill me 'bout."

"Well, don't make any secret of it," said I. "Out with it!" exclaimed
Harry.

"Marse Harry, I done gone an' shot Marse Jack Bledsoe."

"Good Lord!" cried Harry.

"Yasser, I done shot 'im, an' he's bad hurt, too. You know dat las'
time we went at um? Well, suh, I wuz shootin' at a man right at me, an'
he knock my han' down des ez I pull de trigger, an' de ball cotch him
right 'twix de hip an' de knee. He call me by my name, an' den it come
over me dat we done got mix' up in de shuffle an' dat I wuz shootin' at
you. But 'twuz Marse Jack Bledsoe; I know'd 'im time I look at 'im
good."

"Good heavens! Is he dead?" inquired Harry, his voice shaking a little
in spite of himself.

"He ain't dead yit, suh," replied Whistling Jim. "I got down off'n my
hoss an' pick 'im up an' take 'im out er de paff er de rucus, an' den
when you-all done des ez much shootin' an' killin' ez you wanter, I
went back an' put 'im on my hoss an' tuck 'im ter dat little house by
de river. Dey's a white lady dar, an' she say she'll take keer un' 'im
twel somebody come. Does you reckon any er his side gwineter come back
atter 'im, Marse Harry? Kaze ef dey don't, I dunner what de name er
goodness he gwineter do. Dar he is, an' dar he'll lay. I'm done sick er
war ef you call dis war--you hear me!"

Harry said nothing, but I knew he was thinking of the fair Katherine,
Jack's sister, and wondering if he would ever be to her what she was to
him. He had his face in his hands, and appeared ready to give way to
grief. General Forrest turned to an orderly: "Go fetch Grissom here;
tell him to come right away." The surgeon soon came, General Forrest
told Whistling Jim to lead the way, and we were soon riding through the
night in the direction of the river.




III


A fine mist was falling, and the night was so dark that we would never
have found our way but for a small dog whose inhospitable bark directed
us to the cabin. The dog was so disturbed by our approach that a woman
opened the door to see what the trouble could be. We found Jack Bledsoe
on a pallet, and saw at a glance that the woman had administered such
remedies as common-sense and experience had taught her would allay the
fever of a wound. He recognized us at once, and Harry could hardly keep
back his tears when he saw his college chum lying helpless on the
floor. He supported Jack's head while the surgeon was examining the
wound.

"You are here sooner than I thought," said Jack, gripping Harry's hand
hard, "but I knew you would--I knew it. And there is Carroll Shannon,"
he went on, holding out a hand to me. "You never were very fond of me,
Carroll, but I always liked you."

I hardly knew what to say, and therefore I said nothing. I could only
take his hand in mine and give him a grip that would tell him more than
words could tell. "Don't worry, old fellow," Jack continued, observing
the expression of grief and anxiety in Harry Herndon's countenance.
"It's all owing to the way the cards fall. Some day your turn may come,
and then I hope I'll be able to go to you." His eyes were unnaturally
bright, and his lips trembled with suppressed emotion.

The tension was relieved by the woman, who looked at both the young
fellows, and then turned to the surgeon and asked almost unconcernedly,
"Ain't war a hell of a thing?"

It was the surgeon who responded. "It would be hard to find a better
definition, ma'am."

"I've saw lots wuss'n this," she remarked, as if she would thus find
excuse for her sudden use of an expression that is rarely heard on the
lips of a woman.

"Why, yes, ma'am--a great deal worse. This is not a bad case at all. No
great damage has been done. He will be lame for some weeks--perhaps for
a longer time. The ball struck the bone, glanced, and is now close to
the surface."

In a few moments he had deftly extracted it, and the wounded man seemed
to be greatly relieved. Medicine, strange to say, had been declared a
contraband of war by the Federals, and the surgeon could spare but a
driblet of quinine from his small supply; but he left some, and gave
various directions with respect to the possible symptoms that might
arise.

Just then the woman's husband entered the door. He was an emaciated,
unkempt man, whose movements were in strange contrast with his
appearance. He was one of the most trustworthy of General Forrest's
scouts, but neither betrayed the fact that he knew the other. On the
contrary, the man was both angry and rude. "What'd I tell you, Rhody?"
he exclaimed, turning to his wife. "I know'd they'd crowd us out'n
house an' home ef they got a chance; I could 'a' took oath to it! Cuss
'em, an' contrive 'em, both sides on 'em, all an' similar! They'd as
lief make a hoss-stable out'n the house as not, an' I built it wi' my
two han's."

"An' what ef you did?" inquired the woman with some show of spirit.
"Hit ain't sech a beauty that you kin brag on it. An' who made your two
han's? You made 'em, I reckon, an' nobody else could 'a' done it."

The man made a gesture as though he could in that way weaken the force
of the woman's words, and he evidently knew when to speak, for he said
no more. On the contrary, sympathy shone in his eyes when he looked at
the wounded man. "Don't you worry, Bill; ef ther's any worryin' to be
done, leave it to me. It takes a 'oman to know how to worry right; an'
ever'thing oughter be done right."

"Can you get a boat across the river?" inquired General Forrest,
turning to the man. He was somewhat doubtful until he caught the
General's eye, and then he thought that nothing would be easier.
"Well," said the General, "go across and tell the Yankees that there's
a wounded officer at your house and that he needs attention. Tell 'em
that General Forrest says they can get him whenever they send after
him."

"Is this General Forrest?" inquired Jack Bledsoe. "General, I hardly
know how to thank you. I had just been dreaming of prison."

The General made a deprecatory gesture, and was on the point of saying
something, when the man of the house spoke up. "Ef you're Gener'l
Forrest," he said, "you'll be more than pleased to know that the
Yankees ain't never took time for to cook supper. After they hit the
furder bank they jest kep' on a-humpin', an' I don't blame 'em myself,
bekaze 'twuz the only way wet men could keep warm."

"It's up to you, Herndon; he's your prisoner. He ought to be in a
hospital where he could be looked after, but I reckon he'll have to
stay where he is for a while."

"He won't put me out a mite ef he stays," said the woman. "He'll be
company fer me when Bill is pirootin' 'roun'."

General Forrest gave us permission to remain where we were for the
night. "We move at five," said he. "Bill here will put you across and
show you which way to go when he has found your horses for you." Just
how Bill would do that was a mystery, but we asked no questions.

We called for Whistling Jim when General Forrest had gone, but he was
nowhere to be found. He had shown us the way to the cabin and then
disappeared. I judged that he was afraid Jack Bledsoe would upbraid him
or that Harry would give him a scolding; but, whatever his reasons, he
disappeared when we went in the cabin, and we saw him no more till the
next morning.

Harry and Jack talked of old times until the woman was compelled to
warn the wounded man that it would be worse for him if he excited
himself. But he talked away in spite of the warning. He talked of his
sister Katherine, much to Harry's delight, and told of his own
sweetheart in Missouri. His colonel, he said, was very fond of
Katherine, but he declared that Kate still thought of Harry, whereupon
the young fellow blushed and looked as silly as a school-girl.

Tom Ryder was the Colonel's name, and he had a sister Lucy. Miss Lucy
was Jack's choice out of a thousand, he said. The main trouble with
Jack was that his sweetheart's sister, Jane Ryder, didn't like him--and
so forth and so on, till I nodded where I sat, and dreamed of Katherine
and Jane and Lucy Ryder, until someone took me by the arm and told me
that it was time to be up and going.

We delayed our departure on one excuse and another, until finally Bill,
who was to be our guide, grew irritable; and even then we made a
further delay while Jack pencilled a note to his colonel, which Harry
was to take charge of as long as there was danger of his capture by
roving bands of Federals, and then it was to be given to the guide, who
thought he could insure its delivery.

When we were ready, and could invent no further excuse, Harry turned to
Jack. "The war doesn't touch us, dear boy. Good-by, and don't fail to
put in a good word for me when you go home."

Jack Bledsoe's face brightened up. "That's so!" he exclaimed; "I can go
home now. Well, you may depend on me, Harry; but the two Miss Ryders
are all the other way, and I'll be between two fires. Tell Whistling
Jim I have no hard feelings. He has really done me a favor, if things
turn out no worse than they are."

We bade our friend good-by again and went out into the damp morning
air, each with his various thoughts. I congratulated myself that mine
had little to do with the troublesome sex. The fog, hanging heavily
over the river, shut out the sunlight. We had to take the guide's word
for that, for we could see no sign of the sun. Indeed, it was so dark
that we had considerable difficulty in making our way. But when we were
on the other side, and had mounted the somewhat steep bank, the fog
disappeared and the sun shone out; and not far away we saw Whistling
Jim and the horses.

He hailed our coming with delight, for he had been waiting some time,
and he was both cold and frightened. He took off his hat, as he said,
to old King Sun, and he seemed to feel all the better for it; and we
all felt better when our horses were between our knees. Even the horses
felt better, for they whinnied as we mounted, and were for going at a
more rapid gait than was necessary.

We entered the scrub timber and went through it for half a mile or
more, and then suddenly came out on the public highway. The guide
suggested that we smarten up our gait, and we put the horses to a
canter. I thought surely that the man would give out, but he merely
caught hold of my stirrup to help him along, and when we came to a
cross-road, and halted at his suggestion, he showed as little fatigue
as the horses--this man who seemed too frail to walk a mile.

Here he gave us such instructions as seemed necessary, and was just
about to so-long us, as he said, when he paused with his hand to his
ear. "I'll be whopped," he exclaimed, "ef I don't hear buggy-wheels,
an' they're comin' right this way." With that he slipped into the
bushes, and, though I knew where he was concealed, it was impossible to
catch a glimpse of him.

There was a bend in the road about a quarter of a mile ahead of us, and
we waited expectantly, while Whistling Jim, with a cunning for which I
did not give him credit, pretended to be fixing his saddle-girth. As we
waited a top-buggy rounded the bend in the road and came bowling toward
us. It was surprising to see a buggy, but I was more surprised when its
occupant turned out to be a woman--a woman in a top-buggy, riding
between two hostile armies!




IV


The lady made no pause whatever, and apparently was not at all
surprised to find soldiers in the road ahead of her. She was not large,
and yet she had a certain dignity of deportment. She was not youthful,
neither was she old, but she was very grave-looking, as if she had seen
trouble or was expecting to see it. Under any other circumstances I
should have paid small attention to her, but the situation was such
that I was compelled to regard her with both interest and curiosity.
Almost in a moment my curiosity took the shape of sympathy, for there
was something in the pale face that commanded it.

She was accompanied by a very clean-looking officer on horseback, and
he, in turn, was followed by a small escort of cavalry--I did not take
the trouble to count them, for my eyes were all for the lady; and it
was left to Harry Herndon to realize the fact that we were in something
of a pickle should the officer take advantage of the position in which
he found us. He saw at once that our capture was a certainty unless we
took prompt measures to provide against it, and he was quick to suggest
that we adopt the tactics of Forrest and ride at them if they made a
display of hostilities. I had just time to shift my carbine to the
front under my overcoat and loosen the flap of my holsters when the
lady drove up. We raised our hats as she came up, and made way for her
to pass.

But she did nothing of the sort. She brought her horse to a halt.
"Good-morning," she said, as cool as a cucumber. "You can't deceive us
with your blue overcoats; you are both rebels. Oh, I have heard more of
you Southerners than can be found in the newspapers."

"I'm sure we had no thought of deceiving you," responded Harry with one
of his engaging smiles. "We are from the South, and you are from the
North, of course. It may be that we are well met."

"Oh, no! not this time. I have seen prisoners taken before," remarked
the lady with a little smile.

"Then you'll not flinch to see them taken again," said Harry very
boldly. "But I shall regret to put you to any inconvenience."

I think the confident air of Harry saved us considerable trouble at the
moment; but while he was putting on a bold front and trembling in his
shoes--as he told me afterward--I had my eyes on the lady. She looked
at me once, and turned her face away; twice, and frowned; thrice, and
blushed. "I was afraid at first that you were a prisoner," I remarked
in a tone that was intended to be apologetic, but the lady calmly
turned her head away and ignored me.

"To what command are you attached?" inquired the Federal officer, very
brusquely.

"We are serving under General Forrest," replied Harry.

"Why are you so far away from your command?" the officer inquired with
real curiosity. His tone was so puzzling that Harry hesitated an
instant--but in that instant a detachment of Forrest's troopers came
around the bend in the road.

"Are we indeed so very far from our command?" I inquired.

The troopers came rattling up, and the officer turned to the lady,
somewhat ungraciously, I thought, with the remark that they had been
led into an ambuscade.

This was so ridiculous that I laughed aloud, though I felt little like
laughing. "What amuses you?" the lady asked in some surprise. "I am
sure I can see nothing humorous in our situation."

"Perhaps you have heard ladies placed under such accusations before?" I
suggested.

"Miss Ryder knows I meant no such thing," said the officer with some
heat.

"Is this Miss Lucy Ryder?" I inquired.

"What do you know of Lucy Ryder?" the lady asked.

"I know she has a sister Jane," I answered, whereupon the lady blushed
again. "And I have heard that Miss Jane doesn't like a friend of
ours--a young fellow named Jack Bledsoe, who is greatly in need of
sympathy at this time."

"I like him well enough to go on a wild-goose chase in search of him,"
the lady replied. "We had an idea that he had been left on the
battle-field."

Harry, who had been consulting with our comrades who had just arrived,
returned in time to overhear a part of this conversation. He fumbled in
his pocket and finally produced Jack Bledsoe's note. He lifted his hat
as he handed it to the lady. She read it very calmly, and then passed
it to the Federal officer who had escorted her: "You see, I am
justified in coming."

"We sat up with Jack last night, my friend and I," Harry remarked.

"Well, you know the Bible tells us to love our enemies," remarked the
lady, dryly.

"It was an easy matter to carry out the commandment in this particular
instance, for, with the exception of this gentleman here"--indicating
me--"Jack Bledsoe is the dearest friend I ever had."

"I know you well enough," the lady remarked with a smile. "You are
Harry Herndon, and your friend there is Carroll Shannon, and the negro
is Whistling Jim. Why, I know your grandmother, although I have never
seen her."

"That doesn't help us now. How are we to find Captain Bledsoe?" asked
the officer. I could have slapped him for the tone he employed.

"It is all provided for," replied Harry Herndon, curtly. "All you have
to do is to hold on to the pommel of your saddle. There is a
non-combatant here who will guide you. Bill!"

"I'm a-lis'nin' at ye," responded the guide from the bushes.

"This is one of the natives," Harry explained. "His wife is taking care
of Jack Bledsoe and he will have no difficulty whatever in showing you
the way."

The officer thanked us ungraciously, though why he took that attitude I
was unable to discover, and we were on the point of joining our
comrades when the lady remarked: "You'll probably know me again when
you see me, Mr. Carroll Shannon!" This was a rebuke, I knew, and it
upset me not a little, but there was something in the tone of her voice
that sounded like a challenge, and I remarked that I should be sure to
know her. "Then call my attention to the fact when you next see me,"
she cried as she touched up her horse.

"With great pleasure," I answered, raising my hat, and with that we
were off to join our waiting comrades. It seemed that General Forrest
was somewhat concerned for our safety, knowing that the country was
strange to us, and he had sent William Forrest's company of
Independents to watch the road for us so that we might come to no harm.
While engaged in carrying out this order they saw the lady and her
escort far ahead of them, and a detachment was sent to investigate, the
rest of the company remaining to see whether other Federals would
follow. Thus they came upon us in the very nick of time, for I judge
that the Federal officer would have held us prisoners, in spite of the
information we had for him, for he was very gruff and surly.

We reached the recruiting camp at Murfreesborough without further
incident, and Harry and I soon settled down to the routine of duties
that fell to our share. Harry served General Forrest temporarily as a
courier, while I was billeted with Captain Bill Forrest's company of
Independents, sometimes known as the Forty Thieves, owing to their
ability as foragers.

I had time to ramble about in the woods, and I took advantage of it
to explore the whole countryside in the neighborhood of the camp.
Returning one day from a ride that was partly on business and partly
for pleasure, I was informed that General Forrest had sent for me.
When I responded to his summons he was reading a late copy of the
Chattanooga _Rebel_, and was evidently much interested in what he read.
He handed the paper to me when he had finished, and pointed out an
article that was printed under a great display of black type.

A Federal scout, Leroy by name, and well known in both armies (so the
newspaper said), had entered General Bragg's lines under very peculiar
circumstances and had then managed to escape. Two pickets had been
found bound and gagged. The whole story appeared to be absurd.

It was stated, among other things, that the scout intended to turn his
attention to General Forrest. He directed my eye to this, and said he
wanted me to take the matter in hand. I inquired how the correspondent
knew the intentions of the scout.

"Why, he guessed 'em," replied General Forrest, "and he guessed right,
too. I've got information from one of my men who is thick with the
Yankees that this chap will soon be nosing around here, and I want to
give him the worth of his money. I don't want the other side to know
how many men I've got, and I don't want 'em to know that my superior
officer has refused to honor my requisition for arms and horses. I'd
cut a purty figure with the Yankees if they know'd that some of my men
