The Project Gutenberg EBook of Red Rooney, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Red Rooney
       The Last of the Crew

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21696]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RED ROONEY ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




RED ROONEY, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.

A Tale of Eskimo (Innuit) Life in Greenland at the end of the
Eighteenth Century.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE LAST OF THE CREW.

LOST AND FOUND.

There is a particular spot in those wild regions which lie somewhere
near the northern parts of Baffin's Bay, where Nature seems to have set
up her workshop for the manufacture of icebergs, where Polar bears, in
company with seals and Greenland whales, are wont to gambol, and where
the family of Jack Frost may be said to have taken permanent possession
of the land.

One winter day, in the early part of the eighteenth century, a solitary
man might have been seen in that neighbourhood, travelling on foot over
the frozen sea in a staggering, stumbling, hurried manner, as if his
powers, though not his will, were exhausted.

The man's hairy garb of grey sealskin might have suggested that he was a
denizen of those northern wilds, had not the colour of his face, his
brown locks, and his bushy beard, betokened him a native of a very
different region.

Although possessing a broad and stalwart frame, his movements indicated,
as we have said, excessive weakness.  A morsel of ice in his path, that
would have been no impediment even to a child, caused him to stumble.
Recovering himself, with an evidently painful effort, he continued to
advance with quick, yet wavering steps.  There was, however, a strange
mixture of determination with his feebleness.  Energy and despair seemed
to be conjoined in his look and action--and no wonder, for Red Rooney,
although brave and resolute by nature, was alone in that Arctic
wilderness, and reduced to nearly the last extremity by fatigue and
famine.  For some days--how many he scarcely remembered--he had
maintained life by chewing a bit of raw sealskin as he travelled over
the frozen waste; but this source of strength had at last been consumed,
and he was now sinking from absolute want.

The indomitable spirit of the man, however, kept his weakened body
moving, even after the mind had begun to sink into that dreamy,
lethargic state which is said to indicate the immediate approach of
death, and there was still a red spot in each of his pale and hollow
cheeks, as well as an eager gleam of hope in his sunken eyes; for the
purpose that Red Rooney had in view was to reach the land.

It was indeed a miserably faint hope that urged the poor fellow on, for
the desolate shore of Western Greenland offered little better prospect
of shelter than did the ice-clad sea; but, as in the case of the
drowning man, he clutched at this miserable straw of hope, and held on
for life.  There was the bare possibility that some of the migratory
Eskimos might be there, or, if not, that some scraps of their food--some
bits of refuse, even a few bones--might be found.  Death, he felt, was
quickly closing with him on the sea.  The great enemy might, perhaps, be
fought with and kept at bay for a time if he could only reach the land.

Encouraging himself with such thoughts, he pushed on, but again stumbled
and fell--this time at full length.  He lay quiet for a few seconds.  It
was so inexpressibly sweet to _rest_, and feel the worn-out senses
floating away, as it were, into dreamland!  But the strong will burst
the tightening bands of death, and, rising once more, with the
exclamation, "God help me!" he resumed his weary march.

All around him the great ocean was covered with its coat of solid,
unbroken ice; for although winter was past, and the sun of early spring
was at the time gleaming on bergs that raised their battlements and
pinnacles into a bright blue sky, the hoary king of the far north
refused as yet to resign his sceptre and submit to the interregnum of
the genial sun.

A large hummock or ridge of ice lay in front of the man, blocking his
view of the horizon in that direction.  It had probably been heaved up
by one of the convulsions of the previous autumn, and was broken into a
chaotic mass.  Here he stopped and looked up, with a sigh.  But the
sinking of the heart was momentary.  Deep snow had so filled up the
crevices of the shattered blocks that it was possible to advance slowly
by winding in and out among them.  As the ascent grew steeper the
forlorn man dropped on all-fours and crawled upwards until he reached
the top.

The view that burst upon him would have roused enthusiasm if his
situation had been less critical.  Even as it was, an exclamation of
surprise broke from him, for there, not five miles distant, was the
coast of Greenland; desolate, indeed, and ice-bound--he had expected
that--but inexpressibly grand even in its desolation.  A mighty tongue
of a great glacier protruded itself into the frozen sea.  The tip of
this tongue had been broken off, and the edge presented a gigantic wall
of crystal several hundred feet high, on which the sun glittered in
blinding rays.

This tongue--a mere offshoot of the great glacier itself--filled a
valley full ten miles in length, measuring from its tip in the ocean to
its root on the mountain brow, where the snow-line was seen to cut
sharply against the sky.

For some minutes Red Rooney sat on one of the ice-blocks, gazing with
intense eagerness along the shore, in the hope of discerning smoke or
some other evidence of man's presence.  But nothing met his disappointed
gaze save the same uniform, interminable waste of white and grey, with
here and there a few dark frowning patches where the cliffs were too
precipitous to sustain the snow.

Another despairing sigh rose to the man's lips, but these refused to
give it passage.  With stern resolve he arose and stumbled hurriedly
forward.  The strain, however, proved too great.  On reaching the level
ice on the other side of the ridge he fell, apparently for the last
time, and lay perfectly still.  Ah! how many must have fallen thus, to
rise no more, since men first began to search out the secrets of that
grand mysterious region!

But Red Rooney was not doomed to be among those who have perished there.
Not far from the spot where he fell, one of the short but muscular and
hairy-robed denizens of that country was busily engaged in removing the
skin from a Polar bear which he had just succeeded in spearing, after a
combat which very nearly cost him his life.  During the heat of the
battle the brave little man's foot had slipped, and the desperately
wounded monster, making a rush at the moment, overturned him into a
crevice between two ice-blocks, fortunately the impetus of the rush
caused the animal to shoot into another crevice beyond, and the man,
proving more active than the bear, sprang out of his hole in time to
meet his foe with a spear-thrust so deadly that it killed him on the
spot.  Immediately he began to skin the animal, intending to go home
with the skin, and return with a team of dogs for the meat and the
carcass of a recently-caught seal.

Meanwhile, having removed and packed up the bear-skin, he swung it on
his broad shoulders, and made for the shore as fast as his short legs
would carry him.  On the way he came to the spot where the fallen
traveller lay.

His first act was to open his eyes to the uttermost, and, considering
the small, twinkling appearance of those eyes just a minute before, the
change was marvellous.

"Hoi!" then burst from him with tremendous emphasis, after which he
dropped his bundle, turned poor Rooney over on his back, and looked at
his face with an expression of awe.

"Dead!" said the Eskimo, under his breath--in his own tongue, of course,
not in English, of which, we need scarcely add, he knew nothing.

After feeling the man's breast, under his coat, for a few seconds, he
murmured the word "Kablunet" (foreigner), and shook his head mournfully.

It was not so much grief for the man's fate that agitated this child of
the northern wilderness, as regret at his own bad fortune.  Marvellous
were the reports which from the south of Greenland had reached him, in
his far northern home, of the strange Kablunets or foreigners who had
arrived there to trade with the Eskimos--men who, so the reports went,
wore smooth coats without hair, little round things on their heads
instead of hoods, and flapping things on their legs instead of sealskin
boots--men who had come in monster kayaks (canoes), as big as icebergs;
men who seemed to possess everything, had the power to do anything, and
feared nothing.  No fabrications in the _Arabian Nights_, or _Gulliver_,
or _Baron Munchausen_, ever transcended the stories about those
Kablunets which had reached this broad, short, sturdy Eskimo--stories
which no doubt began in the south of Greenland with a substratum of
truth, but which, in travelling several hundreds of miles northward, had
grown, as a snowball might have grown if rolled the same distance over
the Arctic wastes; with this difference--that whereas the snowball would
have retained its original shape, though not its size, the tales lost
not only their pristine form and size, but became so amazingly distorted
that the original reporters would probably have failed to recognise
them.  And now, at last, here was actually a Kablunet--a _real_
foreigner in the body; but not alive!  It was extremely disappointing!

Our sturdy Eskimo, however, was not a good judge of Kablunet vitality.
He was yet rubbing the man's broad chest, with a sort of pathetic pity,
when a flutter of the heart startled him.  He rubbed with more vigour.
He became excited, and, seizing Red Rooney by the arms, shook him with
considerable violence, the result being that the foreigner opened his
eyes and looked at him inquiringly.

"Hallo, my lad," said Rooney, in a faint voice; "not quite so hard.  I'm
all right.  Just help me up, like a good fellow."

He spoke in English, which was, of course, a waste of breath in the
circumstances.  In proof of his being "all right," he fell back again,
and fainted away.

The Eskimo leaped up.  He was one of those energetic beings who seem to
know in all emergencies what is best to be done, and do it promptly.
Unrolling the bear-skin, which yet retained a little of its first
owner's warmth, he wrapped the Kablunet in it from head to foot, leaving
an opening in front of his mouth for breathing purposes.  With his
knife--a stone one--he cut off a little lump of blubber from the seal,
and placed that in the opening, so that the stranger might eat on
reviving, if so inclined, or let it alone, if so disposed.  Then,
turning his face towards the land, he scurried away over the ice like a
hunted partridge, or a hairy ball driven before an Arctic breeze.

He made such good use of his short legs that in less than an hour he
reached a little hut, which seemed to nestle under the wing of a great
cliff in order to avoid destruction by the glittering walls of an
impending glacier.  The hut had no proper doorway, but a tunnel-shaped
entrance, about three feet high and several feet long.  Falling on his
knees, the Eskimo crept into the tunnel and disappeared.  Gaining the
inner end of it, he stood up and glared, speechless, at his astonished
wife.

She had cause for surprise, for never since their wedding-day had Nuna
beheld such an expression on the fat face of her amiable husband.

"Okiok," she said, "have you seen an evil spirit?"

"No," he replied.

"Why, then, do you glare?"

Of course Nuna spoke in choice Eskimo, which we render into English with
as much fidelity to the native idiom as seems consistent with the
agreeable narration of our tale.

"Hoi!" exclaimed Okiok, in reply to her question, but without ceasing to
glare and breathe hard.

"Has my husband become a walrus, that he can only shout and snort?"
inquired Nuna, with the slightest possible twinkle in her eyes, as she
raised herself out of the lamp-smoke, and laid down the stick with which
she had been stirring the contents of a stone pot.

Instead of answering the question, Okiok turned to two chubby and
staring youths, of about fifteen and sixteen respectively, who were
mending spears, and said sharply, "Norrak, Ermigit, go, harness the
dogs."

Norrak rose with a bound, and dived into the tunnel.  Ermigit, although
willing enough, was not quite so sharp.  As he crawled into the tunnel
and was disappearing, his father sent his foot in the same direction,
and, having thus intimated the necessity for urgent haste, he turned
again to his wife with a somewhat softened expression.

"Give me food, Nuna.  Little food has passed into me since yesterday at
sunrise.  I starve.  When I have eaten, you shall hear words that will
make you dream for a moon.  I have seen,"--he became solemn at this
point, and lowered his voice to a whisper as he advanced his head and
glared again--"I have seen a--a--Kablunet!"

He drew back and gazed at his wife as connoisseurs are wont to do when
examining a picture.  And truly Nuna's countenance _was_ a
picture-round, fat, comely, oily, also open-mouthed and eyed, with
unbounded astonishment depicted thereon; for she thoroughly believed her
husband, knowing that he was upright and never told lies.

Her mental condition did not, however, interfere with her duties.  A
wooden slab or plate, laden with a mess of broiled meat, soon smoked
before her lord.  He quickly seated himself on a raised platform, and
had done some justice to it before Nuna recovered the use of her tongue.

"A Kablunet!" she exclaimed, almost solemnly.  "Is he dead?"

Okiok paused, with a lump of blubber in his fingers close to his mouth.

"No; he is alive.  At least he was alive when I left him.  If he has not
died since, he is alive still."

Having uttered this truism, he thrust the blubber well home, and
continued his meal.

Nuna's curiosity, having been aroused, was not easily allayed.  She sat
down beside her spouse, and plied him with numerous questions, to which
Okiok gave her brief and very tantalising replies until he was gorged,
when, throwing down the platter, he turned abruptly to his wife, and
said impressively--

"Open your ears, Nuna.  Okiok is no longer what he was.  He has been
born only to-day.  He has at last seen with his two eyes--a Kablunet!"

He paused to restrain his excitement.  His wife clasped her hands and
looked at him excitedly, waiting for more.

"This Kablunet," he continued, "is very white, and not so ruddy as we
have been told they are.  His hair is brown, and twists in little
circles.  He wears it on the top of his head, and on the bottom of his
head also--all round.  He is not small or short.  No; he is long and
broad,--but he is thin, very thin, like the young ice at the beginning
of winter.  His eyes are the colour of the summer sky.  His nose is like
the eagle's beak, but not so long.  His mouth--I know not what his mouth
is like; it is hid in a nest of hair.  His words I understand not.  They
seem to me nonsense, but his voice is soft and deep."

"And his dress--how does he dress?" asked Nuna, with natural feminine
curiosity.

"Like ourselves," replied Okiok, with a touch of disappointment in his
tone.  "The men who said the Kablunets wear strange things on their
heads and long flapping things on their legs told lies."

"Why did you not bring him here?" asked Nuna, after a few moments'
meditation on these marvels.

"Because he is too heavy to lift, and too weak to walk.  He has been
starving.  I wrapped him in the skin of a bear, and left him with a
piece of blubber at his nose.  When he wakes up he will smell; then he
will eat.  Perhaps he will live; perhaps he will die.  Who can tell?  I
go to fetch him."

As the Eskimo spoke, the yelping of dogs outside told that his sons had
obeyed his commands, and got ready the sledge.  Without another word he
crept out of the hut and jumped on the sledge, which was covered with
two or three warm bearskins.  Ermigit restrained the dogs, of which
there were about eight, each fastened to the vehicle by a single line.
Norrak handed his father the short-handled but heavy, long-lashed whip.

Okiok looked at Norrak as he grasped the instrument of punishment.

"Jump on," he said.

Norrak did so with evident good-will.  The whip flashed in the air with
a serpentine swing, and went off like a pistol.  The dogs yelled in
alarm, and, springing away at full speed, were soon lost among the
hummocks of the Arctic sea.



CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A RESCUE AND A HAPPY FAMILY.

While the Eskimos were thus rushing to his rescue, poor Red Rooney--
whose shipmates, we may explain at once, had thus contracted his
Christian name of Reginald--began to recover from his swoon, and to
wonder in a listless fashion where he was.  Feeling comparatively
comfortable in his bear-skin, he did not at first care to press the
inquiry; but, as Okiok had anticipated, the peculiar smell near his nose
tended to arouse him.  Drawing his hand gently up, he touched the object
in front of his mouth.  It felt very like blubber, with which substance
he was familiar.  Extending his tongue, he found that it also tasted
like blubber.  To a starving man this was enough.  He pulled the end of
the raw morsel into his mouth and began to chew.

Ah, reader, turn not up your refined nose!  When you have been for
several months on short allowance, when you have scraped every shred of
meat off the very last bones of your provisions, and sucked out the last
drop of marrow, and then roasted and eaten your spare boots, you may
perhaps be in a position to estimate and enjoy a morsel of raw blubber.

Regardless of time, place, and circumstance, our poor wanderer continued
to chew until in his great weakness he fell into a sort of half slumber,
and dreamed--dreamed of feasting on viands more delightful than the
waking imagination of man has ever conceived.

From this state of bliss he was rudely awakened by a roughish poke in
the back.  The poke was accompanied by a snuffing sound which caused the
blood of the poor man to curdle.  Could it be a bear?

He was not left long in doubt.  After giving him another poke on the
shoulder, the creature walked round him, snuffing as it went, and, on
reaching the air-hole already referred to, thrust its snout in and
