people were not prepared for such changes, and bitter conflicts took
place between the rival parties. In the confusion that resulted the
supporters of the deposed king rose in arms against his successful
rival, and the country was subjected to the horrors of civil war.
Frederick I. found it necessary to abandon the violent propagation of
Lutheranism and to offer toleration to the Catholics.

On his death in 1533 the bishops of Denmark protested against the
succession of his son Christian III. (1533-51) who was a personal
friend of Luther, and who had already introduced Protestantism into
his own state of Holstein; but as the nobles, won over by promises of
a share in the spoliation of the Church, refused to make common cause
with the bishops, their protest was unheeded. Confident that he could
rely on the support of the nobles, the king gave secret instructions
to his officials that on a certain day named by him all the bishops of
Denmark should be arrested and lodged in prison. His orders were
carried out to the letter (1536), and so rejoiced was Luther by this
step that he hastened to send the king his warmest congratulations.
The bishops were offered release on condition that they should resign
their Sees and pledge themselves to offer no further opposition to the
religious change. To their shame be it said that only one of their
number, Ronnow, Bishop of Roskilde, refused to accept liberty on such
disgraceful terms, preferring to remain a prisoner until he was
released by death (1544). The priests who refused to accept the new
religion were driven from their parishes, and several monasteries and
convents were suppressed.

To complete the work of reform and to give the Church in Denmark a new
constitution Bugenhagen, a disciple of Luther, was invited to the
capital (1539). He began by crowning the king according to Lutheran
ritual, and by drawing up a form of ecclesiastical government that
placed full spiritual power in the hands of the civil ruler. As in
Germany, superintendents were appointed in room of the bishops who had
resigned. When the work of drawing up the new ecclesiastical
organisation had been finished it was submitted to and approved of by
the Diet held at Odensee in 1539. In another Diet held in 1546 the
Catholic Church in Denmark was completely overthrown, her possessions
were confiscated, her clergy were forbidden to remain in the country
under penalty of death, and all lay Catholics were declared incapable
of holding any office in the state or of transmitting their property
to their Catholic heirs. By those measures Catholicism was suppressed,
and victory was secured for the Lutheran party.

Norway, which was united with Denmark at this period, was forced into
submission to the new creed by the violence of the Danish kings, aided
as they were by the greedy nobles anxious to share in the plunder of
the Church. Similarly Iceland, which was subject to Denmark, was
separated from Rome, though at first the people offered the strongest
resistance to the reformers. The execution, however, of their bishop,
John Aresen, the example of Denmark and Norway, and the want of
capable religious leaders produced their effects, and in the end
Iceland was induced to accept the new religion (1551). For a
considerable time Catholicism retained its hold on a large percentage
of the people both in Norway and Iceland, but the severe measures
taken by the government to ensure the complete extirpation of the
Catholic hierarchy and priesthood led almost of necessity to the
triumph of Lutheranism.

By the Union of Kalmar (1397) Sweden, Norway, and Denmark were united
under the rule of the King of Denmark. The Union did not, however,
bring about peace. The people of Sweden disliked the rule of a
foreigner, and more than once they rose in rebellion against Denmark.
In the absence of a strong central authority the clergy and nobles
became the dominant factors in the state, especially as they took the
lead in the national agitations against King Erik and his successors.
As in most other countries at the time, the Church was exceedingly
wealthy, the bishoprics and abbacies being endowed very generously,
but unfortunately, as elsewhere, the progress of religion was not in
proportion to the worldly possessions of its ministers. Endowment had
destroyed the liberty of election so essential for good
administration, with the result that the bishops and other
ecclesiastical dignitaries were selected without much regard for their
qualifications as spiritual guides. Yet it must be said that in
general the administrators of the ecclesiastical property were not
hard task-masters when compared with their lay contemporaries, nor was
there anything like a strong popular feeling against the Church. Still
the immense wealth of the religious institutions, the prevalence of
abuses, and the failure of the clergy to instruct the people in the
real doctrines of their faith were a constant source of menace to the
Church in Sweden, and left it open to a crushing attack by a leader
who knew how to win the masses to his side by proclaiming himself the
champion of national independence and of religious reform.

In 1515 Sten Sture, the administrator of Sweden, supported by the
Bishop of Linkoping as leader of the popular party, made a gallant
attempt to rally his countrymen to shake off the Danish yoke.
Unfortunately for the success of his undertaking he soon found a
dangerous opponent in the person of Gustaf Trolle, Archbishop of
Upsala, the nominee and supporter of the King of Denmark. The
archbishop threw the whole weight of his influence into the scales of
Denmark, and partly owing to his opposition, partly owing to the want
of sufficient preparation the national uprising was crushed early in
1520. Christian II. was crowned King of Sweden by the Archbishop of
Upsala. He signified his elevation to the throne by a general massacre
of his opponents which lasted for two days, and during which many of
the best blood of Sweden were put to death (Nov. 1520). The archbishop
was rewarded for his services to Denmark by receiving an appointment
as region or administrator of Sweden. He and his party made loud boast
of their political victory, but had they been gifted with a little
prudence and zeal they would have found good reason to regret a
triumph that had been secured by committing the Church to the support
of a Danish tyrant against the wishes of the majority who favoured
national independence. Religion and patriotism were brought into
serious conflict, and, given only a capable leader who would know how
to conduct his campaign with skill, it was not difficult to foresee
the results of such a conflict.

As it happened, such a leader was at hand in the person of Gustaf
Eriksson, better known as Gustavus Vasa. His father had been put to
death in the massacre of Stockholm, and he himself when a youth had
been given as a hostage to the King of Denmark. He made his escape and
fled to Lubeck, where he was kindly received, and remained until an
opportunity arose for his return to Sweden. He placed himself
immediately at the head of the party willing to fight against Denmark,
called upon his countrymen to rally to his standard, and in a short
time succeeded in driving the Danish forces from Sweden. He was
proclaimed administrator of his country in 1521, and two years later a
national Diet assembled at Strengnas offered him the crown.

Such an offer was in exact accordance with his own wishes. But he had
no intention of becoming king of Sweden merely to remain a tool in the
hands of the spiritual and lay lords as the kings of Denmark had
remained. Determined in his own mind to make himself absolute ruler of
Sweden by crushing the bishops and barons, he recognised that Luther's
teaching, with which he was familiar owing to his stay at Lubeck, held
out good hopes for the success of such a project. The warm attachment
of the Bishop of Upsala for the Danish faction had weakened the
devotion of the people to the Church, and had prepared the way for the
change which Gustavus contemplated. Some of the Swedish ecclesiastics,
notably the brothers Olaf and Laurence Peterson, both students of
Wittenberg, the former a well-known preacher at Stockholm, the latter
a professor at Upsala, were strongly Lutheran in their tendencies, and
were ready to assist the king. Though in his letters to Rome and in
his public pronouncements Gustavus professed himself to be a sincere
son of the Church, anxious only to prevent at all costs the spread of
Lutheranism in his dominions, he was taking steps secretly to
encourage his Lutheran supporters and to rid himself of the bishops
and members of the religious orders from whom he feared serious
opposition. As was done elsewhere, he arranged for a public
disputation at which Olaf Peterson undertook to defend the main
principles advocated by Luther, but the results of the controversy
were not so satisfactory for his party as he had anticipated.

Gustavus now threw off the mask of hypocrisy, and came forward boldly
as the champion of the new religion. He removed those bishops who were
most outspoken in their opposition, banished the Dominicans who stood
loyal to Rome, and tried to force the clergy to accept the change.
Anxious to enrich his treasury by confiscating the wealth of the
Church he scattered broadcast Luther's pamphlet on the confiscation of
ecclesiastical property, and engaged the professors of the University
of Upsala to use their efforts to defend and popularise the views it
contained. A commission was appointed to make an inventory of the
goods of the bishops and religious institutions and to induce the
monasteries to make a voluntary surrender of their property. By means
of threats and promises the commissioners secured compliance with the
wishes of the king in some districts, though in others, as for example
in Upsala, the arrival of the commission led to scenes of the greatest
violence and commotion. More severe measures were necessary to overawe
the people, and Gustavus was not a man to hesitate at anything likely
to promote the success of his plans. Bishop Jakobson and some of the
clergy were arrested, and after having been treated with every species
of indignity were put to death (1527).

In this year, 1527, a national Diet was held at Vesteras principally
for the discussion of the religious difficulties that had arisen. Both
parties, the supporters of the old and of the new, mustered their
forces for a final conflict. Gustavus took the side of the so-called
reformers, and proposed the measures which he maintained were required
both in the interests of religion and of the public weal. The Catholic
party were slightly in the majority and refused to assent to these
proposals. Gustavus, though disappointed at the result, did not
despair. He announced to the Diet that in view of its refusal to agree
to his terms he could undertake no longer the government and defence
of the country. A measure such as this, calculated to lead to anarchy
and possibly to a new subjugation of the country by Denmark, was
regarded by both sides as a national disaster, and secured for the
king the support of the waverers. The masses of the people were
alarmed lest their opposition might lead to the restoration of Danish
tyranny, while the support of the nobles was secured by the
publication of a decree authorising them to resume possession of all
property handed over by their ancestors to religious institutions for
the last eighty years. The remainder of the possessions of the Church
were appropriated for the royal treasury. The king now issued a
proclamation in favour of the new religion, insisted on the adoption
of a liturgy in the vulgar tongue, and abolished clerical celibacy. At
the National Assembly of Orebro (1529) the Catholic religion was
abolished in favour of Lutheranism, and two years later Laurence
Peterson was appointed first Lutheran Archbishop of Upsala.

Though the Lutheran teaching had been accepted, great care was taken
not to shock the people by any violent change. Episcopal government of
the Church was retained; most of the Catholic ritual in regard to the
sacraments and the Mass was adopted in the new liturgy, and even in
some cases the pictures and statues were not removed from the
churches. But the revolution that Gustavus had most at heart was fully
accomplished. The authority of the Pope had been overthrown, and in
his place the king had been accepted as the head of the Swedish
Church. Nor did the Lutheran bishops find themselves in the enjoyment
of greater liberty and respect as a result of their treason to the
Church. Gustavus warned them that they must not carry themselves like
lords, and if they would attempt to wield the sword he would know how
to deal with them in a summary manner. Resenting such dictation and
tyranny they began to attack Gustavus in their sermons and to organise
plots for the overthrow of his government. The conspiracy was
discovered (1540). Olaf and Laurence Peterson, the two prominent
leaders of the reforming party, were condemned to death, but were
reprieved on the payment of a large fine. Laurence was, however,
removed from his position as Archbishop of Upsala. In the Diet of
Vesteras in 1544 the crown of Sweden was declared to be hereditary,
and was vested in the family and heirs of Gustavus. Thus the well-
considered policy of Gustavus was crowned with success. By means of
the Lutheran revolt he had changed the whole constitution of the
country, had made himself absolute master of Sweden, and had secured
the succession to the throne for his own family.

But he had not broken the power of his opponents so completely as to
bring peace to his country, nor, if credence be given to the
proclamations in which he bewailed the increase of evil under the plea
of evangelical freedom, did the reformed religion tend to the
elevation of public morals. On his death in 1560 he was succeeded by
his son Erik XIV. (1560-9). Hardly had the new king been proclaimed
than the principle of private judgment introduced by the reformers
began to produce its natural results. Calvinism, which was so opposed
to Lutheranism both in doctrine and in church government, found its
way into Sweden, and attracted the favourable notice of the king.
Regardless for the time being of the Catholic Church, which to all
appearances was dead in Sweden, the two parties, Lutherans and
Calvinists, struggled for supremacy. Erik was won over to the side of
the Calvinists, and measures were taken to overcome the Lutherans by
force, but the king had neither the capacity nor the energy of his
father. The plan miscarried; the Calvinists were defeated (1568), and
Erik was deposed and imprisoned.

His younger brother John succeeded to the throne under the title John
III. He was a man of considerable ability, and was by no means
satisfied with the new religion. His marriage with Catharine, sister
of Sigismund, King of Poland, herself a devoted Catholic, who
stipulated for liberty to practice her religion, helped to make him
more favourable to a Catholic revival. He set himself to study the
Scriptures and writings of the Holy Fathers under the guidance of
Catharine's chaplains, and convinced himself that he should return to
the Catholic Church and endeavour to rescue his country from the
condition of heresy into which it had fallen. He allowed the monks and
nuns who were still in Sweden to form communities again, and
endeavoured to win over the clergy by a series of ordinances couched
in a Catholic tone which he issued for their guidance. In 1571 he
induced the Archbishop of Upsala to publish a number of regulations
known as the /Agenda/, which both in ritual and doctrine indicated a
return to Rome, and he employed some Jesuit missionaries to explain
the misrepresentations of Catholic doctrine indulged in by the
Lutheran and Calvinist leaders. His greatest difficulty in bringing
about a reunion was the presence of Lutheran bishops, but fortunately
for him many of them were old men whose places were soon vacant by
death, to whose Sees he appointed those upon whom he could rely for
support. When he thought the time was ripe he summoned a National
Synod in 1574, where he delivered an address deploring the sad
condition to which religious dissensions had reduced the country. He
pointed out that such a state of affairs had been brought about by the
Reformation and could be remedied only by a return to the Church. The
address received from the clergy a much more favourable reception than
he had anticipated. As the Archbishopric of Upsala was vacant, he
secured the election of an archbishop, who have his adhesion to
seventeen articles of faith wholly satisfactory to Catholics, and who
allowed himself to be consecrated according to the Catholic ritual. He
promised also to use his influence to secure the adhesion of the other
bishops. In 1576 the king issued a new liturgy, /The Red Book of
Sweden/, which was adopted by the Diet in 1577, and accepted by a
large body of the clergy. Its principal was the king's brother, Karl,
Duke of Suthermanland, who for political reasons had constituted
himself head of the Lutheran party, and who refused to agree with the
Roman tendencies of the king on the ground that they were opposed to
the last wishes of Gustavus and to the laws of Sweden. A disputation
was arranged to take place at Upsala, where the Belgian Jesuit,
Laurence Nicolai, vindicated triumphantly against his Lutheran
opponents the Catholic teaching on the Church and the Mass. Copies of
the celebrated catechism of the Blessed Peter Canisius were circulated
throughout Sweden, and made an excellent impression on the people.

Encouraged by these hopeful signs, the king despatched an embassy to
Rome to arrange for the reconciliation of Sweden to the Church. The
royal commissioners were instructed to request, that owing to the
peculiar circumstances of the country, permission should be given for
Communion under both kinds, for the celebration of the Mass in the
Swedish language, and for the abrogation of the law of celibacy at
least in regard to the clergy who were already married. Gregory XIII.,
deeply moved by the king's offer of a reunion, sent the Jesuit,
Anthony Possevin, as his legate to discuss the terms. John set an
example himself by abjuring publicly his errors and by announcing his
submission to the Church (1578).

A commission was appointed at Rome to discuss the concessions which
the king demanded, and unfortunately the decision was regarded in
Sweden as unfavourable. A warm controversy, fomented and encouraged by
the enemies of reunion, broke out between the opponents and supporters
of the new liturgy. Duke Karl, who had now become the hope of the
Lutheran party, did everything he could to stir up strife, while at
the same time Rome refused to accept the terms proposed by the king.
Indignant at what he considered the unreasonable attitude of the Roman
authorities, John began to lose his enthusiasm for his religious
policy, and after the death of his wife who was unwavering in her
devotion to her religion, there was no longer much hope that Sweden
was to be won from heresy (1584). The king married another who was
strongly Lutheran in her sympathies, and who used her influence over
him to secure the expulsion of the Jesuits. Though John III. took no
further steps to bring about reunion he could not be induced to
withdraw the liturgy, the use of which he insisted upon till his death
in 1592.

His son Sigismund III. should have succeeded. He was an ardent
Catholic as his mother had been, but as he had been elected King of
Poland (1586) he was absent from Sweden when the throne became vacant
by the death of his father. Duke Karl and his friends did not fail to
take advantage of his absence. When the Synod met the senators
demanded that Sigismund should accept the Augsburg Confession as a
condition for his election to the throne. To this Sigismund sent the
only reply that a good Catholic and an honest man could send, namely,
a blunt refusal. His uncle, Duke Karl, the acting regent of Sweden,
took steps to seduce the Swedish people from their allegiance to their
lawful king, and to prepare the way for his own accession. He
proclaimed himself the protector of Lutheranism and endeavoured to win
over the bishops to his side. In a national Assembly held at Upsala
(The "Upsala-mote" 1593) after a very violent address from the regent
against the Catholic Church, the bishops confessed that they had
blundered in accepting the liturgy of John III., and the Assembly
declared itself strongly in favour of the Augsburg Confession.

When, therefore, Sigismund returned to claim the throne he found that
Lutheranism was entrenched safely once more, and that even the most
moderate of the bishops appointed by his father must be reckoned with
as opponents. The clergy united with Duke Karl in stirring up the
people against him. In these conditions he was forced to abandon his
projects of reform, and to entrust his uncle with the administration
of Sweden when he himself was obliged to return to Poland. While
Sigismund was engaged in Poland, the regent conducted a most skilful
campaign, nominally on behalf of Protestantism, but in reality to
secure the deposition of Sigismund and his own election to the throne.
In the Diet of Suderkoping (1595) Sigismund was condemned for having
bestowed appointments on Catholics and for having tolerated the
Catholic religion in his kingdom of Sweden, and it was ordered that
all who professed the doctrines of Rome should abandon their errors
within six months under pain of expulsion from the country. The
Archbishop of Upsala made a visitation of the churches, during which
he ordered that all those who absented themselves from the Lutheran
service should be flogged in his presence, that the pictures, statues,
and reliquaries should be destroyed, and that the liturgy introduced
by John III. should be abolished. The greatest violence was used
towards the supporters of King Sigismund, most of whom were either
Catholic or at least favourably inclined towards Catholicism.

Enraged by a decree that no edict of the king should have any binding
force unless confirmed by the Swedish Diet, and driven to desperation
by the tyranny and oppression of the regent, some of Sigismund's
followers raised the standard on behalf of their king, and Sigismund
returned to Sweden with an army of five thousand men. He found himself
opposed by the forces of the regent against whom he was at first
successful, but in his treatment of his uncle and his rebel followers
he showed himself far too forgiving. In return for his kindness,
having strengthened themselves by a large army they forced him to
submit to the decision of a national Assembly to be held at Jonkoping
(1599). At this meeting Duke Karl accused the king of endeavouring to
plunge Sweden once more into the errors from which it had been rescued
by the reformers. In May of the same year a resolution was passed
declaring that the king had forfeited the allegiance of his subjects
unless he yielded to their demands, and more especially unless he
handed over his son and heir to be reared by the regent as a
Protestant. Many of his supporters, including nine members of the
Council of State, were put to death. Finally in 1604 Sigismund was
formally deposed, and the crown was bestowed on his uncle, Duke Karl,
who became king under the title of Charles IX. Protestantism had
triumphed at last in Sweden, but even its strongest supporters would
hardly like to maintain that the issue was decided on religious
grounds, or that the means adopted by Charles IX. to secure the
victory were worthy of the apostle of a new religion.
                              ----------

[1] A Franciscan. He was the author of the /Confutatio Lutheranismi
    Danici/, edited and published 1902.



                             CHAPTER III

                        PROGRESS OF CALVINISM


                         (a) In Switzerland.

  /Calvini Joannis, Opera quae supersunt/ in the /Corp.
  Reformatorum/, vols. xxix.-lxxxvii. Doumergue, /Jean Calvin, les
  hommes et les choses de son temps/, 1900-5. Kampschulte, /Johann
  Calvin, seine Kirche und sein staat in Genf/, 1899. Fleury,
  /Histoire de l'Eglise de Geneve/, 3 vols., 1880. Mignet,
  /Etablissement de la reforme religieuse et constition du
  calvinisme a Geneve/, 1877. Choisy, /La theocratie a Geneve au
  temps de Calvin/, 1897. /Cambridge Mod. History/, ii., chap. xi.
  (Bibliography, 769-83). For complete bibliography, see /Diction.
  Theologique/ (art. Calvin).

John Calvin, from whom the heresy takes its name, was born at Noyon in
Picardy in 1509. In accordance with the wishes of his father he
studied philosophy and theology at the University of Paris, where he
was supported mainly from the fruits of the ecclesiastical benefices
to which he had been appointed to enable him to pursue his studies.
Later on he began to waver about his career in life, and without
abandoning entirely his hopes of becoming an ecclesiastic he turned
his attention to law in the Universities of Orleans and Bourges. In
French intellectual circles of this period a certain spirit of unrest
and a contempt for old views and old methods might be detected. The
Renaissance ideas, so widespread on the other side of the Alps, had
made their way into France, where they found favour with some of the
university professors, and created a feeling of distrust and suspicion
in the minds of those to whom Scholasticism was the highest ideal.
Margaret of Navarre, sister of the king, showed herself the generous
patron and defender of the new movement, and secured for it the
sympathy and to some extent the support of Francis I. A few of the
friends of the Renaissance in France were not slow to adopt the
religious ideas of Luther, though not all who were suspected of heresy
by the extreme champions of Scholasticism had any intention of joining
in a movement directed against the defined doctrines or constitution
of the Catholic Church.

As a student at Bourges, Calvin was brought into close relations with
Melchior Wolmar, a German Humanist, who was strongly Lutheran in his
tendencies, and through whom he became enamoured of Luther's teaching
on Justification. On his return to Paris he was soon remarkable as a
strong partisan of the advanced section of the university, and by his
ability and determination he did much to win over the Renaissance
party to the religious teaching that had become so widespread in
Germany. As a result of an address delivered by Nicholas Cop, rector
of the university, and of several acts of violence perpetrated in the
capital by the friends of heresy Francis I. was roused to take action.
Calvin, fearing death or imprisonment, made his escape from Paris to
Basle (1534). Here he published his first and greatest theological
treatise, /Christianae Religionis Institutio/, which he dedicated to
the King of France (1536). The work was divided into four sections,
namely, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, Grace, and the External
Means for Salvation. Both in its style and in its arguments drawn from
the Scriptures, the Fathers, and the theologians of the Middle Ages,
it was far superior, at least for educated readers, to the best that
had been produced by Luther and even to the /Loci Communes/ of
Melanchthon.

He arrived at Basle at a time when a crisis had arisen in the
political and religious development of Geneva. For a long period the
House of Savoy was seeking for an opportunity to annex the territory
of Vaud extending along the Lake of Geneva, and the episcopal cities
of Geneva and Lausanne. Berne, too, had aspirations of a similar kind.
The authorities of Berne, having adopted the Zwinglian doctrine,
thought that in it they had a means at their hand to detach Geneva and
Lausanne from any sympathy with Savoy and to secure these territories
for themselves. They despatched preachers to Geneva, where there were
already two political factions, one advocating a closer alliance with
Savoy, another clamouring for a union with Berne. The supporters of
Berne rallied round William Farel and the Zwinglian ministers, while
the friends of Savoy undertook to champion the old religion. The whole
struggle was at bottom political rather than religious, but the
triumph of the republican adherents of Berne meant victory for the
reforming party in Geneva. The Duke of Savoy issued a declaration of
war against the rebels to whom the Canton of Berne had pledged support
(1534). As a result the forces of Savoy were driven out of Geneva and
the Vaud, a close union was formed between Geneva and Berne, and every
effort was made to spread the new religion in the city and among the
Vaudois. A Zwinglian university was established at Lausanne, which
exercised a great influence in propagating the new doctrine, and which
had the honour of counting among its students Theodore Beza[1] the
most gifted and learned assistant of Calvin.

But though the Vaudois had been won over, Geneva was by no means
secured for the reformers. Farel and his followers, finding themselves
involved in serious difficulties, appealed to Calvin to help them in
completing the work they had begun. In 1536 Calvin accepted this
invitation, and took up his residence at Geneva. Gifted with great
powers as an organiser and administrator he soon restored order in the
city, and won over the people to his doctrines. Himself a man of very
strict notions, in whose eyes all even the most harmless amusements
