The Project Gutenberg EBook of Death of a Spaceman, by Walter M. Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Death of a Spaceman

Author: Walter M. Miller

Illustrator: Ernest Schroeder

Release Date: August 9, 2009 [EBook #29643]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATH OF A SPACEMAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Illustrator: Ernest Schroeder]


 DEATH
    OF A
      SPACEMAN

BY WALTER M. MILLER, JR.


    _The manner in which a man has lived is often the key to the way he
    will die. Take old man Donegal, for example. Most of his adult life
    was spent in digging a hole through space to learn what was on the
    other side. Would he go out the same way?_


Old Donegal was dying. They had all known it was coming, and they
watched it come--his haggard wife, his daughter, and now his grandson,
home on emergency leave from the pre-astronautics academy. Old Donegal
knew it too, and had known it from the beginning, when he had begun to
lose control of his legs and was forced to walk with a cane. But most of
the time, he pretended to let them keep the secret they shared with the
doctors--that the operations had all been failures, and that the cancer
that fed at his spine would gnaw its way brainward until the paralysis
engulfed vital organs, and then Old Donegal would cease to be. It would
be cruel to let them know that he knew. Once, weeks ago, he had joked
about the approaching shadows.

"Buy the plot back where people won't walk over it, Martha," he said.
"Get it way back under the cedars--next to the fence. There aren't many
graves back there yet. I want to be alone."

"Don't _talk_ that way, Donny!" his wife had choked. "You're not dying."

His eyes twinkled maliciously. "Listen, Martha, I want to be buried
face-down. I want to be buried with my back to space, understand? Don't
let them lay me out like a lily."

"Donny, _please_!"

"They oughta face a man the way he's headed," Donegal grunted. "I been
up--_way_ up. Now I'm going straight down."

Martha had fled from the room in tears. He had never done it again,
except to the interns and nurses, who, while they insisted that he was
going to get well, didn't mind joking with him about it.

Martha can bear my death, he thought, can bear pre-knowledge of it. But
she couldn't bear thinking that he might take it calmly. If he accepted
death gracefully, it would be like deliberately leaving her, and Old
Donegal had decided to help her believe whatever would be comforting to
her in such a troublesome moment.

"When'll they let me out of this bed again?" he complained.

"Be patient, Donny," she sighed. "It won't be long. You'll be up and
around before you know it."

"Back on the moon-run, maybe?" he offered. "Listen, Martha, I been
planet-bound too long. I'm not too old for the moon-run, am I?
Sixty-three's not so old."

That had been carrying things too far. She knew he was hoaxing, and
dabbed at her eyes again. The dead must humor the mourners, he thought,
and the sick must comfort the visitors. It was always so.

But it was harder, now that the end was near. His eyes were hazy, and
his thoughts unclear. He could move his arms a little, clumsily, but
feeling was gone from them. The rest of his body was lost to him.
Sometimes he seemed to feel his stomach and his hips, but the sensation
was mostly an illusion offered by higher nervous centers, like the
"ghost-arm" that an amputee continues to feel. The wires were down, and
he was cut off from himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lay wheezing on the hospital bed, in his own room, in his own rented
flat. Gaunt and unshaven, gray as winter twilight, he lay staring at the
white net curtains that billowed gently in the breeze from the open
window. There was no sound in the room but the sound of breathing and
the loud ticking of an alarm clock. Occasionally he heard a chair
scraping on the stone terrace next door, and the low mutter of voices,
sometimes laughter, as the servants of the Keith mansion arranged the
terrace for late afternoon guests.

With considerable effort, he rolled his head toward Martha who sat
beside the bed, pinch-faced and weary.

"You ought to get some sleep," he said.

"I slept yesterday. Don't talk, Donny. It tires you."

"You ought to get more sleep. You never sleep enough. Are you afraid
