hopeless as ever. Early on the 10th the showers of ashes and streams
of lava diminished and almost ceased, but later the same day they began
again, and the terrified inhabitants feared that a catastrophe like that
which buried Pompeii and Herculaneum was about to visit them. The lava
which reached the cemetery of Torre Annunziata turned in the direction
of Pompeii as if to freshly entomb that exhumed city of the past. A
violent storm of sulphurous rain fell at San Giuseppe, Vesuviana and
Sariano, and on all sides the fall of sand and ashes came on again in
full strength. Even with the sun shining high in the heavens the light
was a dim yellow, in the midst of which the few persons who still
haunted the stricken towns moved about in the awful stillness of
desolation like gray ghosts, their clothing, hair and beards covered
with ashes.


THE ERUPTION RESUMED.


A typical case was that of Torre del Greco. Though for thirty hours
the place had been deserted, a few ghostly figures could be seen
at intervals when the vivid flashes of lightning illuminated the
gloom-covered scene, wandering desolately about, hungry and thirsty,
their throats parched by smoke and dust, yet unable to tear themselves
away from the ruins of their late comfortable homes.

So deep was the ash fall that railway or tramway travel to the inner
circle of towns was impossible, and the great depth of fallen dust
choked the roads so as to render travel by carriage or on foot very
difficult. A party of officials made a tour of inspection by automobile,
visiting a number of the town, but were prevented by the state of the
roads from reaching others. Ottajano was thus cut off from travel, and
a heavy fall of ashes followed the officials in their retreat. At Bosco
Trecase the lava had gathered into a lake, already growing solid on top,
but a mass of liquid rock beneath.

The lava carried vast masses of burnt stone and sulphur on its surface,
like dross on melted lead, and nothing was visible toward Bosco
Trecase but endless acres of dark scoriae, broken here and there by the
greenish, curling smoke of sulphur. At one point a great cone pine tree,
torn up by its roots and turned to black charcoal, stuck out of the mass
at a sharp angle. The air was almost unbearable, the heat intense, and
few could long bear the dangers and discomfort of the situation.


SCENES OF HORROR.


The greatest depth of ashes encountered was in the vicinity of Ottajano.
Here large areas were buried to a depth of several feet. Soldiers had
been sent there with military carts, carrying provisions and surgical
appliances, with orders to lend their aid in the work of relief. They
found it almost impossible to make their way through the deep fine dust,
and the tales of horror and heroism they had to tell resembled those
that must of old have been borne to Rome by the fleeing inhabitants of
Pompeii.

Efforts were made to remove the children and old persons in the carts,
but when these had gone a few hundred feet it was found that, although
there were four horses harnessed to each vehicle, they could not pull
their loads through the ashes. This caused a panic among the children,
who expected to be buried in the incessant fall from the volcano, and
they fled in all directions in the darkness and blinding rain. Searching
parties went after them, but in spite of continuous shouting and calling
no trace was found of the little ones, and numbers of the children were
undoubtedly smothered by the ashes and sand.

Many of the inhabitants had been buried in the ruins of their houses,
and the scenes when the victims were unearthed were often piteous and
terrible. The positions of the bodies showed that the victims had died
while in a state of great terror, the faces being convulsed with fear.
Three bodies were found in a confessional of one of the fallen churches.
One body was that of an old woman who was sitting with her right arm
raised as though to ward off the advancing danger. The second was that
of a child about eight years old. It was found dead in a position, which
would indicate that the child had fallen with a little dog close to it
and had died with one arm raised across its face, to protect itself
and pet from the crumbling ruins. The third body, that of a woman, was
reduced to an unrecognizable mass. These three victims were reverently
laid side by side while a procession of friends and relatives offered up
prayers beside them.

One soldier rode his horse through the ashes reaching up to its flanks,
calling out, "Who wants help?" He was rewarded by hearing a woman's
voice reply in weak tones and, springing from his horse, he floundered
through the ashes to the ruined walls of a house from which the voice
seemed to come. As he made his way through the soft, treacherous
layer of scoriae which surrounded the destroyed habitation, and with
difficulty worked his way toward the building the soldier shouted
words of encouragement and, climbing over a heap of ruins and braving a
toppling wall, entered the building. In the cellar he found the bodies
of three children. Near them was a woman, barely alive, who by almost
superhuman efforts for hours had succeeded in freeing herself from a
mass of debris which had fallen upon her. The soldier picked the woman
up in his arms and carried her to a place of safety. It was found that
both legs were broken and that she had been badly crushed about the
body.

Some extraordinary escapes from death took place. A man and his
four children were rescued after having been lost in the ash-covered
wilderness for fifty-six hours. They were terribly exhausted, and were
reduced almost to skeletons.

Robert Underwood Johnson, one of the editors of the "Century Magazine",
who happened to be in Rome at the time of the eruption, made one of a
party who ventured as near the scene of destruction as they could safely
approach. From his graphic story of his experiences we copy some of the
most interesting details.


AN AMERICAN OBSERVER.


"We caught a train for Torre Annunziata, three miles this side of
Pompeii and two miles from the southern end of the wedge of lava which
destroyed Bosco Trecase. We had a magnificent view of the eruption,
eight miles away. Rising at an angle of fifty degrees, the vast mass of
tumult roundness was beautifully accentuated by the full moon, shifting
momentarily into new forms and drifting south in low, black clouds of
ashes and cinders reaching to Capri. At Torre del Greco we ran under
this terrifying pall, apparently a hundred feet above, the solidity of
which was soon revealed in the moonlight. The torches of the railway
guards added to the effect, but greatly relieved the sulphurous
darkness.

"We reached Torre Annunziata at three in the morning. There was little
suggestion of a disaster as we trudged through the sleeping town to the
lava, two miles away. The brilliant moon gave us a superb view of the
volcano, a gray-brown mass rising, expanding and curling in with a
profile like a monstrous cyclopean face. But nothing in mythology gives
a suggestion of the fascination of this awful force, presenting the
sublime beauty above, but in its descent filled with the mysterious
malignance of God's underworld.

"We reached the lava at a picturesque cypress-planted cemetery on
the northern boundary of Torre Annunziata. It was as if the dead had
effectually cried out to arrest the crushing river of flames which
pitilessly engulfed the statue of St. Anne with which the people of
Bosco Reale tried to stay it, as at Catania the veil of St. Agathe is
said to have stayed a similar stream from Mount Etna.

"We climbed on the lava. It was cool above but still alive with fire
below. We could see dimly the extent of the destruction beyond the
barrier of brown which had enclosed the streets, torn down the houses,
invaded the vineyards and broken Cook's railways. A better idea of the
surroundings was obtained at dawn from the railway. We saw north what
was left of Bosco Trecase--a great, square stone church and a few houses
inland in a sea of dull, brown lava. North and east rose a thousand
patches of blue smoke like swamp miasma. All was dull and desolate slag,
with nowhere the familiar serpentine forms of the old lava streams. In
terrible contrast with the volcanic evidences were strong cypresses and
blooming camelias in a neighboring cemetery.

"We ate a hasty luncheon before sunrise, when the great beauty of the
scene was revealed. The column now seemed higher and more massive,
rising to three times the height of Vesuvius. Each portion had a
concentric motion and new aspects. The south edges floating toward the
sea showed exquisite curved surfaces, due to the upper moving current.
It was like the decoration of the side of a great sarcophagus. As a
yellow dust hangs over Naples and hides the volcano, I count myself
fortunate to have seen all day from leeward this spectacle of changing,
undiminishing beauty.

"The wedge of cultivated land ruined east of the volcano extended at
least ten miles, with a width of twenty or thirty miles. Fancy a rich
and thickly populated country of vineyards lying under three to six
inches of ashes and cinders of the color of chocolate with milk, while
above, to the west, the volcano in full activity is distributing to the
outer edges of the circle the same fate, and you will get an idea of the
desolate impression of the scene, a tragedy colossal and heartrending.
Like that of Calabria, it enlists the sympathy of the civilized world.
It takes time for such a calamity to be realized.

"Two miles below San Giuseppe we struck cinders which the soldiers
were shoveling, making a narrow road for the refugees. Our wagon driver
begged off from completing his contract to take us to San Giuseppe. We
had not the heart to insist, so the rest of the journey to the railway
at Palma, eight miles, was made laboriously on foot for three hours
through sliding cinders.

"In many places temporary shelters had been built by the roadside,
like children's playhouses. Here women were huddled with their bedding,
awaiting the coming of supplies which the army had begun to distribute.
The men were largely occupied with shoveling cinders from the stronger
roofs and floors into heaps three to six feet deep along the roadside.
Many two-wheeled carts loaded with salvage, drawn by donkeys or pushed
by peasants, were making their way along, the women with bundles on
their heads or carrying poultry.

"In the square of San Giuseppe was an encampment of soldiers, with low
tents. Near a destroyed church, in coarse yellow linen shrouds, were the
bodies of thirty-three of the persons who there lost their lives. The
peasants were sad, but uncomplaining; in fact, for so excitable a people
they were wonderfully calm. As evidence of the thrift and self-respect
of these, we were not once asked for alms during the afternoon."


THE KING AT THE FRONT.


The Italian Government did all it could at the moment to alleviate the
horrors of the situation, sending money to be expended in relief
work and dispatching high officials of the government to give aid and
encouragement by their presence. The King, Victor Emmanuel, and Queen
Helene reached the scene of destruction as early as possible and lent
their personal assistance to the work of rescue.

Obliged to leave his automobile, which could not move over the
cinder-choked road, the King went forward with difficulty on horseback,
the animal floundering through four feet of ashes, stumbling into holes,
and half blinded by the fall of dust and cinders.

"How did you escape?" he asked a priest whom he met in his journey.

"I put myself in safety," was the reply.

"What do you mean?" asked the King.

"Realizing the danger, I left Nola."

"What!" cried the King, with a flush of anger. "You, a minister of God,
were not here to share the danger of your people and administer the last
sacraments? You did very wrong and forgot your duty."

Reaching Ottejano, the King did what he could to expedite the work
of rescue at that central point of disaster, more than a hundred dead
bodies being taken from the ruins in his presence. He stood with set
pale face watching the removal of the victims and directing the movement
of the workers. During his visit at the front he inspected the temporary
camp hospitals, in which the soldiers were caring for the injured and
suffering, speaking to the poor victims, giving them what comfort he
could, and asking what he could do to relieve their distress. Every
request or desire was received with sympathy and orders given to have it
fulfilled.

A pitiful scene took place when the King bent over a poor man, whose
right leg had been amputated, and asked what he could do to comfort and
aid him in his affliction.

"Send me my son, who is serving as a soldier," said the maimed peasant.

The King, visibly affected, clasped the old man's hand and exclaimed:

"My poor fellow! I can do much, but to grant your request would mean
breaking the laws, which I must be the first to respect. I would give
anything I have were it possible by so doing to send your son to you,
but I cannot do so."

While the King was thus engaged at the scenes of desolation, Queen
Helene visited the charitable institutions at Naples and inspected the
places where the refugees were housed, doing what she could to improve
conditions and add to the comfort of the sufferers. The Princess of
Schleswig-Holstein, who was in Naples, made an automobile visit to the
afflicted towns, but the motor broke down, and she was forced to return
on foot, walking a distance of twelve miles through the ashes and
displaying a power of endurance that surprised the natives.


THE CANOPY OF DUST.


By Friday, April 13th, the eruption was practically at an end. Vesuvius
had spent itself in the enormous convulsion of the 7th and 8th and
the subsequent minor explosions and had returned to its normal state,
ceasing to give any signs of life, except the cloud of smoke which still
rose from its crater and spread like a thick curtain over and around the
mountain. Looked at from Naples, there was none of the familiar aspects
of the volcano, with its output of smoke and ashes by day and fiery
gleam by night. Now it lay buried in darkness and obscurity, clothed
in a dense pall of smoke. At Rome there was sunshine, but twenty miles
south hung a misty veil, and twenty-five miles above Naples a zone of
semi-obscurity began, blotting out the sun, whose light trickled through
with a sickly glare. Everything was whitened with powdery dust; pretty
white villas were daubed and dripping with mud, and people were busy
shoveling the ashes from their roofs.

The crowds at the stations resembled millers, their clothes flour
covered; the Campania presented the appearance of a Dakota prairie after
a blizzard of snow, though everything was gray instead of white. The
ashes lay in drifts knee deep. As the volcano was approached semi-night
replaced the day, the gloom being so deep that telegraph poles twenty
feet away could not be seen. Breathing was difficult, and the smoke made
the eyes water. At Naples, however, a favorable wind had cleared the air
of smoke, the sun shone brightly, and the versatile people were happy
once more. The goggles and eye-screens had disappeared, but the streets
were anything but comfortable, for some six thousand men were at work
clearing the ashes from the roofs and main streets and piling them in
the middle of the narrow streets, making the passage of vehicles very
difficult and the sidewalks far from comfortable for foot passengers.

But while brightness and joy reigned at Naples, there were gruesome
scenes within the volcanic zone. At Bosco Trecase soldiers carried on
the work of exhumation, being able to work only an hour at a time on
account of the advanced stage of decomposition of the bodies. Many of
these were shapeless, unrecognizable masses of flesh and bones, while
others were little disfigured. To lessen the danger of an epidemic the
bodies were buried as quickly as possible in quicklime.

On Sunday, the 15th, the searchers at Ottejano were surprised at finding
two aged women still alive, after six days' entombment in the ruins.
They were among those who had been buried by the falling walls a week
before. The rafters of the house had protected them, and a few morsels
of food in their pockets aided to keep them alive. At some points there
the ashes were ten feet deep. At San Giuseppe bodies of women were found
in whose hands were coins and jewels, and one woman held a jewelled
rosary. This recalls the results of exploration at Herculaneum and
Pompeii, where were similar instances of death overtaking the victims of
the volcano while fleeing with their jewels in their hands.

It is interesting to learn that two men stood heroically to their post
of duty during the whole scene of the explosion, Professor Matteucci,
Director of the Royal Observatory, and his American assistant, Professor
Frank A. Perret, of New York. Though the building occupied by them
was exposed to the full force of the rain of stones from the burning
mountain, they remained undauntedly at their post through that week of
terror. On the 14th some of that venturesome fraternity, the newspaper
correspondents, reached their eyrie on the highest habitable point on
Vesuvius and heard the story of their experiences.


THE HEROES OF THE OBSERVATORY.


For several days Professors Matteucci and Perret and their two servants
had been cut off from the outside world and bombarded by the volcano,
their rations consisting of bread, cheese and dried onions, until on
Friday a hardy guide was induced to push through to them with
some provisions. During the eruption the Professor had kept at his
instruments, taking observations day and night and making calculations
in the midst of the inferno. Roughly dressed, he looked like a Western
cowboy after a hard ride in a dust storm. The portico where he stood was
knee deep in ashes, and from the observatory terrace narrow paths had
been cut through the ashes, but as far as the eye could reach an ocean
of ashes and twisted rivers were alone visible, with Vesuvius rising
grimly in the midst. The great monster was enveloped in a cloak of
white, as if buried under a snowstorm, its surface being here and there
slit with gulches in which lava ran. At the bottom of one of those
gulches lay the wrecked remnants of the peninsular railway, a portion
of its twisted cable protruding through the ashes. As the correspondents
ascended the mountain they were surprised by the apparition of
natives, men wrinkled with age, who emerged from dugouts just below
the observatory and offered them milk and eggs, just as if they were
ordinary visitors to the volcano. As they descended they heard the
sound of a mandolin from one of these dugouts. Evidently Vesuvius had no
terrors for these case-hardened veterans.

We have already told the story gleaned by the correspondents from the
daring scientists. Matteucci completed his record of boldness on Friday,
the 13th, by climbing to a point far above the observatory, at the
imminent risk of his life, to observe the conditions then existing. From
what he says he believed the end of the disturbance near, though he did
not venture to predict. As for the ashes, which a light wind was then
blowing in a direction away from Naples, he said: "The ill wind is now
blowing good to other places, for ashes are the best fertilizer it is
possible to use. It is merely a question just now of having too much of
a good thing."

This is a fact so far as the volcanic ash is concerned. An examination
of the ashes a few days ago shows that they will prove an active and
valuable fertilizer. The fertile slopes of Vesuvius have ever been an
allurement to the vine-grower, four crops a year being a temptation no
possible danger could drive him from, and as soon as the mountain grows
surely peaceful after this eruption, we shall find its farmers risking
again the chance of its uncertain temper. But this is not the case with
the land covered with lava and cinders. Time for their disintegration
is necessary before they can be brought under cultivation, and this is
a matter of years. After the great eruption of 1871-72 the land covered
with cinders did not bear crops for seven years, and there is no reason
that they will do so sooner on the present occasion. So for years to
come much of the volcanic soil must remain a barren and desert void.



CHAPTER XVI.

The Great Lisbon and Calabrian Earthquakes.


To our account of the great earth convulsions of San Francisco it is in
place to append a description of some similar events of older date. It
is due to the same causes, whatever these causes may be, the imprisoned
forces within the earth acting over great distances during the
earthquake, while they are concentrated within some limited space when
the volcano begins its work. The earthquake is the most terrible to
mankind of all the natural agencies of destruction. While the volcano
usually has a greater permanent effect upon surface conditions, it is,
as a rule, much less destructive to human life, the earthquake often
shaking down cities and burying all their inhabitants in one common
grave. Violent earthquakes are also of far more frequent occurrence than
destructive volcanic eruptions, many hundreds of them having taken place
during the historic period.

While the earthquake is only indirectly connected with the subject of
our work, it seems desirable to make some mention of it here, at least
so far as relates to those terrible convulsions whose destructiveness
has given them special prominence in the history of great disasters.
Ancient notable examples are those which threw down the famous Colossus
of Rhodes and the Pharos of Alexandria. The city of Antioch was a
terrible sufferer from this affliction, it having been devastated some
time before the Christian era, while in the year 859 more than 15,000
of its houses were destroyed. Of countries subject to earthquakes, Japan
has been an especial sufferer, in some cases mountains or islands being
elevated in association with shocks; in others, great tracts of land
being swallowed up by the sea. The number of deaths in some of these
instances was enormous.

Numerous thrilling examples of the destructive work of the earthquake
at various periods are on record. Of these we have given elsewhere a
tabular list of the more important, and shall confine ourselves to a
few striking examples of its destructive action. In the record of great
earthquakes, one of the most famous is that which in 1755 visited the
city of Lisbon, the capital of Portugal, and left that populous, place
in ruin and dire distress. It may be well to recall the details of this
dire event to the memories of our readers.


THE GREAT LISBON EARTHQUAKE


On the night of the 31st of October, 1755, the citizens of the fair city
of Lisbon lay down to sleep, in merciful ignorance of what was awaiting
them on the morrow. The morning of the 1st of November dawned, and gave
no sign of approaching calamity. The sun rose in its brightness, the
warmth was genial, the breezes gentle, the sky serene. It was All
Saints' Day--a high festival of the Church of Rome. The sacred edifices
were thronged with eager crowds, and the ceremonies were in full
progress, when the assembled throngs were suddenly startled from their
devotions. From the ground beneath came fearful sounds that drowned
the peal of the organ and the voices of the choirs. These underground
thunders having rolled away, an awful silence ensued. The panic-stricken
multitudes were paralyzed with terror. Immediately after the ground
began to heave with a long and gentle swell, producing giddiness and
faintness among the people. The tall piles swayed to and fro, like
willows in the wind. Shrieks of horror rose from the terrified assembly.
Again the earth heaved, and this time with a longer and higher wave.
Down came the ponderous arches, the stately columns, the massive walls,
the lofty spires, tumbling upon the heads of priests and people. The
graven images, the deified wafers, and they who had knelt in adoration
before them--the worshipped and the worshippers alike--were in a moment
buried under one undistinguishable mass of horrible ruins. Only a few,
who were near the doors, escaped to tell the tale.

It fared no better with those who had remained in their dwellings. The
terrible earth-wave overthrew the larger number of the private houses in
the city, burying their inhabitants under the crumbling walls. Those who
were in the streets more generally escaped, though some there, too, were
killed by falling walls.

The sudden overthrow of so many buildings raised vast volumes of fine
dust, which filled the atmosphere and obscured the sun, producing a
dense gloom. The air was full of doleful sounds--the groans of agony
