The Project Gutenberg EBook of Five Sermons, by H.B. Whipple

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Five Sermons

Author: H.B. Whipple

Posting Date: April 29, 2013 [EBook #8731]
Release Date: August, 2005
First Posted: August 5, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE SERMONS ***




Produced by Jared Fuller








FIVE SERMONS

BY THE RT. REV. H.B. WHIPPLE, D.D., LL.D. BISHOP OF MINNESOTA

1890

PREFACE

My only excuse for printing these sermons is the request of friends who
could not secure copies of them.  They are printed as delivered, and the
repetition of incidents was a part of the historical statement.  The
Third and Fifth Sermons were preached without notes and reported by a
stenographer. H.B.W.



CONTENTS

I.   SERMON AT THE OPENING SERVICES OF THE GENERAL CONVENTION,
     OCTOBER 1889

II.  SERMON AT THE FARIBAULT CELEBRATION OF THE CENTENNIAL
     OF THE INAUGURATION OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, 1789-1889

III. SERMON AT THE SECOND ANNUAL MEETING OF THE MISSIONARY COUNCIL
     IN WASHINGTON, D.C., NOVEMBER 1888

IV.  ADDRESS IN LAMBETH CHAPEL, AT THE FIRST SESSION OF THE LAMBETH
     CONFERENCE, JULY 3, 1888

V.   SERMON AT THE FOURTH ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE BROTHERHOOD OF
     ST. ANDREW, IN CLEVELAND, OHIO, SEPT. 29, 1889




I.  SERMON AT THE OPENING SERVICES OF THE GENERAL CONVENTION,
    OCTOBER 2, 1889.


"We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what
work Thou didst their days, in the times of old."--PSALM xliv. I.


Brethren: I shall take it for granted that there is a visible Church;
that it was founded by Our Lord Jesus Christ, and has His promise that
the gates of hell shall never prevail against it.  We believe that ours
is a pure branch of the apostolic Church; that it has a threefold
ministry; that its two sacraments--Baptism and the Supper of the Lord--are
of perpetual obligation, and are divine channels of grace; that the
faith once delivered to the saints is contained in the Catholic creeds,
and has the warrant of Holy Scripture which was written by inspiration
of God.  On this centennial day I shall speak of the history and mission
of this branch of the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It was a singular providence that this continent, laden with the bounty
of God, was unoccupied by civilization for thousands of years.  America
was discovered by a devout son of the Latin Church, whose name--
Christopher, Christ-bearer, and Columbus, the dove--ought to have been
the prophecy that he would bear the Gospel to the New World.  It was at
a time when Savonarola, with the zeal of a prophet of God and the
eloquence of a Chrysostom, was laboring to awaken the Church to a new
life.  No nation ever had a nobler mission than Spain.  That mission was
forfeited by unholy greed and untold cruelty.  It was lost forever.
Other nations claimed the continent for their own.  In the providence of
God; this last of the nations was founded by the English-speaking race.
I reverently believe that it was because they recognize as no other
people the two truths which underlie the possibility of constitutional
government, i.e., the inalienable rights of the individual citizen, and
loyalty to government as a delegated trust from God, who alone has the
right to govern.  These lessons are intertwined with two thousand years
of history.  They reach back to the days when the savage Briton came in
contact with Roman civilization and Roman law, and have been deepened by
centuries of Christian influences which have changed our savage fathers
into truth-speaking, liberty-loving Christian men.

More marvellous are the providences intertwined with the history of the
Church.  It was planted by apostolic men, and numbered heroes like St.
Patrick and St. Alban before the missionary Augustine came to
Canterbury.  Through all of its history it has been the Church of the
English-speaking race.  The liturgy contains the purest English of any
book, except the English Bible, which was translated by her sons.  The
ritual which Augustine found in England came from the East; and the
liturgy which he introduced was, by the advice of Gregory, taken from
many national Churches.  The Venerable Hooker said: "Our liturgy was
must be acknowledged as the singular work of the providence of God."  In
its services it represents the Church of the English-speaking race.  The
exhortation to pray for the child to be baptized, the direction to put
pure water into the font at each baptism, the sign of the cross, the
words of the reception of the baptized, the joining of hands in holy
matrimony, the "dust to dust" of the burial,--are peculiar to the offices
of the English-speaking people.  In the Holy Communion, the rubric found
in all western Churches, commanding the priest, after consecration, to
kneel and worship the elements, never found a place in any service-book
of the Church of England.  The Book of Common Prayer has preserved for
us Catholic faith and Catholic worship.


The first English missionary priest in America of whose services we have
record was Master Wolfall, who celebrated the Holy Communion in 1578 for
the crews of Martin Forbisher on the shores of Hudson Bay, amid whose
solitudes Bishop Horden has won whole heathen tribes to Jesus Christ.
At about the same time the Rev. Martin Fletcher, the chaplain of Sir
Francis Drake, celebrated the Holy Communion in the bay of San
Francisco, a prophecy that these distant shores should become our
inheritance.  A few years later (1583), divine service was held in the
bay of St. John's, Newfoundland, for Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and when his
ill-fated ship foundered at sea, the last words of the hero-admiral
were, "We are as near heaven by sea as by land."  The mantle of Gilbert
fell on Sir Walter Raleigh, who was commissioned by Queen Elizabeth to
bear the evangel of God's love to the New World.  The faith behind the
adventures of these men is seen in a woodcut of Raleigh's vessels at
anchor; a pinnace, with a man at the mast-head bearing a cross,
approaching the shore with the message of the Gospel.  To some of us
whose hearts have been touched with pity for the red men, its is a
beautiful incident that the first baptism on these shores was that of an
Indian chief, Mateo, on the banks of the Roanoke.  In May, 1607, the
first services on the shore of New England were held by the Rev. Richard
Seymour.  Missionary services in the wilderness were not unlike those of
our pioneer bishops.  "We did hang an awning to the trees to shield us
from the sun, our walls were rails of wood, our seats unhewed trees, our
pulpit a bar of wood--this was our 'church.'"  It was in this church that
the Rev. Robert Hunt celebrated the first communion in Virginia, June
21, 1607.  The missionary spirit of the times is seen when Lord De la
Warr and his companions went in procession to the Temple Church in
London to receive the Holy Communion.  The Rev. Richard Crashaw said in
his sermon: "Go forward in the strength of the Lord, look not for
wealth, look only for the things of the kingdom of God--you go to win the
heathen to the Gospel.  Practise it yourselves.  Make the name of Christ
honorable.  What blessings any nation has had by Christ must be given to
all the nations of the earth."  The first act of Governor De la Warr, on
landing in Virginia, was to kneel in silent prayer, and then, with the
whole people, they went to church, where the services were conducted by
the Rev. Richard Burke.  In 1611 the saintly Alexander Whittaker
baptized Pocahontas.  Disease and death often blighted the colonies, and
yet the old battle cry rang out--"God will found the State and build the
Church."  The work was marred by immoral adventurers, and it was not
until these were repressed with a strong hand by Sir Thomas Dale that a
new life dawned in Virginia.

The first elective assembly of the New World met in 1619.  It was opened
by prayer.  Its first enactment was to protect the Indians from
oppression.  Its next was to found a university.  In the first
legislative assembly which met in the choir of the Church in Jamestown,
more than one year before the Mayflower left the shores of England, was
the foundation of popular government in America.  Time would fail me to
tell the story inwrought in the lives of men like Rev. William Clayton
of Philadelphia, the Rev. Atkin Williamson of South Carolina, and the
Rev. John Wesley and the Rev. George Whitefield, also sons of the Church
in Georgia.


The Church of England had no rights in the English colony of
Massachusetts.  The Rev. William Blaxton, the Rev. Richard Gibson, and
the Rev. Robert Jordan endured privation and suffering, and were accused
"as addicted to the hierarchy of the Church of England," "guilty of
offence against the Commonwealth by baptizing children on the Lord's
Day," and "the more heinous sin of provoking the people to revolt by
questioning the divine right of the New England theocracy."  An new life
dawned on the Church in America when, in 1701, there was organized in
England "The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign
Parts."  It awakened a new missionary spirit.  Princess Anne, afterward
Queen of England, became its lifelong patron.  The blessed work among
the Mohawks was largely due to her, and when these Indians were removed
to Canada and left sheperdless, their chief, Joseph Brant, officiated as
lay reader for twenty years.  The men sent out by the society--the Rev.
Samuel Thomas, the Rev. George Keith, the Rev. Patrick Gordon, the Rev.
John Talbot, and others--were Christian heroes.  No fact in the history
of the colonial Church had so marked influence as the conversion of
Timothy Cutler, James Wetmore, Samuel Johnson, and Daniel Brown to the
Church.  Puritans mourned that the "gold had become dim."  Churchmen
rejoiced that some of the foremost scholars in Connecticut had returned
