
"No, of course not," Braun said in irritation. "By Caesar, man, have you
no imagination? Can't you see it was only a matter of time before
someone, possibly working away on an entirely different subject of
research, stumbled upon a practical method of achieving invisibility?"

"Now, wait a minute," Crowley said, his voice belligerent. "I'm only a
country boy, maybe, without any egghead background, but I'm just as good
as the next man and just as smart. I don't think I like your altitude."

"Attitude," Ross Wooley muttered unhappily. He shot a glance at Patricia
O'Gara but she ignored him.

Patricia turned on the charm. Her face opened into smile and she said
soothingly, "Don't misunderstand, Mr. Crowley. May I call you Don? I'm
sure we're going to be associates. You see, Don, we need your
assistance."

This was more like it. Crowley sat down again and finished the can of
beer. "O.K., it won't hurt to listen. What's the pitch?"

The older man cleared his throat. "We'll cover it quickly so that we can
get to the immediate practical aspects. Are you interested in
biodynamics ... umah ... no, of course not. Let me see. Are you at all
familiar with the laws pertaining to refraction of ... umah, no." He
cleared his throat again, unhappily. "Have you ever seen a medusa, Mr.
Crowley? The gelatinous umbrella-shaped free swimming form of marine
invertebrate related to the coral polyp and the sea anemone?"

Ross Wooley scratched his crew cut and grimaced. "Jellyfish, Doctor,
jellyfish. But I think the Portuguese Man-of-War might be a better
example."

"Oh, jellyfish," Crowley said. "Sure, I've seen jellyfish. I got an aunt
lives near Baltimore. We used to go down there and swim in Chesapeake
Bay. Sting the devil out of you. What about it?"

Patricia leaned forward, still smiling graciously. "I really don't see a
great deal of point going into theory, gentlemen." She looked at Ross
and Dr. Braun, then back at Crowley. "Don, I think that what the doctor
was leading up to was an attempt to describe in layman's language the
theory of the process onto which we've stumbled. He was using the
jellyfish as an example of a life form all but invisible. But I'm sure
you aren't interested in technical terminology, are you? A good deal of
gobbledygook, really, don't you think?"

"Yeah, that's what I say. Let's get to the point. You mean you think
it's possible to make a guy invisible. Nobody could see him, eh?"

"It's not a matter of thinking," Ross said sourly. "We've done it."

Crowley stared at him. "Done it? You mean, you, personal? You got
invisible?"

"Yes. All three of us. Once each."

"And you come back all right, eh? So anybody can see you again."

The doctor said reasonably, "Here we are, quite visible. The effect of
the usual dosage lasts for approximately twelve hours."

They let him assimilate it for a few minutes. Some of the ramifications
were coming home to him. Finally he got up and went into the back again
for another can of beer. By this time Ross Wooley was wishing he would
renew his offer, but the other had forgotten his duties as a host.

He took the can away from his mouth and said, "You want to make me
invisible. You want me to, like, kind of experiment on." His eyes
thinned. "Why pick me?"

The doctor said carefully, "Because you're the common man, the average
man, Mr. Crowley. Before we release this development, we would like to
have some idea of the scope of the effects."

[Illustration]

The beer went down chuck-a-luck. Crowley put the can aside and licked
his bottom lip, then rubbed it with a fingertip. He said slowly, "Now
take it easy while I think about this." He blinked. "Why you could just
walk into a bank and...."

The three were watching him, empty-faced.

"Exactly," Dr. Braun said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frederick Braun stared gloomily from the hotel suite's window at the
street below. He peered absently at his thin wrist, looked blank for a
moment, then realized all over again that his watch was being cleaned.
He stared down at the street once more, his wrinkled face unhappy.

The door opened behind him and Patricia O'Gara came in briskly and said,
"No sign of the guinea pig yet, eh?"

"No."

"Where's Rossie?"

The doctor cleared his throat. "There was an item on the newscast. A
humor bit. It seems that the head waiter of the Gourmet.... Have you
ever eaten at the Gourmet, Patricia?"

"Do I look like a millionaire?"

"At any rate, a half pound of the best Caspian caviar disappeared,
spoonful at a time, right before his eyes."

Patricia looked at him. "Good heavens."

"Yes. Well, Ross has gone to pay the tab."

Patricia looked at her watch. "The effects will be wearing off shortly.
Crowley will probably be back at any time. We warned him about returning
to visibility in the middle of some street, completely nude." She sank
into a seat and looked up at the doctor. "I suppose you admit I was
right." Her voice was crisp.

The other turned on her. "And just why do you say that?"

"This caviar bit. Our friend, Donald Crowley, has obviously walked into
the Gourmet restaurant, having heard it was the most expensive in New
York, and ate as much as he could stuff down of the most expensive item
on the menu."

The elderly little doctor pushed his battered horn-rims farther back on
his nose. "Tell me, Patricia, when you made the experiment, did you do
anything ... umah ... anything at all, that saved you some money?"

Uncharacteristically, she suddenly giggled. "I had the time of my life
riding on a bus without paying the fare."

Braun snorted. "Then Donald Crowley, in eating his caviar, did
substantially the same thing. It's probably been a life's ambition of
his to eat in an ultra-swank restaurant and then walk out without
paying. To be frank," the doctor cleared his throat apologetically,
"it's always been one of mine."

Patricia conceded him a chuckle, but then said impatiently, "It's one
thing my saving fifteen cents on a bus ride, and his eating twenty-five
dollars worth of caviar."

"Merely a matter of degree, my dear."

Patricia said in irritation, "Why in the world did we have to bring him
to New York where he could pull such childish tricks? We could have
performed the experiment right there in Far Cry, Nebraska."

Dr. Braun abruptly ceased the pacing he had begun and found a chair. He
absently stuck a hand into a coat pocket, pulled out a crumbled piece of
paper, stared at it for a moment, as though he had never seen it before,
grunted, and returned it to the pocket. He looked at Patricia O'Gara.
"We felt that on completely unknown territory he would feel less
constrained, don't you remember? In his home town, his conscience would
be more apt to restrict him."

Something suddenly came to her. She looked at her older companion
suspiciously. "That newscast. Was there anything else on it? Don't look
innocent, you know what I mean."

"Well, there was one item."

"Out with it," she demanded.

"The Hotel Belefonte threatens to sue that French movie star, Brigette
whatever-her-name is."

"Brigette Loren," Patricia said, staring. "What's that got to do with
Donald Crowley?"

The good doctor was embarrassed. "It seems that she came running out of
her suite, umah, semi-dressed and screaming that the hotel was haunted."

"Good heavens," Patricia said with sudden vision. "That's one aspect I
hadn't thought of."

"Evidently Crowley did."

Patricia O'Gara said definitely, "My point's been proven. Our average
man is a slob. Give him the opportunity to exercise unlimited freedom
without danger of consequence and he becomes an undisciplined and
dangerous lout."

       *       *       *

Ross Wooley had come in, scowling, just in time to catch most of that.
He tossed his hat onto a table and fished in his pockets for pipe and
tobacco. "Nuts, Pat," he said. "In fact, just the opposite's been
proven. Don's just on a fun binge. Like a kid in a candy shop. He hasn't
done anything serious. Went into a fancy restaurant and ate some
expensive food. Sneaked into the hotel room of the world's most famous
sex-symbol and got a close-up look." He grinned suddenly. "I wish I had
thought of that."

"Ha!" Patricia snorted. "Our engagement is off, you Peeping Tom."

"Children, children," Braun chuckled. "I'll admit, though, I think Ross
is correct. Don's done little we three didn't when first given the robe
of invisibility. We experimented, largely playfully, even childishly."

Patricia bit out, "This experiment is ridiculous, anyway, and I don't
know why I ever agreed to it. Scientific? Nonsense. Where are our
controls? For it to make any sense we'd have to work with scores of
subjects. Suppose we do agree that the manner in which Don Crowley has
reacted is quite harmless. Does that mean we can release this discovery
to the world? Certainly not."

Ross said sullenly, "But you agreed that we'd go by the results of
this...."

"I agreed to no such thing, Rossie Wooley, you overgrown lug. All I
agreed to do was consider the results. I was, and am, of the opinion
that if the person our politicians so lovingly call the Common Man was
released of the restrictions inhibiting him, he'd go hog wild and
destroy both society and himself. What is to prevent murder, robbery,
rape and a score of other crimes, given invisibility for anyone who has
a couple of dollars with which to go into a drugstore and purchase our
serum?"

Her fiance sighed deeply, jamming tobacco fiercely into the bowl of his
briar. He growled, "Look, you seem to think that the only thing that
restricts man is the fear of being punished. There are other things, you
know."

"Good heavens," she said sarcastically. "Name _one_."

"There is the ethical code in which he was raised, based on religion or
otherwise. There is the fact that man is fundamentally good, to use a
trite term, given the opportunity."

"My education has evidently been neglected," Patricia said, still
argumentatively. "I've never seen evidence to support your claim."

"I'm not saying individuals don't react negatively, given opportunity to
be antisocial," he all but snarled. "I'm just saying people in general,
common, little people, trend toward decency, desire the right thing."
