whole cargo much damaged and the crew's lives much endangered, which
occasioned the whole fleet to put on shore and go to their assistance.…
_Monday 6th._ Got under way before sunrise; the morning proving very
foggy, many of the fleet were much bogged--about 10 o'clock lay by for
them; when 189 collected, proceeded down. Camped on the north shore,
where Captain Hutching's negro man died, being much frosted in his feet
and legs, of which he died. _Tuesday, 7th._ Got under way very
early; the day proving very windy, a S.S.W., and the river being wide
occasioned a high sea, insomuch that some of the smaller crafts were in
danger; therefore came to at the uppermost Chiccamauga town, which was
then evacuated, where we lay by that afternoon and camped that night.
The wife of Ephraim Peyton was here delivered of a child. Mr. Peyton has
gone through by land with Captain Robertson. _Wednesday 8th_… proceed
down to an Indian village which was inhabited… they insisted on us to
come ashore, called us brothers, and showed other signs of friendship.…
And here we must regret the unfortunate death of young Mr. Payne, on
board Captain Blakemore's boat, who was mortally wounded by reason of
the boat running too near the northern shore opposite the town, where
some of the enemy lay concealed; and the more tragical misfortune of
poor Stuart, his family and friends, to the number of twenty-eight
persons. This man had embarked with us for the Western country, but his
family being diseased with the small pox, it was agreed upon between him
and the company that he should keep at some distance in the rear, for
fear of the infection spreading, and he was warned each night when the
encampment should take place by the sound of a horn.… The Indians having
now collected to a considerable number, observing his helpless situation
singled off from the rest of the fleet, intercepted him and killed and
took prisoners the whole crew…; their cries were distinctly heard.…

190 After describing a running fight with Indians stationed on the
bluffs on both shores where the river narrowed to half its width and
boiled through a canyon, the entry for the day concludes: Jennings's
boat is missing.

_Friday 10th._ This morning about 4 o'clock we were surprised by
the cries of help poor Jennings at some distance in the rear. He had
discovered us by our fires and came up in the most wretched condition.
He states that as soon as the Indians discovered his situation [his boat
had run on a rock] they turned their whole attention to him and kept
up a most galling fire at his boat. He ordered his wife, a son nearly
grown, a young man who accompanies them and his negro man and woman, to
throw all his goods into the river to lighten their boat for the purpose
of getting her off; himself returning their fire as well as he could,
being a good soldier and an excellent marksman. But before they had
accomplished their object, his son, the young man and the negro, jumped
out of the boat and left.… Mrs. Jennings, however, and the negro woman,
succeeded in unloading the boat, but chiefly by the exertions of Mrs.
Jennings who got out of the boat and shoved her off, but was near
falling a victim to her own intrepidity on account of the boat starting
so suddenly as soon as loosened from the rock. Upon examination he
appears to have made a wonderful escape for his boat is pierced in
numberless places with bullets. It is to be remarked that Mrs. Peyton,
who was the night before delivered of an infant, which was unfortunately
killed upon the hurry and confusion consequent upon such a disaster,
assisted them, 191 being frequently exposed to wet and cold.… Their
clothes were very much cut with bullets, especially Mrs. Jennings's.

Of the three men who deserted, while the women stood by under fire,
the negro was drowned and Jennings's son and the other young man were
captured by the Chickamaugans. The latter was burned at the stake. Young
Jennings was to have shared the same fate; but a trader in the village,
learning that the boy was known to John Sevier, ransomed him by a large
payment of goods, as a return for an act of kindness Sevier had once
done to him.

_Sunday 12th_.… After running until about 10 o'clock came in sight of
the Muscle Shoals. Halted on the northern shore at the appearance of the
shoals, in order to search for the signs Captain James Robertson was to
make for us at that place… that it was practicable for us to go across
by land… we can find none--from which we conclude that it would not be
prudent to make the attempt and are determined, knowing ourselves in
such imminent danger, to pursue our journey down the river.… When we
approached them [the Shoals] they had a dreadful appearance.… The
water being high made a terrible roaring, which could be heard at some
distance, among the driftwood heaped frightfully upon the points of the
islands, the current running in every possible direction. Here we did
not know how soon we should be dashed to pieces and all our troubles 192
ended at once. Our boats frequently dragged on the bottom and appeared
constantly in danger of striking. They warped as much as in a rough
sea. But by the hand of Providence we are now preserved from this
danger also. I know not the length of this wonderful shoal; it had been
represented to me to be twenty-five or thirty miles. If so, we must
have descended very rapidly, as indeed we did, for we passed it in about
three hours.

On the twentieth the little fleet arrived at the mouth of the Tennessee
and the voyagers landed on the bank of the Ohio.

Our situation here is truly disagreeable. The river is very high and the
current rapid, our boats not constructed for the purpose of stemming a
rapid stream, our provisions exhausted, the crews almost worn down with
hunger and fatigue, and know not what distance we have to go or what
time it will take us to our place of destination. The scene is rendered
still more melancholy as several boats will not attempt to ascend the
rapid current. Some intend to descend the Mississippi to Natchez; others
are bound for the Illinois--among the rest my son-in-law and daughter.
We now part, perhaps to meet no more, for I am determined to pursue
my course, happen what will. _Tuesday 21st._ Set out and on this day
labored very hard and got but little way.… Passed the two following days
as the former, suffering much from hunger and fatigue. _Friday 24th._
About three o'clock came to the mouth of a river which I thought was the
Cumberland. Some of 193 the company declared it could not be--it was
so much smaller than was expected.… We determined however to make the
trial, pushed up some distance and encamped for the night. _Saturday
25th._ Today we are much encouraged; the river grows wider;… we are now
convinced it is the Cumberland.… _Sunday 26th_… procured some buffalo
meat; though poor it was palatable. _Friday 31st_… met with Colonel
Richard Henderson, who is running the line between Virginia and North
Carolina. At this meeting we were much rejoiced. He gave us every
information we wished, and further informed us that he had purchased a
quantity of corn in Kentucky, to be shipped at the Falls of Ohio for
the use of the Cumberland settlement. We are now without bread and are
compelled to hunt the buffalo to preserve life.… _Monday, April 24th_.
This day we arrived at our journey's end at the Big Salt Lick, where we
have the pleasure of finding Captain Robertson and his company. It is a
source of satisfaction to us to be enabled to restore to him and others
their families and friends, who were entrusted to our care, and who,
sometime since, perhaps, despaired of ever meeting again.…

Past the camps of the Chickamaugans--who were retreating farther and
farther down the twisting flood, seeking a last standing ground in the
giant caves by the Tennessee--these white voyagers had steered their
pirogues. Near Robertson's station, where they landed after having
traversed 194 the triangle of the three great rivers which enclose
the larger part of western Tennessee, stood a crumbling trading house
marking the defeat of a Frenchman who had, one time, sailed in from the
Ohio to establish an outpost of his nation there. At a little distance
were the ruins of a rude fort cast up by the Cherokees in the days when
the redoubtable Chickasaws had driven them from the pleasant shores of
the western waters. Under the towering forest growth lay vast burial
mounds and the sunken foundations of walled towns, telling of a departed
race which had once flashed its rude paddles and had its dream of
permanence along the courses of these great waterways. Now another
tribe had come to dream that dream anew. Already its primitive keels had
traced the opening lines of its history on the face of the immemorial
rivers.

195




Chapter IX

King's Mountain

About the time when James Robertson went from Watauga to fling out the
frontier line three hundred miles farther westward, the British took
Savannah. In 1780 they took Charleston and Augusta, and overran Georgia.
Augusta was the point where the old trading path forked north and west,
and it was the key to the Back Country and the overhill domain. In
Georgia and the Back Country of South Carolina there were many Tories
ready to rally to the King's standard whenever a King's officer should
carry it through their midst. A large number of these Tories were
Scotch, chiefly from the Highlands. In fact, as we have seen, Scotch
blood predominated among the racial streams in the Back Country from
Georgia to Pennsylvania. Now, to insure a triumphant march northward for
Cornwallis and his royal troops, these sons of Scotland must be gathered
together, 196 the loyal encouraged and those of rebellious tendencies
converted, and they must be drilled and turned to account. This task, if
it were to be accomplished successfully, must be entrusted to an officer
with positive qualifications, one who would command respect, whose
personal address would attract men and disarm opposition, and especially
one who could go as a Scot among his own clan. Cornwallis found his man
in Major Patrick Ferguson.

Ferguson was a Highlander, a son of Lord Pitfour of Aberdeen, and
thirty-six years of age. He was of short stature for a Highlander--about
five feet eight--lean and dark, with straight black hair. He had a
serious unhandsome countenance which, at casual glance, might not
arrest attention; but when he spoke he became magnetic, by reason of
the intelligence and innate force that gleamed in his eyes and the
convincing sincerity of his manner. He was admired and respected by his
brother officers and by the commanders under whom he had served, and he
was loved by his men.

He had seen his first service in the Seven Years' War, having joined
the British army in Flanders at the age of fifteen; and he had early
distinguished himself for courage and coolness. In 1768, as a captain of
infantry, he quelled an insurrection of 197 the natives on the island
of St. Vincent in the West Indies. Later, at Woolwich, he took up the
scientific study of his profession of arms. He not only became a crack
shot, but he invented a new type of rifle which he could load at the
breach without ramrod and so quickly as to fire seven times in a minute.
Generals and statesmen attended his exhibitions of shooting; and even
the King rode over at the head of his guards to watch Ferguson rapidly
loading and firing.

In America under Cornwallis, Ferguson had the reputation of being the
best shot in the army; and it was soon said that, in his quickness at
loading and firing, he excelled the most expert American frontiersman.
Eyewitnesses have left their testimony that, seeing a bird alight on a
bough or rail, he would drop his bridle rein, draw his pistol, toss it
in the air, catch and aim it as it fell, and shoot the bird's head off.
He was given command of a corps of picked riflemen; and in the Battle of
the Brandywine in 1777 he rendered services which won acclaim from the
whole army. For the honor of that day's service to his King, Ferguson
paid what from him, with his passion for the rifle, must have been
the dearest price that could have been demanded. His right arm was
shattered, and 198 for the remaining three years of his short life
it hung useless at his side. Yet he took up swordplay and attained a
remarkable degree of skill as a left-handed swordsman.

Such was Ferguson, the soldier. What of the man? For he has been
pictured as a wolf and a fiend and a coward by early chroniclers, who
evidently felt that they were adding to the virtue of those who fought
in defense of liberty by representing all their foes as personally
odious. We can read his quality of manhood in a few lines of the letter
he sent to his kinsman, the noted Dr. Adam Ferguson, about an incident
that occurred at Chads Ford. As he was lying with his men in the woods,
in front of Knyphausen's army, so he relates, he saw two American
officers ride out. He describes their dress minutely. One was in hussar
uniform. The other was in a dark green and blue uniform with a high
cocked hat and was mounted on a bay horse:

I ordered three good shots to steal near to and fire at them; but the
idea disgusting me, I recalled the order. The hussar in retiring made a
circuit, but the other passed within a hundred yards of us, upon which
I advanced from the wood towards him. Upon my calling he stopped; but
after looking at me he proceeded. I again drew his attention and made
signs to him to stop, 199 levelling my piece at him; but he slowly
cantered away. As I was within that distance, at which, in the quickest
firing, I could have lodged half a dozen balls in or about him before he
was out of my reach, I had only to determine. But it was not pleasant to
fire at the back of an unoffending individual who was acquitting himself
very coolly of his duty--so I let him alone. The day after, I had been
telling this story to some wounded officers, who lay in the same room
with me, when one of the surgeons who had been dressing the wounded
rebel officers came in and told us that they had been informing him that
General Washington was all the morning with the light troops, and only
attended by a French officer in hussar dress, he himself dressed and
mounted in every point as above described. I am not sorry that I did not
know at the time who it was.¹

¹ Doubt that the officer in question was Washington was expressed
by James Fenimore Cooper. Cooper stated that Major De Lancey his
father-in-law, was binding Ferguson's arm at the time when the two
officers were seen and Ferguson recalled the order to fire, and that De
Lancey said he believed the officer was Count Pulaski. But, as Ferguson,
according to his own account, leveled his piece at the officer, his arm
evidently was not wounded until later in the day. The probability is
that Ferguson's version, written in a private letter to his relative, is
correct as to the facts, whatever may be conjectured as to the identity
of the officer. See Draper's _King's Mountain and its Heroes,_ pp.
52-54. Ferguson had his code towards the foe's women also. On one
occasion when he was assisting in an action carried out by Hessians
and Dragoons, he learned that some American women had been shamefully
maltreated. He went in a white fury 200 to the colonel in command, and
demanded that the men who had so disgraced their uniforms instantly be
put to death.

In rallying the loyalists of the Back Country of Georgia and the
Carolinas, Ferguson was very successful. He was presently in command of
a thousand or more men, including small detachments of loyalists from
New York and New Jersey, under American-born officers such as De Peyster
and Allaire. There were good honest men among the loyalists and there
were also rough and vicious men out for spoils--which was true as well
of the Whigs or Patriots from the same counties. Among the rough element
were Tory banditti from the overmountain region. It is to be gathered
from Ferguson's records that he did not think any too highly of some
of his new recruits, but he set to work with all energy to make them
useful.

The American Patriots hastily prepared to oppose him. Colonel Charles
McDowell of Burke County, North Carolina, with a small force of militia
was just south of the line at a point on the Broad River when he heard
that Ferguson was sweeping on northward. In haste he sent a call for
help across the mountains to Sevier and Shelby. Sevier had his hands
full at Watauga, but he 201 dispatched two hundred of his troops; and
Isaac Shelby, with a similar force from Sullivan County crossed the
mountains to McDowell's assistance. These overmountain men or backwater
men, as they were called east of the hills, were trained in Sevier's
method of Indian warfare--the secret approach through the dark, the
swift dash, and the swifter flight. Fight strong and run away fast was
the Indian motto, as their women had often been heard to call it after
the red men as they ran yelling to fall on the whites. The frontiersmen
had adapted the motto to fit their case, as they had also made their own
the Indian tactics of ambuscade and surprise attacks at dawn. To sleep,
or ride if needs must, by night, and to fight by day and make off, was
to them a reasonable soldier's life.

But Ferguson was a night marauder. The terror of his name, which grew
among the Whigs of the Back Country until the wildest legends about his
ferocity were current, was due chiefly to a habit he had of pouncing on
his foes in the middle of the night and pulling them out of bed to
give fight or die. It was generally both fight and die, for these
dark adventures of his were particularly successful. Ferguson knew no
neutrals or conscientious 202 objectors; any man who would not carry
arms for the King was a traitor, and his life and goods were forfeit. A
report of his reads: The attack being made at night, no quarter could be
given. Hence his wolfish fame. Werewolf would have been a fit name for
him for, though he was a wolf at night, in the daylight he was a man
and, as we have seen, a chivalrous one.

In the guerrilla fighting that went on for a brief time between the
overmountain men and various detachments of Ferguson's forces, sometimes
one side, sometimes the other, won the heat. But the field remained
open. Neither side could claim the mastery. In a minor engagement fought
at Musgrove's Mill on the Enoree, Shelby's command came off victor and
was about to pursue the enemy towards Ninety-Six when a messenger from
McDowell galloped madly into camp with word of General Gates's crushing
defeat at Camden. This was a warning for Shelby's guerrillas to flee as
birds to their mountains, or Ferguson would cut them off from the north
and wedge them in between his own force and the victorious Cornwallis.
McDowell's men, also on the run for safety, joined them. For forty-eight
hours without food or rest they rode a race with Ferguson, who kept
hard on 203 their trail until they disappeared into the mystery of the
winding mountain paths they alone knew.

Ferguson reached the gap where they had swerved into the towering hills
only half an hour after their horses' hoofs had pounded across it. Here
he turned back. His troops were exhausted from the all-night ride and,
in any case, there were not enough of them to enable him to cross the
mountains and give the Watauga men battle on their own ground with a
fair promise of victory. So keeping east of the hills but still close to
them, Ferguson turned into Burke County, North Carolina. He sat him down
