
I heard another shot, and looked up the slope. I was near enough now
to see that the card he was shooting at was a ten of diamonds--and
that he was plugging the pips one by one. Always could shoot, like I
said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then he heard me coming, and whirled away from the tree, his gun
holstered, his hand held out in front of him like he must have
imagined Hickock or somebody held it when he was ready to draw.

I stopped my horse about ten feet away and just stared at him. He
looked real funny in his baggy old levis and dirty checkered shirt and
that big gun low on his hip, and me knowing he couldn't handle it
worth a damn.

"Who you trying to scare, Buck?" I said. I looked him up and down and
snickered. "You look about as dangerous as a sheepherder's wife."

"And you're a son of a bitch," he said.

I stiffened and shoved out my jaw. "Watch that, runt, or I'll get off
and put my foot in your mouth and pull you on like a boot!"

"Will you now," he said nastily, "you son of a bitch?"

And he drew on me ... and I goddam near fell backwards off my saddle!

I swear, I hadn't even seen his hand move, he'd drawn so fast! That
gun just practically _appeared_ in his hand!

"Will you now?" he said again, and the bore of his gun looked like a
greased gate to hell.

I sat in my saddle scared spitless, wondering if this was when I was
going to die. I moved my hands out away from my body, and tried to
look friendlylike--actually, I'd never tangled with Buck, just razzed
him a little now and then like everybody did; and I couldn't see much
reason why he'd want to kill me.

But the expression on his face was full of gloating, full of wildness,
full of damn-you recklessness--exactly the expression you'd look to
find on a kid like Buck who suddenly found out he was the deadliest
gunman alive.

And that's just what he was, believe me.

Once I saw Bat Masterson draw--and he was right up there with the very
best. Could draw and shoot accurately in maybe half a second or
so--you could hardly see his hand move; you just heard the slap of
hand on gunbutt, and a split-second later the shot. It takes a lot of
practise to be able to get a gun out and on target in that space of
time, and that's what makes gunmen. Practise, and a knack to begin
with. And, I guess, the yen to be a gunman, like Buck Tarrant'd always
had.

When I saw Masterson draw against Jeff Steward in Abilene, it was that
way--slap, crash, and Steward was three-eyed. Just a blur of motion.

But when Buck Tarrant drew on me, right now in the Pass, I didn't see
any motion _atall_. He just crouched, and then his gun was on me. Must
have done it in a millionth of a second, if a second has millionths.

It was the fastest draw I'd ever seen. It was, I reckoned, the fastest
draw anybody's ever seen. It was an impossibly fast draw--a man's hand
just couldn't move to his holster that fast, and grab and drag a heavy
Peacemaker up in a two foot arc that fast.

It was plain damn impossible--but there it was.

And there I was.

       *       *       *       *       *

I didn't say a word. I just sat and thought about things, and my horse
wandered a little farther up the slope and then stopped to chomp
grass. All the time, Buck Tarrant was standing there, poised, that
wild gloating look in his eyes, knowing he could kill me anytime and
knowing I knew it.

When he spoke, his voice was shaky--it sounded like he wanted to bust
out laughing, and not a nice laugh either.

"Nothing to say, Doolin?" he said. "Pretty fast, huh?"

I said, "Yeah, Buck. Pretty fast." And my voice was shaky too, but not
because I felt like laughing any.

He spat, eying me arrogantly. The ground rose to where he stood, and
our heads were about on a level. But I felt he was looking down.

"Pretty fast!" he sneered. "Faster'n anybody!"

"I reckon it is, at that," I said.

"Know how I do it?"

"No."

"I _think_, Doolin. I _think_ my gun into my hand. How d'you like
that?"

"It's awful fast, Buck."

"I just _think_, and my gun is there in my hand. Some draw, huh!"

"Sure is."

"You're damn right it is, Doolin. Faster'n anybody!"

I didn't know what his gabbling about "thinking his gun into his hand"
meant--at least not then, I didn't--but I sure wasn't minded to
question him on it. He looked wild-eyed enough right now to start
taking bites out of the nearest tree.

He spat again and looked me up and down. "You know, you can go to
hell, Joe Doolin. You're a lousy, God damn, white-livered son of a
bitch." He grinned coldly.

Not an insult, I knew now, but a deliberate taunt. I'd broken jaws for
a lot less--I'm no runt, and I'm quick enough to hand back crap if
some lands on me. But now I wasn't interested.

He saw I was mad, though, and stood waiting.

"You're fast enough, Buck," I said, "so I got no idea of trying you.
You want to murder me, I guess I can't stop you--but I ain't drawing.
No, sir, that's for sure."

"And a coward to boot," he jeered.

"Maybe," I said. "Put yourself in my place, and ask yourself why in
hell I should kill myself?"

"Yellow!" he snarled, looking at me with his bulging eyes full of
meanness and confidence.

My shoulders got tight, and it ran down along my gun arm. I never took
that from a man before.

