expected to go there, for the control room alone need be occupied;
vision-screens here viewed every part of the ship, and all about it.

The eyes of the new ship were set in recesses of the tremendously strong
cosmium wall, and over them, protecting them, was an infinitely thin,
but infinitely strong wall of artificial matter, permanently maintained.
It was opaque to all forms of radiation known from the longest Hertzian
to the shortest cosmics, save for the very narrow band of visible light.
Whether this protection would stop the Thessian beam that was so deadly
to lux and relux was not, of course, known. But Arcot hoped it would,
and, if that beam was radiant energy, or material particles, it would.

"We'll destroy our station here now, and leave the _Ancient Mariner_
where it is. Of course we are a long way out of the orbit this planetoid
followed, due to the effect of the time apparatus, but we can note where
it is, and we'll be able to find it when we want it," said Arcot, seated
at the great control board now. There were no buttons now, or visible
controls; all was mental.

A tiny sphere of artificial matter formed, and shot toward the control
board of the time machine outside. It depressed the main switch, and
space about them shifted, twisted, and returned to normal. The time
apparatus was off for the first time in six weeks.

"Can't fuse that, and we can't crush it. It's made of cosmium, and
trying to crush it against the rock would just drive it into it. We'll
see what we can do though," muttered Arcot. A plane of artificial matter
formed just beneath it, and sheared it from its bed on the planetoid,
cutting through the heavy cosmium anchors. The framework lifted, and the
apparatus with it. A series of planes, a gigantic honeycomb formed, and
the apparatus was cut across again and again, till only small fragments
were left of it. Then these were rolled into a ball, and crushed by a
sphere of artificial matter beyond all repair. The enemy would never
learn their secret.

A huge cylinder of artificial matter cut a great gouge from the plane
that was left where the apparatus had been, and a clamp of the same
material picked up the _Ancient Mariner_, deposited it there, then
covered it with rubble and broken rock. A cosmic flashed on the rock for
an instant, and it was glowing, incandescent lava. The _Ancient Mariner_
was buried under a hundred feet of rapidly solidifying rock, but rock
which could be fused away from its infusible walls when the time came.

"We're ready to go now--get to work with the radio, Morey, when we get
to Earth."

The gravity seemed normal here as they walked about, no accelerations
affected them as the ship darted forward, for all its inconceivably
great mass, like an arrow, then flashed forward under time control. The
sun was far distant now, for six weeks they had been traveling with the
section of Eros under time control. But with their tremendous time
control plant, and the space control, they reached the solar system in
very little time.

It seemed impossible to them that that battle could still be waging, but
it was. The ships of Earth and Venus, battling now as a last, hopeless
stand, over Chicago, were attempting to stop the press of a great
Thessian fleet. Thin, long Negrian, or Sirian ships had joined them in
the hour of Earth time that the men had been working. Still, despite the
reinforcements, they were falling back.




Chapter XIX

THE BATTLE OF EARTH


It had been an anxious hour for the forces of the Solar System.

They were in the last fine stages of Earth's defense when the general
staff received notice that a radio message of tremendous power had
penetrated the ray screen, with advice for them. It was signed "Arcot."

"Bringing new weapon. Draw all ships within the atmosphere when I start
action, and drive Thessians back into space. Retire as soon as a
distance of ten thousand miles is reached. I will then handle the
fleet," was the message.

"Gentlemen: We are losing. The move suggested would be eminently poor
tactics unless we are sure of being able to drive them. If we don't, we
are lost in any event. I trust Arcot. How vote you?" asked General
Hetsar Sthel.

The message was relayed to the ships. Scarcely a moment after the
message had been relayed, a tremendous battleship appeared in space,
just beyond the battle. It shot forward, and planted itself directly in
the midst of the battle, brushing aside two huge Thessians in its
progress. The Thessian ships bounced off its sides, and reeled away. It
lay waiting, making no move. All the Thessian ships above poured the
full concentration of their moleculars into its tremendous bulk. A
diffused glow of opalescence ran over every ship--save the giant. The
moleculars were being reflected from its sides, and their diffused
energy attacked the very ships that were sending them!

A fort moved up, and the deadly beam of destruction reached out,
luminous even in space.

"Now," muttered Morey, "we shall see what cosmium will stand."

A huge spot on the side of the ship had become incandescent. A vapor, a
strange puff of smokiness exploded from it, and disappeared instantly.
Another came and faster and faster they followed each other. The cosmium
was disintegrating under the ray, but very slowly, breaking first into
gaseous cosmic rays, then free, and spreading.

"We will not fight," muttered Morey happily as he saw Arcot shift in his
seat.

Arcot picked the moleculars. They reached out, touched the heavy relux
of the fort, and it exploded into opalescence that was hazily white, the
colors shifted so quickly. A screen sprang into being, and the ray was
chopped off. The screen was a mass of darting flames as energies of
stupendous magnitude clashed.

Arcot used a bit more of his inconceivable power. The ray struck the
screen, and it flashed once--then died into blackness. The fort suddenly
crumpled in like a dented can, and rolled clumsily away. The other fort
was near now, and started an attack of its own. Arcot chose the
artificial matter this time. He was not watching the many attacking
ships.

The great ship careened suddenly, fell over heavily to one side.
"Foolish of me," said Arcot. "They tried crashing us."

A mass of crumpled, broken relux and lux surrounded by a haze of gas
lying against a slight scratch on the great sides, told the story. Eight
inches of cosmium does not give way.

Yet another ship tried it. But it stopped several feet away from the
real wall of the ship. It struck a wall even more unyielding--artificial
matter.

But now Arcot was using this major weapon--artificial matter. Ship after
ship, whether fleeing or attacking, was surrounded suddenly by a great
sphere of it, a sudden terrific blaze of energy as the sphere struck the
ray shield, the control forces now backed by the energy of all the
millions of stars of space shattered it in an instant. Then came the
inexorable crush of the artificial matter, and a ball of matter alone
remained.

But the pressing disc of the battle-front which had been lowering on
Chicago, greatest of Earth's metropolises, was lifted. This disc-front
was staggering back now as Arcot's mighty ship weakened its strength,
and destroyed its morale, under the steady drive of the now hopeful
Solarians.

The other gigantic fort moved up now, with twenty of the largest
battleships. The fort turned loose its destructive ray--and Arcot tried
his new "magnet." It was not a true magnet, but a transformed space
field, a field created by the energy of all the universe.

The fort was gigantic. Even Arcot's mighty ship was a small thing beside
it, but suddenly it seemed warped and twisted as space curved visibly in
a magnetic field of such terrific intensity as to be immeasurable.

Arcot's armory was tested and found not wanting.

Suddenly every Thessian ship in sight ceased to exist. They disappeared.
Instantly Arcot threw on all time power, and darted toward Venus. The
Thessians were already nearing the planet, and no possible rays could
overtake them. An instantaneous touch of the space control, and the
mighty ship was within hundreds of miles of the atmosphere.

Space twisted about them, reeled, and was firm. The Thessian fleet was
before them in a moment, visible now as they slowed to normal speed.
Startled, no doubt, to find before them the ship they had fled, they
charged on for a space. Then, as though by some magic, they stopped and
exploded in gouts of light.

When space had twisted, seconds before, it was because Arcot had drawn
on the enormous power of space to an extent that had been appreciable
even to it--ten sols. That was forty million tons of matter a second,
and for a hundredth part of a second it had flowed. Before them, in a
vast plane, had been created an infinitesimally thin film of artificial
matter, four hundred thousand tons of it, and into this invisible,
infinitely hard barrier, the Thessian fleet had rammed. And it was gone.

"I think," said Arcot softly, as he took off his headpiece, "that the
beginning of the end is in sight."

"And I," said Morey, "think it is now out of sight. Half a dozen ships
stopped. And they are gone now, to warn the others."

"What warning? What can they tell? Only that their ships were destroyed
by something they couldn't see." Arcot smiled. "I'm going home."




Chapter XX

DESTRUCTION


Some time later, Arcot spoke. "I have just received a message from
Zezdon Fentes that he has an important communication to make, so I will
go down to New York instead of to Chicago, if you gentlemen do not mind.
Morey will take you to Chicago in the tender, and I can find Zezdon
Fentes."

Zezdon Fentes' message was brief. He had discovered from the minds of
several who had been killed by the magnetic field Arcot had used, and
not destroyed, that they had a base in this universe. Thett's base was
somewhere near the center of the galaxy, on a system of unusually large
planets, circling a rather small star. But what star their minds had not
revealed.

"It's up to us then to locate said star," said Arcot, after listening to
Zezdon Fentes' account: "I think the easiest way will be to follow them
home. We can go to your world, Zezdon Fentes, and see what they are
doing there, and drive them off. Then to yours, Stel Felso. I place your
world second as it is far better able to defend itself than is Ortol. It
is agreeable?"

It was, and the ship which had been hanging in the atmosphere over New
York, where Zezdon Afthen, Fentes and Inthel had come to it in a
taxi-ship, signaled for the crowd to clear away above. The enormous bulk
of the shining machine, the savior of Earth, had attracted a very great
amount of attention, naturally, and thousands on thousands of hardy
souls had braved the cold of the fifteen mile height with altitude suits
or in small ships. Now they cleared away, and as the ship slowly rose,
the tremendous concentrated mental well-wishing of the thousands reached
the men within the ship. "That," observed Morley, "is one thing cosmium
won't stop. In some ways I wish it would--because the mental power that
could be wielded by any great number of those highly advanced Thessians,
if they know its possibilities, is not a thing to neglect."

"I can answer that, terrestrian," thought Zezdon Afthen. "Our
instruments show great mental powers, and great ability to concentrate
the will in mental processes, but they indicate a very slight
development of these abilities. Our race, despite the fact that our
mental powers are much less than those of such men as Arcot and
yourself, have done, and can do many things your greater minds cannot,
for we have learned the direction of the will. We need not fear the will
of the Thessians. I feel confident of that!"

The ship was in space now, and as Arcot directed it toward Ortol, far
far across the Island, he threw on, for the moment, the combined power
of space distortion and time fields. Instantly the sun vanished, and
when, less than a second later, he cut off the space field, and left
only the time, the constellations were instantly recognizable. They were
within a dozen light years of Ortol.

"Morey, may I ask what you call this machine?" asked Torlos.

"You may, but I can't answer," laughed Morey. "We were so anxious to get
it going that we didn't name it. Any suggestions?"

For a moment none of them made any suggestions, then slowly came Arcot's
thoughts, clear and sharp, the thoughts of carefully weighed decision.

"The swiftest thing that ever was _thought_! The most irresistible
thing, _thought_, for nothing can stop its progress. The most
destructive thing, _thought_. Thought, the greatest constructor, the
greatest destroyer, the product of mind, and producer of powers, the
greatest of powers. Thought is controlled by the mind. Let us call it
_Thought_!"

"Excellent, Arcot, excellent. The _Thought_, the controller of the
powers of the cosmos!" cried Morey.

"But the _Thought_ has not been christened, save in battle, and then it
had no name. Let us emblazen its name on it now," suggested Wade.

Stopping their motion through space, but maintaining a time field that
permitted them to work without consuming precious time, Arcot formed
some more cosmium, but now he subjected it to a special type of
converted field, and into the cosmium, he forced some light photons,
half bound, half free. The fixture he formed into the letters, and
welded forever on the gigantic prow of the ship, and on its huge sides.
_Thought_, it stood in letters ten feet high, made of clear transparent
cosmium, and the golden light photons, imprisoned in it, the slowly
disintegrating lux metal, would cause those letters to shine for
countless aeons with the steady golden light they now had.

The _Thought_ continued on now, and as they slowed their progress for
Ortol, they saw that messengers of Thett had barely arrived. The fort
here too had been razed to the ground, and now they were concentrating
over the largest city of Ortol. Their rays were beating down on the
great ray screen that terrestrial engineers had set up, protecting the
city, as Earth had been protected. But the fleet that stood guard was
small, and was rapidly being destroyed. A fort broke free, and plunged
at last for the ray screen. Its relux walls glowed a thousand colors as
the tremendous energy of the ray-screen struck them--but it was through!

A molecular ray reached down for the city--and stopped halfway in a
tremendous coruscating burst of light and energy. Yet there was none of
the sheen of the ray screen. Merely light.

The fort was still driving downward. Then suddenly it stopped, and the
side dented in like the side of a can some one has stepped on, and it
came to sudden rest against an invisible, impenetrable barrier. A
molecular reached down from somewhere in space, hit the ray screen of
Ortol, which the Thessians had attacked for hours, and the screen
flashed into sudden brilliance, and disappeared. The ray struck the
Thessian fort, and the fort burst into tremendous opalescence, while the
invisible barrier the ray had struck was suddenly a great sheet of
flaming light. In less than half a second the opalescence was gone, the
fort shuddered, and shrieked out of the planet's atmosphere, a mass of
lux now, and susceptible to the moleculars. And everything that lived
within that fort had died instantly and painlessly.

The fleet which had been preparing to follow the leading fort was
suddenly stopped; it halted indecisively.

Then the _Thought_ became visible as its great golden letters showed
suddenly, streaking up from distant space. Every ship turned cosmic and
moleculars on it. The cosmic rebounded from the cosmium walls, and from
the artificial matter that protected the eyes. The moleculars did not
affect either, but the invisible protective sheet that the _Thought_ was
maintaining in the Ortolian atmosphere became misty as it fought the
slight molecular rebounds.

The _Thought_ went into action. The fort which remained was the point of
attack. The fort had turned its destructive ray on the cosmium ship with
the result that, as before, the cosmium slowly disintegrated into puffs
of cosmic rays. The vapor seemed to boil out, puff suddenly, then was
gone. Arcot put up a wall of artificial matter to test the effect. The
ray went right through the matter, without so much as affecting it. He
tried a sheet of pure energy, an electro-magnetic energy stream of
tremendous power. The ray bent sharply to one side. But in a moment the
Thessians had realigned it.

"It's a photonic stream, but of some type that doesn't affect ordinary
matter, but only artificial matter such as lux, relux, or cosmium. If
the artificial matter would only fight it, I'd be all right." The
thought running through Arcot's mind reached the others.

A tremendous burst of light energy to the rear announced the fact that a
Thessian had crashed against the artificial matter wall that surrounded
the ship. Arcot was throwing the Thessian destructive beam from side to
side now, and twice succeeded in misdirecting it so that it hit the
enemy machines.

The _Thought_ sent out its terrific beam of magnetic energy. The ray was
suddenly killed, and the fort cruised helplessly on. Its driving
apparatus was dead. The diffused cosmic reached out, and as the magnetic
field, the relux and the cosmics interacted, the great fort was suddenly
blue-white--then instantly a dust that scattered before an enormous
blast of air.

From the _Thought_ a great shell of artificial matter went, a visible,
misty wall, that curled forward, and wrapped itself around the Thessian
ships with a motion of tremendous speed, yet deceptive, for it seemed to
billow and flow.

A Thessian warship decided to brush it away--and plowed into
inconceivable strength. The ship crumpled to a mass of broken relux.

The greater part of the Thessian fleet had already fled, but there
remained half a hundred great battleships. And now, within half a
million miles of the planet, there began a battle so weird that
astronomers who watched could not believe it.

From behind the _Thought_, where it hung motionless beyond the misty
wall, a Thing came.

The Thessian ships had realized now that the misty sphere that walled
them in was impenetrable, and their rays were off, for none they now had
would penetrate it. The forts were gone.

But the Thing that came behind the _Thought_ was a ship, a little ship
of the same misty white, and it flowed into, and through the wall, and
was within their prison. The Thessian ships turned their rays toward it,
and waited. What was this thing?

The ovaloid ship which drifted so slowly toward them suddenly seemed to
jerk, and from it reached pseudopods! An amoeba on a titanic scale! It
writhed its way purposefully toward the nearest ship, and while that
ship waited, a pseudopod reached out, and suddenly drove through the
four foot relux armor! A second pseudopod followed with lightning
rapidity, and in an instant the ship had been split from end to end!

Now a hundred rays were leaping toward the thing, and the rays burst
into fire and gouts of light, blackened, burned pseudopods seemed to
fall from the thing and hastily it retreated from the enclosure, flowing
once more through the wall that stopped their rays.

But another Thing came. It was enormous, a mile long, a great, shining
scaly thing, a dragon, and on its mighty neck was mounted an enormous,
distorted head, with great flat nose and huge flapping nostrils. It was
a Thessian head! The mouth, fifty feet across, wrinkled into an horrific
grin, and broken, stained teeth of iron showed in the mouth. Great
talons upraised, it rent the misty wall that bound them, and writhed its
