there, would quickly turn his face away and tell another tale.

But oftener the master-player stayed all night at the Falcon Inn with
Dick Jones, Tom Hearne, Humphrey Jeffs, and other reckless roysterers,
dicing and flipping shillings at shovel-board until his finger-nails
were sore. Then Nick would read aloud to Cicely out of the "Hundred
Merry Tales," or pop old riddles at her puzzled head until she,
laughing, cried, "Enough!" But most of all he liked the story of brave
Guy of Warwick, and would tell it again and again, with other legends of
Arden Wood, till bedtime came.

In the gray of the morning Carew would come home, unshaven and
leaden-eyed, with his bandy-legged varlet trotting like a watch-dog at
his heels; and then, if the gaming had gone well, he was a lord, an
earl, a duke, at least, so merry and so sprightly would he be withal;
but if the dice had fallen wrong, he would by turns be raving mad or
sodden as a sunken pie.

Yet, be his temper what it might, he was but one thing always to Cicely,
and doffed ill humor like a shabby hat when she came running to meet
him in the shadows of the hall; so that when he came into the lighted
room, with her upon his shoulder, his face was smiles, his step a
frolic, and his bearing that of a happy boy.

But day by day the weather grew worse, with snow and ice paving the
streets with a glassy glare and choking the frozen drains; and there was
trouble and want among the poor in the wretched alleys near Carew's
house: for fuel was high and food scarce, and there were many deaths, so
that the knell was tolling constantly.

Cicely cried until her eyes were red for the very sadness of it all,
since she might do nothing for them, and hated the sound of the
sullen bell.

"Pshaw, Cicely!" said Nick; "why should ye cry? Ye do na know them; so
ye need na care."

"But, Nick," said she, "_nobody_ seems to care! And, sure, _somebody_
ought to care; for it may be some one's mother that is dead."

At that Nick felt a very queer choking in his own throat, and did not
rest quite easy in his mind until he had given the silver buckle from
his cloak to a boy who stood crying with cold and hunger in the street,
and begged a farthing of him for the love of the good God.

Then came a thaw, with mist and fog so thick that people were lost in
their own streets, and knocked at their next-door neighbor's gate to ask
the way home. All day long, down by the Thames drums beat upon the
wharves and bells ding-donged to guide the watermen ashore; but most of
those who needs must fare abroad went over London Bridge, because
there, although they might in no wise see, it felt, at least, as if the
world were still beneath their feet.

At noon the air was muddy brown, with a bitter taste like watered smoke;
at night it was a blinding pall; and though, after mid-December, by
order of the Council, every alderman and burgess hung a light before his
door, torches, links, and candles only sputtered feebly in the gloom, of
no more use than jack-o'-lanterns gone astray, and none but blind men
knew the roads.

The city watch was doubled everywhere; and all night long their shouts
went up and down--"'Tis what o'clock, and a foggy night!"--and right and
left their hurrying staves came thumping helplessly along the walls to
answer cries of "Murder!" and of "Help! Watch! Help!" For under cover of
the fog great gangs of thieves came down from Hampstead Heath, and
robberies were done in the most frequented thoroughfares, between the
very lights set up by the corporation; so that it was dangerous to go
about save armed and wary as a cat in a crowd.

While such foul days endured there was no singing at St. Paul's, nor
stage-plays anywhere, save at Blackfriars play-house, which was roofed
against the weather. And even there at last the fog crept in through
cracks and crannies until the players seemed but moving shadows talking
through a choking cloud; and Master Will Shakspere's famous new piece of
"Romeo and Juliet," which had been playing to crowded houses, taking ten
pound twelve the day, was fairly smothered off the boards. Nick was
eager to be out in all this blindman's holiday; but, "Nay," said Carew;
"not so much as thy nose. A fog like this would steal the croak from a
raven's throat, let alone the sweetness from a honey-pot like thine--and
bottom crust is the end of pie!" With which, bang went the door, creak
went the key, and Carew was off to the Falcon Inn.

       *       *       *       *       *

So went the winter weather, and so went Carew; for there was no denying
that both had fallen into a very bad way. Yet another change came
creeping over Carew all unaware.

Nick's face had from the first attracted him; and now, living with the
boy day after day, housed up, a prisoner, yet cheerful through it all,
the master-player began to feel what in a better man had been the prick
of conscience, but in him was only an indefinite uneasiness like a
blunted cockle-bur. For the lad's patient perseverance at his work, his
delight in singing, and the tone of longing threaded through his voice,
crept into the master-player's heart in spite of him; and Nick's gentle
ways with Cicely touched him more than all the rest: for if there was
one thing in all the world that Gaston Carew truly loved, it was his
daughter Cicely. So for her sake, as well as for Nick's own, the
master-player came to love the lad. And this was shown in queer ways.

In the wainscot of the dining-hall there was a carven panel just above
the Spanish chest. At night, when the house was still and all the rest
asleep, Carew often came and stood before this panel, with a queer,
hesitating look upon his hard, bold face; and stretching out his hand,
would press upon the head of a cherub cut in the bevel edge. Whereupon
the panel slipped away within the wainscot, leaving a little closet in
the hollow of the wall, in which a few strange things were stowed: an
empty flask, an inlaid rosewood box, a little slipper, and a dusty
gittern with its strings all snapped and a faded ribbon tied about
its neck.

The rosewood box he would take down, and with it open in his lap would
sit beside the fire like a man within a dream, until the hearth grew
white and cold, and the draught had blown the ashes out in streaks
across the floor. In the box was a woman's riding-glove and a miniature
upon ivory, Cicely's mother's face, painted at Paris in other days.

One night, while they were sitting all together by the fire, Nick and
Cicely snug in the chimney-seat, Carew spoke up suddenly out of a little
silence which had fallen upon them all. "Nick," said he, quite softly,
with a look on his face as if he were thinking of other things, "I
wonder if thou couldst play?"

"What, sir?" asked Nick; "a game?" and made the bellows whistle in his
mouth.

"Nay, lad; a gittern."

Nick and Cicely looked up, for his manner was very odd.

"Why, sir, I do na know. I could try. I ha' heard one played, and it is
passing sweet." "Ay, Nick, 'tis passing sweet," said Carew,
quickly--and no more; but spoke of France, how the lilies grow in the
ditches there, and the tall trees stand like soldiers by the road that
runs to the land of sunny hills and wine; and of the radiant women
there, with hair like night and eyes like the summer stars. Then all at
once he stopped as if some one had clapped a hand upon his mouth, and
sat and stared into the fire.

But in the morning at breakfast there was a gittern at Nick's place--a
rare old yellow gittern, with silver scrolls about the tail-piece, ivory
pegs, and a head that ended in an angel's face. It was strung with
bright new silver strings, but near the bridge of it there was a little
rut worn into the wood by the tips of the fingers that had rested there
while playing, and the silken shoulder-ribbon was faded and worn.

Nick stopped, then put out both his hands as if to touch it, yet did
not, being half afraid.

"Tut, take it up!" said Carew, sharply, though he had not seemed to
heed. "Take it up--it is for thee."

"For me?" cried Nick--"not for mine own?"

Carew turned and struck the table with his hand, as if suddenly wroth.
"Why should I say it was for thee? if it were not to be thine own?"

"But, Master Carew--" Nick began.

"'Master Carew' fiddlesticks! Hold thy prate. Do I know my own mind, or
do I filter my wits through thee? Did I not say that it is thine? Good,
then--'tis thine, although it were thrice somebody else's; and thrice as
much thy very own through having other owners. Dost hear? Well, then,
enough--we'll have no words about it!"

Rising abruptly as he spoke, he clapped his hat upon his head and left
the room, Nick standing there beside the table, staring after him, with
the gittern in his hands.




CHAPTER XXVI


TO SING BEFORE THE QUEEN

     "Sir Fly hangs dead on the window-pane;
        The frost doth wind his shroud;
     Through the halls of his little summer house
        The north wind cries aloud.
     We will bury his bones in the mouldy wall,
        And mourn for the noble slain:
     A southerly wind and a sunny sky--
        Buzz! up he comes again!
                   Oh, Master Fly!"

Nick looked up from the music-rack and shivered. He had forgotten the
fire in studying his song, and the blackened ends of the burnt-out logs
lay smouldering on the hearth. The draught, too, whistled shrilly under
the door, in spite of the rushes that he had piled along the crack.

The fog had been gone for a week. It was snapping cold; and through the
peep-holes he had thawed upon the window-pane with his breath, he could
see the hoar-frost lying in the shadow of the wall in the court below.

How forlorn the green old dial looked out there alone in the cold, with
the winter dust whirling around it in little eddies upon the wind! The
dial was fringed with icicles, like an old man's beard; and even the
creeping shadow on its face, which told mid-afternoon, seemed frozen
where it fell.

Mid-afternoon already, and he so much to do! Nick pulled his cloak about
him, and turned to his song again:

     "Sir Fly hangs dead on the window-pane;
       The frost doth wind his shroud--"

But there he stopped; for the boys were singing in the great hall below,
and the whole house rang with the sound of the roaring chorus:

     "Down-a-down, hey, down-a-down,
       Hey derry derry down-a-down!"

Nick put his fingers in his ears, and began all over again:

     "Sir Fly hangs dead on the window-pane;
       The frost doth wind his shroud;
     Through the halls of his little summer house
       The north wind cries aloud."

But it was no use; all he could hear was:

     "Down-a-down, hey, down-a-down,
       Hey derry derry down-a-down!"

How could a fellow study in a noise like that? He gave it up in despair,
and kicking the chunks together, stood upon the hearth, warming his
hands by the gathering blaze while he listened to the song:

     "Cold's the wind, and wet's the rain;
       Saint Hugh, be our good speed!
     Ill is the weather that bringeth no gain,
       Nor helps good hearts in need.

     "Down-a-down, hey, down-a-down,
       Hey derry derry down-a-down!"

He could hear Colley Warren above them all. What a voice the boy had!
Like a golden horn blowing in the fresh of a morning breeze. It made
Nick tingle, he could not tell why. He and Colley often sang together,
and their voices made a quivering in the air like the ringing of a bell.
And often, while they sang, the viols standing in the corner of the room
would sound aloud a deep, soft note in harmony with them, although
nobody had touched the strings; so that the others cried out that the
instruments were bewitched, and would not let the boys sing any more.
Colley Warren was Nick's best friend--a dark-eyed, quiet lad, as gentle
as a girl, and with a mouth like a girl's mouth, for which the others
sometimes mocked him, though they loved him none the less.

It was not because his voice was loud that it could be so distinctly
heard; but it was nothing like the rest, and came through all the others
like sunshine through a mist. Nick pulled the stool up closer, and sat
down in the chimney-corner, humming a second to the tune, and blowing
little glory-holes in the embers with the bellows. He liked the smell
of a wood fire, and liked to toast his toes. He was a trifle drowsy,
too, now that he was warm again to the marrow of his bones; perhaps he
dozed a little.

But suddenly he came to himself again with a sense of a great stillness
fallen over everything--no singing in the room below, and silence
everywhere but in the court, where there was a trampling as of horses
standing at the gate. And while he was still lazily wondering, a great
cheer broke out in the room below, and there was a stamping of feet like
cattle galloping over a bridge; and then, all at once, the door opened
into the hallway at the foot of the stair, and the sound burst out as
fire bursts from the cock-loft window of a burning barn, and through the
noise and over it Colley Warren's voice calling him by name: "Skylark!
Nick Skylark! Ho there, Nick! where art thou?"

He sprang to the door and kicked the rushes away. All the hall was full
of voices, laughing, shouting, singing, and cheering. There were
footsteps coming up the stair. "What there, Skylark! Ho, boy! Nick,
where art thou?" he could hear Colley calling above them all. Out he
popped his nose: "Here I am, Colley--what's to do? _Whatever in the
world!_" and he ducked his head like a mandarin; for whizz--flap! two
books came whirling up the stair and thumped against the panel by
his ears.

"The news--the news, Nick! Have ye heard the news?" the lads were
shouting as if possessed. "We're going to court! Hurrah, hurrah!" And
some, with their arms about one another, went whirling out at the door
and around the windy close like very madcaps, cutting such capers that
the horses standing at the gate kicked up their heels, and jerked the
horse-boys right and left like bundles of hay.

Nick leaned over the railing and stared.

"Come down and help us sing!" they cried. "Come down and shout with us
in the street!"

"I can na come down--there's work to do!"

"Thy 'can na' be hanged, and thy work likewise! Come down and sing, or
we'll fetch thee down. The Queen hath sent for us!"

"The Queen--hath sent--for us?"

"Ay, sent for us to come to court and play on Christmas day! Hurrah for
Queen Bess!"

At that shrill cheer the startled horses fairly plunged into the street,
and the carts that were passing along the way were jammed against the
opposite wall. The carriers bellowed, the horse-boys bawled, the people
came running to see the row, and the apprentices flew out of the shops
bareheaded, waving their dirty aprons and cheering lustily, just for the
fun of the chance to cheer.

"It's true!" called Colley, his dark eyes dancing like stars on the sea.
"Come down, Nick, and sing in the street with us all! We are going to
Greenwich Palace on Christmas day to play before the Queen and the
court--for the first time, Nick, in a good six years; and we're not to
work till the new masque comes from the Master of the Revels! Come down,
Nick, and sing with us out in the street; for we're going to court,
we're going to court to sing before the Queen! Hurrah, hurrah!"

"Hurrah for good Queen Bess!" cried Nick; and up went his cap and down
went he on the baluster-rail like a runaway sled, head first into the
crowd, who caught him laughing as he came. Then all together they
cantered out like a parcel of colts in a fresh, green field, and sang in
the street before the school till the people cheered themselves hoarse
to hear such music on such a wintry day; sang until there was no other
business on all the thoroughfare but just to listen to their songs; sang
until the under-masters came out with their staves and drove them into
the school again, to keep them from straining their throats by singing
so loudly and so long in the frosty open air.

But a fig for staves and for under-masters! The boys clapped fast the
gates behind them, and barred the under-masters out in the street,
singing twice as loudly as before, and mocking at them with wry faces
through the bars; and then trooped off up the old precentor's private
stair and sang at his door until the old man could not hear his own
ears, and came out storming and grim as grief.

But when he saw the boys all there, and heard them cheering him three
times three, he could not storm to save his life, but only stood there,
black and thin, against the yellow square of light, smiling a quaint
smile that half was wrinkles and half was pride, shaking his lean
forefinger at them as if he were beating time, and nodding until his
head seemed almost nodding off.

"Hurrah for Master Nathaniel Gyles!" they shouted.

"_Primus Magister Scholarum, Custos Morum, Quartus Custos Rotulorum_,"
said the old man softly to himself, the firelight from behind him
falling in a glory on his thin white hair. "Be off, ye rogues! Ye are
not fit to waste good language on; or, faith, I'd Latin ye all as dumb
as fishes in the depths of the briny sea!"

"Hurrah for the fishes in the sea!"

"Soft, ye knaves! Save thy throats for good Queen Bess!"

"Hurrah for good Queen Bess!"

"Be still, I say, ye good-for-nothing varlets; or ye sha'n't have pie
and ale to-night. But marry, now, ye _shall_ have pie--ay, pie and ale
without a stint; for ye are good lads, and ye have pleased the Queen at
last; and I am as proud of ye as a peacock is of his own tail!"

"Hurrah for the Queen--and the pie--and the ale! Hurrah for the peacock
and his tail!" shouted the boys; and straightway, seeing that they had
made a rhyme, they gave a cheer shriller and longer than all the others
put together, and went clattering down the stairway, singing at the top
of their lungs:

     Hurrah for the Queen, and the pie and the ale!
     Hurrah for the peacock, hurrah for his tail!
     Hurrah for hurrah, and hurrah again--
     We're going to court on Christmas day
          To sing before the Queen!"

"Good lads, good lads!" said the old precentor to himself, as he turned
back into his little room. His eyes were shining proudly in the
candle-light, yet the tears were running down his cheeks. A queer old
man, Nat Gyles, and dead this many a long, long year; yet that night no
man was happier than he.

But Master Gaston Carew, who had come for Nick, stood in the gathering
dusk by the gate below, and stared up at the yellow square of light with
a troubled look upon his reckless face.




CHAPTER XXVII


THE QUEEN'S PLAISANCE

It was a frosty morning when they all marched down to the boats that
bumped along Paul's wharf.

The roofs of London were white with frost and rosy with the dawn. In the
shadow of the walls the air lay in still pools of smoky blue; and in the
east the horizon stretched like a swamp of fire. The winking lights on
London Bridge were pale. The bridge itself stood cold and gray,
mysterious and dim as the stream below, but here and there along its
crest red-hot with a touch of flame from the burning eastern sky. Out of
the river, running inland with the tide, came steamy shreds that drifted
here and there. Then over the roofs of London town the sun sprang up
like a thing of life, and the veil of twilight vanished in bright day
with a million sparkles rippling on the stream.

Warm with piping roast and cordial, keen with excitement, and blithe
with the sharp, fresh air, the red-cheeked lads skipped and chattered
along the landing like a flock of sparrows alighted by chance in a land
of crumbs.

"Into the wherries, every one!" cried the old precentor. _"Ad unum
omnes_, great and small!"

"Into the wherries!" echoed the under-masters.

"Into the wherries, my bullies!" roared old Brueton the boatman, fending
off with a rusty hook as red as his bristling beard. "Into the wherries,
yarely all, and we's catch the turn o' the tide! 'Tis gone high
water now!"

Then away they went, three wherries full, and Master Gyles behind them
in a brisk sixpenny tilt-boat, resplendent in new ash-colored hose, a
cloak of black velvet fringed with gold, and a brand-new periwig curled
and frizzed like a brush-heap in a gale of wind.

How they had worked for the last few days! New songs, new dances, new
lines to learn; gallant compliments for the Queen, who was as fond of
flattery as a girl; new clothes, new slippers and caps to try, and a
thousand what-nots more. The school had hummed like a busy mill from
morning until night. And now that the grinding was done and they had
come at last to their reward,--the hoped-for summons to the court, which
had been sought so long in vain,--the boys of St. Paul's bubbled with
glee until the under-masters were in a cold sweat for fear their
precious charges would pop from the wherries into the Thames, like so
many exuberant corks.

They cheered with delight as London Bridge was shot and the boats went
flying down the Pool, past Billingsgate and the oystermen, the White
Tower and the Traitors' Gate, past the shipping, where brown,
foreign-looking faces stared at them above sea-battered bulwarks.

The sun was bright and the wind was keen; the air sparkled, and all the
world was full of life. Hammers beat in the builders' yards; wild
bargees sang hoarsely as they drifted down to the Isle of Dogs; and in
slow ships that crept away to catch the wind in the open stream below,
with tawny sails drooping and rimmed with frost, they heard the hail of
salty mariners.

