"The sun is giving off energy. It is giving off mass, then, in the form
of light photons. The field of the sun's gravity must be constantly
decreasing as its mass decreases. It is a collapsing field. It is true,
the sun's gravitational field does decrease, by a minute amount, despite
the fact that our sun loses a thousand million tons of matter every four
minutes. The percentage change is minute, but the energy released
is--immeasurable.

"But, I am going to invent a new power unit, Afthen. I will call it the
'sol,' the power of a sun. One sol is the rating of our sun. And I will
measure the energy I use in terms of sun-powers, not horsepower. That
may tell you of its magnitude!"

"But," Zezdon Afthen asked, "while you men of Earth work on this
problem, what is there for us? We have no problems, save the problem of
the fate of our world, still fifty thousand years of your time in the
future. It is terrible to wait, wait, wait and think of what may be
happening in that other time. Is there nothing we can do to help? I know
our hopeless ignorance of your science. Stel Felso Theu can scarcely
understand the thoughts you use, and I can scarcely understand his
explanations! I cannot help you there, with your calculations, but is
there nothing I can do?"

"There is, Ortolian, decidedly. We badly need your help, and as Stel
Felso Theu cannot aid us here as much as he can by working with you, I
will ask him to do so. I want your knowledge of psycho-mechanical
devices to help us. Will you make a machine controlled by mental
impulses? I want to see such a system and know how it is done that I may
control machines by such a system."

"Gladly. It will take time, for I am not the expert worker that you are,
and I must make many pieces of apparatus, but I will do what I can,"
exclaimed Zezdon Afthen eagerly.

So, while Arcot and his group continued their work of determining the
constants of the space-energy field, the others were working on the
mental control apparatus.




Chapter XV

ALL-POWERFUL GODS


Again there was a period of intense labor, while the ship drifted
through time, following Earth in its mad careening about the sun, and
the sun as it rushed headlong through space. At the end of a thirty-day
period, they had reached no definite position in their calculations, and
the Talsonian reported, as a medium between the two parties of
scientists, that the work of the Ortolian had not reached a level that
would make a scientific understanding possible.

As the ship needed no replenishing, they determined to finish their
present work before landing, and it was nearly forty thousand years
after their first arrival that they again landed on Earth.

It was changed now; the ice caps had retreated visibly, the Nile delta
was far longer, far more prominent, and cities showed on the Earth here
and there.

Greece, they decided would be the next stop, and to Greece they went,
landing on a mountain side. Below was a village, a small village, a
small thing of huts and hovels. But the villagers attacked, swarming up
the hillside furiously, shouting and shrieking warnings of their
terrible prowess to these men who came from the "shining house,"
ordering them to flee from them and turn over their possession to them.

"What'll we do?" asked Morey. He and Arcot had come out alone this time.

"Take one of these fellows back with us, and question him. We had best
get a more or less definite idea of what time-age we are in, hadn't we?
We don't want to overshoot by a few centuries, you know!"

The villagers were swarming up the side of the hill, armed with weapons
of bronze and wood. The bronze implements of murder were rare, and
evidently costly, for those that had them were obviously leaders, and
better dressed than the others.

"Hang it all, I have only a molecular pistol. Can't use that, it would
be a plain massacre!" exclaimed Arcot.

But suddenly several others, who had come up from one side, appeared
from behind a rock. The scientists were wearing their power suits, and
had them on at low power, leaving a weight of about fifty pounds. Morey,
with his normal weight well over two hundred, jumped far to one side of
a clumsy rush of a peasant, leaped back, and caught him from behind.
Lifting the smaller man above his head, he hurled him at two others
following. The three went down in a heap.

Most of the men were about five feet tall, and rather lightly built. The
"Greek God" had not yet materialized among them. They were probably
poorly fed, and heavily worked. Only the leaders appeared to be in good
physical condition, and the men could not develop to large stature.
Arcot and Morey were giants among them, and with their greater skill,
tremendous jumping ability, and far greater strength, easily overcame
the few who had come by the side. One of the leaders was picked up, and
trussed quickly in a rope a fellow had carried.

"Look out," called Wade from above. Suddenly he was standing beside
them, having flown down on the power suit. "Caught your thoughts--rather
Zezdon Afthen did." He handed Arcot a ray pistol. The rest of the Greeks
were near now, crying in amazement, and running more slowly. They didn't
seem so anxious to attack. Arcot turned the ray pistol to one side.

"Wait!" called Morey. A face peered from around the rock toward which
Arcot had aimed his pistol. It was that of a girl, about fifteen years
old in appearance, but hard work had probably aged her face. Morey bent
over, heaved on a small boulder, about two hundred pounds of rock, and
rolled it free of the depression it rested in, then caught it on a
molecular ray, hurled it up. Arcot turned his heat ray on it for an
instant, and it was white hot. Then the molecular ray threw it over
toward the great rock, and crushed it against it. Three children
shrieked and ran out from the rock, scurrying down the hillside.

The soldiers had stopped. They looked at Morey. Then they looked at the
great rock, three hundred yards from him. They looked at the rock
fragments.

"They think you threw it," grinned Arcot.

"What else--they saw me pick it up, saw me roll it, and it flew. What
else could they think?"

Arcot's heat ray hissed out, and the rocks sputtered and cracked, then
glowed white. There was a dull explosion, and chips of rock flew up.
Water, imprisoned, had been turned into steam. In a moment the whistle
and crackle of combined heat and molecular rays stabbing out from
Arcot's hands had built a barrier of fused rocks.

Leisurely Arcot and Morey carried their now revived prisoner back to the
ship, while Wade flew ahead to open the locks.

Half an hour later the prisoner was discharged, much to his surprise,
and the ship rose. They had been able to learn nothing from him. Even
the Greek Gods, Zeus, Hermes, Apollo, all the later Greek gods, were
unknown, or so greatly changed that Arcot could not recognize them.

"Well," he said at length, "it seems all we know is that they came
before any historical Greeks we know of. That puts them back quite a
bit, but I don't know how far. Shall we go see the Egyptians?"

They tried Egypt, a few moments across the Mediterranean, landing close
to the mouth of the Nile. The people of a village near by immediately
set out after them. Better prepared this time, Arcot flew out to meet
them with Zezdon Afthen and Stel Felso Theu. Surely, he felt, the sight
of the strange men would be no more terrifying than the ship or the men
flying. And that did not seem to deter their attack. Apparently the
proverb that "Discretion is the better part of valor," had not been
invented.

Arcot landed near the head of the column, and cut off two or three men
from the rest with the aid of his ray pistol. Zezdon Afthen quickly
searched his mind, and with Arcot's aid they determined he did not know
any of the Gods that Arcot suggested.

Finally they had to return to the ship, disappointed. They had had the
slight satisfaction of finding that the Sun God was Ralz, the later
Egyptian Ra might well have been an evolved form of that name.

They restocked the ship, fresh game and fruits again appearing on the
menu, then once again they launched forth into space to wait for their
own time.

"It seems to me that we must have produced some effect by our visit,"
said Arcot, shaking his head solemnly.

"We did, Arcot," replied Morey softly. "We left an impress in history,
an impress that still is, and an impress that affected countless
thousands.

"Meet the Egyptian Gods with their heads strange to terrestrians, the
Gods who fly through the air without wings, come from a shining house
that flies, whose look, whose pointed finger melts the desert sands, and
the moist soil!" he continued softly, nodding toward the Ortolian and
the Talsonian.

"Their 'impossible' Gods existed, and visited them. Indubitably some
genius saw that here was a chance for fame and fortune and sold 'charms'
against the 'Gods.' Result: we are carrying with us some of the oldest
deities. Again, we did leave our imprint in history."

"And," cried Wade excitedly, "meet the great Hercules, who threw men
about. I always knew that Morey was a brainless brute, but I never
realized the marvelous divining powers of those Greeks so
perfectly--now, the Incarnation of Dumb Power!" Dramatically Wade
pointed to Morey, unable even now to refrain from some unnecessary
comments.

"All right, Mercury, the messenger of the Gods speaks. The little flaps
on Wade's flying shoes must indeed have looked like the winged shoes of
legend. Wade was Mercury, too brainless for anything but carrying the
words of wisdom uttered by others.

"And Arcot," continued Morey, releasing Wade from his condescending
stare, "is Jove, hurling the rockfusing, destroying thunderbolts!"

"The Gods that my friends have been talking of," explained Arcot to the
curious Ortolians, "are legendary deities of Earth. I can see now that
we did leave an imprint on history in the only way we could--as Gods,
for surely no other explanation could have occurred to those men."

The days passed swiftly in the ship, as their work approached
completion. Finally, when the last of the equation of Time, artificial
matter, and the most awful of their weapons, the unlimited Cosmic Power,
had been calculated, they fell to the last stage of the work. The actual
appliances were designed. Then the completed apparatus that the Ortolian
and the Talsonian had been working on, was carefully investigated by the
terrestrial physicists, and its mechanism studied. Arcot had great plans
for this, and now it was incorporated in their control apparatus.

The one remaining problem was their exact location in time. Already
their progress had brought them well up to the nineteenth century, but,
as Morey sadly remarked, they couldn't tell what date, for they were
sadly lacking in history. Had they known the real date, for instance, of
the famous battle of Bull Run, they could have watched it in the
telectroscope, and so determined their time. As it was, they knew only
that it was one of the periods of the first half of the decade of 1860.

"As historians, we're a bunch of first-class kitchen mechanics. Looks
like we're due for another landing to locate the exact date," agreed
Arcot.

"Why land now? Let's wait until we are nearer the time to which we
belong, so we won't have to watch so carefully and so long," suggested
Wade.

They argued this question for about two hundred years as a matter of
fact. After that, it was academic anyway.




Chapter XVI

HOME AGAIN


They were getting very near their own time, Arcot felt. Indeed, they
must already exist on Earth. "One thing that puzzles me," he commented,
"is what would happen if we were to go down now, and see ourselves."

"Either we can't or we don't want to do it," pointed out Morey, "because
we didn't."

"I think the answer is that nothing can exist two times at the same
time-rate," said Arcot. "As long as we were in a different time-rate we
could exist at two times. When we tried to exist simultaneously, we
could not, and we were forced to slip through time to a time wherein we
either did not exist or wherein we had not yet been. Since we were
nearer the time when we last existed in normal time, than we were to the
time of our birth, we went to the time we left. I suspect that we will
find we have just left Earth. Shall we investigate?"

"Absolutely, Arcot, and here's hoping we didn't overshoot the mark by
much." As Morey intimated, had they gone much beyond the time they left
Earth, they might find conditions very serious, indeed. But now they
went at once toward Earth on the time control. As they neared, they
looked anxiously for signs of the invasion. Arcot spotted the only
evident signs, however; two large spheres, tiny points in appearance on
the telectroscope screen, were circling Earth, one at about 1,000 miles,
moving from east to west, the other about 1,200 miles moving from north
to south.

"It seems the enemy have retreated to space to do their fighting. I
wonder how long we were away."

As they swept down at a speed greater than light, they were invisible
till Arcot slowed down near the atmosphere. Instantly half a dozen fast
ships darted toward them, but the ship was very evidently unlike the
Thessian ships, and no attack was made. First the occupants would have
an opportunity to prove their friendliness.

"Terrestrians Arcot, Morey and Wade reporting back from exploration in
space, with two friends. All have been on Earth with us previously,"
said Arcot into the radio vision apparatus.

"Very well, Dr. Arcot. You are going to New York or Vermont?" asked the
Patrol commander.

"Vermont."

"Yes, Sir. I'll see that you aren't stopped again."

And, thanks to the message thus sent ahead, they were not, and in less
than half an hour they landed once more in Vermont, on the field from
which they had started.

The group of scientists who had been here on their last call had gone,
which seemed natural enough to them, who had been working for three
months in the interval of their trip, but to Dr. Arcot senior, as he saw
them, it was a misfortune.

"Now I never will get straight all you'll have ready, and I didn't
expect you back till next week. The men have all gone back to their
laboratories, since that permits of better work on the part of each, but
we can call them here in half an hour. I'm sure they'll want to come.
What did you learn, Son, or haven't you done any calculating on your
data as yet?"

"We learned plenty, and I feel quite sure that a hint of what we have
would bring all those learning-hounds around us pretty quickly, Dad,"
laughed Arcot junior, "and believe it or not, we've been calculating on
this stuff for three months since we left yesterday!"

"What!"

"Yes, it's true! We were on our time field, and turned on the space
control--and a Thessian ship picked that moment to run into us. We cut
the ship in half as neatly as you please, but it threw us eighty
thousand years into the past. We have been coasting through time on
retarded rate while Earth caught up with itself, so to speak. In the
meantime--three months in a day!

"But don't call those men. Let them come to the appointment, while we do
some work, and we have plenty of work to do, I assure you. We have a
list of things to order from the standard supply houses, and I think you
better get them for us, Dad." Arcot's manner became serious now. "We
haven't gotten our Government Expense Research Cards yet, and you have.
Order the stuff, and get it out here, while we get ready for it.
Honestly, I believe that a few ships such as this apparatus will permit,
will be enough in themselves to do the job. It really is a pity that the
other men didn't have the opportunity we had for crowding much work into
little time!

"But then, I wouldn't want to take that road to concentration again
myself!

"Have the enemy amused you in my absence? Come on, let's sit down in the
house instead of standing here in the sun."

They started toward the house, as Arcot senior explained what had
happened in the short time they had been away.

"There is a friend of yours here, whom you haven't seen in some time,
Son. He came with some allies."

As they entered the house, they could hear the boards creak under some
heavy weight that moved across the floor, soundlessly and light of
motion in itself. A shadow fell across the hall floor, and in the
doorway a tremendously powerfully-built figure stood.

He seemed to overflow the doorway, nearly six and a half feet tall, and
fully as wide as the door. His rugged, bronzed face was smiling
pleasantly, and his deep-set eyes seemed to flash; a living force flowed
from them.

"Torlos! By the Nine Planets! Torlos of Nansal! Say, I didn't expect you
here, and I will not put my hand in that meatgrinder of yours," grinned
Arcot happily, as Torlos stretched forth a friendly, but quite too
powerful hand.

Torlos of Nansal, that planet Arcot had discovered on his first voyage
across space, far in another Island of Space, another Island Universe,
was not constructed as are human beings of Earth, nor of Venus, Talso,
or Ortol, but most nearly resembled, save in size, the Thessians. Their
framework, instead of being stone, as is ours, was iron, their bones
were pure metallic iron, far stronger than bone. On these far stronger
bones were great muscles of an entirely different sort, a muscle that
used heat of the body as its fuel, a muscle that was utterly tireless,
and unbelievably powerful. Not a chemical engine, but a molecular motion
engine, it had no chemical fatigue-products that would tire it, and
needed only the constant heat supply the body sucked from the air to
work indefinitely. Unlimited by waste-carrying considerations, the
strength was enormous.

It was one of the commercial space freighters plying between Nansal,
Sator, Earth and Venus that had brought the news of this war to him,
Torlos explained, and he, as the new Trade Coordinator and Fourth of the
Four who now ruled Nansal, had suggested that they go to the aid of the
man who had so aided them in their great war with Sator. It was Arcot's
gift of the secret of the molecular ray and the molecular ship that had
enabled them to overcome their enemy of centuries, and force upon them
an unwelcome peace.

Now, with a fleet of fifty interstellar, or better, intergalactic
battleships, Nansal was coming to Earth's aid.

The battleships were now on patrol with all of Earth's and Venus' fleet.
But the Nansalian ships were all equipped with the enormously rapid
space distortion system of travel, of course, and were a shock troop in
the patrol. The Terrestrian and Venerian patrols were not so equipped in
full.

"And Arcot, from what I have learned from your father, it seems that I
