time giving a measure of the planet's apparent displacement, hence of
its actual rate of travel in miles per minute, from which its distances
severally from earth and sun are immediately deducible. Its chief
attendant difficulty is the necessity for accurately fixing the
longitudes of the points of observation. But this was much more sensibly
felt a century ago than it is now, the improved facility and certainty
of modern determinations tending to give the Delislean plan a decided
superiority over its rival.

These two traditional methods were supplemented in 1874 by the camera
and the heliometer. From photography, above all, much was expected.
Observations made by its means would have the advantages of
impartiality, multitude, and permanence. Peculiarities of vision and
bias of judgment would be eliminated; the slow progress of the
phenomenon would permit an indefinite number of pictures to be taken,
their epochs fixed to a fraction of a second; while subsequent leisurely
comparison and measurement could hardly fail, it was thought, to educe
approximate truth from the mass of accumulated evidence. The use of the
heliometer (much relied on by German observers) was so far similar to
that of the camera that the object aimed at by both was the
determination of the relative positions of the _centres_ of the sun and
Venus viewed, at the same absolute instant, from opposite sides of the
globe. So that the principle of the two older methods was to ascertain
the exact times of meeting between the solar and planetary limbs; that
of the two modern to determine the position of the dark body already
thrown into complete relief by its shining background. The former are
"methods by contact," the latter "methods by projection."

Every country which had a reputation to keep or to gain for scientific
zeal was forward to co-operate in the great cosmopolitan enterprise of
the transit. France and Germany each sent out six expeditions;
twenty-six stations were in Russian, twelve in English, eight in
American, three in Italian, one in Dutch occupation. In all, at a cost
of nearly a quarter of a million, some fourscore distinct posts of
observation were provided; among them such inhospitable, and all but
inaccessible rocks in the bleak Southern Ocean, as St. Paul's and
Campbell Islands, swept by hurricanes, and fitted only for the
habitation of seabirds, where the daring votaries of science, in the
wise prevision of a long leaguer by the elements, were supplied with
stores for many months, or even a whole year. Siberia and the Sandwich
Islands were thickly beset with observers; parties of three
nationalities encamped within the mists of Kerguelen Island,
expressively termed the "Land of Desolation," in the sanguine, though
not wholly frustrated hope of a glimpse of the sun at the right moment.
M. Janssen narrowly escaped destruction from a typhoon in the China seas
on his way to Nagasaki; Lord Lindsay (now Earl of Crawford and
Balcarres) equipped, at his private expense, an expedition to Mauritius,
which was in itself an epitome of modern resource and ingenuity.

During several years, the practical methods best suited to insure
success for the impending enterprise formed a subject of European
debate. Official commissions were appointed to receive and decide upon
evidence; and experiments were in progress for the purpose of defining
the actual circumstances of contacts, the precise determination of which
constituted the only tried, though by no means an assuredly safe road to
the end in view. In England, America, France, and Germany, artificial
transits were mounted, and the members of the various expeditions were
carefully trained to unanimity in estimating the phases of junction and
separation between a moving dark circular body and a broad illuminated
disc. In the previous century, a formidable and prevalent phenomenon,
which acquired notoriety as the "Black Drop" or "Black Ligament," had
swamped all pretensions to rigid accuracy. It may be described as
substituting adhesion for contact, the limbs of the sun and planet,
instead of meeting and parting with the desirable clean definiteness,
_clinging_ together as if made of some glutinous material, and
prolonging their connection by means of a dark band or dark threads
stretched between them. Some astronomers ascribed this baffling
appearance entirely to instrumental imperfections; others to atmospheric
agitation; others again to the optical encroachment of light upon
darkness known as "irradiation." It is probable that all these causes
conspired, in various measure, to produce it; and it is certain that its
_conspicuous_ appearance may, by suitable precautions, be obviated.

The organisation of the British forces reflected the utmost credit on
the energy and ability of Lieutenant-Colonel Tupman, who was responsible
for the whole. No useful measure was neglected. Each observer went out
ticketed with his "personal equation," his senses drilled into a species
of martial discipline, his powers absorbed, so far as possible, in the
action of a cosmopolitan observing machine. Instrumental uniformity and
uniformity of method were obtainable, and were attained; but diversity
of judgment unhappily survived the best-directed efforts for its
extirpation.

The eventful day had no sooner passed than telegrams began to pour in,
announcing an outcome of considerable, though not unqualified success.
The weather had proved generally favourable; the manifold arrangements
had worked well; contacts had been plentifully observed; photographs in
lavish abundance had been secured; a store of materials, in short, had
been laid up, of which it would take years to work out the full results
by calculation. Gradually, nevertheless, it came to be known that the
hope of a definitive issue must be abandoned. Unanimity was found to be
as remote as ever. The dreaded "black ligament" gave, indeed, less
trouble than was expected; but another appearance supervened which took
most observers by surprise. This was the illumination due to the
atmosphere of Venus. Astronomers, it is true, were not ignorant that the
planet had, on previous occasions, been seen girdled with a lucid ring;
but its power to mar observations by the distorting effect of refraction
had scarcely been reckoned with. It proved, however, to be very great.
Such was the difficulty of determining the critical instant of internal
contact, that (in Colonel Tupman's words) "observers side by side, with
adequate optical means, differed as much as twenty or thirty seconds in
the times they recorded for phenomena which they have described in
almost identical language."[767]

Such uncertainties in the data admitted of a corresponding variety in
the results. From the British observations of ingress and egress Sir
George Airy[768] derived, in 1877, a solar parallax of 8.76" (corrected
to 8.754"), indicating a mean distance of 93,375,000 miles. Mr. Stone
obtained a value of ninety-two millions (parallax 8.88"), and held any
parallax less than 8.84" or more than 8.93" to be "absolutely negatived"
by the documents available.[769] Yet, from the same, Colonel Tupman
deduced 8.81",[770] implying a distance 700,000 miles greater than Stone
had obtained. The best French observations of contacts gave a parallax
of about 8.88"; French micrometric measures the obviously exaggerated
one of 9.05".[771]

Photography, as practised by most of the European parties, was a total
failure. Utterly discrepant values of the microscopic displacements
designed to serve as sounding lines for the solar system, issued from
attempts to measure even the most promising pictures. "You might as well
try to measure the zodiacal light," it was remarked to Sir George Airy.
Those taken on the American plan of using telescopes of so great focal
length as to afford, without further enlargement, an image of the
requisite size, gave notably better results. From an elaborate
comparison of those dating from Vladivostock, Nagasaki, and Pekin, with
others from Kerguelen and Chatham Islands, Professor D. P. Todd, of
Amherst College, deduced a solar distance of about ninety-two million
miles (parallax 8.883" +-0.034"),[772] and the value was much favoured by
concurrent evidence.

On the whole, estimates of the great spatial unit cannot be said to have
gained any security from the combined effort of 1874. A few months
before the transit, Mr. Proctor considered that the uncertainty then
amounted to 1,448,000 miles;[773] five years after the transit,
Professor Harkness judged it to be still 1,575,950 miles;[774] yet it
had been hoped that it would have been brought down to 100,000. As
regards the end for which it had been undertaken, the grand campaign had
come to nothing. Nevertheless, no sign of discouragement was apparent.
There was a change of view, but no relaxation of purpose. The problem,
it was seen, could be solved by no single heroic effort, but by the
patient approximation of gradual improvements. Astronomers, accordingly,
looked round for fresh means or more refined expedients for applying
those already known. A new phase of exertion was entered upon.

On September 5, 1877, Mars came into opposition near the part of his
orbit which lies nearest to that of the earth, and Dr. Gill (now Sir
David) took advantage of the circumstance to appeal once more to him for
a decision on the _quaestio vexata_ of the sun's distance. He chose, as
the scene of his labours, the Island of Ascension, and for their plan a
method recommended by Airy in 1857,[775] but never before fairly tried.
This is known as the "diurnal method of parallaxes." Its principle
consists in substituting successive morning and evening observations
from the same spot, for simultaneous observations from remote spots, the
rotation of the earth supplying the necessary difference in the points
of view. Its great advantage is that of unity in performance. A single
mind, looking through the same pair of eyes, reinforced with the same
optical appliances, is employed throughout, and the errors inseparable
from the combination of data collected under different conditions are
avoided. There are many cases in which one man can do the work of two
better than two men can do the work of one. The result of Gill's skilful
determinations (made with Lord Lindsay's heliometer) was a solar
parallax of 8.78", corresponding to a distance of 93,080,000 miles.[776]
The bestowal of the Royal Astronomical Society's gold medal stamped the
merit of this distinguished service.

But there are other subjects for this kind of inquiry besides Mars and
Venus. Professor Galle of Breslau suggested in 1872[777] that some of
the minor planets might be got to repay astronomers for much
disinterested toil spent in unravelling their motions, by lending aid to
their efforts towards a correct celestial survey. Ten or twelve come
near enough, and are bright enough for the purpose; in fact, the absence
of sensible magnitude is one of their chief recommendations, since a
point of light offers far greater facilities for exact measurement than
a disc. The first attempt to work this new vein was made at the
opposition of Phocaea in 1872; and from observations of Flora in the
following year at twelve observatories in the northern and southern
hemispheres, Galle deduced a solar parallax of 8.87".[778] At Mauritius
in 1874, Lord Lindsay and Sir David Gill applied the "diurnal method" to
Juno, then conveniently situated for the purpose; and the continued use
of similar occasions affords an unexceptionable means for improving
knowledge of the sun's distance. They frequently recur; they need no
elaborate preparation; a single astronomer armed with a heliometer can
do all the requisite work. Dr. Gill, however, organized a more complex
plan of operations upon Iris in 1888, and upon Victoria and Sappho in
1889. A novel method was adopted. Its object was to secure simultaneous
observations made from opposite sides of the globe just when the planet
lay in the plane passing through the centre of the earth and the two
observers, the same pair of reference-stars being used on each occasion.
The displacements caused by parallax were thus in a sense doubled, since
the star to which the planet seemed approximated in the northern
hemisphere, showed as if slightly removed from it in the southern, and
_vice versa_. As the planet pursued its course, fresh star-couples came
into play, during the weeks that the favourable period lasted. In these
determinations, only heliometers were employed. Dr. Elkin, of Yale
college, co-operated throughout, and the heliometers of Dresden,
Gottingen, Bamberg, and Leipzig, shared in the work, while Dr. Auwers of
Berlin was Sir David Gill's personal coadjutor at the Cape. Voluminous
data were collected; meridian observations of the stars of reference for
Victoria occupied twenty-one establishments during four months; the
direct work of triangulation kept four heliometers in almost exclusive
use for the best part of a year; and the ensuing toilsome computations,
carried out during three years at the Cape Observatory, filled two bulky
tomes[779] with their details. Gill's final result, published in 1897,
was a parallax of 8.802", equivalent to a solar distance of 92,874,000;
and it was qualified by a probable error so small that the value might
well have been accepted as definitive but for an unlooked-for discovery.
The minor planet Eros, detected August 14, 1898, was found to pursue a
course rendering it an almost ideal intermediary in solar
parallax-determinations. Once in thirty years, it comes within fifteen
million miles of the earth; and although the next of these choice epochs
must be awaited for some decades, an opposition too favourable to be
neglected occurred in 1900. At an International Conference, accordingly,
held at Paris in July of that year, a plan of photographic operations
was concerted between the representatives of no less than 58
observatories.[780] Its primary object was to secure a large stock of
negatives showing the planet with the comparison-stars along the route
traversed by it from October, 1900, to March, 1901,[781] and this at
least was successfully attained. Their measurement will in due time
educe the apparent displacements of the moving object as viewed
simultaneously from remote parts of the earth; and the upshot should be
a solar parallax adequate in accuracy to the exigent demands of the
twentieth century.

The second of the nineteenth-century pair of Venus-transits was looked
forward to with much abated enthusiasm. Russia refused her active
co-operation in observing it, on the ground that oppositions of the
minor planets were trigonometrically more useful, and financially far
less costly; and her example was followed by Austria; while Italian
astronomers limited their sphere of action to their own peninsula.
Nevertheless, it was generally held that a phenomenon which the world
could not again witness until it was four generations older should, at
the price of any effort, not be allowed to pass in neglect.

The persuasion of its importance justified the summoning of an
International Conference at Paris in 1881, from which, however, America,
preferring independent action, held aloof. It was decided to give
Delisle's method another trial; and the ambiguities attending and
marring its use were sought to be obviated by careful regulations for
insuring agreement in the estimation of the critical moments of ingress
and egress.[782] But in fact (as M. Puiseux had shown[783]), contacts
between the limbs of the sun and planet, so far from possessing the
geometrical simplicity attributed to them, are really made up of a
prolonged succession of various and varying phases, impossible either to
predict or identify with anything like rigid exactitude. Sir Robert Ball
compared the task of determining the precise instant of their meeting or
parting, to that of telling the hour with accuracy on a watch without a
minute hand; and the comparison is admittedly inadequate. For not only
is the apparent movement of Venus across the sun extremely slow, being
but the excess of her real motion over that of the earth; but three
distinct atmospheres--the solar, terrestrial, and Cytherean--combine to
deform outlines and mask the geometrical relations which it is desired
to connect with a strict count of time.

The result was very much what had been expected. The arrangements were
excellent, and were only in a few cases disconcerted by bad weather. The
British parties, under the experienced guidance of Mr. Stone, the late
Radcliffe observer, took up positions scattered over the globe, from
Queensland to Bermuda; the Americans collected a whole library of
photographs; the Germans and Belgians trusted to the heliometer; the
French used the camera as an adjunct to the method of contacts. Yet
little or no approach was made to solving the problem. Thus, from 606
measures of Venus on the sun, taken with a new kind of heliometer at
Santiago in Chili, M. Houzeau, of the Brussels Observatory, derived a
solar parallax of 8.907", and a distance of 91,727,000 miles.[784] But
the "probable errors" of this determination amounted to 0.084" either
way: it was subject to a "more or less" of 900,000, or to a total
uncertainty of 1,800,000 miles. The "probable error" of the English
result, published in 1887, was less formidable,[785] yet the details of
the discussion showed that no great confidence could be placed in it.
The sun's distance came out 92,560,000 miles; while 92,360,000 was given
by Professor Harkness's investigation of 1,475 American
photographs.[786] Finally, Dr. Auwers deduced from the German
heliometric measures the unsatisfactorily small value of 92,000,000
miles.[787] The transit of 1882 had not, then, brought about the desired
unanimity.

The state and progress of knowledge on this important topic were summed
up by Faye and Harkness in 1881.[788] The methods employed in its
investigation fall (as we have seen) into three separate classes--the
trigonometrical, the gravitational, and the "phototachymetrical"--an
ungainly adjective used to describe the method by the velocity of light.
Each has its special difficulties and sources of error; each has
counter-balancing advantages. The only trustworthy result from celestial
surveys, was at that time furnished by Gill's observations of Mars in
1877. But the method by lunar and planetary disturbances is unlike all
the others in having time on its side. It is this which Leverrier
declared with emphasis must inevitably prevail, because its accuracy is
continually growing.[789] The scarcely perceptible errors which still
impede its application are of such a nature as to accumulate year by
year; eventually, then, they will challenge, and must receive, a more
and more perfect correction. The light-velocity method, however,
claimed, and for some years justified, M. Faye's preference.

By a beautiful series of experiments on Foucault's principle, Michelson
fixed in 1879 the rate of luminous transmission at 299,930 (corrected
later to 299,910) kilometres a second.[790] This determination was held
by Professor Todd to be entitled to four times as much confidence as any
previous one; and if the solar parallax of 8.758" deduced from it by
Professor Harkness errs somewhat by defect, it is doubtless because
Glasenapp's "light-equation," with which it was combined, errs slightly
by excess. But all earlier efforts of the kind were thrown into the
shade by Professor Newcomb's arduous operations at Washington in
1880-1882.[791] The scale upon which they were conducted was in itself
impressive. Foucault's entire apparatus in 1862 had been enclosed in a
single room; Newcomb's revolving and fixed mirrors, between which the
rays of light were to run their timed course, were set up on opposite
shores of the Potomac, at a distance of nearly four kilometres. This
advantage was turned to the utmost account by ingenuity and skill in
contrivance and execution; and the deduced velocity of 299,860
kilometres = 186,328 miles a second, had an estimated error (30
kilometres) only one-tenth that ascribed by Cornu to his own result in
1874.

Just as these experiments were concluded in 1882, M. Magnus Nyren, of
St. Petersburg, published an elaborate investigation of the small
annular displacements of the stars due to the successive transmission of
light, involving an increase of Struve's "constant of aberration" from
20.445" to 20.492". And from the new value, combined with Newcomb's
light-velocity, was derived a valuable approximation to the sun's
distance, concluded at 92,905,021 miles (parallax = 8.794"). Yet it is
not quite certain that Nyren's correction was an improvement. A
differential method of determining the amount of aberration, struck out
by M. Loewy of Paris,[792] avoids most of the objections to the absolute
method previously in vogue; and the upshot of its application in 1891
was to show that Struve's constant might better be retained than
altered, Loewy's of 20.447" varying from it only to an insignificant
extent. Professor Hall had, moreover, deduced nearly the same value
(20.454") from the Washington observations since 1862, of Alpha
Lyrae (Vega); whence, in conjunction with Newcomb's rate of light
transmission, he arrived at a solar parallax of 8.81".[793] Inverting
the process, Sir David Gill in 1897 derived the constant from the
parallax. If the earth's orbit have a mean radius, as found by him, of
92,874,000 miles, then, he calculated, the aberration of
light--Newcomb's measures of its velocity being supposed exact--amounts
to 20.467". This figure can need very slight correction.

Professor Harkness surveyed in 1891,[794] from an eclectic point of
view, the general situation as regarded the sun's parallax. Convinced
that no single method deserved an exclusive preference, he reached a
plausible result through the combination, on the principle of least
squares--that is, by the mathematical rules of probability--of all the
various quantities upon which the great datum depends. It thus summed up
and harmonised the whole of the multifarious evidence bearing upon the
point, and, as modified in 1894,[795] falls very satisfactorily into
line with the Cape determination. We may, then, at least provisionally,
accept 92,870,000 miles as the length of our measuring-rod for space.
Nor do we hazard much in fixing 100,000 miles as the outside limit of
its future correction.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 748: Airy, _Month. Not._, vol. xvii., p. 210.]

[Footnote 749: Mars comes into opposition once in about 780 days; but
owing to the eccentricity of both orbits, his distance from the earth at
those epochs varies from thirty-five to sixty-two million miles.]

[Footnote 750: J. D. Cassini, _Hist. Abregee de la Parallaxe du Soleil_,
p. 122, 1772.]

[Footnote 751: The present period of coupled eccentric transits will, in
the course of ages, be succeeded by a period of single, nearly central
transits. The alignments by which transits are produced, of the earth,
Venus, and the sun, close to the place of intersection of the two
planetary orbits, now occur, the first a little in front of, the second,
after eight years less two and a half days, a little behind the node.
But when the first of these two meetings takes place very near the node,
giving a nearly central transit, the second falls too far from it, and
the planet escapes projection on the sun. The reason of the liability to
an eight-yearly recurrence is that eight revolutions of the earth are
accomplished in only a very little more time than thirteen revolutions
of Venus.]

[Footnote 752: _Die Entfernung der Sonne: Fortsetzung_, p. 108. Encke
slightly corrected his results of 1824 in _Berlin Abh._, 1835, p. 295.]

[Footnote 753: Owing to the ellipticity of its orbit, the earth is
nearer to the sun in January than in June by 3,100,000 miles. The
quantity to be determined, or "mean distance," is that lying midway
between these extremes--is, in other words, half the major axis of the
ellipse in which the earth travels.]

[Footnote 754: _Month. Not._, vol. xv., p. 9.]

[Footnote 755: _The Distance of the Sun from the Earth determined by the
Theory of Gravity_, Edinburgh, 1763.]

[Footnote 756: _Opera_, t. iii., p. 326.]

[Footnote 757: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xlvi., p. 882. The parallax 8.95"
derived by Leverrier from the above-described inequality in the earth's
motion, was corrected by Stone to 8.91". _Month. Not._, vol. xxviii., p.
25.]

[Footnote 758: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxv., p. 156.]

[Footnote 759: _Wash. Obs._, 1865, App. ii., p. 28.]

[Footnote 760: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xxix., p. 90.]

[Footnote 761: _Ibid._, t. xxx., p. 551.]

[Footnote 762: _Ibid._, t. lv., p. 501. The previously admitted velocity
was 308 million metres per second; Foucault reduced it to 298 million.
Combined with Struve's "constant of aberration" this gave 8.86" for the
solar parallax, which exactly agreed with Cornu's result from a
repetition of Fizeau's experiments in 1872. _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxxvi.,
p. 338.]

[Footnote 763: _Month. Not._, vol. xxiv., p. 103.]

[Footnote 764: _Astr. Papers of the American Ephemeris_, vol. ii., p.
263.]

[Footnote 765: _Month. Not._, vol. xvii., p. 208.]

[Footnote 766: Because closely similar to that proposed by him in _Phil.
Trans._ for 1716.]

[Footnote 767: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxviii., p. 447.]

[Footnote 768: _Ibid._, p. 11.]

[Footnote 769: _Ibid._, p. 294.]

[Footnote 770: _Ibid._, p. 334.]

[Footnote 771: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcii., p. 812.]

[Footnote 772: _Observatory_, vol. v., p. 205.]

[Footnote 773: _Transits of Venus_, p. 89 (1st ed.).]

[Footnote 774: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xx., p. 393.]

[Footnote 775: _Month. Not._, vol. xvii., p. 219.]

[Footnote 776: _Mem. Roy. Astr. Soc._, vol. xlvi., p. 163.]

[Footnote 777: _Astr. Nach._, No. 1,897.]

[Footnote 778: Hilfiker, _Bern Mittheilungen_, 1878, p. 109.]

[Footnote 779: _Annals of the Cape Observatory_, vols. vi., vii.]

[Footnote 780: _Rapport sur l'Etat de l'Observatoire de Paris pour
l'Annee 1900_, p. 7.]

[Footnote 781: _Observatory_, vol. xxiii., p. 311; Newcomb, _Astr.
Jour._, No. 480.]

[Footnote 782: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xciii., p. 569.]

[Footnote 783: _Ibid._, t. xcii., p. 481.]

[Footnote 784: _Bull. de l'Acad._, t. vi., p. 842.]

[Footnote 785: _Month. Not._, vol. xlviii., p. 201.]

[Footnote 786: _Astr. Jour._, No. 182.]

[Footnote 787: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,066.]

[Footnote 788: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcii., p. 375; _Am. Jour. of Sc._,
vol. xxii., p. 375.]

[Footnote 789: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxv., p. 401.]

[Footnote 790: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xviii., p. 393.]

[Footnote 791: _Nature_, vol. xxxiv., p. 170; _Astron. Papers of the
American Ephemeris_, vol. ii., p. 113.]

[Footnote 792: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxii., p. 549.]

[Footnote 793: _Astr. Journ._, Nos. 169, 170]

[Footnote 794: _The Solar Parallax and its Related Constants_,
Washington, 1891.]

[Footnote 795: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xiii., p. 626.]




                                CHAPTER VII

                         _PLANETS AND SATELLITES_


Johann Hieronymus Schroeter was the Herschel of Germany. He did not,
it is true, possess the more brilliant gifts of his rival. Herschel's
piercing discernment, comprehensive intelligence, and inventive
splendour were wanting to him. He was, nevertheless, the founder of
descriptive astronomy in Germany, as Herschel was in England.

Born at Erfurt in 1745, he prosecuted legal studies at Gottingen, and
there imbibed from Kaestner a life-long devotion to science. From the
law, however, he got the means of living, and, what was to the full as
precious to him, the means of observing. Entering the sphere of
Hanoverian officialism in 1788, he settled a few years later at
Lilienthal, near Bremen, as "Oberamtmann," or chief magistrate. Here he
built a small observatory, enriched in 1785 with a seven-foot reflector
by Herschel, then one of the most powerful instruments to be found
anywhere out of England. It was soon surpassed, through his exertions,
by the first-fruits of native industry in that branch. Schrader of Kiel
transferred his workshops to Lilienthal in 1792, and constructed there,
under the superintendence and at the cost of the astronomical
Oberamtmann, a thirteen-foot reflector, declared by Lalande to be the
finest telescope in existence, and one twenty-seven feet in focal
length, probably as inferior to its predecessor in real efficiency as it
was superior in size.

Thus, with instruments of gradually increasing power, Schroeter studied
during thirty-four years the topography of the moon and planets. The
field was then almost untrodden; he had but few and casual predecessors,
and has since had no equal in the sustained and concentrated patience of
his hourly watchings. Both their prolixity and their enthusiasm are
faithfully reflected in his various treatises. Yet the one may be
pardoned for the sake of the other, especially when it is remembered
that he struck out a substantially new line, and that one of the main
lines of future advance. Moreover, his infectious zeal communicated
itself; he set the example of observing when there was scarcely an
observer in Germany; and under his roof Harding and Bessel received
their training as practical astronomers.

But he was reserved to see evil days. Early in 1813 the French under
Vandamme occupied Bremen. On the night of April 20, the Vale of Lilies
was, by their wanton destructiveness, laid waste with fire; the
Government offices were destroyed, and with them the chief part of
Schroeter's property, including the whole stock of his books and
writings. There was worse behind. A few days later, his observatory,
which had escaped the conflagration, was broken into, pillaged, and
ruined. His life was wrecked with it. He survived the catastrophe three
years without the means to repair, or the power to forget it, and
gradually sank from disappointment into decay, terminated by death,
August 29, 1816. He had, indeed, done all the work he was capable of;
and though not of the first quality, it was far from contemptible. He
laid the foundation of the _comparative_ study of the moon's surface,
and the descriptive particulars of the planets laboriously collected by
him constituted a store of more or less reliable information hardly
added to during the ensuing half century. They rested, it is true, under
some shadow of doubt; but the most recent observations have tended on
several points to rehabilitate the discredited authority of the
Lilienthal astronomer. We may now briefly resume, and pursue in its
further progress, the course of his studies, taking the planets in the
order of their distances from the sun.

In April, 1792, Schroeter saw reason to conclude, from the gradual
degradation of light on its partially illuminated disc, that Mercury
possesses a tolerably dense atmosphere.[796] During the transit of May
7, 1799, he was, moreover, struck with the appearance of a ring of
softened luminosity encircling the planet to an apparent height of three
seconds, or about a quarter of its own diameter.[797] Although a "mere
thought" in texture, it remained persistently visible both with the
seven-foot and the thirteen-foot reflectors, armed with powers up to
288. It had a well-marked grayish boundary, and reminded him, though
indefinitely fainter, of the penumbra of a sun-spot. A similar appendage
had been noticed by De Plantade at Montpellier, November 11, 1736, and
again in 1786 and 1789 by Prosperin and Flaugergues; but Herschel, on
November 9, 1802, saw the preceding limb of the planet projected on the
sun cut the luminous solar clouds with the most perfect sharpness.[798]
The presence, however, of a "halo" was unmistakable in 1832, when
Professor Moll, of Utrecht, described it as a "nebulous ring of a darker
tinge approaching to the violet colour."[799] Again, to Huggins and
Stone, November 5, 1868, it showed as lucid and most distinct. No change
in the colour of the glasses used, or the powers applied, could get rid
of it, and it lasted throughout the transit.[800] It was next seen by
Christie and Dunkin at Greenwich, May 6, 1878,[801] and with much
precision of detail by Trouvelot at Cambridge (U.S.).[802] Professor
Holden, on the other hand, noted at Hastings-on-Hudson the total absence
of all anomalous appearances.[803] Nor could any vestige of them be
perceived by Barnard at Lick on November 10, 1894.[804] Various effects
of irradiation and diffraction were, however, observed by Lowell and W.
H. Pickering at Flagstaff;[805] and Davidson was favoured at San
Francisco with glimpses of the historic aureola,[806] as well as of a
central whitish spot, which often accompanies it. That both are somehow
of optical production can scarcely be doubted.

Nothing can be learned from them regarding the planet's physical
condition. Airy showed that refraction in a Mercurian atmosphere could
not possibly originate the noted aureola, which must accordingly be set
down as "strictly an ocular nervous phenomenon."[807] It is the less
easy to escape from this conclusion that we find the virtually airless
moon capable of exhibiting a like appendage. Professor Stephen
Alexander, of the United States Survey, with two other observers,
perceived, during the eclipse of the sun of July 18, 1860, the advancing
lunar limb to be bordered with a bright band;[808] and photographic
effects of the same kind appear in pictures of transits of Venus and
partial solar eclipses.

The spectroscope affords little information as to the constitution of
Mercury. Its light is of course that of the sun reflected, and its
spectrum is consequently a faint echo of the Fraunhofer spectrum. Dr. H.
C. Vogel, who first examined it in April, 1871, _suspected_ traces of
the action of an atmosphere like ours,[809] but, it would seem, on
slight grounds. It is, however, certainly very poor in blue rays. More
definite conclusions were, in 1874,[810] derived by Zoellner from
photometric observations of Mercurian phases. A similar study of the
waxing and waning moon had afforded him the curious discovery that
light-changes dependent upon phase vary with the nature of the
reflecting surface, following a totally different law on a smooth
homogeneous globe and on a rugged and mountainous one. Now the phases of
Mercury--so far as could be determined from only two sets of
observations--correspond with the latter kind of structure. Strictly
analogous to those of the moon, they seem to indicate an analogous mode
of surface-formation. This conclusion was fully borne out by Mueller's
more extended observations at Potsdam during the years 1885-1893.[811]
Practical assurance was gained from them that the innermost planet has a
rough rind of dusky rock, absorbing all but 17 per cent. of the light
poured upon it by the fierce adjacent sun. Its "albedo," in other words,
is 0.17,[812] which is precisely that ascribed to the moon. The absence
of any appreciable Mercurian atmosphere followed almost necessarily from
these results.

On March 26, 1800, Schroeter, observing with his 13-foot reflector in a
peculiarly clear sky, perceived the southern horn of Mercury's crescent
to be quite distinctly blunted.[813] Interception of sunlight by a
Mercurian mountain rather more than eleven English miles high explained
the effect to his satisfaction. By carefully timing its recurrence, he
concluded rotation on an axis in a period of 24 hours 4 minutes. The
first determination of the kind rewarded twenty years of unceasing
vigilance. It received ostensible confirmation from the successive
appearances of a dusky streak and blotch in May and June, 1801.[814]
These, however, were inferred to be no permanent markings on the body of
the planet, but atmospheric formations, the streak at times drifting
forwards (it was thought) under the fluctuating influence of Mercurian
breezes. From a rediscussion of these somewhat doubtful observations
Bessel inferred that Mercury rotates on an axis inclined 70 deg. to the
plane of its orbit in 24 hours 53 seconds.

The rounded appearance of the southern horn seen by Schroeter was more or
less doubtfully caught by Noble (1864), Burton, and Franks (1877);[815]
but was obvious to Mr. W. F. Denning at Bristol on the morning of
November 5, 1882.[816] That the southern polar regions are usually less
bright than the northern is well ascertained; but the cause of the
deficiency remains dubious. If inequalities of surface are in question,
they must be on a considerable scale; and a similar explanation might be
given of the deformations of the "terminator"--or dividing-line between
darkness and light in the planet's phases--first remarked by Schroeter,
and again clearly seen by Trouvelot in 1878 and 1881.[817] The
displacement, during four days, of certain brilliant and dusky spaces on
the disc indicated to Mr. Denning in 1882 rotation in about twenty-five
hours; while the general aspect of the planet reminded him of that of
Mars.[818] But the difficulties in the way of its observation are
enormously enhanced by its constant close attendance on the sun.

In his sustained study of the features of Mercury, Schroeter had no
imitator until Schiaparelli took up the task at Milan in 1882. His
observations were made in daylight. It was found that much more could be
seen, and higher magnifying powers used, high up in the sky near the
sun, than at low altitudes, through the agitated air of morning or
evening twilight. A notable discovery ensued.[819] Following the planet
hour by hour, instead of making necessarily brief inspections at
intervals of about a day, as previous observers had done, it was found
that the markings faintly visible remained sensibly fixed, hence, that
there was no rotation in a period at all comparable with that of the
earth. And after long and patient watching, the conclusion was at last
reached that Mercury turns on his axis in the same time needed to
complete a revolution in his orbit. One of his hemispheres, then, is
always averted from the sun, as one of the moon's hemispheres from the
earth, while the other never shifts from beneath his torrid rays. The
"librations," however, of Mercury are on a larger scale than those of
the moon, because he travels in a more eccentric path. The temporary
inequalities arising between his "even pacing" on an axis and his
alternately accelerated and retarded elliptical movement occasion, in
fact, an oscillation to and fro of the boundaries of light and darkness
on his globe over an arc of 47 deg. 22', in the course of his year of
88 days. Thus the regions of perpetual day and perpetual night are
separated by two segments, amounting to one-fourth of the entire
surface, where the sun rises and sets once in 88 days. Else there is no
variation from the intense glare on one side of the globe, and the
nocturnal blackness on the other.

To Schiaparelli's scrutiny, Mercury appeared as a "spotty globe,"
enveloped in a tolerably dense atmosphere. The brownish stripes and
streaks, discerned on his rose-tinged disc, and judged to be permanent,
were made the basis of a chart. They were not indeed always equally well
seen. They disappeared regularly near the limb, and were at times veiled
even when centrally situated. Some of them had been clearly perceived by
De Ball at Bothkamp in 1882.[820]

Mr. Lowell followed Schiaparelli's example by observing Mercury in the
full glare of noon. "The best time to study him," he remarked, "is when
planetary almanacs state 'Mercury invisible.'" A remarkable series of
drawings executed, some at Flagstaff in 1896, the remainder at Mexico in
1897, supplied grounds for the following, among other, conclusions.[821]
Mercury rotates synchronously with its revolution--that is, once in 88
days--on an axis sensibly perpendicular to its orbital plane. No certain
signs of a Mercurian atmosphere are visible. The globe is seamed and
furrowed with long narrow markings, explicable as cracks in cooling. It
is, and always was, a dead world. From micrometrical measures, moreover,
the inferences were drawn that the planet's mass has a probable value
about 1/20 that of the earth, while its mean density falls considerably
short of the terrestrial standard.

The theory of Mercury's movements has always given trouble. In
Lalande's,[822] as in Maestlin's time, the planet seemed to exist for no
other purpose than to throw discredit on astronomers; and even to
Leverrier's powerful analysis it long proved recalcitrant. On the 12th
of September, 1869, however, he was able to announce before the Academy
of Sciences[823] the terms of a compromise between observation and
calculation. They involved the addition of a new member to the solar
system. The hitherto unrecognised presence of a body about the size of
Mercury itself revolving at somewhat less than half its mean distance
from the sun (or, if farther, then of less mass, and _vice versa_),
would, it was pointed out, produce exactly the effect required, of
displacing the perihelion of the former planet 38" a century more than
could otherwise be accounted for. The planes of the two orbits, however,
should not lie far apart, as otherwise a nodal disturbance would arise
not perceived to exist. It was added that a ring of asteroids similarly
placed would answer the purpose equally well, and was more likely to
have escaped notice.

Upon the heels of this forecast followed promptly a seeming
verification. Dr. Lescarbault, a physician residing at Orgeres, whose
slender opportunities had not blunted his hopes of achievement, had,
ever since 1845, when he witnessed a transit of Mercury, cherished the
idea that an unknown planet might be caught thus projected on the solar
background. Unable to observe continuously until 1858, he, on March 26,
1859, saw what he had expected--a small perfectly round object slowly
traversing the sun's disc. The fruitless expectation of reobserving the
phenomenon, however, kept him silent, and it was not until December 22,
after the news of Leverrier's prediction had reached him, that he wrote
to acquaint him with his supposed discovery.[824] The Imperial
Astronomer thereupon hurried down to Orgeres, and by personal inspection
of the simple apparatus used, by searching cross-examination and local
inquiry, convinced himself of the genuine character and substantial
accuracy of the reported observation. He named the new planet "Vulcan,"
and computed elements giving it a period of revolution slightly under
twenty days.[825] But it has never since been seen. M. Liais, director
of the Brazilian Coast Survey, thought himself justified in asserting
that it never had been seen. Observing the sun for twelve minutes after
the supposed ingress recorded at Orgeres, he noted those particular
regions of its surface as "tres uniformes d'intensite."[826] He
subsequently, however, admitted Lescarbault's good faith, at first
rashly questioned. The planet-seeking doctor was, in truth, only one
among many victims of similar illusions.

Waning interest in the subject was revived by a fresh announcement of a
transit witnessed, it was asserted, by Weber at Peckeloh, April 4,
1876.[827] The pseudo-planet, indeed, was detected shortly afterwards on
the Greenwich photographs, and was found to have been seen by M. Ventosa
at Madrid in its true character of a sun-spot without penumbra; but
Leverrier had meantime undertaken the investigation of a list of twenty
similar dubious appearances, collected by Haase, and republished by Wolf
in 1872.[828] From these, five were picked out as referring in all
likelihood to the same body, the reality of whose existence was now
confidently asserted, and of which more or less probable transits were
fixed for March 22, 1877, and October 15, 1882.[829] But, widespread
watchfulness notwithstanding, no suspicious object came into view at
either epoch.

The next announcement of the discovery of "Vulcan" was on the occasion
of the total solar eclipse of July 29, 1878.[830] This time it was
stated to have been seen at some distance south-west of the obscured
sun, as a ruddy star with a minute planetary disc; and its simultaneous
detection by two observers--the late Professor James C. Watson,
stationed at Rawlins (Wyoming Territory), and Professor Lewis Swift at
Denver (Colorado)--was at first readily admitted. But their separate
observations could, on a closer examination, by no possibility be
brought into harmony, and, if valid, certainly referred to two distinct
objects, if not to four; each astronomer eventually claiming a pair of
planets. Nor could any one of the four be identified with Lescarbault's
and Leverrier's Vulcan, which, if a substantial body revolving round the
sun, must then have been found on the _east_ side of that luminary.[831]
The most feasible explanation of the puzzle seems to be that Watson and
Swift merely saw each the same two stars in Cancer: haste and excitement
doing the rest.[832] Nevertheless, they strenuously maintained their
opposite conviction.[833]

Intra-Mercurian planets have since been diligently searched for when the
opportunity of a total eclipse offered, especially during the long
obscuration at Caroline Island. Not only did Professor Holden "sweep" in
the solar vicinity, but Palisa and Trouvelot agreed to divide the field
of exploration, and thus make sure of whatever planetary prey there
might be within reach; yet with only negative results. Photographic
explorations during recent eclipses have been equally fruitless. Belief
in the presence of any considerable body or bodies within the orbit of
Mercury is, accordingly, at a low ebb. Yet the existence of the anomaly
in the Mercurian movements indicated by Leverrier has been made only
surer by further research.[834] Its elucidation constitutes one of the
"pending problems" of astronomy.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the observation at Bologna in 1666-67 of some very faint spots,
Domenico Cassini concluded a rotation or libration of Venus--he was not
sure which--in about twenty-three hours.[835] By Bianchini in 1726 the
period was augmented to twenty-four _days_ eight hours. J. J. Cassini,
however, in 1740, showed that the data collected by both observers were
consistent with rotation in twenty-three hours twenty minutes.[836] So
the matter rested until Schroeter's time. After watching nine years in
vain, he at last, February 28, 1788, perceived the ordinarily uniform
brightness of the planet's disc to be marbled with a filmy streak, which
returned periodically to the same position in about twenty-three hours
twenty-eight minutes. This approximate estimate was corrected by the
application of a more definite criterion. On December 28, 1789, the
southern horn of the crescent Venus was seen truncated, an outlying
lucid point interrupting the darkness beyond. Precisely the same
appearance recurred two years later, giving for the planet's rotation a
period of 23h. 21m.[837] To this only twenty-two seconds were added by
De Vico, as the result of over 10,000 observations made with the
Cauchoix refractor of the Collegio Romano, 1839-41.[838] The axis of
rotation was found to be much more bowed towards the orbital plane than
that of the earth, the equator making with it an angle of 53 deg. 11'.

These conclusions inspired, it is true, much distrust, consequently
there were no received ideas on the subject to be subverted.
Nevertheless, a shock of surprise was felt at Schiaparelli's
announcement, early in 1890,[839] that Venus most probably rotates after
the fashion just previously ascribed to Mercury. A continuous series of
observations, from November, 1877, to February, 1878, with their records
in above a hundred drawings, supplied the chief part of the data upon
which he rested his conclusions. They certainly appeared exceptionally
well-grounded; and the doubts at first qualifying them were removed by a
fresh set of determinations in July, 1895.[840] Most observers had
depended, in their attempts to ascertain the rotation-period of Venus,
upon evanescent shadings, most likely of atmospheric origin, and
scarcely recognisable from day to day. Schiaparelli fixed his attention
upon round, defined, lustrously white spots, the presence of which near
the cusps of the illuminated crescent has been attested for close upon
two centuries. His steady watch over them showed the invariability of
their position with regard to the terminator; and this is as much as to
say that the regions of day and night do not shift on the surface of the
planet. In other words, she keeps the same face always turned towards
the sun. Moreover, since her orbit is nearly circular, libratory effects
are very small. They amount in fact to only just one-thirtieth of those
serving to modify the severe contrasts of climate in Mercury.

Confirmatory evidence of Schiaparelli's result for Venus is not wanting.
Thus, observations irreconcilable with a swift rate of rotation were
made at Bothkamp in 1871 by Vogel and Lohse;[841] and a drawing executed
by Professor Holden with the great Washington reflector, December 15,
1877, showed the same markings in the positions recorded at Milan to
have been occupied by them eight hours previously. Further, a series of
observations, carried out by M. Perrotin at Nice, May 15 to October 4,
1890, and from Mount Mounier in 1895-6, with the special aim of testing
the inference of synchronous rotation and revolution, proved strongly
corroborative of it.[842] A remarkable collection of drawings made by
Mr. Lowell in 1896 appeared decisive in its favour;[843] Tacchini at
Rome,[844] Mascari at Catania and Etna,[845] Cerulli at Terano,[846]
obtained in 1892-6 evidence similar in purport. On the other hand,
Niesten of Brussels found reason to revert to Vico's discarded elements
for the planet's rotation;[847] and Trouvelot,[848] Stanley
Williams,[849] Villiger,[850] and Leo Brenner,[851] so far agreed with
him as to adopt a period of approximately twenty-four hours. Finally, E.
Von Oppolzer suggested an appeal to the spectroscope;[852] and
Belopolsky secured in 1900[853] spectrograms apparently marked by the
minute displacements corresponding to a rapid rate of axial movement.
But they were avowedly taken only as an experiment, with unsuitable
apparatus; and the desirable verification of their supposed import is
not yet forthcoming. Until it is, Schiaparelli's period of 225 days must
be allowed to hold the field.

Effects attributed to great differences of level in the surface of Venus
have struck many observers. Francesco Fontana at Naples in 1643 noticed
irregularities along the inner edge of the crescent.[854] Lahire in 1700
considered them--regard being had to difference of distance--to be much
more strongly marked than those visible in the moon.[855] Schroeter's
assertions to the same effect, though scouted with some unnecessary
vehemence by Herschel,[856] have since been repeatedly confirmed;
amongst others by Maedler, De Vico, Langdon, who in 1873 saw the broken
line of the terminator with peculiar distinctness through a veil of
auroral cloud;[857] by Denning,[858] March 30, 1881, despite preliminary
impressions to the contrary, as well as by C. V. Zenger at Prague,
January 8, 1883. The great mountain mass, presumed to occasion the
periodical blunting of the southern horn, was precariously estimated by
the Lilienthal observer to rise to the prodigious height of nearly
twenty-seven miles, or just five times the elevation of Mount Everest!
Yet the phenomenon persists, whatever may be thought of the explanation.
Moreover, the speck of light beyond, interpreted as the visible sign of
a detached peak rising high enough above the encircling shadow to catch
the first and last rays of the sun, was frequently discerned by Baron
Van Ertborn in 1876;[859] while an object near the northern horn of the
crescent, strongly resembling a lunar ring-mountain, was delineated both
by De Vico in 1841 and by Denning forty years later.

We are almost equally sure that Venus, as that the earth is encompassed
with an atmosphere. Yet, notwithstanding luminous appearances plainly
due to refraction during the transits both of 1761 and 1769, Schroeter,
in 1792, took the initiative in coming to a definite conclusion on the
subject.[860] It was founded, first, on the rapid diminution of
brilliancy towards the terminator, attributed to atmospheric absorption;
next, on the extension beyond a semicircle of the horns of the crescent;
lastly, on the presence of a bluish gleam illuminating the early hours
of the Cytherean night with what was taken to be genuine twilight. Even
Herschel admitted that sunlight, by the same effect through which the
heavenly bodies show _visibly above_ our horizons while still
_geometrically below_ them, appeared to be bent round the shoulder of
the globe of Venus. Ample confirmation of the fact has since been
afforded. At Dorpat in May, 1849, the planet being within 3 deg. 26' of
inferior conjunction, Maedler found the arms of waning light upon the
