that had been detained on account of an accident at Albany; so the
steamer was decidedly overcrowded.

"There are more people aboard," thought Jack, "than would make two such
villages as Crofield, unless you should count in the farms and farmers.
I'm glad I came, if it's only to know what a steamboat is.  I haven't
spent a cent of my nine dollars yet, either."

Here and there he wandered, until he came out at the stern, and had a
look at the foaming wake of the boat, and at the river and the heights
behind, and at the grand spectacle of another great steamboat, full of
lights, on her way up the river.  He had seen any number of smaller
boats, and of white-sailed sloops and schooners, and now, along the
eastern bank, he heard and saw the whizzing rush of several railway
trains.

"I'd rather be here," he thought.  "The people there can't see half so
much as I can."

Not one of them, moreover, had been traveling all over the world with
Mr. Guilderaufenberg, and hearing and about kings and their "police."

Getting back to his old place was easier, now that he began to
understand the plan of the Columbia; but, when Jack returned, his
camp-stool was gone, and he had to sit down on the bare deck or to
stand up.  He did both, by turns, and he was beginning to feel very
weary of sight-seeing, and to wish that he were sound asleep, or that
to-morrow had come.

"It's a warm night," he said to himself, "and it isn't so very dark,
even now the moon has gone down.  Why--it's getting lighter!  Is it
morning?  Can we be so near the city as that?"

There was a growing rose-tint upon a few clouds in the western sky, as
the sun began to look at them from below the range of heights,
eastward, but the sun had not yet risen.

Jack was all but breathless.  He walked as far forward as he could go,
and forgot all about being sleepy or tired.

"There," he said, after a little, "those must be the Palisades."

Out came his guide-book, and he tried to fit names to the places along
shore.

"More sailing-vessels," he said, "and there goes another train.  We
must be almost there."

He was right, and he was all one tingle of excitement as the Columbia
swept steadily on down the widening river.

There came a pressure of a hand upon his shoulder.

"Goot-morning, my poy.  De city ees coming.  How you feels?"

"First-rate," said Jack.  "It won't be long, now, will it?"

"You wait a leetle.  I sleep some.  It vas a goot varm night.  De
varmest night I efer had vas in Egypt, and de coldest vas in Moscow.
De shtove it went out, and ve vas cold, I dell you, dill dot shtove vas
kindle up again!  Dere vas dwenty-two peoples in dot room, and dot safe
us.  Ye keep von another varm.  Dot ees de trouble mit Russia.  De
finest vedder in all the vorlt is een America,--and dere ees more
vedder of all kinds."

On, on, and now Jack's blood tingled more sharply, to his very fingers
and toes, for they swept beyond Spuyten Duyvil Creek, which his friend
pointed out, and the city began to make its appearance.

"It's on both sides," said Jack.  "No, that's New Jersey"--and he read
the names on that side from his guidebook.

Masts, wharves, buildings, and beyond them spires, and--and Jack grew
dizzy trying to think of that endless wilderness of streets and houses.
He heard what Mr. Guilderaufenberg said about the islands in the
harbor, the forts, the ferries, and yet he did not hear it plainly,
because it was too much to take in all at once.

"Now I brings de ladies," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg, "an' ve eats
breakfast, ven ve all gets to de Hotel Dantzic.  Come!"

Jack took one long, sweeping look at the city, so grand and so
beautiful under the newly risen sun, and followed.


At that same hour a dark-haired girl sat by an open window in the
village of Mertonville.  She had arisen and dressed herself, early as
it was, and she held in her hand a postal-card, which had arrived for
her from Albany the night before.

"By this time," she said, "Jack is in the city.  Oh, how I wish I were
with him!"

She was silent after that, but she had hardly said it before one of two
small boys, who had been pounding one another with pillows in a very
small bedroom in Crofield, suddenly threw his pillow at the other, and
exclaimed:

"I s'pose Jack's there by this time, Jimmy!"




CHAPTER XII.

IN A NEW WORLD.

Jack Ogden stood like a boy in a dream, as the "Columbia" swept
gracefully into her dock and was made fast.  Her swing about was helped
by the outgoing tide, that foamed and swirled around the projecting
piers.

A hurrying crowd of people was thronging out of the "Columbia," but
Jack's German friend did not join them.

"De ceety vill not roon avay," he said, calmly.  "You comes mit me."

They went to the cabin for the ladies, and Jack noticed how much
baggage the rest were carrying.  He took a satchel from Miss
Hildebrand, and then the Polish lady, with a grateful smile, allowed
him to take another.

"Dose crowds ees gone," remarked Mr. Guilderaufenberg.  "Ve haf our
chances now."

Afterward, Jack had a confused memory of walking over a wide gang-plank
that led into a babel.  Miss Hildebrand held him by his left arm while
the two other ladies went with Mr. Guilderaufenberg.  They came out
into a street, between two files of men who shook their whips, shouted,
and pointed at a line of carriages.  Miss Hildebrand told Jack that
they could reach their hotel sooner by the elevated railway.

"He look pale," she thought, considerately.  "He did not sleep all
night.  He never before travel on a steamboat!"

Jack meanwhile had a new sensation.

"This is the city!" he was saying to himself.  "I'm really here.  There
are no crowds, because it's Sunday,--but then!"

After walking a few minutes they came to a corner, where Mr.
Guilderaufenberg turned and said to Jack:

"Dees ees Proadvay.  Dere ees no oder street in de vorlt dat ees so
long.  Look dees vay und den look dat vay!  So!  Eh?  Dot ees Proadvay.
Dere ees no oder city in de vorlt vere a beeg street keep Soonday!"

It was indeed a wonderful street to the boy from Crofield, and he felt
the wonder of it; and he felt the wonder of the Sunday quiet and of the
closed places of business.

[Illustration: _On Broadway, at last!_]

"There's a policeman," he remarked to Mr. Guilderaufenberg.

"So!" said the German, smiling; "but he ees a beople's boleeceman.  Eef
he vas a king's boleeceman, I vas not here.  I roon avay, or I vas lock
up.  Jack, ven you haf dodge some king's boleecemen, like me, you vish
you vas American, choost like me now, und vas safe!"

"I believe I should," said Jack, politely; but his head was not still
for an instant.  His eyes and his thoughts were busily at work.  He had
expected to see tall and splendid buildings, and had even dreamed of
them.  How he had longed and hoped and planned to get to this very
place!  He had seen pictures of the city, but the reality was
nevertheless a delightful surprise.

Miss Hildebrand pointed out Trinity Church, and afterward St. Paul's.

"Maybe I'll go to one of those big churches, to-day," said Jack.

"Oh, no," said Miss Hildebrand.  "You find plenty churches up-town.
Not come back so far."

"I shall know where these are, any way," Jack replied.

After a short walk they came to City Hall Square.

"There!" Jack exclaimed.  "I know this place!  It's just like the
pictures in my guide-book.  There's the Post-office, the City
Hall,--everything!"

"Come," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg, beginning to cross the street.  "Ve
must go ofer und take de elevated railvay."

"Come along, Meester Jack Ogden," added Mrs. Guilderaufenberg.

"There are enough people here now," said Jack, as they walked
along--"Sunday or no Sunday!"

"Of course," said Miss Hildebrand, pointing with a hand that lifted a
small satchel.  "That's the elevated railway station over there, across
both streets.  There, too, is where you go to the suspension bridge to
Brooklyn, over the East River.  You see, when we go by.  You see
to-morrow.  Not much, now.  I am so hungry!"

"I want to see everything," said Jack; "but I'm hungry, too.  Why,
we're going upstairs!"

In a minute more Jack was sitting by an open window of an elevated
railway car.  This was another entirely new experience, and Jack found
it hard to rid himself of the notion that possibly the whole
long-legged railway might tumble down or the train suddenly shoot off
from the track and drop into the street.

"Dees ees bretty moch American," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg, as Jack
stared out at the third-story windows of the buildings.  "You nefer vas
here before?  So!  Den you nefer feels again choost like now.  You ees
fery moch a poy.  I dell you, dere is not soch railvays in Europe; I
vonce feel like you now.  Dot vas ven I first come here.  It vas not
Soonday; it vas a day for de flags.  I dell you vat it ees: ven dot
American feels goot, he hang out hees flag.  Shtars und shtripes--I
like dot flag!  I look at some boleece, und den I like dot flag again,
for dey vas not hoont, hoont, hoont, for poor Fritz von
Guilderaufenberg, for dot he talk too moch!"

"It's pretty quiet all along.  All the stores seem to be closed," said
Jack, looking down at the street below.

"Eet ees so shtill!" remarked Mr. Guilderaufenberg.  "I drafel de vorlt
ofer und I find not dees Soonday.  In Europe, it vas not dere to keep.
I dell you, ven dere ees no more Soonday, den dere ees no more America!
So!  Choost you remember dot, my poy, from a man dot vas hoonted all
ofer Europe!"

Jack was quite ready to believe Mr. Guilderaufenberg.  He had been used
to even greater quiet, in Crofield, for after all there seemed to be a
great deal going on.

The train they were in made frequent stops, and it did not seem long to
Jack before Mrs. Guilderaufenberg and the other ladies got up and began
to gather their parcels and satchels.  Jack was ready when his friends
led the way to the door.

"I'll be glad to get off," he thought.  "I am afraid Aunt Melinda would
say I was traveling on Sunday."

The conductor threw open the car door and shouted, and Mr.
Guilderaufenberg hurried forward exclaiming: "Come!  Dees ees our
station!"

Jack had taken even more than his share of the luggage; and now his arm
was once more grasped by Miss Hildebrand.

"I'll take good care of her," he said to himself, as she pushed along
out of the cars.  "All I need to do is to follow the rest."

He did not understand what she said to the others in German, but it
was: "I'll bring Mr. Ogden.  He will know how to look out for himself,
very soon."

She meant to see him safely to the Hotel Dantzic, that morning; and the
next thing Jack knew he was going down a long flight of stairs, to the
sidewalk, while Miss Hildebrand was explaining that part of the city
they were in.  Even while she was talking, and while he was looking in
all directions, she wheeled him suddenly to the left, and they came to
a halt.

"Hotel Dantzic," read Jack aloud, from the sign.  "It's a tall
building; but it's very thin."

The ladies went into the waiting-room, while Jack followed Mr.
Guilderaufenberg into the office.  The German was welcomed by the
proprietor as if he were an old acquaintance.

A moment afterward, Mr. Guilderaufenberg turned away from the desk and
said to Jack:

"My poy, I haf a room for you.  Eet ees high oop, but eet ees goot; und
you bays only feefty cent a day.  You bay for von veek, now.  You puys
vot you eats vere you blease in de ceety."

The three dollars and a half paid for the first week made the first
break in Jack's capital of nine dollars.

"Any way," he thought, when he paid it, "I have found a place to sleep
in.  Money'll go fast in the city, and I must look out.  I'll put my
baggage in my room and then come down to breakfast."

"You breakfast mit us dees time," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg, kindly.
"Den you not see us more, maybe, till you comes to Vashington."

Jack got his key and the number of his room and was making his way to
the foot of a stairway when a very polite man said to him:

"This way, sir.  This way to the elevator.  Seventh floor, sir."

Jack had heard and read of elevators, but it was startling to ride in
one for the first time.  It was all but full when he got in, and after
it started, his first thought was:

"How it's loaded!  What if the rope should break!"

It stopped to let a man out, and started and stopped again and again,
but it seemed only a few long, breathless moments before the man in
charge of it said; "Seventh, sir!"

The moment Jack was in his room he exclaimed:

"Isn't this grand, though?  It's only about twice as big as that
stateroom on the steamboat.  I can feel at home here."

It was a pleasant little room, and Jack began at once to make ready for
breakfast.

He was brushing his hair when he went to the window, and as he looked
out he actually dropped the brush in his surprise.

"Where's my guide-book?" he said.  "I know where I am, though.  That
must be the East River.  Away off there is Long Island.  Looks as if it
was all city.  Maybe that is Brooklyn,--I don't know.  Isn't this a
high house?  I can look down on all the other roofs.  Jingo!"

He hurried through his toilet, meanwhile taking swift glances out of
the window.  When he went out to the elevator, he said to himself:

"I'll go down by the stairs some day, just to see how it seems.  A
storm would whistle like anything, round the top of this building!"

When he got down, Mr. Guilderaufenberg was waiting for him, and the
party of ladies went in to breakfast, in a restaurant which occupied
nearly all of the lower floor of the hotel.

"I understand," said Jack, good-humoredly, in reply to an explanation
from Miss Hildebrand.  "You pay for just what you order, and no more,
and they charge high for everything but bread.  I'm beginning to learn
something of city ways."

During all that morning, anybody who knew Jack Ogden would have had to
look at him twice, he had been so quiet and sedate; but the old,
self-confident look gradually returned during breakfast.

"Ve see you again at supper," said Mr. Guilderaufenberg, as they arose.
"Den ve goes to Vashington.  You valks out und looks about.  You easy
finds your vay back.  Goot-bye till den."

Jack shook hands with his friends, and walked out into the street.

"Well, here I am!" he thought.  "This is the city.  I'm all alone in
it, too, and I must find my own way.  I can do it, though.  I'm glad
it's Sunday, so that I needn't go straight to work."


At that moment, the nine o'clock bells were ringing in two wooden
steeples in the village of Crofield; but the bell of the third steeple
was silent, down among the splinters of what had been the pulpit of its
own meeting-house.  The village was very still, but there was something
peculiar in the quiet in the Ogden homestead.  Even the children went
about as if they missed something or were listening for somebody they
expected.

There were nine o'clock bells, also, in Mertonville, and there was a
ring at the door-bell of the house of Mr. Murdoch, the editor.

"Why, Elder Holloway!" exclaimed Mrs. Murdoch, when she opened the
door.  "Please to walk in."

"Thank you, Mrs. Murdoch, but I can't," he said, speaking as if
hurried, "Please tell Miss Ogden there's a class of sixteen girls in
our Sunday school, and the teacher's gone; and I've taken the liberty
of promising for her that she'll take charge of it."

"I'll call her," said Mrs. Murdoch.

"No, no," replied the elder.  "Just tell her it's a nice class, and
that the girls expect her to come, and we'll be ever go much obliged to
her.  Good-morning!"--and he was gone.

"Oh, Mrs. Murdoch!" exclaimed Mary, when the elder's message was given.
"I can't!  I don't know them!  I suppose I ought; but I'd have said no,
if I had seen him."

The elder had thought of that, perhaps, and had provided against any
refusal by retreating.  As he went away he said to himself:

"She can do it, I know; if she does, it'll help me carry out my plan."

He looked, just then, as if it were a very good plan, but he did not
reveal it.

Mary Ogden persuaded Mrs. Murdoch to take her to another church that
morning, so that she need not meet any of her new class.

"I hope Jack will go to church in the city," she said; and her mother
said the same thing to Aunt Melinda over in Crofield.

Jack could not have given any reason why his feet turned westward, but
he went slowly along for several blocks, while he stared at the rows of
buildings, at the sidewalks, at the pavements, and at everything else,
great and small.  He was actually leaving the world in which he had
