"That settles that," said Nuwell, more philosophically then Maya would
have expected. "Our only hope is to find a groundcar."

That necessitated another search, but at last they found the motor pool.
And there were three groundcars, all in various stages of breakdown or
dismantlement.

"It looks like we'll have to walk, Nuwell," said Maya.

Nuwell shook his head.

"I checked the chart carefully," he said. "The oxygen supply of a
marsuit won't take us either back to the Canfell Farm or to Ophir, even
with extra tanks. We're just going to have to cannibalize two of these
machines and repair us a groundcar."

"But, Nuwell, how long will that take?"

"I don't know," he admitted. "It looks like it may be quite a job. I
expect it will take two or three weeks, but that's the only way we're
going to get out of here."

He looked at her speculatively.

"It's a shame we aren't already married," he said. "This would provide
us with a honeymoon, of a sort, out here by ourselves in the desert."

"Well, we aren't," she said flatly. "And we won't be until we get back
to Mars City."

"That's true," he said. "Well, the only thing we can do for tonight is
to have supper and find the rooms that Goat assigned us when we were
here before. I hope he left some beds intact in those, or some of the
other rooms. If not, we may have some uncomfortable nights ahead of us."




12


The two Dark Kensingtons and Happy Thurbelow walked along one of the
pathways between the vats, Happy trailing a bit behind. Somewhere near
them, they knew, Shadow accompanied them.

The place was dim, with the moist dimness of a swamp. The source of the
light that filtered through the faint mist and seemed to permeate the
air was not discernible, and the roof of this underground world was lost
in the darkness above them. The placid surface of the water gleamed
vaguely in the vats they passed, and the pale-green tangle of vegetation
rose above and around them, sometimes drooping over the paths like
skinny arms that sought to detain them.

"What I don't understand," said Dark the younger, "is that our memories
coincide exactly, up to a point which you say is a time twenty-five
years ago. My memories are just as genuine as you say yours are; they
aren't something someone told me, but real memories of things that
happened to me, things I felt and did. If they're both genuine sets of
memories, how can it be explained? Are we the same person, who was
somehow split into two distinct individuals?"

"I can only guess at the explanation, but I have a theory," answered Old
Beard. "You are much younger than I am. I would estimate that you're
twenty-five years younger than I am. My memories are consecutive and
complete: I remember not only the earlier things you say you remember,
but the events of these past twenty-five years, without a break. You say
you suffered a period of amnesia, and your next consecutive memory is of
being with Martians in the Icaria Desert."

"That would appear to give you an advantage in claiming to be the real
Dark Kensington," agreed Dark with a smile. "But, if you are, who am I?
How is it that I remember being Dark Kensington?"

"It's entirely possible that, for some reason, my earlier memories were
grafted onto you as your own," replied Old Beard. "I don't know how this
would be done, perhaps through very deep and extensive hypnosis. The
Martians, as well as we can tell anything about them at all, are experts
in such mental fields, a relic of the ancient science they're legended
to have had when their civilizations covered Mars.

"I worked with Martians very closely for long periods during the early
days of the rebellion--the Phoenix, as you say they call it now--and
they may very well have recorded my memory pattern through some means I
don't know anything about and for reasons I can't imagine."

"That sounds reasonable," conceded Dark. "But that still leaves
unanswered the questions: Who am I, and what's happened to my memories
of the past twenty-five years?"

"I'm afraid I can't answer that," replied Old Beard.

In the dimness ahead of them, they discerned a group of nude Toughs
approaching, swaggering down the path. They turned aside and found a
recess in the vegetation in which they could wait until the Toughs
passed and went on their way. The Toughs were aggressive, and
insensately brutal, and a meeting with them could only mean trouble.

"Happy's explained the situation here, as well as he could, but I'm
afraid it wasn't a very adequate explanation," said Dark as they huddled
in the shadowed recess. "Could you tell me more about it, and explain
how you happen to be here?"

"Happy is very intelligent, for a Jelly, but none of the Jellies are
exceptionally bright," answered Old Beard, with a touch of affection in
his voice. "I'll outline it to you as briefly as I can.

"As your memories--or transplanted memories--indicate, I was one of a
group of Martian colonists who joined forces to work at what, at first,
appeared to be a theoretical and fantastic project: the development of
the ability to live under natural Martian conditions, without dependence
on the regular importation of extremely expensive imports from Earth. As
you know, this project very shortly began to lose its fantastic
qualities and appear to be definitely within the realm of possible
realization.

"Because of the differing background and orientation of those of us who
attempted this project, two approaches were adopted. One, based on
advancing terrestrial research into the field of extrasensory
perception, was aimed at developing telepathic and telekinetic powers so
that food, oxygen, machinery and other essentials could be teleported
directly from Earth into the martian domes without dependence on the
spacelines. The other, based on more orthodox science, was aimed at
genetic development of a human type that could live _without_ these
importations, on native Martian food and in the Martian atmosphere.

"As you know, the government banned these experiments and we retreated
into the desert to carry them on despite the ban. From what you tell me
of the extent of your memories, what you do not know is the reason
behind the ban, which we discovered--or, at least, I did--only after we
had been betrayed and the government had raided and broken up our
experimental colony.

"The spacelines, as one might have guessed, were responsible. They saw
that the success of the experiments would destroy their lucrative
business. These spacelines, led by the Mars Corporation, which later
absorbed the others and gained a monopoly, brought political pressure to
bear and got the project banned.

"I had heard reports that a great many of my colleagues escaped and
formed a rebel organization that carried on the work secretly and
illegally, but I was never able to learn details of it until you came
and told me of the activities in which you have been engaged. You see, I
haven't been out of these caves in a quarter of a century."

Shadow appeared at the recess to report to them that the Toughs had
passed on. How he did it, Dark was unable to determine surely, for he
could hear no words spoken. Either Shadow communicated by subtle
gestures or by tones beyond Dark's powers of hearing, but both Old Beard
and Happy seemed to understand him readily.

"How do you happen to be here, Old Beard?" asked Dark as they left the
recess and resumed their progress down the walkways.

"I was captured when the government broke up the experimental groups,"
answered Old Beard. "I was the leader of the section of the experiments
dealing with extrasensory perception, and, instead of executing me at
once, they tried to persuade me to continue this work for the government
along specific lines and under supervision. I refused, because I knew
that anything I helped them develop would not be used for the benefit of
the Martian colonists, but for greater profits for the spacelines.

"At last I was able to escape into these underground caverns where they
grow food plants hydroponically and sell them to supplement the produce
of the dome farms and the gardens in the dome cities. These caverns are
extensive and, with the friendship and help of the Jellies, I've evaded
discovery for twenty-five years."

"Just who and what are the Jellies?" asked Dark. "I haven't been able to
get a very satisfactory answer to that question from Happy."

"They're human experimental animals," answered Old Beard. "The
terrestrial food plants grown hydroponically and sold in the dome cities
actually are a supplemental sideline to the real purpose of this place.
Marscorp is conducting its own experiments here, with a crew of expert
geneticists.

"What Marscorp is trying to do is to breed native Martian plants, that
will grow in the open lowlands without expensive oxygenation and
irrigation, that are not poisonous to humans and can be used for food.
At the same time, they're approaching the problem from the other side,
and the Jellies are men and women whose glandular structure has been
altered in an effort to make their physiology more receptive to native
Martian vegetation. If they succeed, of course, Marscorp has just as
complete a monopoly over such a food supply as it does over imports from
Earth, but at considerably less expense."

"And the Toughs?"

"They're human experimental animals, too, based on a different type of
glandular alteration. They're neither as docile nor as intelligent as
the Jellies, so they can't be used for slave labour as the Jellies can.
About the only way they're ever used is as occasional goon squads to
terrorize the Jellies and keep them in line."

"You've been here twenty-five years and have never been able to escape?"
asked Dark incredulously.

"This place isn't guarded," replied Old Beard, with a wry smile. "They
don't have to guard it. All they have to guard are the supply room where
the marsuits are kept and the motor pool of groundcars. This place is in
the middle of the Desert of Candor, and no one can live in the Martian
desert without oxygen."

They came now to one of the walls of the underground cavern, and Old
Beard led them suddenly into a fissure that was well concealed from the
walkways by a tangled screen of vegetation. They stumbled along a narrow
passageway for a few feet, and emerged into a rude shaft, around the
walls of which a roughly-chiseled and steep stairway led upward into
pitch darkness. Here Old Beard halted.

"When I told you there's no way of escape here, it was not that I
haven't tried many times," he said to Dark.

"This shaft leads up into the walls of the structure above--above,
although it is still underground--and I have been up there often at
night. It has long been my hope that I might be able to get a marsuit or
a groundcar and make my escape, but they are kept locked up and always
guarded, against the Jellies and the Toughs.

"I want to take you up and give you an idea of the place now, and later
perhaps you will have some ideas to contribute. Happy and Shadow will
stay down here until we get back."

Old Beard mounted the steep steps slowly, and Dark followed at his
heels. Although the bottom of the "well" was lighted with the same dim
light as that which spread throughout the entire underground area, there
was no light at all higher up, and they had to feel their way carefully
lest they fall off the narrow steps.

At the top, Old Beard stopped and Dark bumped sharply into him.

"I'm going to move down the space between the walls," Old Beard
whispered. "Hold onto my hand and follow me. But don't say anything or
make any more noise than you can help, because anyone beyond the wall
may be able to hear you."

They moved ahead. The way was very narrow, very dark and very difficult,
and frequently was choked with ventilator pipes or tangles of wiring.
They had gone some forty or fifty feet, when Old Beard stopped.

By Old Beard's movements, Dark knew he was working at something. Then a
section of ventilator pipe came away from a ventilator grill, and faint
light illuminated the space in which they crouched. In this dimness, Old
Beard gestured to Dark to look through the ventilator.

Peering out, Dark saw that they were near the ceiling of a large,
high-ceilinged room. In it, under glaring lights, a group of half a
dozen white-clad men were working with knives and other instruments on
the body of a man, either anaesthetized or dead, which lay on a surgical
table.

Old Beard put his face against the grill next to Dark's, and the two men
watched the scene below for a few moments. Then one of the men around
the table raised his head, revealing a thin face, with watery blue eyes
and a straggly goatee.

The two men inside the wall gasped as one man.

"_Father!_"

The single loud word was torn from Dark's throat without his volition,
without his actually realizing he had spoken.

The heads of the men in the room jerked up at the cry, and they looked
around and at each other, with puzzled expressions. Old Beard clapped a
firm hand over Dark's mouth and hissed in his ear:

"Fool! Let's get out of here!"

As quietly as possible, they made their way back. Through the ventilator
behind them came the murmur of querulous voices.

When they had climbed back down the stairs and, with Happy and Shadow,
made their way back through the fissure, Old Beard fixed penetrating
eyes on Dark and said:

"I told you to keep quiet up there! What was that exclamation all
about?"

"It's something very strange," murmured Dark, his face thoughtful and
bemused. "But you evidently recognized that man, too. Who is he?"

"Yes, I know him very well," answered Old Beard, with deep bitterness in
his tone. "That's Goat Hennessey. But that's the first time I've seen
him in twenty-five years. He must have just come here recently."

"Goat Hennessey? I heard of him when I was in Mars City."

"Goat Hennessey was one of my most trusted friends," said Old Beard. "If
you bear my earlier memories, I'm surprised you didn't recognize him as
Goat Hennessey, too."

"I recognized him as someone else," said Dark in a low voice.

"We worked together," went on Old Beard. "I was a leader in the effort
to solve our problem through extrasensory perception, and he was the
major scientist in the group attempting to solve it by genetic change.
We worked together and we went into the desert together with the others
when the government banned our experiments.

"But Goat was the man who sold out. He betrayed us to the
government--for what price I don't know. And when government agents
raided us and broke up our organization and captured me, Goat Hennessey
kidnapped my young and pregnant wife, and I never saw her again.

"I'm glad Goat Hennessey is here, because now I can get to him. And when
I can reach him, I'm going to kill him. I'd like to kill him as slowly
and painfully as he killed the heart inside of me!"

As Old Beard spoke these last words, his face was tense, his fists
clenched and a somber fire burned in his pale eyes. Then, slowly, the
fire died out and he turned his eyes, once more cool and rational, a
little quizzical, on Dark.

"Didn't you call him 'father'?" he asked.

"Yes," said Dark in a low voice. "But I'd rather not talk about it right
now."

He looked at Old Beard, and seemed to be ridding himself, with an
effort, of a deep introversion.

"There's one thing that I've remembered as a result of seeing Goat
Hennessey," said Dark in a firmer voice. "This place isn't too far from
a place in the Xanthe Desert where Goat conducted some significant
