The ball was thrown up, and the game began.  Macgreggor had the first
stroke.  He sent the ball a considerable distance towards the nearest
hole.

Ernest had then to strike his ball.  If he struck it very hard it might
go beyond the hole, which would have thrown him back; and if he did not
send it as far as the ball first struck, Macgreggor's party would have
had the right to strike twice before his would again strike the ball.

Ellis at first thought that there was nothing in the game, but he soon
perceived that there was a good deal of science required, and that
nothing but constant practical experience could make a person a good
player.  He, however, as Bracebridge was doing, gave his mind entirely
to it, and by listening to the remarks made by Macgreggor, he learned
the rules and many of the manoeuvres golf players are accustomed to
practise.  He very soon got deeply interested in the game, as did,
indeed, all the party; and perhaps had they been asked at the moment
what they considered one of the most delightful things to do all day,
they would all have pronounced in favour of playing golf.

Golf is a most difficult game to describe.  I should liken it, in some
respects, to billiards on a grand scale, except that the balls have to
be put into holes instead of pockets; that they have to be struck with
the side instead of with the end of a club, and that there is no such
thing as cannoning.

Bracebridge sent his ball very cleverly a few yards only beyond
Macgreggor's, which called forth the latter's warm approval.  Then
Gregson struck the ball, and sent it but a very short distance.  Buttar
next sent theirs nearly up to the hole, and Bouldon then going on, and
being afraid of going beyond the hole, sent it not so far, as Buttar had
struck their ball.

"Two, two," shouted Bracebridge.  "Now, Knowles, hit very gingerly, and
let me see if I cannot send our ball in."

Knowles rolled the ball within a few feet of the hole, and Ernest, who,
in consequence of Bouldon's miss, was now allowed to strike, guided by
his correct and well-practised eye, sent it clean into the hole, to the
great delight of Macgreggor, who was pleased at having so apt a pupil.

Bracebridge now took his ball out of the hole, and struck it on.
Macgreggor, however, was not long in catching him up, but Tom Bouldon
was a great drawback to Macgreggor.  He had not calmness enough to play
the game well.  He was continually missing the ball, or sending it
beyond the hole, while Macgreggor, and Bracebridge, and Ellis
especially, always considered how far it was necessary to send it, and
took their measures accordingly.

Few games show the character of a person more than does that of golf,
although all, more or less, afford some index to those who are
attentively looking on.  A boy, when playing, should endeavour to keep a
watch over himself as much as on all other occasions, and he should
especially endeavour to practise that very important duty of restraining
his temper.  Boys are too apt to fancy that they may say and do what
they like, and often they abuse each other, and make use of language of
which, it is to be hoped, they would be ashamed when out of the
playground.

While the game was going on, and drawing near its completion,
Bracebridge being ahead, a number of boys came out to see what was going
forward.  From their remarks, there was not much chance of the game
becoming popular.  There was not enough activity and bustle in it to
please them.  It was not to be compared for a moment with cricket, or
rackets, or football, or even hockey.

Among the spectators were Blackall and Dawson, and the new fellow,
Barber.  His eye was ranging over the heath.  Ernest and his party were
then at a distance, playing up towards the last hole.

"Well, to my mind, after all, it is only like a game of marbles, played
with a little leathern ball instead of a stone, and a stick instead of
one's knuckles," sneered Blackall.

Dawson echoed the sentiment.  "How that fellow Bracebridge can find
anything to like in it, I do wonder," he remarked.  "In Macgreggor, who
has been brought up to it, it is a different affair."

"Hollo! who is that fellow?" exclaimed Barber, as the players drew near.

"Which do you mean?" said Dawson.  "That natty-looking fellow, who is
taking the ball?  He's a genius; and if you were to take him at his own
valuation, there is not such another fellow in the school, or perhaps in
the world."

Dawson never lost an opportunity of having a fling at Bracebridge, who
had passed so rapidly by him in the school, and had beat him at all
their games.

"No, no; I mean a lanky-limbed, long-faced fellow, who looks as if his
face was made of butter.  I think I know him," said Barber.

"Oh, you mean that miserable wretch Ellis," snarled Blackall.  "He's a
fellow born to be licked.  He is of no other earthly use.  I'll give you
leave to thrash him as much as you like; it will save me the trouble,
and I shall be much obliged to you."

It might well save Blackall trouble; for had he ventured to touch Ellis,
he knew full well that he should have got into it.

"Yes; if Ellis is his name, I am certain it is him," observed Barber, as
Ellis drew nearer.  "He was at my last school, and I wish you fellows
joy of him."

"Why, do you know anything against him?" asked Blackall, eagerly,
thinking that he might have the satisfaction of annoying Bracebridge,
and Ellis's other friends.

"Oh! you know we never say anything against a fellow out of school,
however bad he may be," said Barber, looking virtuous.  "All I can say
is, he is not the sort of chap I should choose for my associate.  He may
have altered, you know.  Few fellows remain always the same.  When I see
a fellow get into rows, smash windows, screw off knockers, and show that
he has some spirit, I always have hopes of him; but that fellow was
always a sneak, and, in the end, proved something a great deal worse.
I'll not say anything more about him."

"Oh, I wish you would!" said Blackall.  "If there is anything against a
fellow, I like to know it.  I am rather particular in my company; and
though I do not associate with him now, I might be tempted to do so if
he came back some week with a box full of grub, or with anything else
worth having."

This sally of wit was fully appreciated by his auditors, who laughed
heartily, or I should rather say loudly, at it.

Poor Ellis meantime had been so intent on watching the game, that he had
not observed their approach, till the voices reached his ear.  He looked
up, and then he saw Barber watching him, with a sneer on his
countenance.  He recognised him at once as his old school-fellow.

Bracebridge was standing near.  "I'll go and speak with him at once," he
said quietly, "It may be that he will not think it necessary to repeat
the vile story that was told of me at our former school.  If I pass him
by as a stranger, it will make him more inclined to think ill of me."

Ellis acted according to the impulse of the moment.  He walked up to
Barber, and, putting out his hand, said, "Don't you remember me,
Barber!"

"Perfectly," said Barber, with great emphasis, and a sneer on his lips.
"One remembers people sometimes whom one would rather forget."

"What do you mean, Barber?" said Ellis.  "You are not so cruel, so
unjust, as--"

"Put what construction you like on my meaning," answered Barber.  "I am
a straightforward fellow.  I say what I think; and of all the characters
I have ever met, I hate most that of a canting hypocrite.  I never trust
such an one.  You know best what such a fellow is capable of doing."

Ellis stood by listening calmly, but not unmoved, to this cutting
speech.  He turned pale and red, and seemed to have difficulty in
drawing his breath.  He looked for a moment imploringly at Barber, but
saw only a sneer on his countenance; so gulping down all the feelings
which were rising in his bosom, and which, had he allowed them to break
forth, would not have tended to harmony, he turned away and rejoined
Bracebridge, who was waiting for him.

"There he goes," sneered Barber.  "Just like him.  Had any fellow spoken
to me as I did to him, I would have knocked him over with my golf club;
but he did not even move his hand as if he would have struck me."

After hearing these remarks, Blackall, Dawson, and other boys of that
set, thought Barber a very fine spirited fellow, and came to the
conclusion that Ellis was not only a regular sneak, but that he was
probably a convicted thief, or liar, or something fully as bad, if not
worse.  He said nothing after rejoining his friends, but his spirits
sank lower than Bracebridge had ever before seen them.  He seemed
incapable even of doing his ordinary lessons in the way he had been
accustomed to get through them.  Even the Doctor and the masters
observed the change.  By degrees, too, many of the boys with whom he had
been accustomed to join in their various games began to look shy at him.
One declined to play with him, and then another, and another, till at
last he found that he was cut by the whole school, with the exception of
the three or four friends who generally sided with Bracebridge--Buttar,
Bouldon, Gregson, and little Eden.  Poor fellow! it was a sore trial.
Whatever the fault of which he had been guilty, he had long ago heartily
repented of it.  Of that, at all events, there could be no doubt.  It
seemed hard that he should be compelled to suffer, supposing even that
he was guilty, when a new sphere was open to him; and the better
disposed boys, even though they mostly went with the tide, could not
help feeling that Barber had acted in a very ungenerous way in bringing
tales from one school to another, and in injuring the character of one
who had always proved himself so harmless and kind-hearted a fellow.

Bracebridge did not hesitate to show his opinion of Barber on all
occasions, and took every opportunity of marking his regard for Ellis,
and in showing his disbelief of the tales current against him.  Thus the
last half of the year drew on, and winter was once more approaching.



CHAPTER NINE.

AN ATTEMPT TO INTRODUCE FAGGING--A GAME AT HOCKEY.

The half-year sped on much as usual.  Not a gleam of sunshine burst
forth to dispel the clouds which hung lowering over the fair fame of
poor Ellis.  He was either too proud or too indifferent as to what was
said of him to take any notice of the various tales--different versions
of the same story--flying about the school to his discredit.  Now and
then Bracebridge heard of them, but he invariably replied that he
believed them to be utterly false, and he always treated the boy who
ventured to begin to narrate them to him with the scorn which a
tale-bearer deserves.  The tales at last reached the ears of the
masters, but in so indefinite a form that they could take no notice of
them, much less report them to the Doctor; but they had the bad effect
of making them look upon poor Ellis as a black sheep, and of inducing
them to treat him with suspicion.  Wrong motives were assigned to all he
did, and, with one exception, no one spoke kindly or encouragingly to
him.  The exception was Monsieur Malin.  Ellis's clever contrivance with
the kite and carriage had won his regard; and though, to be sure, his
reasoning might have been very incorrect, he could not fancy that so
ingenious a boy could have been guilty of the conduct alleged against
him, and which had brought him into such general disrepute.  He talked
the subject over with Bracebridge, who was delighted to find that Ellis
had so powerful a friend.  Monsieur Malin determined, therefore, to
support Ellis.  He called him up one day, and asked him if he would like
to learn French.

Ellis said, "Yes, of him; if he could get leave."

"Well, if you cannot get leave, I will teach you myself in the
play-hours, or at any odd times.  You stay in so much, and play so
little with the other boys, that you will not mind that, I know," he
said, in a kind encouraging voice.  "You will learn soon, I know, and
then we will walk together, and talk French, and you will learn more
rapidly than any one else."

"Thank you, sir! indeed, thank you!" said poor Ellis, the tears coming
into his eyes.  "It is very kind to take so much trouble with a person
like me.  I will do whatever you tell me."

"Then write home, and get leave to learn, and I will tell you what you
shall do in the meantime," replied the French master.  "Get into your
head as large a vocabulary of words as you can collect.  Put down in a
little pocket-book the French and English of everything you can think
of.  Thus: write down, a boy, a man, a book, a desk, and I will show you
how to pronounce them properly.  Here is a book; accept it from me; I
got it on purpose for you.  Now write down a boy; now the French,
garcon.  The _c_ you hear is soft.  Roll the _r_ well in your mouth.
Repeat it frequently."  Monsieur Malin made him write down numerous
other words, and repeated them over to him frequently till he had caught
their exact sounds.  "Now, my boy, you have learned your first French
lesson," he observed.  "Every day add as many words as these to your
vocabulary.  Begin with the substantives; go on to the adjectives, next
the verbs; then study the construction of the language; the simple rules
of grammar; and lastly, in the same manner that you have learned single
words, collect the idioms of the language.  Read constantly aloud, and
learn by heart interesting portions of modern French writings especially
the speeches of the best orators of the present day, and I can promise
you that in a very short time you will become a very fair French
scholar."

Ellis saw the wisdom of Monsieur Malin's advice, and implicitly followed
it.  Bracebridge helped him, and they in a short time were able to
converse together.  In the meantime Ellis got leave to learn French, and
some of the boys were very much surprised, and rather indignant, to find
him put in one of the upper classes.

"That's the fellow who pretended that he did not know French, and has
all the time been listening to us, and overhearing all we said,"
remarked Blackall, whose own knowledge of the language was so limited
that, at all events, it would have puzzled a Frenchman to have
comprehended him.  "It's just like the sneak," he continued.  "I wonder
how a chap like Bracebridge can patronise him, or how a big fellow like
Lemon can condescend to speak to him."

Though these remarks, as it was intended they should, reached the ears
both of Ernest and Lemon, they took no notice of them, and thus they did
Ellis no further harm.  It is very sad that I should not have to recount
the pleasant sayings and doings of my schoolfellows; but as in the world
the worst actions of people often come most prominently forward, so they
do at school, and generally make the deepest impression.  I know,
however, that even at this time there were many pleasant things said,
and amusing things done; that there was much good fellowship among us;
that we entered into our games with thorough heartiness; that we made
very satisfactory progress in our studies, and were generally happy and
contented.  Indeed, the school was thoroughly well-conducted and ably
ruled.  The dark spots I have been picturing arose entirely from the bad
tempers, dispositions, and ill-conduct of those ruled.  So it is with
this world at large.  It is admirably ordered, beautifully fashioned,
ruled with unbounded love, regularity, and justice.  Men, and men alone,
have made all the blots and stains to be found in it; they have caused
all the irregularities and disorders which abound; all the misery, all
the suffering, all the wretchedness; we see they have themselves and
themselves only to blame; that is to say, man alone is at fault; man,
and sin which man introduced, beguiled by Satan.  But up, boys!  Do not
suppose that you are to yield to this state of things; to say that so
you find them, and that so you will let them be.  No; far from that.
You are sent into the world to fight against them, to overcome them, to
strive with Satan, the prince of sin and lies, and all abominations,
with all your might and main.  It is a glorious contest; it is worth
living for, if we did but understand it aright.  The knights who went
out, as we are told of old, armed cap-a-pie, to do battle with
enchanters, and dragons, and monsters of all sorts, had not half so
glorious, so difficult, so perilous a contest to engage in.  The writers
who invented those fables had, I suspect, a pretty clear notion of what
is the true destiny of man.  The enchanters were the spirits of evil;
their necromancies the works of Satan; the dragons and monsters, the
ills, the difficulties, the obstacles to all good works which have to be
overcome.  It was not the fashion to speak out great truths plainly in
those days, as it has happily become at the present time; and so
philosophers who held them wrapped them up in fables and allegories, the
true import of which only the wisest and most sagacious could
comprehend.  The great truth that all men are sent into this world to
work, to fight, to strive with might and main, the Doctor tried to
impress on his pupils.  He found it difficult, however, to make them
understand the matter.  Many of them thought that they knew better than
he did on that subject.  Some of them had been told at home, by ignorant
servants or injudicious friends, that they were born heirs to good
fortunes; that they were to go to school, and be good boys, and get
through their lessons as well as they could, and then they would go to
Oxford or Cambridge, because most gentlemen of any pretension went
there; and then that they would be able to live at home and amuse
themselves for the rest of their lives.  Of course, such boys thought
that what the Doctor was saying could have nothing at all to do with
them, and could only refer to the children of poor people, who had
nothing to give them.  The Doctor, suspecting what was in their
thoughts, surprised them very much by propounding the doctrine that no
one was exempt from the rule; that all mankind, from the sovereign on
