
"Forgive me the discourtesy of inquiring directly," the light voice
said. "But you are Trigger Argee, aren't you?"

Quillan's hand slapped the table. He looked at Trigger and laughed.
"Better give up, Trigger! I told you you were much more widely known
than you believed."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Brule," Trigger muttered moodily to the solidopic propped upright
against the pillow before her, "you'd bug those pretty blue eyes out if
you knew who's invited me to dinner!"

Brule smiled back winningly. She lay on her cabin's bed, chin on her
crossed arms, eyes a dozen inches from the pretty blue ones. She
studied Brule's features soberly.

"Major Heslet Quillan," she announced suddenly in cold, even tones, "is
a completely impossible character!"

It was no more than the truth. She didn't mind so much that Quillan
wouldn't tell her what he thought of Lyad Ermetyne's standing on the
suspect list now--there hadn't really been much opportunity for open
conversation so far. But he and that unpleasant Belchik Pluly had
engaged in some jovial back-slapping and rib-punching when he and
Trigger went over to join Lyad's party at her request; and Quillan cried
out merrily that he and Belchik had long had one great interest in
common--ha-ha-ha! Then those two great buddies vanished together for a
full hour to take in some very special, not publicly programmed
Sensations Unlimited in the Dawn City's Inferno.

Lyad had smiled after them as they left. "Aren't men disgusting?" she
said tolerantly.

That reflected on her, didn't it? She was supposed to be very good
friends with somebody like that! Of course Quillan must have some bit of
Intelligence business in mind with Pluly, but there should be other ways
of going about it. And later, when she'd been just a little stiff with
him, Quillan had had the nerve to tell her not to be a prude, doll!

Trigger shoved the solidopic under the pillow. Then she rolled on her
side and blinked at the wall.

Naturally, Major Quillan's personal habits were none of her business. It
was just that in less than an hour he was to pick her up and take her to
the Ermetyne suite for that dinner. She was wondering how she should
behave towards him.

Reasonably pleasant but cool, she decided. But again, not too cool,
since she'd obligated herself to help him find out what the Tranest
tycooness was after. Any obvious lack of friendliness between them might
make the job more difficult.

Trigger sighed. Things were getting complicated again.

While Quillan was indulging his baser nature among the questionable
attractions of the Inferno, she'd shot three hundred of her Precol
credits on a formal black gown ... on what, yesterday, she would have
considered a rather unbelievable gown. Even at an Ermetyne dinner she
couldn't actually look dowdy in it. And then, accompanied by Gaya, who
had turned out to be a very pleasant but not very communicative
companion, she'd headed for a gambling room to make back the price of
the gown.

It hadn't worked out. The game she'd particularly studied up on turned
out to have a five hundred minimum play. Which finished that scheme. The
system she'd planned to use looked very sound, but she needed more than
one chance to try it in. She and Gaya sat down at another table, with a
different game, where you could get in for fifty credits. In eight
minutes Trigger lost a hundred and twenty and quit.

Gaya won seventy-five.

It had been an interesting day, but with some unsatisfactory aspects to
it.

She hauled the solidopic out from under the pillow again.

"And you," she told Brule warningly, "seem to be playing around with
some very bad company, my friend! Just luck I'm coming back to see you
don't get into serious trouble!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She'd showered and was studying the black gown's effect before the
mirror when the ComWeb chimed.

"Permission for audio intrusion granted," Trigger said casually without
looking around. She was getting used to this sort of thing.

"Thank you, Miss Drellgannoth," said the ComWeb. "A package from the
Beldon Shop has been deposited in your mail transmitter." It signed off.

Beldon Shop? Trigger frowned, laid the gown across a chair and went over
to the transmitter receptacle. She opened it. A flat small green
package, marked "The Styles of Beldon," slid out. A delicate scent came
trailing along with it. A small white envelope clung to the package's
top.

Inside the envelope was a card. It read:

"A peace offering. Would you wear it to dinner in token of forgiveness?
Very humbly, Q."

Trigger found herself smiling and wiped off the smile. Then she let it
come back. No point in staying grim with the character! She pulled the
package tab and it opened up. There were three smaller packages inside.


She opened the first of these and for a moment gazed doubtfully at four
objects like green leaf buds, each the size of her thumb. She laid them
down and opened the second package. This one contained a pair of very
fancy high heels, green and pale gold.

Out of the third flowed something which was, at all events,
extraordinarily beautiful material of some kind. Velvety green ...
shimmeringly alive. Its touch was a caress. Its perfume was like soft
whispers. Lifting one end with great care between thumb and finger,
Trigger let it unfold itself to the floor.

Tilting her head to the side, she studied the shimmering featherweight
cat's cradle of jewel-green ribbons that hung there.

Wear it?

What _was_ it?

She reflected, found her dressing gown in one of the suitcases, slipped
it on, sat down before the ComWeb with the mysterious ribbon
arrangement, and dialed Gaya's number.

The Intelligence girl was in her cabin and obviously had been napping.
But she was wide awake now. "Shielded here!" she said quickly as soon as
her image cleared. "Go ahead!"

"It's nothing important," Trigger said hastily. Gaya relaxed. "It's
just--" she held up the ribbons. "Major Quillan sent me this."

Gaya uttered a small squeal. "Oh! Beautiful! A Beldon!"

"That's what it says."

Gaya smiled. "He must like you!"

"Oh?" said Trigger. She hesitated. Gaya's face grew questioning. She
asked, "Is something the matter?"

"Probably not," said Trigger. She considered. "If you laugh," she
warned, "I'll hate you." She indicated the ribbons again. "What is that
Beldon really?"

Gaya blinked. "You haven't been around our decadent circles long
enough," she said soberly. Then she did laugh. "Don't hate me, Trigger!
Anyway, it's very high fashion. It's also"--her glance went quickly over
Trigger--"in excellent taste, in this case. It's a Beldon gown."

A gown!

Some of the beautiful ribbons were wider than others. None of them
looked as wide as they should have been. Not for a gown.

Dubiously, Trigger wriggled and fitted herself into the high fashion
item. Even before she went over to the mirror in it, she knew it
wouldn't do. Not possibly! Styles on many Hub worlds were rather bold of
course, but she was sure this effect wasn't what the Beldon's designers
had intended.

She stepped in front of the mirror. Her eyes widened. "Brother!" she
breathed.

That Beldon did go with a woman like stripes went with a tiger! After
one look, you couldn't quite understand why nature hadn't arranged for
it first. But just as obviously there wasn't nearly enough Beldon around
at the moment.

Trigger checked the time and began to feel harried. Probably she'd wind
up wearing the black gown anyway, but at least she wanted to get this
matter worked out before she decided. She dialed for a drink, took two
swallows and reflected that she might have put the thing on backwards.
Or upside down.

Five minutes later, she sat at the dresser, tapping her fingers on its
glassy surface, gazing at the small pile of green ribbons before her and
whistling softly. There was a thoroughly bared look on her face.
Suddenly she stood up and went back to the ComWeb.

"Ribbons?" said the lady who was the Beldon Shop's manager. "That would
be 741. A delightful little creation!"

"Delightful," said Trigger. "May I see it on the model?"

"Immediately, madam."

A few moments later, a long-limbed model strolled into the view screen,
displaying an exquisite arrangement of burnt sienna ribbons plus four
largish leaf-like designs. Trigger glanced quickly back to the table
where she had put down the strange green buds. They had quietly opened
out meanwhile.

She thanked the manager, switched off the ComWeb, got into the Beldon
again and attached her leaf designs where the model had carried them.
They adhered softly, molding themselves to her, neatly completing the
costume.

She stepped into the high heels and looked in the mirror again. She
breathed "Brother!" again. Maccadon wouldn't have approved. She wasn't
sure she approved either.

But one thing was certain--there wasn't the remotest suggestion of
dowdiness about a Beldon. Objectively, impersonally considered, the
effect was terrific.

Feeling tawny and feline, Trigger slowly lifted one shoulder and lowered
it again. She turned and strolled toward the full-length mirror across
the cabin, admiring the shifts of the Beldon effect in the flow of
motion.

Terrific!

With another drink, she could do it.

She dialed another drink and settled down with it beneath the mechanical
stylist for a readjustment in the hairdo department. This time the
stylist purred as it surveyed and hummed while it worked. And when the
hairdo was done and Trigger moved to get up, its flexible little tool
pads pulled her back gently into the seat and tilted up her chin. For a
moment she was startled. Then she saw that the stylist had produced a
shining make-up kit and was opening it. This time she was getting the
works....

Twenty minutes later, Quillan's voice informed her via the ComWeb that
he could be outside her cabin any time she was ready. Trigger told him
cheerily to come right over, picked up her purse and swaggered toward
the door, smiling a cool, feline smile.

"Prude, eh?" she muttered.

She opened the door.

"Ya-arghk!" cried Quillan, shaken.





14


They were out on a terrace near the top of an illusion mountainside, in
a beautiful evening. Dinner had been old-style and delicious, served by
its creators, two slim, brown-skinned, red-lipped girls who looked much
too young to have acquired such skills. They were natives of Tranest,
Lyad said proudly, and two of the finest food technicians in the Hub.
They were, at all events, the two finest food technicians Trigger had
run into as yet.

The brandy which followed the dinner seemed to represent no let-down to
the connoisseurs around Trigger. She went at it cautiously, though she
had swallowed a couple of wake-up capsules just before they walked into
the Ermetyne suite. The capsules took effect in the middle of the first
course; and what she woke up to was a disconcerting awareness of being
the center of much careful attention. The boys were all giving
her-plus-Beldon the eye, intensively; even Lyad's giant-sized butler or
majordomo or whatever she'd called him, named Virod, ogled coldly out of
the background. Trigger gave them the eye back, one after the other, in
turn; and that stopped it. Lyad, beautifully wearing something which
would have passed muster at the U-League's Annual Presidential Dinner in
Ceyce, looked amused.

It wasn't till the end of the second course that Trigger began to feel
at ease again. After that she forgot, more or less, about the Beldon.
The talk remained light during dinner. When they switched off the
illusion background for a look at the goings-on during the Garth
stopover, she took the occasion to study her companions in more detail.

There were three men at the table; Lyad and herself. Quillan sat
opposite her. Belchik Pluly's unseemly person, in a black silk robe
which left his plump arms bare from the elbows down, was on Quillan's
right.

The third man fascinated her. It was as if some strange cold creature
had walked up out of a polar sea to come on board their ship.

It wasn't so much his appearance, though the green tip of a Vethi sponge
lying coiled lightly about his neck probably had something to do with
the impression. Trigger knew about Vethi sponges and their addicts,
though she hadn't seen either before. It wasn't so serious an addiction,
except perhaps in the fact that it was rarely given up again. The
sponges soothed jangled nerves, stabilized unstable emotions.

Balmordan didn't look like a man who needed one. He was big, not as tall
as Quillan but probably heavier, with strong features, a boldly jutting
nose. Bleak, pale eyes. He was about fifty and wore a richly ornamented
blue shirt and trousers. The shirt hung loose, perhaps to conceal the
flattened contours of his odd companion's body. Lyad had introduced him
as a Devagas scientist and in a manner which indicated he was a man of
considerable importance. That meant he was almost certainly a member of
the Devagas hierarchy, which in itself would have made him very
interesting.

Trigger had run into some of the odd-ball missionaries the Devagas kept
sending about the Hub; and she'd sometimes speculated curiously
regarding the leaders of that chronically angry, unpredictable nation
which, on its twenty-eight restricted worlds, formed more than six
percent of the population of the Hub. The Devagas seemed to like nobody;
and certainly nobody liked them.

Balmordan didn't fit her picture of a Devagas leader too badly. His
manner and talk were easygoing and agreeable. But his particular brand
of ogle, when she first became aware of it, had been disquieting. Rather
like a biologist planning the details of an interesting vivisection.

Of course he _was_ a biologist.

But Trigger kept wondering why Lyad had invited him to dinner. She was
positive, for one thing, that Belchik Pluly wasn't at all happy about
Balmordan's presence.

Dinner was over before the Garth take-off, and they switched themselves
back to the mountainside and took other chairs. A red-haired,
green-eyed, tanned, sinuous young woman called Flam appeared from time
to time to renew brandy glasses and pass iced fruits around. She gave
Trigger coolly speculative looks now and then.

Then Virod showed up again with a flat tray of what turned out to be a
very special brand of tobacco. Trigger declined. The men made
connoisseur-type sounds of high appreciation, and everybody, including
Lyad, lit up small pipes of a very special brand of coral and puffed
away happily. Quillan looked up at Virod.

"Hi, big boy!" he said pleasantly. "How's everything been with you?"

Virod, in a wide-sleeved scarlet jacket and creased black trousers,
bowed his shaved bullet head very slightly. "Everything's been fine,
Major Quillan," he said. "Thank you." He turned and went out of the
place. Trigger glanced after him. Virod awed her a little--he was really
huge. Moving about among them, he had seemed like a softly padding
elephant. And there was an elephant's steady deftness in the way he held
out the tiny tobacco trays.

The Ermetyne winked at Quillan. "Quillan wrestled Virod to a pindown
once," she said to Trigger. "A fifty-seven minute round, wasn't it?"

"Thereabouts," Quillan said. He added, "Trigger doesn't know yet that I
was a sports bum in my youth."

"Really?" Trigger said.

He nodded. "Come from a long line of sports bums, as a matter of fact.
But I broke tradition--went into business for myself finally. Nowadays
I'm old and soft. Eh, Belchy?" The two great pals, sitting side by side,
dug elbows at each other and ha-ha-ha'd. Trigger winced.

"Still in the same line of business, on the side?" Lyad inquired.

Quillan looked steadily at her and grinned. "More or less," he said.

"We might," Lyad said thoughtfully, "come back to that later. As for
that match with Virod," she went on to Trigger, "it was really a
terrific event! Virod was a Tranest arena professional before I took him
into my personal employ, and he's very, very rarely been beaten in any
such contest." She laughed. "And before such a large group of people
too! I'm afraid he's never quite forgiven you for that, Quillan."

"I'll keep out of his way," Quillan said easily.

"Did you people know," Lyad said, "that the trouble on the way between
Maccadon and Evalee was caused by a catassin killing?" There was a touch
of mischief in the question, Trigger thought.
