hut under the trees, the milk cans are kept in a stream, which even
the severe drought of last summer did not dry, nor the heat raise to a
temperature of 60 deg.

We are assured most positively that none of the spring water finds its
way over the mouth of the can into the milk. Its dilution, of which
there is so much just complaint, must be done, if at all, in the city,
for the wholesale buyer is said to have such means of testing the milk
as effectually protects him against the farmer. May the man be busy at
work who is to give each family such a protection. We have heard it said
that one end of a small piece of common tape placed in a pan of milk
will carry from it all the water into another vessel in which the other
end of the tape should be placed; but we have never found this a safe
test.

Strange to say, no butter is made on these large milk farms. The supply
for the family is obtained from market, or, more rarely, from a neighbor
who churns all his milk for the accommodation of those who send all
theirs to the city. Our notions of the way to make butter were decidedly
overturned on going to such a dairy. No setting of the milk in shallow
pans for cream to rise; no skimming and putting away in jars until
"churning day," when the thick cream was agitated by a strong arm until
the butter came, then worked and salted. Instead, there is a daily
pouring of the unskimmed soured milk into a common churn, perhaps
somewhat larger than ordinary. The dasher is fastened to a shaft, which
is moved by a crank. The crank is turned by means of a nearly horizontal
wheel some eight or ten feet in diameter, which is kept in motion by a
dog, sheep, or calf standing on it, something after the manner of the
old tread-mill.

When taken from the churn, the butter is worked by hand as of old. The
farmer with whom we have talked said he was about determined to send his
milk to the creamery, since butter-making made it so hard for the women.
Surely woman is less a drudge than she used to be. If, after being
relieved from the labor of churning, the remaining working of the butter
is considered too hard for the farmer's wife, the day of a woman's
redemption must be near at hand.

Only one butter farm, have we been able to find, and not enough is made
there to supply the immediate neighborhood. Where, then, does all the
Orange county butter come from? Mostly from the West. Farmers buy
from the vicinity of the Alleghenies, and even further west, large
quantities, which they sell in the original packages or repack in pails.
Since railroads have become so numerous, New York drinks up all the milk
in Orange county, and must butter her bread elsewhere.

The largest institution for the disposition of milk is the Creamery,
which is, in other words, a cheese factory. Here is brought the milk
which the farmers themselves are unable properly to prepare for market,
for want of cool springs or sufficient help. Received here, it is placed
in deep but narrow tin pails holding twelve or fourteen quartz. These
are floated in large tanks of water. From these pails the cream is
carefully taken and sent to market. The skimmed milk is then placed in
a large vat and heated, by means of steam pipes to about 80 deg. Then the
rennet is put in. From twenty to thirty minutes suffices for curdling,
and the mass is then stirred to separate the curd from the whey. After
which it is heated still more; and then the whey, passing off through a
strainer, goes to feed hogs, while the curd remains in the vat, to be
salted and worked before putting into the presses. In two or three hours
the curds become hard enough for the canvas to be put upon them ready
for the shelves. Very carefully they must then be watched, lest the
fly lying in wait for them makes in them a snug house for her family.
Greasing and turning must be a daily labor, and some weeks must pass
before they are sufficiently cured for market.

For the benefit of city consumers, who are paying ten and twelve cents a
quart for milk, from a tenth to a quarter of which is not infrequently
pure Croton, we may add that the highest price the farmer ever gets for
his milk is seven cents a quart; and he sometimes sells it for as low as
two cents and a half. Our friends, the milkmen, have, therefore, it will
be seen, a pretty good margin for freight and profit.

       *       *       *       *       *




Improved Hay Elevator.


The method most generally used for elevating hay is evidently not
the most economical application of the power of horses for the
accomplishment of the purpose desired. The tackle involves a great deal
of friction, and as the quantity which can be thus raised at once is,
probably, on the average, not more than from 150 to 200 lbs, much more
time is employed in re-adjusting the fork, than would be the case if a
larger quantity were elevated.

The invention under consideration supplies a means whereby it is claimed
hay may be unloaded with far greater facility than heretofore, with less
labor to the team and with fewer hands than are at present employed.

A primary gear wheel is propelled horizontally by a lever worked by
a horse. The primary gear impels a pinion keyed to the shaft of a
windlass, upon which is wound the elevating rope, whenever the clutch,
A, is made to operate through the cord and lever, B. This cord runs over
a pulley on the under side the wood framework at C, and its further end
may be held in the hand of the workman on the hay load, who, when he has
properly adjusted the fork, pulls the cord which operates the clutch,
and the "fork-full" of hay is at once elevated. The cylinder of the
windlass, not being keyed to the shaft, only operates when the clutch is
closed by the cord.

The horse, or horses which furnish power to the machine, may, therefore,
keep on traveling in the same direction, and no time is lost in stopping
and backing, as in the method in general use.

[Illustration: DERR'S CAPSTSTAN FOR ELEVATING HAY FORKS.]

There is no doubt but that this is a cheap, durable, and desirable
machine, and one that can be used to great advantage, not only for the
elevation of hay, but for many other purposes. We think it would be
found a decided improvement in discharging cargoes of coal from barges,
and for handling coal in storage yards.

The inventor claims that twice as much hay can be raised in a given time
by its use, as can be done by the old method; and it dispenses with one
hand at the barn or stack.

A coupling at D, enables attachments to be made, which extend the
usefulness of the machine very much. It may be used as a power for
driving wood saws, cutting fuel, thrashing, and other work where a
simple horse power is desirable.

Address for further information, Wm. Derr, Tiffin, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPETITORS FOR PRIZES.--The interest that our friends have taken in
obtaining additional names to send with their own subscriptions to the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN for the coming year, is without a parallel. The
clubs sent by competitors for the cash prizes are not so many or so
large as we expected, but the number of applicants for the steel plate
engraving exceeds our expectation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Emperor of France is said to be interested in the art of flying and
to have given money to fledge some inventions.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVEMENT IN LAMP WICKS.


Our engravings show a novel substitute for the cotton lamp wick. The
wick, two forms of which are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, are made of
glass, and are filled preferably with pulverized gypsum, although any
finely-ground stone, mineral, or metal may be employed. The bottom of
the glass tube is closed by wire gauze, or other suitable strainer,
through which the fluid flows; and is carried by the capillary
attraction of the pounded material to the top of the wick.

Thus a permanent wick is obtained, which may be employed with any form
of lamp, and will last for an indefinite time. It may also be used in
connection with an open cup, which the inventor terms a poor man's
lamp. A perforated card is laid upon the top of the cup or tumbler as a
support to the wick.

[Illustration]

It may be used either with or without a chimney, and it is claimed that
with good kerosene oil it is perfectly safe, and consumes less of it,
while it may be also used as a candle.

Patented through the Scientific American Patent Agency, September 14,
1869, by Edward D. Boyd, of Helena, Ark.

Address for rights, etc., the patentee, as above, or Jos. P. Branch, 277
Fulton street, Brooklyn, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




Great Transformation.


Seven years ago, says the Port Said correspondence of the London _News_,
there was nothing to distinguish Ismailla or the smiling lake before you
from the rest of the desert, and all was sand. It is the canal which has
raised up the numerous handsome villas and fine gardens. Fresh water is
all that is needed to turn the arid desert into a fruitful soil; and the
supply of this is provided by the subsidary canal which the company
has formed side by side with that broad salt one which now unites two
worlds. Wonderful stories are told of the productiveness of the gardens,
and a walk through any of those belonging to the leading officials
stationed at Ismailla is to verify them all. Vines with large bunches of
grapes pendent from their branches; orange trees with green fruit just
showing a golden tint; ivy, roses, geraniums from England, and an
endless variety of rich tropical plants are all flourishing. In the
centre of the town is a square with trees and a building clothed with
rich creepers in its midst. Everything here looks French. A handsome
boulevard runs down to the point of embarkation, the streets and squares
are on the true Parisian model, and there are _cafes_, billiard rooms,
and _cafe chantants_ which might easily belong to Nantes or Lyons. There
are of course huge gaps where the houses and shops will be; the roads
are, many of them, still of sand; camels draw carts, and generally
pervade the place in long strings; but with all this you are kept in a
state of wonder during your stay at Ismailla at the marvelous conversion
which has taken, place under your eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

American agricultural implements are highly praised in newspaper reports
of the Metropolitan Cattle Show, held recently in London.

       *       *       *       *       *




Moore's Rural New Yorker


For Dec. 25 contains a splendid full page Engraving of the PRIZE FOWLS
at the recent State Poultry Show--the Best Poultry Picture ever given in
an American newspaper.--Also, a magnificent CHRISTMAS PICTURE, and other
fine Illustrations. For sale by all Newsdealers; price 8 cents. See
advertisement of RURAL in this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.


_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a Line. If
the Notices exceed Four Lines, One Dollar and a Half per line will be
charged._

       *       *       *       *       *

To ascertain where there will be a demand for new machinery or
manufacturers' supplies read Boston Commercial Bulletin's manufacturing
news of the United States. Terms, $4.00 a year.

Ties, timber, and lumber seasoned by steam, without a building. Costs
$2, worth $20 per M. Stops eramacausis. H.G. Bulkley, N.Y.

Wanted--Light Machinery or Articles to Manufacture. Work done in a neat,
prompt manner. Address W.E. Bradner & Co., 13 Mulberry st., Newark, N.J.

Pyrites wanted--Containing Gold, Silver, or Copper. Address A.G. Hunter,
Jackson, Mich.

Those wishing articles of metal or light machinery manufactured, will
find it for their interest to address J.B. Heald, Milford, N.H.

One horizontal stationary steam engine, with variable cut-off, 60-H.P.;
one plain do., 25-H.P.; one do., 20-H.P.; one Portable 12-H.P., on hand
and for sale low. Albertson & Douglass Machine Co., New London, Conn.

For sale cheap--Good 2d-hand plate iron. 50 plates 3-8 thick, 42 inches
wide, 120 inches long. Been used 3 months for a floor. Price 3 cents per
lb. Address box 1352, Norwich, Conn.

The head draftsman of a locomotive works, just closed, desires another
engagement. Familiar with stationary, marine, or locomotive machinery.
Unexceptionable references. Watkins, 13 Dutch st., N.Y.

Wanted--Iron Planer about 4 ft., describe same and price, Geo. S. Grier,
Milford, Del.

Wanted--Best Water Filter for Household purposes. Frank Alexander, Box
3769, New York.

A Brick Machine wanted. Address A. Hansen, Sumter, S.C.

For Sale for want of use--A 3-Horse portable steam engine and boiler, in
perfect running order. Address B.S. Nichols & Co., Burlington, Vt.

Patent Rights bought and sold by R.T. Bradley & Co., 131 Fourth st.,
Cincinnati, Ohio.

Peck's patent drop press. For circulars, address the sole manufacturers,
Milo Peck & Co, New Haven, Ct.

Every wheelwright and blacksmith should have one of Dinsmore's Tire
Shrinkers. Send for circular to R.H. Allen & Co., Postoffice Box 376,
New York.

For Small Engine Lathes, with foot-power, Hand Lathes, Bolt or Terret
Cutters, Planers, etc., address W.E. Bradner & Co., Newark, N.J

Aneroid Barometers made to order, repaired, rated, for sale and
exchange, by C. Grieshaber, 107 Clinton St., New York.

Foundery and Machine Business.--Experience with some capital, wants an
engagement. South or West preferred. Address Box E.E., Catskill, N.Y.

Foreman in a Machine Shop--A person having ten years experience in
that capacity is desirous of forming a new engagement. Address, with
particulars, Postoffice Box 119, La Crosse, Wis.

Makers of Pipe Cutting and Tapping and Screwing Machines send circulars,
without delay, to Forest City Pipe works, Cleveland, O.

For Best Spring-bed Bottoms address S.C. Jennings, Wautoma, Wis.

Parties having patents or patent goods to sell, send for The National,
Buffalo, N.Y., $1 per year, 10c. single copy.

Back Nos., Vols., and Sets of Scientific American for sale. Address
Theo. Tusch, No. 37 Park Row, New York.

Mineral Collections--50 selected specimens, including gold and
silver ores, $15. Orders executed on receipt of the amount. L. & J
Feuchtwanger, Chemists, 55 Cedar st., New York.

The Babcock & Wilcox Steam Engine received the First Premium for the
Most Perfect Automatic Expansion Valve Gear, at the late Exhibition of
the American Institute. Babcock, Wilcox & Co., 44 Cortlandt st., New
York.

For best quality Gray Iron Small Castings, plain and fancy Apply to the
