that he might earn his bread, he replied, 'Oh, father, I could not
suffer you to work, but you shall be overseer, and look after the rest.'

Now the old man was a holy hermit, and when he saw how kind-hearted the
youth was he determined to do all he could for him to gain the wish of
his heart.

By-and-bye, when the ship was finished, the hermit said to his young
friend, 'Now you can go and claim the king's daughter, for hte ship will
float both by land and sea.'

'Oh, good father,' cried the young man, 'you will not forsake me? Stay
with me, I pray you, and lead me to the king!'

'If you wish it, I will,' said the hermit, 'on condition that you will
give me half of anything you get.'

'Oh, if that is all,' answered he, 'it is easily promised!' And they set
out together on the ship.

After they had gone some distance they saw a man standing in a thick
fog, which he was trying to put into a sack.

'Oh, good father,' exclaimed the youth, 'what can he be doing?'

'Ask him,' said the old man.

'What are you doing, my fine fellow?'

'I am putting the fog into my sack. That is my business.'

'Ask him if he will come with us,' whispered the hermit.

And the man answered: 'If you will give me enough to eat and drink I
will gladly stay with you.'

So they took him on their ship, and the youth said, as they started off
again, 'Good father, before we were two, and now we are three!'

After they had travelled a little further they met a man who had torn up
half the forest, and was carrying all the trees on his shoulders.

'Good father,' exclaimed the youth, 'only look! What can he have done
that for?'

'Ask him why he has torn up all those trees.'

And the man replied, 'Why, I've merely been gathering a handful of
brushwood.'

'Beg him to come with us,' whispered the hermit.

And the strong man answered: 'Willingly, as long as you give me enough
to eat and drink.' And he came on the ship.

And the youth said to the hermit, 'Good father, before we were three,
and now we are four.'

The ship travelled on again, and some miles further on they saw a man
drinking out of a stream till he had nearly drunk it dry.

'Good father,' said the youth, 'just look at that man! Did you ever see
anybody drink like that?'

'Ask him why he does it,' answered the hermit.

'Why, there is nothing very odd in taking a mouthful of water!' replied
the man, standing up.

'Beg him to come with us.' And the youth did so.

'With pleasure, as long as you give me enough to eat and drink.'

And the youth whispered to the hermit, 'Good father, before we were
four, and now we are five.'

A little way along they noticed another man in the middle of a stream,
who was shooting into the water.

'Good father,' said the youth, 'what can he be shooting at?'

'Ask him,' answered the hermit.

'Hush, hush!' cried the man; 'now you have frightened it away. In the
Underworld sits a quail on a tree, and I wanted to shoot it. That is my
business. I hit everything I aim at.'

'Ask him if he will come with us.'

And the man replied, 'With all my heart, as long as I get enough to eat
and drink.'

So they took him into the ship, and the young man whispered, 'Good
father, before we were five, and now we are six.'

Off they went again, and before they had gone far they met a man
striding towards them whose steps were so long that while one foot was
on the north of the island the other was right down in the south.

'Good father, look at him! What long steps he takes!'

'Ask him why he does it,' replied the hermit.

'Oh, I am only going out for a little walk,' answered he.

'Ask him if he will come with us.'

'Gladly, if you will give me as much as I want to eat and drink,' said
he, climbing up into the ship.

And the young man whispered, 'Good father, before we were six, and
now we are seven.' But the hermit knew what he was about, and why he
gathered these strange people into the ship.

After many days, at last they reached the town where lived the king and
his daughter. They stopped the vessel right in front of the palace, and
the young man went in and bowed low before the king.

'O Majesty, I have done your bidding, and now is the ship built that
can travel over land and sea. Give me my reward, and let me have your
daughter to wife.'

But the king said to himself, 'What! am I to wed my daughter to a man of
whom I know nothing. Not even whether he be rich or poor--a knight or a
beggar.'

And aloud he spake: It is not enough that you have managed to build the
ship. You must find a runner who shall take this letter to the ruler of
the Underworld, and bring me the answer back in an hour.'

'That is not in the bond,' answered the young man.

'Well, do as you like,' replied the king, 'only you will not get my
daughter.'

The young man went out, sorely troubled, to tell his old friend what had
happened.

'Silly boy!' cried the hermit, 'Accept his terms at once. And send off
the long-legged man with the letter. He will take it in no time at all.'

So the youth's heard leapt for joy, and he returned to the king.
'Majesty, I accept your terms. HEre is the messenger who will do what
you wish.'

The king had no choice but to give the man the letter, and he strode
off, making short work of the distance that lay between the palace and
the Underworld. He soon found the ruler, who looked at the letter, and
said to him, 'Wait a little while i write the answer;' but the man was
soo tired with his quick walk that he went sound asleep and forgot all
about his errand.

All this time the youth was anxiously counting the minutes till he
could get back, and stood with his eyes fixed on the road down which his
messenger must come.

'What can be keeping him,' he said to the hermit when the hour was
nearly up. Then the hermit sent for the man who could hit everything he
aimed at, and said to him, 'Just see why the messenger stays so long.'

'Oh, he is sound asleep in the palace of the Underworld. However, I can
wake him.'

Then he drew his bow, and shot an arrow straight into the man's knee.
The messenger awoke with such a start, and when he saw that the hour had
almost run out he snatched up the answer and rushed back with such speed
that the clock had not yet struck when he entered the palace.

Now the young man thought he was sure of his bride, but the king said,
"Still you have not done enough. Before I give you my daughter you must
find a man who can drink half the contents of my cellar in one day.'

'That is not in the bond,' complained the poor youth.

'Well, do as you like, only you will not get my daughter.'

The young man went sadly out, and asked the hermit what he was to do.

'Silly boy!' said he. 'Why, tell the man to do it who drinks up
everything.'

So they sent for the man and said, 'Do you think you are able to drink
half the royal cellar in one day?'

'Dear me, yes, and as much more as you want,' answered he. 'I am never
satisfied.'

The king was not pleased at the young man agreeing so readily, but he
had no choice, and ordered the servant to be taken downstairs. Oh, how
he enjoyed himself! All day long he drank, and drank, and drank, till
instead of half the cellar, he had drunk the whole, and there was not
a cask but what stood empty. And when the king saw this he said to the
youth, 'You have conquered, and I can no longer withhold my daughter.
But, as her dowry, I shall only give so much as one man can carry away.'

'But,' answered he, 'let a man be ever so strong, he cannot carry more
than a hundredweight, and what is that for a king's daughter?'

'Well, do as you like; I have said my say. It is your affair--not mine.'

The young man was puzzled, and did not know what to reply, for, though
he would gladly have married the princess without a sixpence, he had
spent all his money in building the ship, and knew he could not give her
all she wanted. So he went to the hermit and said to him, 'The king will
only give for her dowry as much as a man can carry. I have no money of
my own left, and my brothers have none either.'

'Silly boy! Why, you have only got to fetch the man who carried half the
forest on his shoulders.'

And the youth was glad, and called the strong man, and told him what he
must do. 'Take everything you can, till you are bent double. Never mind
if you leave the palace bare.'

The strong man promised, and nobly kept his word. He piled all he
could see on his back--chairs, tables, wardrobes, chests of gold and
silver--till there was nothing left to pile. At last he took the king's
crown, and put it on the top. He carried his burden to the ship and
stowed his treasures away, and the youth followed, leading the king's
daughter. But the king was left raging in his empty palace, and he
called together his army, and got ready his ships of war, in order that
he might go after the vessel and bring back what had been taken away.

And the king's ships sailed very fast, and soon caught up the little
vessel, and the sailors all shouted for joy. Then the hermit looked out
and saw how near they were, and he said to the youth, 'Do you see that?'

The youth shrieked and cried, 'Ah, good father, it is a fleet of ships,
and they are chasing us, and in a few moments they will be upon us.'

But the hermit bade him call the man who had the fog in his sack, and
the sack was opened and the fog flew out, and hung right round the
king's ships, so that they could see nothing. So they sailed back to the
palace, and told the king what strange things had happened. Meanwhile
the young man's vessel reached home in safety.

'Well, here you are once more' said the hermit; 'and now you can fulfil
the promise you made me to give me the half of all you had.'

'That will I do with all my heart,' answered the youth, and began to
divide all his treasures, putting part on one side for himself and
setting aside the other for his friend. 'Good father, it is finished,'
said he at length; 'there is nothing more left to divide.'

'Nothing more left!' cried the hermit. 'Why, you have forgotten the best
thing of all!'

'What can that be?' asked he. 'We have divided everything.'

'And the king's daughter?' said the hermit.

Then the young man's heart stood still, for he loved her dearly. But he
answered, 'It is well; I have sworn, and I will keep my word,' and drew
his sword to cut her in pieces. When the hermit saw that he held his
honour dearer than his wife he lifted his hand and cried, 'Hold! she
is yours, and all the treasures too. I gave you my help because you had
pity on those that were in need. And when you are in need yourself, call
upon me, and I will come to you.'

As he spoke he softly touched their heads and vanished.

The next day the wedding took place, and the two brothers came to the
house, and they all lived happily together, but they never forgot the
holy man who had been such a good friend.




The Water of Life

Cuentos Populars Catalans, per lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspous y
Labros. Barcelona, 1885.


Three brothers and one sister lived together in a small cottage, and
they loved one another dearly. One day the eldest brother, who had never
done anything but amuse himself from sunrise to sunset, said to the
rest, 'Let us all work hard, and perhaps we shall grow rich, and be able
to build ourselves a palace.'

And his brothers and sister answered joyfully, 'Yes, we will all work!'

So they fell to working with all their might, till at last they became
rich, and were able to build themselves a beautiful palace; and everyone
came from miles round to see its wonders, and to say how splendid it
was. No one thought of finding any faults, till at length an old woman,
who had been walking through the rooms with a crowd of people, suddenly
exclaimed, 'Yes, it is a splendid palace, but there is still something
it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A church.'

When they heard this the brothers set to work again to earn some more
money, and when they had got enough they set about building a church,
which should be as large and beautiful as the palace itself.

And after the church was finished greater numbers of people than
ever flocked to see the palace and the church and vast gardens and
magnificent halls.

But one day, as the brothers were as usual doing the honours to their
guests, an old man turned to them and said, 'Yes, it is all most
beautiful, but there is still something it needs!'

'And what may that be?'

'A pitcher of the water of life, a branch of the tree the smell of whose
flowers gives eternal beauty, and the talking bird.'

'And where am I to find all those?'

'Go to the mountain that is far off yonder, and you will find what you
seek.'

After the old man had bowed politely and taken farewell of them the
eldest brother said to the rest, 'I will go in search of the water of
life, and the talking bird, and the tree of beauty.'

'But suppose some evil thing befalls you?' asked his sister. 'How shall
we know?'


'You are right,' he replied; ' I had not thought of that!'

Then they followed the old man, and said to him, 'My eldest brother
wishes to seek for the water of life, and the tree of beauty, and the
talking bird, that you tell him are needful to make our palace perfect.
But how shall we know if any evil thing befall him?'

So the old man took them a knife, and gave it to them, saying, 'Keep
this carefully, and as long as the blade is bright all is well; but if
the blade is bloody, then know that evil has befallen him.'

The brothers thanked him, and departed, and went straight to the palace,
where they found the young man making ready to set out for the mountain
where the treasures he longed for lay hid.

And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he had gone a great
way, and there he met a giant.

'Can you tell me how much further I have still to go before I reach that
mountain yonder?'

'And why do you wish to go there?'

'I am seeking the water of life, the talking bird, and a branch of the
tree of beauty.'

'Many have passed by seeking those treasures, but none have ever come
back; and you will never come back either, unless you mark my words.
Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but keep on your way.
As you go you will hear scoffs and laughs behind you; it will be the
stones that mock. Do not heed them; above all, do not turn round. If you
do you will become as one of them. Walk straight on till you get to the
top, and then take all you wish for.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and walked, and walked, and
walked, till he reached the mountain. And as he climbed he heard behind
him scoffs and jeers, but he kept his ears steadily closed to them. At
last the noise grew so loud that he lost patience, and he stooped to
pick up a stone to hurl into the midst of the clamour, when suddenly his
arm seemed to stiffen, and the next moment he was a stone himself!

That day his sister, who thought her brother's steps were long in
