It was a relief to the men, after ten hours of weary stumbling
along in the cold and darkness, to know that they were, at length,
face to face with their foe. Cold and fatigue were at once
forgotten and, with eyes strained through the darkness, and rifles
ready for use, every man pressed forward. Fifty yards up the hill,
behind the sentry who had fired, was the first stockade of the
enemy; formed by several large trees, which had been felled so as
to completely block up the road, presenting an obstacle of about
eight feet high to the attacking force.

The Afghan pickets lining the stockade poured a volley into the
Ghoorkas who, led by Major Fitzhugh and Captain Cook, made a rush
at the place. For a few minutes there was a fierce fight at the
trees but, as fresh assailants momentarily poured up, the
obstruction was scaled; and the Afghans retired on a second
stockade, eighty yards back. Here another stand was made but, the
spur being a little wider, the Ghoorkas were able to work round
and, taking the defense in flank, soon drove the Afghans back.
Beyond this point the ground was clear of trees; and the road ran,
in short zigzags, up the steep hill to the breastwork which lined
the edge of the top zigzag. A mountain gun, at this point, swept
the approach to the position; while the hill at its back was now
covered with Afghans, who opened a heavy fire upon the troops as,
in the dim morning light, they issued from the trees.

By the time that the Ghoorkas and the Rangers had cleared the
second stockade, the wing of the 72nd Highlanders--ascending by the
right flank--had made their way up to the front; and the whole now
advanced together. As quickly as possible they pushed up the hill,
under the heavy fire of the enemy. The latter fought well, and a
number of them were killed before retiring. At the defense erected
at the top of the zigzag, so obstinately did the Afghans in front
hold their ground that their comrades, behind, were enabled to
remove their mountain gun.

To the right of the enemy's position was a knoll, and the 72nd at
once took possession of this; and two mountain guns were brought up
to their assistance. The Afghans were seen, in great numbers, in
the broken ground ahead. The Ghoorkas and the little body of
Rangers pushed on against them. Presently the enemy gathered, and
made a rush down upon them; and a desperate hand-to-hand fight took
place, for a few minutes. The men were scattered among the trees,
and each fought for himself.

William Gale had just reloaded his rifle when he saw Captain
Herbert--who commanded his company--fall to the ground, and three
Afghans spring forward to finish him. With a bound, Will reached
the side of the officer. Two of the Afghans had already discharged
their pieces. The third leveled and fired. So close was he that the
flash almost burnt the soldier's face, and he felt a sharp pain, as
if a hot iron had passed across his cheek. In an instant, he shot
his assailant dead; and then, with bayonet, stood at bay as the
other two Afghans rushed upon him.

Illustration: Captain Herbert saved.

They had drawn their tulwars, and slashed fiercely at him; but he
kept them off with his bayonet until a Ghoorka, running up, cut
down one of them with his kookerie--a heavy, sword-like knife which
the Ghoorkas carry, and which they always employ in preference to
the bayonet, in fighting at close quarters. The remaining Afghan at
once took to flight. The 29th Punjaubees had now come into action;
and the Afghans, disheartened at the loss of their position, fell
back and withdrew into the woods which cover the plateau.

At half-past seven o'clock the whole force--except the elephant
guns--had reached the plateau; and General Roberts was able to
flash the news, of the successful capture of the enemy's first
position, to Brigadier General Cobbe, who was in command of the
force which was to operate direct against the Peiwar-Khotal. A rest
was given the troops after their long march and, at half-past nine,
they again fell in for the attack upon the pine-covered slopes in
the direction of the Peiwar-Khotal. How strong were the enemy who
might be lurking there, they knew not. But it was certain that he
would fight obstinately and, in so dense a forest, much of the
advantage gained by drill and discipline is lost.

A change was made in the order of the advance. The troops who had
before led the advance, and had done the fighting, were now placed
in the rear; and the 23rd Pioneers led the way, followed by the 2nd
and 29th Punjaubees. The column crossed the plateau without
opposition, and began the ascent towards the enemy's position in
the woods. Considerable caution was needed, as no one had any
knowledge of the country, and all were ignorant of the position and
numbers of the enemy; who might, for aught they knew, be massing in
great numbers for an attack upon the front, or one of the flanks.

The line of skirmishers entered the pine wood near the rocky
hillside, and a rolling fire of musketry soon told that they were
engaged, from end to end of the line. It was slow work; for fallen
trees, rocks, and bushes everywhere hampered the advance. Still the
skirmishing line--reinforced from behind--pushed forward steadily
and, presently, cleared the Afghans off the hillside.

When the troops reached the top, they found a valley in front of
them and, from the woods on the opposite side, so heavy a musketry
fire was kept up that it was evident the Afghans intended to make a
desperate stand here. The valley--or rather ravine--was a narrow
one: fifty yards wide, at its foot; and scarce three times as much,
from brow to brow. The enemy--hidden among the trees--could not be
made out, except by their continual fire. They did not content
themselves, however, with the mere defense of their side of the
hill but, from time to time, large numbers charged down, and tried
to force their way up that held by the British. Each time, however,
when they attempted this, the Punjaubees drove them back with
slaughter.

It was clear that the Afghans were in great numbers, for their line
extended for a mile and a half along the hillside. Major Anderson
of the 23rd Pioneers, after repulsing one of these attacks, led
four companies to the assault of the Afghan position, and drove the
enemy back for some little distance; but Major Anderson fell, and
the party retired. Colonel Curry--who commanded the regiment--again
led the men forward and, for a time, a hand-to-hand fight took
place. For two hours the rifle contest continued, without
cessation. The storm of bullets was tremendous, but no very great
execution was done, on either side, both parties lying behind the
shelter of trees.

So far, no advantage had been gained by the British; and General
Roberts felt that, with the force under his command, it would be
rash to attempt to carry so strong a position, held by a greatly
superior force.

In the meantime, the attack upon the Peiwar-Khotal from the valley
had commenced. Before daylight Brigadier General Cobbe, with the
5th Punjaub Infantry and the 8th Regiment, left camp; his object
being to cooperate with the flank attack. The 8th Regiment moved
directly towards the pass, while the 5th Punjaubees climbed one of
the principal spurs between the Peiwar and Spingawi Khotals.

The ascent was extremely difficult, and it took the troops six
hours to reach the summit. During the last portion of the ascent,
they came under the fire of the enemy. When near the summit, Major
Macqueen of the 5th Punjaubees saw, through an opening in the pine
wood, the Afghan camp, with their baggage animals; which were
placed, for shelter, in the glade behind the Peiwar-Khotal. Two
mountain guns were at once brought up, and a fire opened upon the
Afghan camp. In a few minutes the tents caught fire, the animals
stampeded in all directions; and the enemy in front, seized with a
panic, began rapidly to retreat.

The Afghan troops facing General Roberts' column, when they found
their comrades on their right retreating, began to draw off, and
the fire sensibly diminished. The movement was accelerated by the
four elephant guns--which had, at length, come up--opening fire
into the pine-wood forest. As the fire slackened, a reconnaissance
of the hill was made by General Roberts and his staff; but the
result showed that the mountain was so covered with pines, and
brushwood, that it formed an almost impenetrable barrier to the
advance of troops--for the growth was so thick that it was
impossible to say in which direction any movement should be made.
The experience gained, in the last six hours of hard fighting, had
shown how difficult it was to keep command over troops scattered
along a front of half a mile long, in the forest, where nothing
could be seen beyond a radius of a few yards.

The general, therefore, determined to desist from the attempt to
force his way direct to the top of the Peiwar-Khotal; and to march
to his left and so, by menacing the Afghan line of retreat, to
hasten the movement towards the rear which had evidently begun. The
men were, therefore, brought back to the plateau to the east of the
ravine. Here they were halted for a time, and the contents of their
haversacks furnished them with a meal.

At two o'clock they again drew up on the Spingawi plateau. The 2nd
Punjaub Infantry being left on the hill, to oppose the Afghans,
should they again advance in that direction; the rest of the column
entered the defile leading into the Hurriab valley, far in the rear
of the Peiwar-Khotal. As soon as the enemy--who were still opposing
the 2nd Punjaub Infantry--saw the head of the column enter the
defile, they were seized with a panic lest their retreat should be
cut off; and began to retreat with the greatest haste, as they had
to make their way across two mountain ridges, before they could
pass the spot towards which our troops were moving. The advance of
the column, however, was necessarily slow; as the woods and side
valleys had to be carefully examined, lest a flank attack should be
made upon them.

In two hours the head of the column emerged from the forest on to
the open slopes above the highest cultivated point in the Hurriab
valley. It was now four o'clock. The short December day was drawing
to a close. No enemy were in sight, for their line of retreat was
hidden in the bed of the stream, a couple of miles further on; and
no one knew where they were to be found. The troops were much
exhausted with the want of rest, and with their heavy work--for
they had now been marching, and fighting, for eighteen hours--and
they were glad to receive the order to bivouac; although they had
no tents, or food, and the cold--as might be expected on a winter
day, at an elevation of over 9000 feet above the sea--began to be
very severe.

A number of the nearest trees were felled by the pioneers, and huge
fires were soon alight. There was still some uneasiness, as no one
knew where the force under General Cobbe was, or whether the attack
on the Peiwar-Khotal had been successful or not.

While the 5th Punjaub Infantry had been mounting the spur, halfway
between the Peiwar and the Spingawi Khotal, the 8th Regiment had
moved directly upon the pass. The Afghans, who had expected an
attack, had remained under arms until three in the morning when,
hearing no sounds in our camp, they had been dismissed to rest.

Three guns of the Royal Artillery, and two of the Royal Horse
Artillery took up their post 800 yards in front of our camp; where
their fire, at the crest of the pass, would assist the advance of
the 8th. These, after two hours' march, found themselves at seven
in the morning on the last spur, which is separated from the
Peiwar-Khotal by a deep ravine. When it became daylight, a few
minutes later, the enemy caught sight of our artillery in the
valley, and at once opened fire. Although they had six field pieces
at the top of the hill, only three had been placed in position to
command the valley and the ascent; and the mountain battery, which
had arrived the afternoon before, was not brought to the front.

The three field pieces, and the mountain gun on the spur kept up a
continuous fire on our battery, of five guns. These were, however,
almost beyond their range, and but little damage was done. On our
side, the fire was chiefly directed against the mountain gun, at
the end of the spur; and at any bodies of men who showed
themselves. The artillery duel went on for four hours and, in the
meantime, the infantry were engaged sharply with the Afghans. These
had taken up their position in the woods, on the other side of the
ravine; and kept up a continuous fire upon the 8th. The distance,
however, was too great for much execution on either side,
especially as both parties were sheltered in the woods.

About ten o'clock the Afghans were seen gathering in strength, as
if to come down across the road leading up to the Khotal, to attack
the 8th in the rear. A squadron of the 18th Bengal Cavalry charged
up the valley, and the enemy retired up the hill again and, seeing
that they could not cross the road, without the chance of being cut
up by the cavalry, they did not try to repeat the experiment.

At eleven o'clock Brigadier General Cobbe was wounded in the leg,
and Colonel Barry-Drew succeeded him in the command; receiving the
orders which had been given to General Cobbe--that the Khotal was
not to be attacked, till there was some evidence that the flank
attack had shaken the enemy's defense, in front.

At twelve o'clock the guns, with the 2nd Punjaub Infantry, alarmed
the Afghans by their fire upon the camp and, although the Afghan
guns in front kept up their fire, the musketry fire decreased
considerably. Seeing this, Colonel Drew ordered the artillery to be
brought up nearer. When--after advancing 300 yards--they came to a
ravine crossing the road, the Afghans--who had come down the hill
to meet them--opened a heavy fire and, the road being narrow, only
the leading gun could come into action. However, the two companies
of the 8th--which were acting as an escort to the guns--advanced in
skirmishing order, and drove the Afghans up the hill.

The panic among the Afghans on the plateau having now spread to the
troops at the Khotal, their fire entirely ceased; and the 8th
Regiment descended the defile, and began to climb the path to the
Khotal. Not a hostile shot was fired and, at half-past two, they
reached the enemy's camp, which they found deserted.



Chapter 11: A Prisoner.


The panic which had seized the Afghans, when they found their
retreat menaced, had been thorough and complete and, when the 8th
Regiment entered the camp, they found that the tents were standing.
Food had been left, ready cooked, and every possession had been
abandoned. In the artillery camp, the gunners had left their
silver-mounted brass helmets and caps, as well as their guns and
carriages. A body of friendly Turis had accompanied the column,
making a demonstration on its flank; and these, arriving upon the
spot, plundered the Afghan camp of everything of the smallest
value.

No one knew what had become of the main body, under General
Roberts. The Bengal Cavalry scouted for some distance in advance,
but found no signs of the enemy. Strong pickets were set, in case
the Afghans should rally and return. The tents were brought up from
the camp below, fires were lit, and the 8th encamped for the night.

In the morning, communication was established between the two camps
and, it having been ascertained that the enemy had fled, in the
greatest disorder, towards the Shatur-Gardan Pass leading down to
Cabul, there was no prospect of further fighting. The Afghans had
abandoned all their guns, and even thrown away a great quantity of
muskets, in their rapid retreats. Great stores of flour and other
provisions were discovered, in the various villages, and were
divided among the troops.

The winter was now setting in, and the Shatur-Gardan Pass might,
any moment, be closed by deep snow. There was, therefore, no
prospect of a renewal of hostilities before the spring.
Preparations were made for putting a regiment on the top of the
Khotal. The rest of the force were to winter at Khuram. General
Roberts, with an escort of cavalry, rode to the Shatur-Gardan Pass,
and assured himself that the whole of the Afghan army had fled
beyond this point.

The troops were, for some time, kept hard at work lowering the
captured guns and ammunition down to the valley. A portion of the
troops advanced as far as Ali-Kheyl, the principal town of the
plateau. The Jajis--the inhabitants of the country--had hitherto
been extremely hostile but, cowed by the defeat of the Afghans,
they submitted without resistance.

On the 12th, all the preparations for the return were complete. It
was known that there was another pass from Ali-Kheyl into the
Khuram valley, by the south. This had never been explored by any
European; but General Roberts determined to return by it, with a
portion of his force, as the pass might be found valuable in future
operations. The force detailed for the march through the Sappir
defile was composed of the 8th Ghoorkas, a wing of the 72nd
Highlanders, a company of the Norfolk Rangers, the 23rd Punjaub
Pioneers, and a mountain battery.

The country through which the march was to be made was inhabited by
the Mongals, a turbulent robber tribe. The column marched at nine
in the morning and, after their down march, arrived at the village
of Sappir at midday. The road lay down the Hurriab river, till the
Khuram river was reached; and then along the right bank, passing
through the village of Kermana; after which it turned up a narrow
road, for two miles, till an open plateau was reached, at the
farther end of which stood the village of Sappir. It was reported,
here, that the Mongals intended to defend a defile and hill pass,
two miles farther on. The 23rd Pioneers were therefore pushed on,
to occupy the pass and bivouac there. The remainder of the troops
camped in the village.

No signs of the enemy were seen, either by the 23rd Pioneers or in
the vicinity of the camp. The troops were to march at three in the
morning, and the tents were struck an hour after midnight. The
track up the pass was excessively steep, and very difficult for the
