priest in the hovel of the paraschites, while he had talked to Nefert and
visited the old witch.

"I should not care to be in the priest's skin," observed Nemu, "for
though Rameses is far away, the Regent Ani is near enough.  He is a
gentleman who seldom pounces, but even the dove won't allow itself to be
attacked in is own nest."

Paaker looked enquiringly at Nemu.

"I know," said the dwarf "Ani has asked Rameses' consent to marry his
daughter."

"He has already asked it," continued the dwarf as Paaker smiled
incredulously, "and the king is not disinclined to give it.  He likes
making marriages--as thou must know pretty well."

"I?"  said Paaker, surprised.

"He forced Katuti to give her daughter as wife to the charioteer.
That I know from herself.  She can prove it to thee."

Paaker shook his head in denial, but the dwarf continued eagerly, "Yes,
yes!  Katuti would have had thee for her son-in-law, and it was the king,
not she, who broke off the betrothal.  Thou must at the same time have
been inscribed in the black books of the  high gate, for Rameses used
many hard names for thee.  One of us is like a mouse behind the curtain,
which knows a good deal."

Paaker suddenly brought his horses to a stand-still, threw the reins to
the slave, sprang from the chariot, called the dwarf to his side, and
said:

"We will walk from here to the river, and you shall tell me all you know;
but if an untrue word passes your lips I will have you eaten by my dogs."

"I know thou canst keep thy word," gasped the little man.  "But go a
little slower if thou wilt, for I am quite out of breath.  Let Katuti
herself tell thee how it all came about.  Rameses compelled her to give
her daughter to the charioteer.  I do not know what he said of thee, but
it was not complimentary.  My poor mistress!  she let herself be caught
by the dandy, the ladies' man-and now she may weep and wail.  When I pass
the great gates of thy house with Katuti, she often sighs and complains
bitterly.  And with good reason, for it soon will be all over with our
noble estate, and we must seek an asylum far away among the Amu in the
low lands; for the nobles will soon avoid us as outcasts.  Thou mayst be
glad that thou hast not linked thy fate to ours; but I have a faithful
heart, and will share my mistress's trouble."

"You speak riddles," said Paaker, "what have they to fear?"

The dwarf now related how Nefert's brother had gambled away the mummy of
his father, how enormous was the sum he had lost, and that degradation
must overtake Katuti, and her daughter with her.

"Who can save them," he whimpered.  "Her shameless husband squanders his
inheritance and his prize-money.  Katuti is poor, and the little words
"Give me! scare away friends as the cry of a hawk scares the chickens.
My poor mistress!"

"It is a large sum," muttered Paaker to himself.  "It is enormous!"
sighed the dwarf, "and where is it to be found in these hard times?  It
would have been different with us, if--ah if--.  And it would be a form
of madness which I do not believe in, that Nefert should still care for
her braggart husband.  She thinks as much of thee as of him."

Paaker looked at the dwarf half incredulous and half threatening.

"Ay--of thee," repeated Nemu.  "Since our excursion to the Necropolis
the day before yesterday it was--she speaks only of thee, praising thy
ability, and thy strong manly spirit.  It is as if some charm obliged her
to think of thee."

The pioneer began to walk so fast that his small companion once more had
to ask him to moderate his steps.

They gained the shore in silence, where Paaker's boat was waiting, which
also conveyed his chariot.  He lay down in the little cabin, called the
dwarf to him, and said:

"I am Katuti's nearest relative; we are now reconciled; why does she not
turn to me in her difficulty?"

"Because she is proud, and thy blood flows in her veins.  Sooner would
she die with her child--she said so--than ask thee, against whom she
sinned, for an "alms."

"She did think of me then?"

"At once; nor did she doubt thy generosity.  She esteems thee highly--I
repeat it; and if an arrow from a Cheta's bow or a visitation of the Gods
attained Mena, she would joyfully place her child in thine arms, and
Nefert believe me has not forgotten her playfellow.  The day before
yesterday, when she came home from the Necropolis, and before the letter
had come from the camp, she was full of thee--

     ["To be full (meh) of any one" is used in the Egyptian language for
     "to be in love with any one."]

nay called to thee in her dreams; I know it from Kandake, her black
maid."  The pioneer looked down and said:

"How extraordinary! and the same night I had a vision in which your
mistress appeared to me; the insolent priest in the temple of Hathor
should have interpreted it to me."

"And he refused? the fool! but other folks understand dreams, and I am
not the worst of them--Ask thy servant.  Ninety-nine times out of a
hundred my interpretations come true.  How was the vision?"

"I stood by the Nile," said Paaker, casting down his eyes and drawing
lines with his whip through the wool of the cabin rug.  "The water was
still, and I saw Nefert standing on the farther bank, and beckoning to
me.  I called to her, and she stepped on the water, which bore her up as
if it were this carpet.  She went over the water dry-foot as if it were
the stony wilderness.  A wonderful sight!  She came nearer to me, and
nearer, and already I had tried to take her hand, when she ducked under
like a swan.  I went into the water to seize her, and when she came up
again I clasped her in my arms; but then the strangest thing happened--
she flowed away, she dissolved like the snow on the Syrian hills, when
you take it in your hand, and yet it was not the same, for her hair
turned to water-lilies, and her eyes to blue fishes that swam away
merrily, and her lips to twigs of coral that sank at once, and from her
body grew a crocodile, with a head like Mena, that laughed and gnashed
its teeth at me.  Then I was seized with blind fury; I threw myself upon
him with a drawn sword, he fastened his teeth in my flesh, I pierced his
throat with my weapon; the Nile was dark with our streaming blood, and so
we fought and fought--it lasted an eternity--till I awoke."

Paaker drew a deep breath as he ceased speaking; as if his wild dream
tormented him again.

The dwarf had listened with eager attention, but several minutes passed
before he spoke.

"A strange dream," he said, "but the interpretation as to the future is
not hard to find.  Nefert is striving to reach thee, she longs to be
thine, but if thou dost fancy that she is already in thy grasp she will
elude thee; thy hopes will melt like ice, slip away like sand, if thou
dost not know how to put the crocodile out of the way."

At this moment the boat struck the landing-place.  The pioneer started
up, and cried, "We have reached the end!"

"We have reached the end," echoed the little man with meaning.  "There is
only a narrow bridge to step over."

When they both stood on the shore, the dwarf said,

"I  have  to  thank  thee  for  thy  hospitality,  and when I can serve
thee command me."

"Come here," cried the pioneer, and drew Nemu away with him under the
shade of a sycamore veiled in the half light of the departing sun.

"What do you mean by a bridge which we must step over?  I do not
understand the flowers of speech, and desire plain language."

The dwarf reflected for a moment; and then asked, "Shall I say nakedly
and openly what I mean, and will you not be angry?"

"Speak!"

"Mena is the crocodile.  Put him out of the world, and you will have
passed the bridge; then Nefert will be thine--if thou wilt listen to me."

"What shall I do?"

"Put the charioteer out of the world."

Paaker's gesture seemed to convey that that was a thing that had long
been decided on, and he turned his face, for a good omen, so that the
rising moon should be on his right hand.

The dwarf went on.

"Secure Nefert, so that she may not vanish like her image in the dream,
before you reach the goal; that is to say, ransom the honor of your
future mother and wife, for how could you take an outcast into your
house?"

Paaker looked thoughtfully at the ground.

"May I inform my mistress that thou wilt save her?"  asked Nemu.
"I may?--Then all will be well, for he who will devote a fortune to love
will not hesitate to devote a reed lance with a brass point to it to his
love and his hatred together."




CHAPTER XVI.

The sun had set, and darkness covered the City of the Dead, but the moon
shone above the valley of the kings' tombs, and the projecting masses of
the rocky walls of the chasm threw sharply-defined shadows.  A weird
silence lay upon the desert, where yet far more life was stirring than in
the noonday hour, for now bats darted like black silken threads through
the night air, owls hovered aloft on wide-spread wings, small troops of
jackals slipped by, one following the other up the mountain slopes.  From
time to time their hideous yell, or the whining laugh of the hyena, broke
the stillness of the night.

Nor was human life yet at rest in the valley of tombs.  A faint light
glimmered in the cave of the sorceress Hekt, and in front of the
paraschites' but a fire was burning, which the grandmother of the sick
Uarda now and then fed with pieces of dry manure.  Two men were seated in
front of the hut, and gazed in silence on the thin flame, whose impure
light was almost quenched by the clearer glow of the moon; whilst the
third, Uarda's father, disembowelled a large ram, whose head he had
already cut off.

"How the jackals howl!"  said the old paraschites, drawing as he spoke
the torn brown cotton cloth, which he had put on as a protection against
the night air and the dew, closer round his bare shoulders.

"They scent the fresh meat," answered the physician, Nebsecht.  "Throw
them the entrails, when you have done; the legs and back you can roast.
Be careful how you cut out the heart--the heart, soldier.  There it is!
What a great beast."

Nebsecht took the ram's heart in his hand, and gazed at it with the
deepest attention, whilst the old paraschites watched him anxiously.  At
length:

"I promised," he said, "to do for you what you wish, if you restore the
little one to health; but you ask for what is impossible."

"Impossible?"  said the physician, "why, impossible?  You open the
corpses, you go in and out of the house of the embalmer.  Get possession
of one of the canopi,

     [Vases of clay, limestone, or alabaster, which were used for the
     preservation of the intestines of the embalmed Egyptians, and
     represented the four genii of death, Amset, Hapi, Tuamutef, and
