
"I know you will, Commander. I have absolutely no fear on that score.
How's everything going?" The twangy voice across the abyss of space took
on a solicitous tone that set his nerves on edge. Something's
wrong--something bad, he thought. The Colonel sounded like a doctor
asking a dying patient how he felt.

"Okay, everything seems in hand. We've got the ship in good shape and
Larkwell thinks we might fare pretty well with the drone. It might be in
better shape than we first thought."

"Good, good, glad to hear it. We need a silver lining once in a while,
eh?"

"Yeah, but I'm fairly certain you didn't call just to cheer me up," Crag
said dryly. "What's on your mind?" The silence came again, a little
longer this time.




CHAPTER 13


"You're in trouble." Gotch spoke like a man carefully choosing his
words. "Intelligence informs us that another rocket's been fired from
east of the Caspian. BuNav's got a track on it."

Crag waited.

"There are two possibilities," Gotch continued. "The first and most
logical assumption is that it's manned. We surmise that from the fact
that their first manned rocket was successful--that is, as far as
reaching the moon is concerned. The assumption is further borne out by
its trajectory and rate of acceleration." His voice fell off.

"And the second possibility?" Crag prompted.

"Warhead," Gotch said succinctly. "Intelligence informs us that the
enemy is prepared to blow Arzachel off the face of the moon if they fail
to take it over. And they have failed--so far." Crag tossed the idea
around in his mind.

He said fretfully, "I doubt if they could put a warhead down on
Arzachel. That takes some doing. Hell, it's tough enough to monitor one
in from here, let alone smack from earth."

"I think you're right, but they can try." Gotch's voice became brisk.
"Here's the dope as we see it. We think the rocket contains a landing
party for the purpose of establishing a moon base. In Arzachel,
naturally, because that's where the lode is."

"More to the point, you expect an attack on Pickering Base," Crag
interjected.

"Well, yes, I think that is a reasonable assumption...."

Crag weighed the information. Gotch was probably right. A nuclear
explosion on the moon would be detected on earth. That was the dangerous
course--the shot that could usher in World War III and perhaps a new
cave era.

Attack by a landing party seemed more logical. They batted ideas back
and forth. The Colonel suggested that just before the landing phase of
Red Dog--the code name assigned the new rocket--Crag post armed guards
at some point covering the Aztec.

"Might as well get some use out of Bandit's automatic weapons," Gotch
dryly concluded.

Crag disagreed. He didn't think it likely that any attack would take the
form of a simple armed assault. "That would give us time to get off a
message," he argued. "They can't afford that."

Gotch pointed out that neither could they launch a missile while still
in space. "A homing weapon couldn't differentiate between Aztec, Baker
and Bandit," he said.

"But they'd still have to have some sure fire quick-kill method," Crag
insisted.

"You may be right. Have you a better plan?"

Crag did, and outlined it in some detail. Gotch listened without comment
until he had finished.

"Could work," he said finally. "However, it's going to shoot your
schedule, even if you could do it."

"Why can't we?"

"You're not supermen, Commander," he said tersely. "The psychiatrists
here inform us that your crew--as individuals--should be near the
breaking point. We know the cumulative strain. To be truthful with you,
we've been getting gray hair over that prospect."

"Nuts to the psychiatrists," Crag declared with a certainty he didn't
feel. "Men don't break when their survival depends on their sanity."

"No?" The single word came across the void, soft and low.

"We can do it," Crag persisted.

"All right, I agree with the plan. I think you're wrong but you're the
Commander in the field." His voice was flat. "Good luck." He cut off
abruptly.

Crag looked at the silent panel for a moment. Another problem, another
solution required. Maybe Gotch was right. Maybe they'd all wind up as
candidates for the laughing academy--if they lived long enough. The
thought didn't cheer him. Well, he'd better get moving. There was a lot
to be done. He looked up and saw the question in Prochaska's eyes. Might
as well tell him, he thought.

He repeated the information Gotch had given, together with his plan.
Prochaska listened quietly, nodding from time to time. When he finished,
they discussed the pros and cons of Crag's proposed course of action.
Prochaska thought it would work. In the end they decided to pursue the
plan without telling the others the full story. It might be the breaking
point, especially for Nagel, and they would be needing a good oxygen man
in the coming days. Crag got on the interphone and called Larkwell, who
was working in the tail section with the others.

"Judging from what you've seen of Bandit, how long would it take to make
it livable as crew quarters?"

"Why?" he asked querulously.

"I haven't time to go into that now," Crag said evenly. "Just give me
your best estimate."

"You can't make it livable. It's hot."

"Not that hot. You've just got the radiation creeps. Let's have the
estimate."

Larkwell considered a moment. "There's quite a weld job on the hull,
assuming we could get the necessary patch metal from Bandit. We'd have
to haul one helluva lot of gear across that damned desert--"

"How long?" Crag cut in.

"Well, three days, at least. But that's a minimum figure."

"That's the figure you'll have to meet," Crag promised grimly. "Start
now. Use Nagel and Richter. Load up the gear you'll need and get in a
trip before chow."

"Now?" Larkwell's voice was incredulous. "What about winding up this job
first? The airlock is damned important."

"Drop it," Crag said briefly. There was silence at the other end of the
interphone.

"Okay," the construction boss grumbled finally.

Crag suggested that Prochaska make the first trip with them to look over
Bandit's electronic gear. He would need to know what repairs and
modifications would be necessary to make it usable. The Chief was
delighted. It would mark the first time he'd been out of the space cabin
since the day of their landing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crag watched them leave through the port. It was impossible to tell the
crew members apart in their bulky garments. The extra oxygen and the
tools Larkwell had selected gave them an odd shambling gait, despite the
low gravity. They plodded in single file, winding slowly across the
plain. The thought struck him that they resembled grotesque life forms
from some alien planet. For just a moment he felt sorry, and a trifle
guilty, over assigning Nagel to the trip. The oxygen man was already in
a state of perpetual fatigue. Still, he couldn't allow anyone the luxury
of rest. Work was in the cards--grueling, slavish toil if they were to
survive.

It struck Crag that this was a moment of great risk. Of the four figures
plodding toward Bandit, one was an enemy ... one a saboteur. Yet, what
could either accomplish by striking now? Nothing! _Not while I live_, he
thought. Strangely enough, Richter bothered him more than the saboteur.
There was a quality about the man he couldn't decipher, an armor he
couldn't penetrate. It occurred to him that, outwardly at least, Richter
was much like Prochaska--quiet, calm, steady. He performed the tasks
assigned him without question ... evinced no hostility, no resentment.
He was seemingly oblivious to Nagel's barbs and Larkwell's occasional
surly rebuffs. On the face of the record he was an asset--a work horse
who performed far more labor than Nagel.

He decided he couldn't write the German off as a factor to be
continually weighed--weighed and watched. He was no ordinary man. Of
that he was sure. Richter's presence on the enemy's first moon rocket
was ample testimony of his stature. What were his thoughts? His plans?
What fires burned behind his placid countenance? Crag wished he knew.
One thing was certain. He could never lower his guard. Not for a second.

He sighed and turned away from the viewport. A lot of data had piled up.
He'd give Alpine a little work to do to get Gotch off his neck. He
reached for the communicator thinking of Ann. Probably got someone else
lined up by now, he thought sourly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Work on Bandit progressed slowly. Nagel dragged through each successive
work shift on the verge of exhaustion. Crag expected him to collapse
momentarily. His disintegration took him further and further from the
group. He ate silently, with eyes averted. He didn't protest the
arduous hours, but the amount of work he performed was negligible.
Larkwell maintained his stamina but had become more quiet in the
process. He seldom smiled ... never joked. Occasionally he was truculent
or derisive, referring to Bandit as the "Commander's hot box."

Richter remained impersonal and aloof, but performed his assigned tasks
without apparent resentment. Crag noticed that he stayed as far from
Larkwell as possible, perhaps fearing violence from the burly
construction boss. Prochaska, alone, maintained a cheerful exterior--for
which Crag was thankful.

He was watching them now--the evening of the last day of Larkwell's
three-day estimate--returning from the Bandit. The four figures were
strung out over half a mile. He regarded that as a bad omen. They no
longer worked as a crew, but as separate individuals, each in his
separate world, with exception of Prochaska. He turned away from the
port with the familiar feeling that time was running out, and mentally
reviewed what remained to be done.

Making Bandit habitable was a must. There still remained the arduous
task of transferring their belongings and gear to Bandit. Drone Baker
had to be toppled and her cargo salvaged. Then there was Drone Charlie,
at present just a minute speck somewhere in the great void between earth
and her moon; but in somewhat less than forty-eight hours it would
represent tons of metal hurtling over the rim of Arzachel. This time
they couldn't fumble the ball. The building of the airlock in the rill
loomed in the immediate future--an oppressive shadow that caused him no
end of worry. There were other problems, too--like the item of Red
Dog ... the possible battle for control of the moon.

Red Dog, in particular, had become the prime shadow darkening Arzachel's
ashy plains. He thought about the emotional deterioration which had laid
an iron grip over the expedition and wondered if they could hang on
through the rough days ahead. All in all, the task of colonizing the
moon appeared an extremely formidable one. He shook off his
apprehensions and began planning his next step.

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening Crag knocked off the usual three hour work period following
evening chow. Nagel tumbled onto his pad and was asleep almost
instantly. His breathing was a harsh rasp. At Crag's suggestion
Prochaska took the watch until midnight. Crag stood guard the remainder
of the night to allow Nagel and Larkwell a full night's rest.

While the others slept, Crag brooded at the port. Once he ran his hand
over his face, surprised at the hardness. All bone and no flesh, he
thought. He looked toward the north wall of Arzachel.

In a few short hours Drone Charlie would come blazing over the rim, and
Red Dog snapping at its heels.




CHAPTER 14


"Adam Crag was not a God-fearing man," the minister stated. His tone
implied that Crag had been just the opposite. "Not a bit like his
parents. The best family guidance in the world, yet he quit Sunday
school almost before he got started. I doubt that he's ever been to
church since."

He looked archly at the agent. "Perhaps a godless world like the moon is
just retribution."

A garage mechanic, a junk dealer and the proprietor of a tool shop had a
lot to say about Adam Crag. So did the owner of a small private
airport. They remembered him as a boy with an insatiable appetite for
tearing cars apart and converting them to what the junk dealer termed
"supersonic jalopies."

Many people in El Cajon remembered Adam Crag. Strangely enough, his
teachers all the way back through grade school had little difficulty in
recalling his antics and attitudes. An elementary teacher explained it
by saying, "He was that kind of a boy."

The family doctor had the most to say about Adam. He had long since
retired, a placid seventyish man who had elected to pass his last years
in the same house, in an older section of the town, in which he'd been
born.

He sat swinging and talking, reminiscing about "the growing up of young
Adam," as he put it. The agent had made himself at home on the front
steps, listening. The doctor's comments were little short of being an
eulogy.

He finished and was silent, tapping a black briar pipe against his hand
while he contemplated the agent with eyes which had long since ceased to
see.

"One other thing," he added finally. "Adam was sure a heller with the
girls."

The agent started to comment that Crag's dossier looked like the roll
call of a girl's dormitory but refrained. He didn't want to prejudice
the testimony.

       *       *       *       *       *

Zero hour on the plains of Arzachel. The sun, an intolerably brilliant
ball pasted against the ebony sky, had started its drop toward the
horizon. The shadows on the plain were lengthening, harbingers of the
bitter two-weeks-long night to come. They crept out from the sheer wall
of the crater, reaching to engulf Pickering Base with icy fingers.

Crag and Prochaska were alone, now, in the stripped cabin of the Aztec.
Nagel and Richter, under Larkwell's command, had departed for Bandit an
hour earlier with the last of their supplies. Crag disliked splitting
the crew but saw no alternative. He had to gamble. The element of
certainty, the ability to predict, the expectations of logic--all these
had vanished, swept away by the vagaries of chance. They could do only
so much. Beyond that their fate was pawn to the chaotic cross fires of
human elements pitted against the architecture of the cosmos. They were
puppets in the last lottery of probability.

Prochaska broke the silence: "It's going to be close."

Crag's eyes remained riveted to the instruments. Drone Charlie and Red
Dog were plunging through space separated by a scant half-hour's flight
time. Despite the drone's long launch lead, the gap between the two
rockets had been narrowed to a perilous point. Drone Charlie was
decelerating rapidly, her braking rockets flaring spasmodically to slow
her headlong flight.

"We'd better get into our suits," Crag said finally. "We want to get out
of this baby the second Charlie lets down."

Prochaska nodded. They left their suits unpressurized for the time being
to allow full mobility. In the moments ahead Prochaska, in particular,
couldn't afford to be hampered by the rigidity the suit possessed when
under pressure.

They turned back to the control panel. Charlie was hurtling over
Alphons, dropping toward the bleak lunar landscape with incredible
speed. The mechanical voice from Alpine droned a stream of data. There
was a rapid exchange of information between Prochaska and Alpine. At its
conclusion he began taking over control of the drone. Crag watched
tensely. Prochaska's fingers, even though encased in the heavy suit
material, moved with certainty. In a little while he spoke without
looking up.

"Got it," he said laconically. He studied the instruments, then his
fingers sought the buttons controlling Charlie's forward braking
rockets.

Crag thought: _This is it._ Within scant moments the drone had covered
the sky over the tangled land lying between Alphons and Arzachel. It
swept over the brimming cliffs at a scant two thousand feet. He saw the
rocket through the forward ports. White vapor flared from its nose
rockets. The Chief had it under full deceleration. The cloud of vapor
covered its body. Prochaska moved the steering control and the rocket
slanted upward at ever-increasing angle of climb. Crag strained his neck
to keep it in sight. He thought its rate of climb was too rapid but
Prochaska seemed unperturbed. His calm approach to the problem of
landing the drone gave Crag renewed confidence.

All at once, it seemed, Drone Charlie was hanging high in the sky, a
tapered needle miraculously suspended in the heavens. Then it began
dropping ... dropping. Bursts of smoke and white vapor shot from its
tail jets, becoming continuous as the rocket hurtled toward the plain.
The drone was lost to sight in its own clouds, but he charted its
progress by the vapor spurts at its lower edge. Prochaska was draining
the tail braking jets of every ounce of energy. Suddenly the rocket gave
the illusion of hanging in mid-air. The gap between it and the stark
terrain below seemed to have stopped closing. Crag half expected the
blasting stern tubes to begin pushing the drone back into the sky.
But ... no! It was moving down again, slowly.

Prochaska moved another control. A servo-mechanism within the rocket
stirred to life and a spidery metal network moved out from its tail
housing. The drone dropped steadily, ever slower, and finally settled.
