A solemn engagement to the Lord, and among ourselves, in a sure
covenant. Wherein we may consider these five things.

_First_, The nature of a covenant, from the whole.

_Secondly_, The grounds of a covenant, from those words, "because of all
this."

_Thirdly_, The property of a covenant, in that epithet, Sure--"we make a
sure covenant."

_Fourthly_, The parties entering into, and engaging themselves in a
covenant, expressed by their several degrees and functions, Princes,
Levites, priests. And were these all? All whom this verse specifies, and
enow to bring in all the rest? Where the governors and the teachers go
before in an holy example, what honest heart will not follow? And the
next chapter shews us, all who were honest hearted, following this holy
example, verse 28: "And the rest of the people, the priests, the
Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had
separated themselves from the people of the lands, unto the law of God,
their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having
knowledge, and having understanding: They clave unto their brethren,
their nobles, and entered into," &c.

_Fifthly_, The outward acts by which they testified their inward sincere
consent, and engaged themselves to continue faithful in that covenant:
First, writing it. Second, sealing to it. Third, (in the tenth chapter,
ver. 29.) "They entered into a curse." Fourth, "Into an oath, to walk in
God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe
to do all the commandments of the Lord their God, with the statutes and
judgments. And that they would not give their daughters to the people of
the land," &c: with divers many articles of that covenant, tending both
to their ecclesiastical and civil reformation.

I begin with the first point, the nature of a covenant. Concerning
which, we may receive some light from the notation of the original
words; 1. For a covenant. 2. For the making of a covenant. The Hebrew
_Berith (a covenant)_ comes from _Barah_, which signifieth two things:
_First_, To choose exactly, and judiciously. _Second_, To eat
moderately, or sparingly. And both these significations of the root
_Barah_, have an influence upon this derivative _Berith_, a covenant:
the former of these intimating, if not enforcing, that a covenant is a
work of sad and serious deliberation, for such are elective acts.
Election is, or ought to be made, upon the rational turn of judgment,
not upon a catch of fancy, or the hurry of our passions.

Now, in a covenant, there is a double work of election: _First_, An
election of the persons, between whom. _Second_, An election of the
conditions, or terms upon which the covenant is entered. As God's
covenant people are His chosen people, so must ours. Some persons will
not enter into covenant, though invited; and others, though they offer
themselves, are not to be admitted. They who are not fit to build with
us, are not fit to swear with us. Some offered their help to the Jews in
the repair of the temple, "Let us build with you, for we seek your God."
But this tender of their service was refused. "Ye have nothing to do
with us, to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will
build." What should we do with their hands in the work, whose hearts, we
know, are not in the work? The intendment of such enjoining, must be
either to build their hay and stubble with our gold and silver, or else
to pull down by night what they build by day, and secretly to undermine
that noble fabric, which seemingly they endeavoured to set up. We find
in this book of Nehemiah, that the persons combining in that covenant,
were choice persons. The text of the tenth chapter, sets two marks of
distinction upon them. _First_, "All they that separated themselves from
the people of the lands, unto the law of God." _Second_, All "having
knowledge, and having understanding." Here are two qualifications,
whereof one is spiritual, and the other is natural. The plain English of
both may be this, "that fools and malignants, such as (in some measure)
know not the cause, and such as have no love at all to the cause, should
be outcasts from this covenant." Such sapless and rotten stuff will but
weaken, if not corrupt this sacred band.

The tenor of the covenant now tendered, speaks thus respecting the
persons. "We noblemen, barons, knights, gentlemen, citizens, burgesses,
ministers of the gospel, and commons, of all sorts, in the kingdom of
England, Scotland, and Ireland." And doth not this indistinctly admit
all, and all, of all sorts? I answer, no. For the words following in
the preface, shew expressly, that only they are called to it, who are of
one reformed religion; which shuts out all papists, till they return.
And the articles pass them through a finer sieve, admitting only such as
promise, yea, and swear, that through the grace of God, they will
sincerely, really, and constantly endeavour the preservation of the
reformed religion, against the common enemy in the one kingdom, the
reformation and extirpation of what is amiss in the other two; as also,
in their own persons, families, and relations. They who do thus, are
choice persons indeed, and they who swear to do thus, are (in charity
and justice) to be reputed so, till their own acts and omissions falsify
their oaths. Thus our covenant makes an equivalent, though not a formal
or nominal election of the persons.

_Second_, There must be a choice of conditions in a covenant; as the
persons obliged, so the matter of the obligation must be distinct. This
is so eminent in the covenant offered, that I may spare my pains in the
clearing of it; every man's pains in reading of it, cannot but satisfy
him, that there are six national conditions about which we make solemn
oath, and one personal, about which we make a most solemn profession and
declaration, before God and the world. And all these are choice
conditions: such as may well be held forth to be (as indeed they are)
the results and issues of many prayers, and serious consultations, in
both the kingdoms of England and Scotland. Conditions they are, in which
holiness and wisdom, piety and policy, zeal for God in purging His
church, and care for man in settling the commonwealth, appear to have
had (in a due subordination) their equal hand and share.

Thus much of a covenant, from the force of the word in the first sense,
leading us to the choice both of persons and conditions.

_Second_, The root signifies, to eat moderately, or so much as breaks
our fast. And this refers also to the nature of a covenant, which is to
draw men into a friendly and holy communion, and converse one with
another. "David describes a familiar friend, in whom he trusted, to be
one, that did eat of his bread." And the apostle Paul, when he would
have a scandalous brother denied all fellowship in church-covenant, he
charges it thus, "With such a one, no not to eat." Hence it was a custom
upon the making up of covenants, for the parties covenanting, soberly to
feast together. "When Isaac and Abimelech sware one to another, and made
a covenant; the sacred story tells us, that Isaac made them a feast, and
they did eat and drink." A covenant is a binder of affection, to assure
it, but it is a loosner of affection, to express it. And their hearts
are most free to one another, which are most bound to one another. How
unbecoming is it, that they who swear together, should be so strange as
scarce to speak together? That which unites, ought also to multiply our
affections.

Further, the word hints so to converse together as not to sin together;
for it signifies moderation in eating. As if it would teach us, that at
a covenant-feast, or when covenanters feast, they should have more
grace, than meat at their tables: or if (through the blessing of God)
their meat be much, their temperance should be more. The covenant yields
us much business, and calls to action: excess soils our gifts, and damps
our spirits, fitting us for sleep, not for work. In and by this
covenant, we (who were almost carried into spiritual and corporal
slavery) are called to strive for the mastery. Let us therefore (as this
word and the apostle's rule instruct us) "Be temperate in all things."
Intemperate excessive eaters will be but moderate workers, especially in
covenant-work. A little will satisfy their consciences, who are given up
to satisfy their carnal appetites. And he who makes his belly his god,
will not make much of the glory of God.

So much concerning the nature of a covenant, from the original word;
for a covenant, signifying both to chuse, and to eat. We may take in
some further light to discover the things from the original word, which
we translate "make"--"Let us make a covenant."

That word signifies properly to cut, to strike, or to slay. The reason
hereof is given, because at the making of solemn covenants, beasts were
killed and divided asunder, and the covenant-makers went between the
parts. When God made that first grand covenant with Abraham, He said
unto him, "Take an heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three
years old. And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the
midst, and laid all those pieces one against another." "Behold, a
smoking furnace, and a burning lamp" (which latter was the token of
God's presence for the deliverance of His people) passed between those
pieces. In Jeremiah we have the like ceremony in making a covenant,
"They cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof." Upon
this usage the phrase is grounded of cutting or striking a covenant.
Which ceremony had this signification in it, that when they passed
between those divided parts of the slain beast, the action spake this
curse or imprecation, "Let him be cut asunder, let his members be
divided, let him be made as this beast, who violates the oath of this
covenant."

From these observations about the words, we may be directed about the
nature of the thing: and thence collect this description of a covenant.
A covenant is a solemn compact or agreement between two chosen parties
or more, whereby with mutual, free, and full consent they bind
themselves upon select conditions, tending to the glory of God, and
their common good.

A covenant strictly considered, is more than a promise, and less than an
oath; unless an oath be joined with it, as was with that in the text,
and is with this we have now before us. A covenant differs from a
promise gradually, and in the formalities of it, not naturally, or in
the substance of it. God made promises to Abraham, Gen. xii. and Gen.
xiii. but He made no covenant with him, till chap. xv. ver. 18. "In that
day the Lord made a covenant with Abraham." And the work of the Lord in
that day with Abraham, had not only truth and mercy in it, but state and
majesty in it. A covenant day, is a solemn day. As the collection of
many stars makes a constellation, so the collection of many promises
makes a covenant. Or, as in the first of Genesis, "The gathering
together of the waters, was by the Lord called seas:" so we may call the
gathering together of promises, or conditions, a covenant. The Lord doth
(as it were) rally all the promises of mercy made to us, which lie
scattered up and down through the whole volume of the scriptures, and
puts them together into a covenant: and we do (as it were) rally all the
promises of duty which we owe unto God, and to one another, and put them
together in a covenant. Such a bundle of duty is tied up in this present
covenant; what duty is there which we owe to God, to His churches, or
these commonwealths whereof we make not promise, either expressly, or by
consequence in the compass of this covenant? And how great an obligation
to duly doth this contain, wherein there is an obligation to every duty?

Seeing then this covenant, being taken, carries in it so great an
obligation, it calls for great preparation before we take it. A
slightness of spirit in taking this covenant, must needs cause a
slightness of spirit in keeping it. All solemn duties, ought to have
solemn preparations; and this I think, as solemn as any. A Christian
ought to set his heart (as far as he can through the strength of Christ)
into a praying frame, before he kneels down to prayer. And we ought to
set our hearts in a promising frame, before we stand up to make such
mighty promises. "Take heed how ye hear," is our Saviour's admonition in
the gospel; surely then we had need take heed how we swear. "Let a man
examine himself (saith the apostle Paul) and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup;" let him come examined to the sacrament:
so I may say, "Let a man examine himself, before he lift up his hand, or
write down his name;" let him come examined to the covenant.

I shall briefly propose three heads of preparatory examination,
respecting our entrance into this covenant.

_First_, Examine your hearts, and your lives, whether or no you are not
pre-engaged in any covenant contrary to the tenor and conditions of this
covenant? If any such upon inquiry be found, be sure you avoid it,
before you engage yourselves in this. A super-institution in this kind,
is very dangerous. Every man must look to it, that he takes this
covenant _(corde vacante)_ with a heart emptied of all covenants which
are inconsistent with this. For a man to covenant with Christ and His
people for reformation, while he hath either taken a covenant with
others, or made a covenant in his own breast against it, is desperate
wickedness. Or if upon a self-search, you find yourselves clear of any
such engagements, yet search further. Every man by nature is a
covenanter with hell, and with every sin he is at agreement: be sure you
revoke and cancel that covenant, before you subscribe this. "If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer;" that is, He
will not regard my prayers, (saith David). And if we regard iniquity in
our hearts, the Lord will not hear us covenanting; that is, He will not
regard our covenant. Woe be unto those who make this league with God and
His people, while they resolve to continue their league with sin: which
is (upon the matter) a league with Satan. God and Satan will never meet
in one covenant. "For what communion hath light with darkness? and what
concord hath Christ and Belial?"

_Second_, Before you enter into this covenant with God, consider of, and
repent for this special sin, your former breaches and failings in God's
covenant. "We who were sometimes afar off, aliens from the commonwealth
of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise, are made nigh by
the blood of Jesus," even so nigh, as to be in covenant with God. Some
who pretend to this privilege, will be found "Such as have counted the
blood of the covenant to be an unholy thing." And where is the man that
walketh so holily in this covenant as becomes him, and as it requires?
Labour therefore to have those breaches healed by a fresh sprinkling of
the blood of Christ upon your consciences, before you enter this
covenant: If you put this new piece to an old garment, the rent will be
made worse: If you put this new wine into old bottles, the bottles will
break, and all your expected comforts will run out and be lost. If you
should not feel and search your own hearts, without doubt the Lord will.
"And if you be found as deceivers, you will bring a curse upon
yourselves, and not a blessing." This is a covenant of amity with God:
reconciliation must go before friendship, you can never make friendship
till you have made peace, nor settle love, where hostility is unremoved.

_Third_, Inquire diligently at your own hearts, whether they come up to
the terms of this covenant? You must bid high for the honour of a
covenanter, for a part in this privilege. "Which of you," saith our Lord
Christ to His hearers, "intending to build a tower, sitteth not down
first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?
Lest haply after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish
it, all that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, this man began to
build, and was not able to finish." We are met this day to lay the
foundation of one tower, and to pull up the foundation of another; we
are pulling up the foundation of Babel's tower, and we are laying a
foundation for Zion's tower. We have seen some who have heretofore done
as much, but they have done no more; when they had laid a foundation
for those noble works in taking a solemn oath and covenant, they have
never moved a hand after either to build or to pull down, unless it were
quite cross to their own engagements, for the pulling down of Zion's
tower, and the building of Babylon.

And what was the reason of this stand, or contrary motion? this surely
was one, they did not gage their own hearts before hand, neither did
they sit down to count the cost of such an undertaking. And therefore
when they perceived the charge to arise so high, they neither could
finish, nor would they endeavour it, but left the work before it looked
above the ground; and are justly become a mock and a scorn and a
reproach in Israel, these are the men that began in a solemn covenant to
build, but could not finish; they had not stock enough either of true
honour or honesty (tho' their stock of parts and opportunities was
sufficient) to finish this work.

Let us therefore sit down seriously and count the cost; yea and consider
whether we be willing to be at the cost. To lead you on in this, my
humble advice is, that you would catechise your hearts upon the articles
of this covenant. Put the question to your hearts, and let every one say
this unto himself:

Am I indeed resolved sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace
of God, in my place and calling, to endeavour the preservation of the
reformed religion in the church of Scotland? The reformation of religion
in the kingdoms of England and Ireland?

Am I indeed resolved in like manner, without respect of persons, to
endeavour the extirpation of popery, prelacy?

Am I indeed resolved never to be withdrawn or divided by whatsoever
terror or persuasion from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to
make defection to the contrary part, or to give myself to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality in this cause of God?

Am I indeed resolved to humble myself for my own sins, and the sins of
the kingdom? to amend myself, and all in my power, and to go before
others in the example of a real reformation?

According to these hints, propose the question upon every clause of this
covenant. And then consider what the cost of performing all these may
amount to, and whether you are willing to go to that cost.

But it may be, some will say, what is this cost? I answer, the express
letter of the covenant tells you of one cost which you must be
constantly at, and that is sincere, real, and constant endeavour. Pains
is a price, I am sure real pains is. The heathens said, "That their gods
sold them all good things for labour." The good things of this covenant
are sold at that rate; yea, this is the price which the true God puts
upon those things which He freely gives. To consent to this covenant, to
wish well to this covenant, to speak well of this covenant, come not up
to the price; you must do these, and you must do more, you must be
doing, so the promise of every man for himself runs, I will through the
grace of God endeavour. Yet every endeavour is not current money,
payable as the price of this covenant: there must be a threefold stamp
upon it. Unless it bear the image and superscription of sincerity,
reality, and constancy, it will not be accepted. For so the promise
runs, "I will sincerely, really, and constantly endeavour."

Neither yet is this all. Such endeavours are virtually money; but as
this covenant calls also for money formally, as the price of it, he that
really endeavours after such ends, as here are proposed, must not only
be at the cost of his pains, but also at the cost of his purse for the
attainment of them. He must open his hand to give and to lend as well as
to work and labour. Unless a man be free of his purse as well as of his
pains, he bides not up to the demands of this covenant, nor pays up to
his own promise when he entered into it. Can that man be said really to
endeavour the maintenance of a cause while he lets it starve? or, to
strengthen it while he keeps the sinews of it close shut up? Would he
have the chariot move swiftly, who only draws but will not oil the
wheels? Know then and consider it that the cost you must be at is both
in your labours and in your estates. The engagement runs to both these:
and to more than both these.

The covenant engages us not only to do but to suffer, not only to
endeavour but to endure. Such is the tenor of the sixth article where
every man promises for himself that he will not suffer himself to be
withdrawn from this blessed Union by any terrors. If not by any terror,
then not by any losses, imprisonments, torments, no, nor by death, that
king of terrors. You see, then, that the price of this covenant may be
the price of blood, of liberty, and of life. Sit down and consider. Are
you willing to be at this cost to build the tower? Through the goodness
of God in ordering these great affairs, you may never come actually to
pay down so much, haply, not half so much, but except you resolve (if
called and put to it by the real exigencies of this cause) to pay down
the utmost farthing, your spirits are too narrow and your hearts too low
for the honour and tenor of this covenant. If any shall say these
demands are very high and the charge very great, but is a part in this
covenant worth it? Will it quit cost to be at so great a charge? Wise
men love to see and have somewhat for their money; and when they see
they will not stick at any cost so the considerations be valuable.

For the answering and clearing of this, I shall pass to the Second point
which holds forth the grounds of a covenant from those words of the
text, "And because of all this." If any one shall be troubled at the
"All this" in the price, I doubt not but the "All this" in the grounds
will satisfy him. Because of all this, we make a sure covenant. Here
observe:

1. A covenant must be grounded on reason: we must shew the cause why.
God often descends, but man is bound, to give a reason of what he doeth.
Some of God's actions are above reason, but none without reason. All our
actions ought to be level with reason and with common reason, for it is
a common act. That which men of all capacities are called to do, should
lie in the reach of every man's capacity. Observe:

2. A covenant must be grounded on weighty reason; there must be much
light in the reason (as was shewed before) but no lightness. "Because of
all this" saith the text. There were many things in it, and much weight
in every one of them.

And the reasons, in their proportion, must at least be as weighty as the
conditions. Weighty conditions will never be balanced with light
reasons. If a man ask a thousand pounds for a jewel, he is bound to
demonstrate that his jewel is intrinsically worth so much, else no wise
man will come up to his demands. So when great things are demanded to be
paid down by all who take part in this covenant, we are obliged to
demonstrate and hold forth an equivalent of worth in the grounds and
nature of it. Hence observe

3. That the reasons of a covenant must be express, "Because of all
this." _This_ is demonstrative. Here's the matter laid before you,
consider of it, examine it thoroughly. This is fair dealing, when a man
sees why he undertakes, and what he may expect, before he is engaged.
And so may say, "Because of this, and this, because of all this," I have
entered into the covenant.

But what were the particulars that made up the gross sum of all this? I
answer, those particulars lie scattered throughout the chapter, the
attentive reader will easily find them out; I shall in brief reduce
them unto two heads. 1. The defection and corruptions that were crept
in, or openly brought in among them. 2. The afflictions, troubles, and
judgments that either were already fallen, or were feared would further
fall upon them.

The former of these causes is laid down in the 34 and 35 verses of this
chapter. "Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our
fathers kept Thy law, nor hearkened to Thy commandments, and Thy
testimonies, wherewith Thou didst testify against them. For they have
not served Thee in Thy kingdom, and in Thy great goodness."

The latter of these reasons is contained in the 36 and 37 verses.
"Behold, we are servants this day; and for the land which Thou gavest
unto our fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof,
behold, we are servants in it." The close of all is, we are in great
distress. From this narrative of the grounds, the making of a covenant
is inferred as a conclusion, in the immediate subsequent words of the
text, "because of all this." As if he had said, "because we are a people
who have so departed from the laws and statutes of our God, and are so
corrupted both in worship, and in practice; because we are a people so
oppressed in our estates, and liberties, and so distressed by judgments
and afflictions: therefore, because of all this, we make a sure
covenant."

And if we peruse the records of the holy Scripture, we shall find, that
either both these grounds conjoined, or one of them, are expressed as
the reasons at any time inducing the people of God, to enter into the
bond of a covenant. This is evident in Asa's covenant, 2 Chron. xv. 12,
13. In Hezekiah's, 2 Chron. xxix. 10. In Josiah's, 2 Chron. xxxiv. 30,
31. In Ezra's, chap. x. 3. To all which, I refer the reader for
satisfaction. And, from all consenting with this in the text, I observe:

That when a people are corrupted or declined in doctrine, worship, and
manners; when they are distressed in their liberties, livelihoods, or
lives; then, and at such a time they have warrantable and sufficient
grounds to make and engage themselves (as their last and highest resort
for redress) in the bonds of a sacred solemn covenant.

What engagement can be upon us, which these reasons do not reach and
answer? The liberty of our persons, and of our estates, is worth much;
but the liberty of the gospel and purity of doctrine and ordinances, are
worth much more. Peace is a precious jewel, but who can value truth? The
wise merchant will sell all that he hath with joy to buy this, and
blesses God for the bargain.

And because of all this, we are called to make a covenant this day.
Truth of doctrine and purity of worship were going, and much of them
both were gone. The liberty of our persons, and property of our estates,
were going, and much of them both were gone; we were at once growing
popish and slavish, superstitious and servile; we were in these great
distresses, "And because of all this we make a covenant this day." That
these are the grounds of our covenant, is clear in the tenor of the
covenant. The preamble whereof speaks thus:

"We calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies,
attempts, and practices of the enemies of God, against the true religion
and professors thereof, in all places, especially in these three
kingdoms, ever since the reformation of religion; and how much their
rage, power and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and
exercised, whereof the deplorable estate of the church and kingdom of
Ireland, the distressed estate of the church and kingdom of England, and
