soldiers on the wall to prevent any of the Pinkies from climbing over.
Therefore, when Cap'n Bill's army reached the wall, he was obliged to
halt his ranks until he could find a way to enter the City.

Now when the Boolooroo looked through the blue-steel bars of the main
gate and saw the enemy armed with sharp-pointed sticks, he began to
tremble; and when he thought how painful it would be to have his body
and arms and legs prodded and pricked by such weapons, he groaned aloud
and was very miserable. But the thought occurred to him that if he
could avoid being caught by the Pinkies, they would be unable to harm
him. So he went among his people and reminded them how horrible it
would feel to be punched full of holes by the invaders and urged them
to fight desperately and drive the Pinkies back into the Fog Bank.

Only a few of the Blueskins were soldiers, and these all belonged to
the King's bodyguard, but the citizens realized that they must indeed
fight bravely to save themselves from getting hurt, so they promised
the Boolooroo to do all they could. They armed themselves with long
cords having weights fastened to the ends and practiced throwing these
weights in such a manner that the cords would wind around their
enemies. Also, they assembled in the streets in small groups and told
each other in frightened whispers that all their trouble was due to the
Boolooroo's cruel treatment of the Earth people. If he had received
them as friends instead of making them slaves, they would never have
escaped to the Pinkies and brought an army into the Blue Country that
they might be revenged. The Blueskins had not liked their Boolooroo
before this, and now they began to hate him, forgetting they had also
treated the strangers in a very disagreeable manner.

Meantime, the Six Snubnosed Princesses had seen from their rooms in a
tower of the palace the army of the Pinkies marching upon them, and the
sight had served to excite them greatly. They had been quarreling
bitterly among themselves all morning, and strangely enough this
quarrel was all about which of them should marry Ghip-Ghisizzle. They
knew that some day the Majordomo would become Boolooroo, and each one
of the six had determined to marry him so as to be Queen and thus force
her sisters to obey her commands. They paid no attention to the fact
that Ghip-Ghisizzle did not want to marry any of them, for they had
determined that when it was agreed who should have him, they would ask
their father to force the man to marry.

While they quarreled in one room of the palace, Ghip-Ghisizzle was in
danger of being patched in another room; but the Six Snubnosed
Princesses did not know that. The arrival of the Pinkies gave them
something new to talk about, so they hurried downstairs and along the
corridors so as to gain the courtyard and take part in the exciting
scenes. But as they passed the closed doors of the Room of the Great
Knife, they heard a low moan and stopped to listen. The moan was
repeated, and being curious, they unlocked the door--the key having
been left on the outside--and entered the room.

At once, the Pinkies were forgotten, for there upon the floor, tightly
bound, lay Ghip-Ghisizzle, and beside him poor Tiggle, who had uttered
the moans.

The six Princesses sat down in a circle facing the captives, and
Cerulia said, "Ghip, my dear, we will release you on one condition:
That you choose a wife from among us and promise to marry the one
selected as soon as the Pinkies are driven back into the Fog Bank."

Ghip-Ghisizzle managed to shake his head. Then he said, "Really,
ladies, you must excuse me. I'd rather be patched than mismatched, as I
would be with a lovely, snub-nosed wife. You are too beautiful for me;
go seek your husbands elsewhere."

"Monster!" cried Indigo. "If you choose me, I'll scratch your eyes out!"

"If you choose me," said Cobalt in a rage, "I'll tear out your hair by
the roots!"

"If I am to be your wife," screamed Azure, "I'll mark your obstinate
face with my fingernails!"

"And I," said Turquoise passionately, "will pound your head with a
broomstick!"

"I'll shake him till his teeth rattle!" shrieked Sapphire.

"The best way to manage a husband," observed Cerulia angrily, "is to
pull his nose."

"Ladies," said Ghip-Ghisizzle when he had a chance to speak, "do not
anticipate these pleasures, I beg of you, for I shall choose none among
you for a wife."

"We'll see about that," said Indigo.

"I think you will soon change your mind," added Azure.

"I'm going to be patched to Tingle, here, as soon as the Boolooroo
returns," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and it's against the law for a patched
man to marry anyone. It's regarded as half-bigamy."

"Dear me!" cried Cerulia. "If he's patched, he never can be Boolooroo."

"Then he musn't be patched," declared Sapphire. "We must save him from
that fate, girls, and force him to decide among us. Otherwise, none of
us can ever be the Queen."

This being evident, they proceeded to unbind the long legs of
Ghip-Ghisizzle, leaving his body and arms, however, tied fast together.
Then between them they got him upon his feet and led him away, paying
no attention to poor Tiggle, who whined to be released so he could
fight in the war. After a hurried consultation, the Six Snubnosed
Princesses decided to hide the Majordomo in one of their boudoirs, so
they dragged him up the stairs to their reception room and fell to
quarreling as to whose boudoir should be occupied by their captive. Not
being able to settle the question, they finally locked him up in a
vacant room across the hall and told him he must stay there until he
had decided to marry one of the Princesses and could make a choice
among them.




THE CAPTURE OF CAP'N BILL

CHAPTER 21


While this was transpiring in the palace, Cap'n Bill and the Pinkies
had encamped before the principal gate of the City and a tent had been
pitched for Trot and Button-Bright and Rosalie. The army had been very
fearful and weak-kneed when it first entered the Blue Country, but
perceiving that the Boolooroo and his people were afraid of them and
had locked themselves up in the City, the Pinkies grew bolder and
longed to make an attack.

One of them, in his curiosity to examine the Blue City, got a little
too near the wall, and a blue soldier threw his cord-and-weight at him.
The cord didn't wind around the Pinkie, as he was too far off, but the
weight hit him in the eye and made him howl lustily as he trotted back
to this comrades at full speed. After this experience, the invaders
were careful to keep a safe distance from the wall.

The Boolooroo, having made all preparations to receive the enemy, was
annoyed because they held back. He was himself so nervous and excited
that he became desperate, and after an hour of tedious waiting, during
which time he pranced around impatiently, he decided to attack the
hated Pinkies and rid the country of them.

"Their dreadful color makes me hysterical," he said to his soldiers,
"so if I am to have any peace of mind, we must charge the foe and drive
them back into the Fog Bank. But take all the prisoners you can, my
brave men, and tomorrow we will have a jolly time patching them. Don't
be afraid; those pink creatures have no blue blood in their veins, and
they'll run like rabbits when they see us coming."

Then he ordered the gate thrown open, and immediately the Blueskins
poured out into the open plain and began to run toward the Pinkies. The
Boolooroo went out, too, but he kept well behind his people,
remembering the sharp sticks with which the enemy were armed.

Cap'n Bill was alert and had told his army what to do in case of an
attack. The Pinkies did not run like rabbits, but formed a solid line
and knelt down with their long, sharp sticks pointed directly toward
the Blueskins, the other ends being set firmly upon the ground. Of
course, the Blueskins couldn't run against these sharp points, so they
halted a few feet away and began swinging their cord-and-weights. But
the Pinkies were too close together to be caught in this manner, and
now by command of Cap'n Bill they suddenly rose to their feet and began
jabbing their sticks at the foe. The Blueskins hesitated until a few
got pricked and began to yell with terror, when the whole of the
Boolooroo's attacking party turned around and ran back to the gate,
their Ruler reaching it first of all. The Pinkies tried to chase them,
but their round, fat legs were no match for the long, thin legs of the
Blueskins, who quickly gained the gate and shut themselves up in the
City again.

"It is evident," panted the Boolooroo, facing his defeated soldiers
wrathfully, "that you are a pack of cowards!"

"But we followed your own royal example in running," replied the
Captain.

"I merely ran back to the City to get a drink of water, for I was
thirsty," declared the Boolooroo.

"So did we! So did we!" cried the soldiers eagerly. "We were all
thirsty."

"Your High and Mighty Spry and Flighty Majesty," remarked the Captain
respectfully, "it occurs to me that the weapons of the Pinkies are
superior to our own. What we need in order to oppose them successfully
is a number of sharp sticks which are longer than their own."

"True, true!" exclaimed the Boolooroo enthusiastically. "Get to work at
once and make yourselves long, sharp sticks, and then we will attack
the enemy again."

So the soldiers and citizens all set to work preparing long, sharp
sticks, and while they were doing this, Rosalie the Witch had a vision
in which she saw exactly what was going on inside the City wall. Queen
Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright saw the vision, too, for they
were all in the tent together, and the sight made them anxious.

"What can be done?" asked the girl. "The Blueskins are bigger and
stronger than the Pinkies, and if they have sharp sticks which are
longer than ours, they will surely defeat us."

"I have one magic charm," said Rosalie thoughtfully, "that will save
our army; but I am allowed to work only one magic charm every three
days--not oftener--and perhaps I'll need the magic for other things."

"Strikes me, ma'am," returned the sailor, "that what we need most on
this expedition is to capture the Blueskins. If we don't, we'll need
plenty of magic to help us back to the Pink Country; but if we do, we
can take care of ourselves without magic."

"Very well," replied Rosalie. "I will take your advice, Cap'n, and
enchant the weapons of the Pinkies." She then went out and had all the
Pinkies come before her, one by one, and she enchanted their sharp
sticks by muttering some cabalistic words and making queer passes with
her hands over the weapons. "Now," she said to them, "you will be
powerful enough to defeat the Blueskins whatever they may do." The
Pinkies were overjoyed at this promise, and it made them very brave
indeed, since they now believed they would surely be victorious.

When the Boolooroo's people were armed with long, thin, lances of
bluewood all sharpened to fine points at one end, they prepared to
march once more against the invaders. Their sticks were twice as long
as those of the Pinkies, and the Boolooroo chuckled with glee to think
what fun they would have in punching holes in the round, fat bodies of
his enemies.

Out from the gate they marched very boldly and pressed on to attack the
Pinkies, who were drawn up in line of battle to receive them, with
Cap'n Bill at their head. When the opposing forces came together,
however, and the Blueskins pushed their points against the Pinkies, the
weapons which had been enchanted by Rosalie began to whirl in swift
circles--so swift that the eye could scarcely follow the motion. The
result was that the lances of the Boolooroo's people could not touch
the Pinkies, but were thrust aside with violence and either broken in
two or sent hurling through the air in all directions. Finding
themselves so suddenly disarmed, the amazed Blueskins turned about and
ran again, while Cap'n Bill, greatly excited by his victory, shouted to
his followers to pursue the enemy, and hobbled after them as fast as he
could make his wooden leg go, swinging his sharp stick as he advanced.

The Blues were in such a frightened, confused mass that they got in one
another's way and could not make very good progress on the retreat, so
the old sailor soon caught up with them and began jabbing at the crowd
with his stick. Unfortunately, the Pinkies had not followed their
commander, being for the moment dazed by their success, so that Cap'n
Bill was all alone among the Blueskins when he stepped his wooden leg
into a hole in the ground and tumbled full length, his sharp stick
flying from his hand and pricking the Boolooroo in the leg as it fell.

At this, the Ruler of the Blues stopped short in his flight to yell
with terror, but seeing that only the sailorman was pursuing them and
that this solitary foe had tumbled flat upon the ground, he issued a
command and several of his people fell upon poor Cap'n Bill, seized him
in their long arms, and carried him struggling into the City, where he
was fast bound.

Then a panic fell upon the Pinkies at the loss of their leader, and
Trot and Button-Bright called out in vain for them to rescue Cap'n
Bill. By the time the army recovered their wits and prepared to obey,
it was too late. And although Trot ran with them in her eagerness to
save her friend, the gate was found to be fast barred, and she knew it
was impossible for them to force an entrance into the City.

So she went sorrowfully back to the camp, followed by the Pinkies, and
asked Rosalie what could be done.

"I'm sure I do not know," replied the Witch. "I cannot use another
magic charm until three days have expired, but if they do not harm
Cap'n Bill during that time, I believe I can then find a way to save
him."

"Three days is a long time," remarked Trot dismally.

"The Boolooroo may decide to patch him at once," added Button-Bright
with equal sadness, for he, too, mourned the sailor's loss.

"It can't be helped," replied Rosalie. "I am not a fairy, my dears, but
merely a witch, and so my magic powers are limited. We can only hope
that the Boolooroo won't patch Cap'n Bill for three days."

When night settled down upon the camp of the Pinkies, where many tents
had now been pitched, all the invaders were filled with gloom. The band
tried to enliven them by playing the "Dead March," but it was not a
success. The Pinkies were despondent in spite of the fact that they had
repulsed the attack of the Blues, for as yet they had not succeeded in
gaining the City or finding the Magic Umbrella, and the blue dusk of
this dread country--which was so different from their own land of
sunsets--made them all very nervous. They saw the moon rise for the
first time in their lives, and its cold, silvery radiance made them
shudder and prevented them from going to sleep. Trot tried to interest
them by telling them that on the Earth the people had both the sun and
the moon and loved them both; but nevertheless it is certain that had
not the terrible Fog Bank stood between them and the Pink Land, most of
the invading army would have promptly deserted and gone back home.

Trot couldn't sleep, either, she was so worried over Cap'n Bill. She
went back to the tent where Rosalie and Button-Bright were sitting in
the moonlight and asked the Witch if there was no way in which she
could secretly get into the City of the Blues and search for her
friend. Rosalie thought it over for some time and then replied:

"We can make a rope ladder that will enable you to climb to the top of
the wall and descend into the City. But if anyone should see you, you
would be captured."

"I'll risk that," said the child, excited at the prospect of gaining
the side of Cap'n Bill in this adventurous way. "Please make the rope
ladder at once, Rosalie!"

So the Witch took some ropes and knotted together a ladder long enough
to reach the top of the wall. When it was finished, the three--Rosalie,
Trot and Button-Bright--stole out into the moonlight and crept
unobserved into the shadow of the wall. The Blueskins were not keeping
a very close watch, as they were confident the Pinkies could not get
into the City.

The hardest part of Rosalie's task was to toss up one end of the rope
ladder until it would catch on some projection on top of the wall.
There were few such projections, but after creeping along the wall for
a distance, they saw the end of a broken flagstaff near the top edge.
The Witch tossed up the ladder, trying to catch it upon this point, and
on the seventh attempt she succeeded.

"Good!" cried Trot. "Now I can climb up."

"Don't you want me to go with you?" asked Button-Bright a little
wistfully.

"No," said the girl. "You must stay to lead the army. And if you can
think of a way, you must try to rescue us. Perhaps I'll be able to save
Cap'n Bill by myself; but if I don't, it's all up to you,
Button-Bright."

"I'll do my best," he promised.

"And here, keep my polly till I come back," added Trot, giving him the
bird. "I can't take it with me, for it would be a bother, an' if it
tried to spout po'try, I'd be discovered in a jiffy."

As the beautiful Witch kissed the little girl goodbye, she slipped upon
her finger a curious ring. At once, Button-Bright exclaimed, "Why,
where has she gone?"

"I'm right here," said Trot's voice by his side. "Can't you see me?"

"No," replied the boy, mystified.

Rosalie laughed. "It's a magic ring I've loaned you, my dear," said
she, "and as long as you wear it, you will be invisible to all eyes,
those of Blueskins and Pinkies alike. I'm going to let you wear this
wonderful ring, for it will save you from being discovered by your
enemies. If at any time you wish to be seen, take the ring from your
finger; but as long as you wear it, no one can see you, not even Earth
people."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Trot. "That will be fine."
