she heard her say, softly, "Think of this, my Wiseli; and when you do
not know which way to turn, and every thing seems difficult and
perplexing, then say to yourself these words,--

  "'Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray.'"

Now the weary head sank down to rest, and little Wiseli would not awaken
her mother by a movement, but nestled up to her quietly, and slept also.
And the feeble light of the little lamp burned dimly in the quiet
room,--more and more feebly it burned, until it slowly flickered and
went out, and the cottage stood a dark object in the bright moonlight.

The next morning the neighbor from the nearest house stopped, as usual,
on her way to the fountain, to look through the window of the cottage to
see if all was well within. She saw that the sick woman was sleeping on
the pillow, with her head against the window-sill, and that Wiseli stood
weeping by her side. This seemed so strange, that she put her head a
little way into the room, and asked, "What is the matter, Wiseli? Is
your mother worse?" The child sobbed dreadfully, and could scarcely say,
"I do not know what ails my mother."

The poor child had a strong suspicion of what it all meant, but she
could not realize that her mother was lost to her. For she was still
there, but asleep,--asleep for all the rest of her daughter's life on
earth,--and could not hear how sadly the child called to her. The
neighbor stepped to the window and looked at the sleeping head upon the
pillow; then she started back in alarm. "Run quickly, Wiseli; run and
fetch your cousin Gotti. He must come at once. You have no other
relation, and somebody must look after things here. Run as fast as you
can: I will wait here until you come back."

The child ran, but not fast, her heart was so heavy within her, and her
limbs trembled; and at last she had to stop and give way to her tears,
for she became more and more sure, with every step, that her mother
would never waken more. But she went on again soon, although she could
not stop her tears, for her sorrow increased as she went. In the beech
grove, full a quarter of an hour's walk from the church, stood the
house of her cousin Gotti; and presently Wiseli entered the door, still
crying bitterly. Her cousin's wife stood in the kitchen, and asked
harshly, "What is the matter with you?" Wiseli replied, between her
sobs, that the neighbor had sent her to ask her cousin Gotti to come
quickly to her mother. Probably the woman suspected, from the child's
look, that her mother was more ill, for she spoke a little less roughly
than usual. "I will tell him. You can go home: he is not here now." So
Wiseli turned about, and reached home more quickly than she came, for
she was returning to her mother. The neighbor stood by the
doorstep,--she could not wait inside the room: it was not pleasant to
her. But the child stepped in, and went to her place by her mother's
side that she had kept all through the night. There she sat weeping,
and only said, now and then, softly, "Mother." But no answering word
came to her. At last Wiseli said, bending over her, "Mother, you can
hear me, although you are in heaven now, and I cannot hear your
answer." And the child sat holding her mother's hand tightly until long
after noontime. About that time her cousin Gotti entered the room,
looked about him a little, and then called for the neighbor. "You must
arrange things here a little,--you know what I mean," he said,--"so
that things will be ready for the removal. Then carry the keys away
with you, so that nothing will be taken." He then turned to Wiseli and
said, "Where are your clothes, little one? Get them together and tie
them up in a bundle, and we will go away."

"Where shall we go?" asked the child.

"We will go home to the beech grove. You can stay there with us, for you
have nobody else in the world now but your cousin Gotti."

At these words, Wiseli felt herself stiff with fear. Go to the beech
grove, and live with them there,--was that her fate? She had always had
the greatest fear of the wife of her cousin Gotti, and always stood a
long time before the door, when she was sent there with a message,
before she could summon courage to enter. The eldest son, Cheppi,--that
rough fellow,--lived there, and Hannes and Rudi; and they threw stones
at all the children. Was that to be her home?

Fear caused the child to turn pale and immovable.

"You must not be frightened, my child," said her cousin Gotti, in a
kindly tone. "There are more people in our house than there are here,
but it is all the more lively for that."

Wiseli put her things silently together in a shawl, and tied the two
corners together crosswise; then she tied her scarf about her head, and
stood ready.

"So," said her cousin, "now we will go," and turned towards the door;
but Wiseli sobbed out suddenly,--

"Then I must leave my mother all alone."

With these words she ran to her mother, and clasped her in her
arms again.

Her cousin Gotti stood rather disconcerted, and looked on. He did not
know how to explain how things were with her mother, if she did not
understand without words; for he was not strong in the matter of
expressing himself: he had never given himself the trouble to try. At
last, he said,--

"Now come, come along. A little child like you must be obedient. Come;
and, after this, no crying. That does not mend matters one bit."

The child swallowed her sobs, and followed the cousin Gotti silently
through the door. Once only she glanced backward, and said softly, "God
will watch over you, mother;" and then went forth with her bundle on her
arm, and left the little house which had been home to her. Just as she
and her cousin Gotti went together across the field, Trine came towards
them down the road, with a covered basket on her arm. The neighbor stood
in the doorway, and looked after the departing couple. Trine went
towards her, saying,--

"To-day I am bringing the sick woman something good. A little late, to
be sure. We have Uncle Max on a visit to us: that always makes me late."

"And even if you had come early in the morning, you would have come too
late to-day. She died last night."

"That cannot be!" cried Trine, startled. "Oh, goodness me! what will my
lady say?"

With these words she turned sharp about, and ran home as fast as
possible. The neighbor went back into the quiet room, and performed the
last kind offices for Wiseli's mother.




CHAPTER IV.

AT COUSIN GOTTI's.


When Wiseli made her entry into her cousin Gotti's house at Beech Grove,
the three boys came running out of the barn, and, behind Wiseli, into
the room, where they placed themselves in front of her in a row, and
stared at the timid little thing with all their eyes. Her cousin's wife
came out of the kitchen, and stared also at the little thing, as if she
had never seen her before.

Her cousin Gotti seated himself behind the table, and said,--

"I think she can eat something: she has not had much to-day. Come here,"
he said, turning to Wiseli, who stood all this time in the same place,
with her bundle under her arm. She obeyed. Now her cousin's wife put new
wine and cheese on the table, also a huge loaf of black bread. Cousin
Gotti cut a big slice, put a lump of cheese upon it, and pushed it
towards the child. "There, eat, little one," he said. "You must be
hungry, I'm sure."

"No, I thank you," said Wiseli, softly. She could not have swallowed
even a crumb. She felt as if she were crushed under her load of sorrow
and anxiety, and could scarcely even breathe.

The boys stood there all the time, and stared at her.

"Don't be frightened," said cousin Gotti, encouragingly. "Do eat
something." But the child sat motionless, and did not touch her bread.
Her cousin's wife came again; and, putting her hands on her hips, stood
looking her over from head to foot.

"If you don't want it," she said, "you can leave it;" and turned on her
heel, and went again into the kitchen.

When cousin Gotti had refreshed himself sufficiently he arose, and said,
"Put it in your pocket. By and by you will feel like eating, only do not
feel frightened;" and he went into the kitchen. Wiseli tried to do as he
told her, to put the bread and cheese into her pocket; but they were too
large, and she put them back upon the table again.

"I will help you," said Cheppi, snatching the pieces from the table; and
was about to stuff them into his open mouth, but they flew up into the
air instead, for Hannes had knocked Cheppi's hand up with a smart blow,
and so the plunder was scattered, and Rudi darted upon it, and carried
part of it away. With this the two oldest boys fell upon him, and they
kicked and cuffed, and screamed and shouted, until Wiseli was terribly
frightened. Presently their father opened the kitchen-door, and called
out, "What does this all mean?" Then the boys all answered at once, from
the floor; and one said, "Wiseli did not want it;" and another, "Wiseli
had not any;" and "As long as Wiseli did not want any"--

Their father called out, loudly, "If you do not stop that, I will come
in with the thong, and whip you." And he slammed the door again.

"It" did not "stop," however; but, as soon as the door was shut again,
it began worse than ever, for Hannes found that the best way to treat
the enemy was to grasp him by the hair; and so they all seized each
other by the hair, and stood in a ring, uttering terrible noises. In the
kitchen their mother sat on a stool, and peeled potatoes. When her
husband closed the door again, she asked,--

"What is your idea about that child? Why did you bring her home with
you at once?"

"I thought she would have to stay with somebody. I am her cousin Gotti,
and she has no other relatives. You can make her useful. She can do what
you are doing now. Then you will be able to do other things. You are
always saying that the boys give you so much work,--more than is right."

"Yes, as regards them, a great help she will be! You can hear now what
a racket there is in there, and she is only a quarter of an hour in
the house."

"I have heard that sort of thing a good many times before the little one
came. I do not think that she has much to do with it," said the cousin
Gotti quietly.

"Oh, you did not hear them!" said his wife sharply; "how they kept
calling out something about Wiseli?"

"Well, they may call out, if they want to," said their father. "You will
soon have the little one in hand. I think she is not a troublesome
child,--I noticed that in the beginning,--and is much more obedient than
those boys of yours."

This was too much for his wife.

"I do not see what is the use of finding fault with the boys," she said;
and she peeled the potatoes faster and faster. "And I _should_ like to
know where the girl is to sleep."

Her husband pushed his cap back and forth several times upon his head,
and said, soothingly,--

"One can't think of every thing at once. She must have had a bed to
sleep in; and she can, at least, have that. Tomorrow I will go to the
pastor. To-night she can sleep on the bench by the stove. It is always
warm there; and I can put a partition in the little passage that goes
into our room later, and set her bed in there."

"I never heard of bringing home a child and getting a bed for it a week
afterwards," said the woman crossly; "and I should like to know who will
pay for it if we must build something more for her into the bargain."

"When the parish assigns the child to us, they will allow us something
for her maintenance. I shall take her cheaper than any one else would
do, and she will be more comfortable here too."

With this the cousin went out into the shed, and called out for Cheppi
to come with him. It was hard for the cousin's wife to make herself
heard in the room when she wished to give this message. They were all
fighting away, and shouting angrily and loudly.

"I am surprised that you sit there looking on, and do not try to quiet
them in the least," said their mother to Wiseli, who sat cowering
against the wall, and did not dare even to move. Cheppi, however, was
dispatched to the barn, and the two others ran after him.

"Do you know how to knit?" the cousin's wife asked Wiseli, who replied,
timidly, "Yes, I can knit stockings."

"Well, then, take this," she said; and took from the cupboard a big
brown stocking, with yarn almost as stout as Wiseli's little fingers.
"Go on with the foot," she said, "and take care to make it big
enough: it is for your cousin Gotti." Then she went back into the
kitchen, and the little girl took her seat on the bench by the stove,
with the long stocking coiled up in her lap,--for it was so heavy
that she could scarcely knit if it hung down: it pulled the needles
out of her hand. She had scarcely begun to work, however, before her
cousin's wife came in again.

"I think you had better come out into the kitchen with me," she said.
"Then you can see how I do things, and be able to help me a little by
and by." Wiseli obeyed, and watched her cousin's wife at her work as
well as she was able; but the tears kept coming into her eyes so that
she could scarcely see, for she thought all the time of how she used to
go about in the kitchen with her mother, who chattered so pleasantly
with her, and how they would stop to kiss each other now and then. She
knew very well that she ought not to give way to her tears, and tried to
swallow her sobs, until she felt almost strangling.

"See here, look here," said the cousin's wife, every now and then; "then
you will know how to do it by and by." And she went about, here and
there, in the kitchen, letting Wiseli stand, and said nothing else to
her. This went on for some time, when there was a terrible stamping in
the entry, and the woman said, "Open the door as quick as you can: they
are coming." The noise was made by the cousin and his sons, who were
knocking the snow off their shoes before entering. Wiseli opened the
door into the inner room as quickly as possible; and the cousin's wife
lifted an enormous pan off the fire, and ran with it into the room,
where she shook a great heap of potatoes out over the slate-topped
table. Then she brought out a big jug of sour milk, and said, "Put the
things that are in the table-drawer on the table, and then they can all
sit down at once."

Wiseli pulled out the drawer as quickly as possible. There lay five
spoons and five knives. She put these upon the table, and the supper was
ready. The father and his sons came in, and sat down at once on the
seats along the wall behind the table. At the other end stood a chair.
Cousin Gotti made a motion towards the chair and said, "She can sit
there, I think; or do you say no?"

"Oh, certainly!" said his wife, whose seat was nearest the kitchen-door.
She did not remain seated a moment; but ran out into the kitchen and
came back, took a spoonful of milk, and was off again.

Nobody knew why she ran about in this way, for there was nothing cooking
in the kitchen, and nothing to bring out, but she always did so; and
when, sometimes, her husband would say, "Do sit still, and eat
something," then she seemed more hurried than ever, and said she had no
time to sit still, there were so many things to be looked after.

When she had made two visits to the kitchen and returned, and began to
peel a potato in great haste, she noticed, for the first time, that
Wiseli sat idly by her side, her hands on her lap. "Why don't you eat
something?" she said, angrily. "She has no spoon," said Rudi, who was
seated on the other side, and had long been wondering why anybody should
sit at table and not eat as long as there was any thing left. "Oh, yes,
of course," said his mother. "Who would ever have thought that we should
need six spoons? We have always found five enough; and we must have
another knife too. Why can't you speak? You know well enough that to eat
you want a spoon." These last words were addressed to Wiseli.

The child glanced timidly at the woman and said, "It is no matter: I do
not need any. I am not hungry."

"Why not?" asked the woman. "Are you used to a different kind of food? I
don't mean to change, if you are."

"I think it would be better to let the child alone for a while; we must
not frighten her," said her cousin Gotti, soothingly. "She will feel
better soon."

So Wiseli was unmolested, and the others were busily employed for a
while. She sat there motionless until her cousin rose, took his fur cap
from the nail, and began to look for the stable lantern; for "Spot" was
sick, and must be looked after again that night. The table was quickly
cleared. The empty potato-skins were brushed off into the empty
milk-jug, the slate-top wiped off; and when the woman was done with
this, she said, turning to Wiseli, "You have seen what I did; now you
can do it the next time." Now Cheppi took his seat firmly behind the
table again. He had his slate-pencil and arithmetic book, and prepared
himself to do his examples. First, however, he stared for a while at
Wiseli, who had again taken up her brown stocking, but did not make any
progress; for she could not see a thing in the dark corner where she
was seated, and she did not dare to draw nearer to the table where the
dim lamp was placed. "You must have something to do," cried Cheppi, in
an irritated tone. "You are not the smartest scholar in the school."
The girl did not know what to answer. She had not been to school that
day, and did not know what lessons were given out; and, besides, was
quite out of her usual habits and life generally. "If I must do my
examples, so must you, or I won't do them at all," cried Cheppi again.
Wiseli kept as still as a mouse. "Well, then, it is all right," said
the boy noisily. "I won't do another stroke of work." And he threw away
his pencil.

"Then I won't do any thing, either," cried Hannes, and stuffed his
multiplication-table into his satchel again; for learning his lessons
was the hardest thing in the world for him.

"I will tell the master whose fault it is," began Cheppi again. "You can
see, then, what you will get."

Probably Cheppi would have gone on in this unpleasant style for a long
time, if his father had not soon returned from the barn. He brought in
two big, empty grain-bags on his shoulders, and came up to the table
with them.

"Make room," he said to Cheppi, who sat with his elbows on the table,
supporting his head on his hands. Then he spread out his two bags,
folded them together again, and then again. At last he went towards the
bench behind the stove, and put them down on it. "There," he said, with
an air of satisfaction, "that is good. Where is your bundle, little
one?" Wiseli fetched it from her corner,--where it had lain ever since
she arrived,--and looked with surprise at her cousin Gotti as he placed
the bundle at the upper end of the folded bags, and pressed it down, so
that it was not perfectly round.

"There, now you may go to sleep," he said, turning round to Wiseli. "You
