"Then it's all right."



CHAPTER XXX. A TIMELY GIFT.



The reader has not forgotten that Farmer Lovett, when Philip refused
to accept any compensation for assisting to frustrate the attempt at
burglary, handed him a sealed envelope, which he requested him not to
open till he was fifty miles away from Norton.

Philip had carried this about in his pocket ever since. He had thought
of it as likely to contain some good advice at the time; but it had
since occurred to him that the farmer had not had time to write down
anything in that line.

He was disposed to think that the mysterious envelope might contain a
five-dollar bill, as a slight acknowledgment of his services.

Though Philip had declined receiving any payment, it did seem to him
now that this amount of money would relieve him from considerable
embarrassment. He therefore drew a penknife from his pocket and cut open
the envelope.

What was his amazement when he drew out three bills--two twenties and
a ten--fifty dollars in all! There was a slip of paper, on which was
written, in pencil:

"Don't hesitate to use this money, if you need it, as you doubtless
will. I can spare it as well as not, and shall be glad if it proves of
use to one who has done me a great service. JOHN LOVETT."

"What's that!" asked the landlord, regarding Philip with interest.

"Some money which I did not know I possessed," answered Philip.

"How much is there?"

"Fifty dollars."

"And you didn't know you had it?" asked the publisher--rather
incredulously, it must be owned.

"No, sir; I was told not to open this envelope till I was fifty miles
away from where it was given me. Of course, Mr. Gates, I am now able to
pay all my bills, and to repay you for what you handed Mr. Gunn."

"I am pleased with your good fortune," said the landlord cordially.

"Thank you, sir."

"But I am sorry your knavish partner has cheated you out of so much
money."

"I shall make him pay it if I can," said Philip resolutely.

"I approve your pluck, and I wish you success."

"He owes you money, too, Mr. Gates. Give me the bill, and I will do my
best to collect it."

"If you collect it, you may have it," said Gates. "I don't care much
for the money, but I should like to have the scamp compelled to fork it
over."

"I wish I knew where he was likely to be," said Philip.

"He may go to Knoxville," suggested the publisher.

"How far is that?"

"Ten miles."

"What makes you think he will go to Knoxville?" asked the landlord.

"He may think of giving a performance there. It is a pretty large
place."

"But wouldn't he be afraid to do it, after the pranks he has played
here?"

"Perhaps so. At any rate, he is very likely to go there."

"I will go there and risk it," said Philip. "He needn't think he is
going to get off so easily, even if it is only a boy he has cheated."

"That's the talk, Mr. Gray!" said the landlord. "How are you going?" he
asked, a minute later.

"I can walk ten miles well enough," answered Philip.

He had considerable money now, but he reflected that he should probably
need it all, especially if he did not succeed in making the professor
refund, and decided that it would be well to continue to practice
economy.

"I have no doubt you can," said the landlord, "but it will be better not
to let the professor get too much the start of you. I will myself have a
horse harnessed, and take you most of the distance in my buggy."

"But, Mr. Gates, won't it be putting you to a great deal of trouble?"

"Not at all. I shall enjoy a ride this morning, and the road to
Knoxville is a very pleasant one."

"Let me pay something for the ride, then."

"Not a cent. You will need all your money, and I can carry you just as
well as not," said the landlord heartily.

"I am very fortunate in such a kind friend," said Philip gratefully.

"Oh, it isn't worth talking about! Here, Jim, go out and harness the
horse directly."

When the horse was brought round, Philip was all ready, and jumped in.

"Would you like to drive, Mr. Gray?" asked the landlord.

"Yes," answered Philip, with alacrity.

"Take the lines, then," said the landlord.

Most boys of Philip's age are fond of driving, and our hero was no
exception to the rule, as the landlord supposed.

"You'll promise not to upset me," said Mr. Gates, smiling. "I am getting
stout, and the consequences might be serious."

"Oh, I am used to driving," said Philip, "and I will take care not to
tip over."

The horse was a good one, and to Philip's satisfaction, went over the
road in good style.

Philip enjoyed driving, but, of course, his mind could not help dwelling
on the special object of his journey.

"I hope we are on the right track," he said. "I shouldn't like to miss
the professor."

"You will soon know, at any rate," said Gates. "It seems to me," he
continued, "that Riccabocca made a great mistake in running off with
that money."

"He thought it would be safe to cheat a boy."

"Yes; but admitting all that, you two were likely to make money. In
Wilkesville your profits were a hundred dollars in one evening. Half of
that belonged to the professor, at any rate. He has lost his partner,
and gained only fifty dollars, which would not begin to pay him for your
loss."

"Perhaps he thought he would draw as well alone."

"Then he is very much mistaken. To tell the plain truth, our people
thought very little of his share of the performance. I saw some of them
laughing when he was ranting away. It was you they enjoyed hearing."

"I am glad of that," said Philip, gratified.

"There's no humbug about your playing. You understand it. It was
you that saved the credit of the evening, and sent people away well
satisfied."

"I am glad of that, at any rate, even if I didn't get a cent for my
playing," said Philip, well pleased.

"The money's the practical part of it," said the landlord. "Of course, I
am glad when travelers like my hotel, but if they should run off without
paying, like the professor, I shouldn't enjoy it so much."

"No, I suppose not," said Philip, with a laugh.

They had ridden some seven miles, and were, therefore, only three miles
from Knoxville, without the slightest intimation as to whether or not
they were on the right track.

To be sure, they had not expected to obtain any clue so soon, but it
would have been very satisfactory, of course, to obtain one.

A little farther on they saw approaching a buggy similar to their own,
driven by a man of middle age. It turned out to be an acquaintance of
the landlord's, and the two stopped to speak.

"Going to Knoxville on business, Mr. Gates?" asked the newcomer.

"Well, not exactly. I am driving this young man over. By the way, have
you seen anything of a tall man, with long, black hair, dressed in
black?"

"Yes. Do you want to see him?"

"This young man has some business with him. Where did you see him?"

"He arrived at our hotel about an hour since, I calculate."

Philip's heart bounded with satisfaction at this important news.

"Did he put up there?"

"Yes. I believe he is going to give a reading this evening."

"Thank you!"

"The professor must be a fool!" said the landlord, as they drove away.

"I begin to think so myself," replied Philip.

"That's all in our favor, however. We shall get back that money yet."

The horse was put to his speed, and in fifteen minutes they reached
Knoxville.



CHAPTER XXXI. THE PROFESSOR'S FLIGHT.



Professor Lorenzo Riccabocca was not a wise man. It would have been much
more to his interest to deal honestly with Philip, paying his share
of the profits of the first performance, and retaining his services as
associate and partner.

But the professor was dazzled by the money, and unwilling to give it up.
Moreover, he had the vanity to think that he would draw nearly as
well alone, thus retaining in his own hands the entire proceeds of any
entertainments he might give.

When he met Philip on the road he was well-nigh penniless. Now,
including the sum of which he had defrauded our hero and his creditors
in Wilkesville, he had one hundred and fifty dollars.

When the professor went to bed, he had not formed the plan of deserting
Philip; but, on awaking in the morning, it flashed upon him as an
excellent step which would put money in his pocket.

He accordingly rose, dressed himself quietly, and, with one cautious
look at Philip--who was fast asleep--descended the stairs to the office.

Only the bookkeeper was in the office.

"You are stirring early, professor," he said.

"Yes," answered Riccabocca, "I generally take a morning walk, to get an
appetite for breakfast."

"My appetite comes without the walk," said the bookkeeper, smiling.

"If Mr. de Gray comes downstairs, please tell him I will be back soon,"
said Riccabocca.

The bookkeeper readily promised to do this, not having the slightest
suspicion that the distinguished professor was about to take French
leave.

When Professor Riccabocca had walked half a mile he began to feel faint.
His appetite had come.

"I wish I had stopped to breakfast," he reflected. "I don't believe De
Gray will be down for an hour or two."

It was too late to go back and repair his mistake. That would spoil all.
He saw across the street a baker's shop, just opening for the day, and
this gave him an idea.

He entered, bought some rolls, and obtained a glass of milk, and,
fortified with these, he resumed his journey.

He had walked three miles, when he was over-taken by a farm wagon, which
was going his way.

He hailed the driver--a young man of nineteen or
thereabouts--ascertained that he was driving to Knoxville, and, for a
small sum, secured passage there.

This brings us to the point of time when Philip and Mr. Gates drove up
to the hotel at Knoxville.

"I can see the professor," said Philip, in eager excitement, when they
had come within a few rods of the inn.

"Where is he?"

"He is in the office, sitting with his back to the front window. I
wonder what he will have to say for himself?"

"So do I," said the landlord curiously.

"Shall we go in together?" questioned Philip.

"No; let us surprise him a little. I will drive around to the sheds back
of the hotel, and fasten my horse. Then we will go round to the front,
and you can go in, while I stand outside, ready to appear a little
later."

Philip thought this a good plan. He enjoyed the prospect of confronting
the rogue who had taken advantage of his inexperience, and attempted
such a bold scheme of fraud. He didn't feel in the least nervous, or
afraid to encounter the professor, though Riccabocca was a man and he
but a boy. When all was ready, Philip entered through the front
door, which was open, and, turning into the office, stood before the
astonished professor.

The latter started in dismay at the sight of our hero. He thought he
might be quietly eating breakfast ten miles away, unsuspiciously waiting
for his return. Was his brilliant scheme to fail? He quickly took his
resolution--a foolish one. He would pretend not to know Philip.

"Well, Professor Riccabocca," Philip said, in a sarcastic tone, "you
took rather a long walk this morning."

The professor looked at him vacantly.

"Were you addressing me?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir," answered Philip, justly provoked.

"I haven't the pleasure of your acquaintance, young man."

"I wish I hadn't the pleasure of yours," retorted Philip.

"Do you come here to insult me?" demanded Riccabocca, frowning.

"I came here to demand my share of the money received for the
entertainment last evening, as well as the money paid for the hall, the
printer, and bill-poster."

"You must be crazy!" said Riccabocca, shrugging his shoulders. "I don't
know you. I don't owe you any money."

"Do you mean to say we didn't give an entertainment together last
evening at Wilkesville?" asked Philip, rather taken aback by the man's
sublime impudence.

"My young friend, you have been dreaming. Prove what you say and I will
admit your claim."

Up to this point those present, deceived by the professor's coolness,
really supposed him to be in the right. That was what Riccabocca
anticipated, and hoped to get off before the discovery of the truth
could be made. But he did not know that Philip had a competent witness
at hand.

"Mr. Gates!" called Philip.

The portly landlord of the Wilkesville Hotel entered the room, and
Riccaboeca saw that the game was up.

"Mr. Gates, will you be kind enough to convince this gentleman that he
owes me money?" asked Philip.

"I think he won't deny it now," said Gates significantly. "He walked
off from my hotel this morning, leaving his bill unpaid. Professor
Riccabocca, it strikes me you had better settle with us, unless you wish
to pass the night in the lockup."

Professor Riccabocca gave a forced laugh.

"Why, Mr. de Gray," he said, "you ought to have known that I was only
playing a trick on you."

"I supposed you were," said Philip.

"No, I don't mean that. I was only pretending I didn't know you, to see
if I could act naturally enough, to deceive you."

"Why did you desert me?" asked Philip suspiciously.

"I started to take a walk--didn't the bookkeeper tell you?--and finding
a chance to ride over here, thought I would do so, and make arrangements
for our appearance here. Of course, I intended to come back, and pay our
good friend, the landlord, and give you your share of the common fund."

Neither Gates nor Philip believed a word of this. It seemed to them
quite too transparent.

"You may as well pay us now, Professor Riccabocca," said the landlord
dryly.

"I hope you don't suspect my honor or integrity," said Riccabocca,
appearing to be wounded at the thought.

"Never mind about that," said Mr. Gates shortly. "Actions speak louder
than words."

"I am quite ready to settle--quite," said the professor. "The money is
in my room. I will go up and get it."

There seemed to be no objection to this, and our two friends saw him
ascend the staircase to the second story. Philip felt pleased to think
that he had succeeded in his quest, for his share of the concert money
would be nearly seventy dollars. That, with the balance of the money;
received from Farmer Lovett, would make over a hundred dollars.

They waited five minutes, and the professor did not come down.

"What can keep him?" said Philip.

Just then one of the hostlers entered and caught what our hero had said.

"A man has just run out of the back door," he said, "and is cutting
across the fields at a great rate."

"He must have gone down the back stairs," said the clerk.

"In what direction would he go?" asked Philip hastily.

"To the railroad station. There is a train leaves in fifteen minutes."

"What shall we do, Mr. Gates?" asked Philip, in dismay.

"Jump into my buggy. We'll get to the depot before the train starts. We
must intercept the rascal."



