Bull-terrier belonging to the Mendoza hotel man. She was the only one
smaller than himself, and they seemed very good friends.

I shall never forget the view of the hunt I had that day. We were on
one of those large, flat-headed buttes that give a kingdom to the eye,
when Hilton, who had been scanning the vast country with glasses,
exclaimed: "I see him. There he goes, toward Skull Creek. Guess it's a
Coyote."

Now the first thing is to get the Greyhounds to see the prey--not an
easy matter, as they cannot use the glasses, and the ground was covered
with sage-brush higher than the Dogs' heads.

But Hilton called, "Hu, hu, Dander," and leaned aside from his saddle,
holding out his foot at the same time. With one agile bound Dander
leaped to the saddle and there stood balancing on the Horse while
Hilton kept pointing. "There he is, Dander; sic him--see him down
there." The Dog gazed earnestly where his master pointed, then seeming
to see, he sprang to the ground with a slight yelp and sped away. The
other Dogs followed after, in an ever-lengthening procession, and we
rode as hard as we could behind them, but losing time, for the ground
was cut with gullies, spotted with badger-holes, and covered with rocks
and sage that made full speed too hazardous.

We all fell behind, and I was last, of course, being least accustomed
to the saddle. We got several glimpses of the Dogs flying over the
level plain or dropping from sight in gullies to reappear at the other
side. Dander, the Greyhound, was the recognized leader, and as we
mounted another ridge we got sight of the whole chase--a Coyote at full
speed, the Dogs a quarter of a mile behind, but gaining. When next we
saw them the Coyote was dead, and the Dogs sitting around panting, all
but two of the Foxhounds and Gingersnap.

"Too late for the fracas," remarked Hilton, glancing at these last
Foxhounds. Then he proudly petted Dander. "Didn't need yer purp after
all, ye see."

"Takes a heap of nerve for ten big Dogs to face one little Coyote,"
remarked the father, sarcastically. "Wait till we run onto a Gray."

Next day we were out again, for I made up my mind to see it to a finish.

From a high point we caught sight of a moving speck of gray. A moving
white speck stands for Antelope, a red speck for Fox, a gray speck for
either Gray-wolf or Coyote, and which of these is determined by its
tail. If the glass shows the tail down, it is a Coyote; if up, it is
the hated Gray-wolf.

Dander was shown the game as before and led the motley mixed
procession--as he had before--Greyhounds, Wolfhounds, Foxhounds, Danes,
Bull-terrier, horsemen. We got a momentary view of the pursuit; a
Gray-wolf it surely was, loping away ahead of the Dogs. Somehow I
thought the first Dogs were not running so fast now as they had after
the Coyote. But no one knew the finish of the hunt. The Dogs came back
to us one by one, and we saw no more of that Wolf.

Sarcastic remarks and recrimination were now freely indulged in by the
hunters.

"Pah--scairt, plumb scairt," was the father's disgusted comment on the
pack. "They could catch up easy enough, but when he turned on them,
they lighted out for home--pah!"

"Where's that thar onsurpassable, fearless, scaired-o'-nort Tarrier?"
asked Hilton, scornfully.

"I don't know," said I. "I am inclined to think he never saw the Wolf;
but if he ever does, I'll bet he sails in for death or glory."

That night several Cows were killed close to the ranch, and we were
spurred on to another hunt.

It opened much like the last. Late in the afternoon we sighted a gray
fellow with tail up, not half a mile off. Hilton called Dander up on
the saddle. I acted on the idea and called Snap to mine. His legs were
so short that he had to leap several times before he made it,
scrambling up at last with my foot as a half-way station. I pointed and
"sic-ed" for a minute before he saw the game, and then he started out
after the Greyhounds, already gone, with energy that was full of
promise.

The chase this time led us, not to the rough brakes along the river,
but toward the high open country, for reasons that appeared later. We
were close together as we rose to the upland and sighted the chase half
a mile off, just as Dander came up with the Wolf and snapped at his
haunch. The Gray-wolf turned round to fight, and we had a fine view.
The Dogs came up by twos and threes, barking at him in a ring, till
last the little white one rushed up. He wasted no time barking, but
rushed straight at the Wolf's throat and missed it, yet seemed to get
him by the nose; then the ten big Dogs closed in, and in two minutes
the Wolf was dead. We had ridden hard to be in at the finish, and
though our view was distant, we saw at least that Snap had lived up to
the telegram, as well as to my promises for him.

Now it was my turn to crow, and I did not lose the chance. Snap had
shown them how, and at last the Mendoza pack had killed a Gray-wolf
without help from the men.

There were two things to mar the victory somewhat: first, it was a
young Wolf, a mere Cub, hence his foolish choice of country; second,
Snap was wounded--the Wolf had given him a bad cut in the shoulder.

As we rode in proud procession home, I saw he limped a little. "Here,"
I cried, "come up, Snap." He tried once or twice to jump to the saddle,
but could not. "Here, Hilton, lift him up to me."

"Thanks; I'll let you handle your own rattlesnakes," was the reply, for
all knew now that it was not safe to meddle with his person. "Here,
Snap, take hold," I said, and held my quirt to him. He seized it, and
by that I lifted him to the front of my saddle and so carried him home.
I cared for him as though he had been a baby. He had shown those
Cattle-men how to fill the weak place in their pack; the Foxhounds may
be good and the Greyhounds swift and the Russians and Danes fighters,
but they are no use at all without the crowning moral force of grit,
that none can supply so well as a Bull-terrier. On that day the
Cattlemen learned how to manage the Wolf question, as you will find if
ever you are at Mendoza; for every successful Wolf pack there has with
it a Bull-terrier, preferably of the Snap-Mendoza breed.


IV

Next day was Hallowe'en, the anniversary of Snap's advent. The weather
was clear, bright, not too cold, and there was no snow on the ground.
The men usually celebrated the day with a hunt of some sort, and now,
of course, Wolves were the one object. To the disappointment of all,
Snap was in bad shape with his wound. He slept, as usual, at my feet,
and bloody stains now marked the place. He was not in condition to
fight, but we were bound to have a Wolf-hunt, so he was beguiled to an
outhouse and locked up, while we went off, I, at least, with a sense of
impending disaster. I knew we should fail without my Dog, but I did not
realize how bad a failure it was to be.

Afar among the buttes of Skull Creek we had roamed when a white ball
appeared bounding through the sage-brush, and in a minute more Snap
came, growling and stump-waggling, up to my Horse's side. I could not
send him back; he would take no such orders, not even from me. His
wound was looking bad, so I called him, held down the quirt, and jumped
him to my saddle.

"There," I thought, "I'll keep you safe till we get home." 'Yes, I
thought; but I reckoned not with Snap. The voice of Hilton, "Hu, hu,"
announced that he had sighted a Wolf. Dander and Riley, his rival, both
sprang to the point of observation, with the result that they collided
and fell together, sprawling, in the sage. But Snap, gazing hard, had
sighted the Wolf, not so very far off, and before I knew it, he leaped
from the saddle and bounded zigzag, high, low, in and under the sage,
straight for the enemy, leading the whole pack for a few minutes. Not
far, of course. The great Greyhounds sighted the moving speck, and the
usual procession strung out on the plain. It promised to be a fine
hunt, for the Wolf had less than half a mile start and all the Dogs
were fully interested.

"They 'ye turned up Grizzly Gully," cried Garvin. "This way, and we can
head them off."

So we turned and rode hard around the north side of Hulmer's Butte,
while the chase seemed to go round the south.

We galloped to the top of Cedar Ridge and were about to ride down, when
Hilton shouted, "By George, here he is! We're right onto him." He
leaped from his Horse, dropped the bridle, and ran forward. I did the
same. A great Gray-wolf came lumbering across an open plain toward us.
His head was low, his tail out level, and fifty yards behind him was
Dander, sailing like a Hawk over the ground, going twice as fast as the
Wolf. In a minute the Hound was alongside and snapped, but bounded
back, as the Wolf turned on him. They were just below us now and not
fifty feet away. Garvin drew his revolver, but in a fateful moment
Hilton interfered: "No; no; let's see it out." In a few seconds the
next Greyhound arrived, then the rest in order of swiftness. Each came
up full of fight and fury, determined to go right in and tear the
Gray-wolf to pieces; but each in turn swerved aside, and leaped and
barked around at a safe distance. After a minute or so the Russians
appeared--fine big Dogs they were.  Their distant intention no doubt
was to dash right at the old Wolf; but his fearless front, his sinewy
frame and death-dealing jaws, awed them long before they were near him,
and they also joined the ring, while the desperado in the middle faced
this way and that, ready for any or all.

Now the Danes came up, huge-limbed creatures, any one of them as heavy
as the Wolf.  I heard their heavy breathing tighten into a threatening
sound as they plunged ahead; eager to tear the foe to pieces; but when
they saw him there, grim fearless, mighty of jaw, tireless of limb,
ready to die if need be, but sure of this, he would not die
alone--well, those great Danes--all three of them--were stricken, as
the rest had been, with a sudden bashfulness: Yes, they would go right
in presently--not now, but as soon as they had got their breath; they
were not afraid of a Wolf, oh, no.  I could read their courage in their
voices.  They knew perfectly well that the first Dog to go in was going
to get hurt, but never mind that--presently; they would bark a little
more to get up enthusiasm.

And as the ten big Dogs were leaping round the silent Wolf at bay,
there was a rustling in the sage at the far side of place; then a
snow-white rubber ball, it seemed, came bounding, but grew into a
little Bull-terrier, and Snap, slowest of the pack, and last, came
panting hard, so hard he seemed gasping.  Over the level open he made,
straight to the changing ring around the Cattle-killer whom none dared
face.  Did he hesitate? Not for an instant; through the ring of the
yelping pack, straight for the old despot of range, right for his
throat he sprang; and the Gray-wolf struck with his twenty scimitars.
But the little one, if fooled at all, sprang again, and then what came
I hardly knew. There was a whirling mass of Dogs. I thought I saw the
little White One clinched on the Gray-wolf's nose. The pack was all
around; we could not help them now.  But they did not need us; they had
a leader of dauntless mettle, and when in a little while the final
scene was done, there on the ground lay the Gray-wolf, a giant of his
kind, and clinched on his nose was the little white Dog.

We were standing around within fifteen feet, ready to help, but had no
chance till were not needed.

The Wolf was dead, and I hallooed to Snap, but he did not move. I bent
over him. "Snap--Snap, it's all over; you've killed him." But the Dog
was very still, and now I saw two deep wounds in his body.  I tried to
lift him. "Let go, old fellow; it's all over." He growled feebly, and
at last go of the Wolf. The rough cattle-men were kneeling around him
now; old Penroof's voice was trembling as he muttered, "I wouldn't had
him hurt for twenty steers."  I lifted him in my arms, called to him
and stroked his head.  He snarled a little, a farewell as it proved,
for he licked my hand as he did so, then never snarled again.

That was a sad ride home for me. There was the skin of a monstrous
Wolf, but no other hint of triumph.  We buried the fearless one on a
butte back of the Ranch-house.  Penroof, as he stood by, was heard to
grumble: "By jingo, that was grit--cl'ar grit!  Ye can't raise Cattle
without grit."




THE WINNIPEG WOLF

I

It was during the great blizzard of 1882 that I first met the Winnipeg
Wolf. I had left St. Paul in the middle of March to cross the prairies
to Winnipeg, expecting to be there in twenty-four hours, but the Storm
King had planned it otherwise and sent a heavy-laden eastern blast. The
snow came down in a furious, steady torrent, hour after hour. Never
before had I seen such a storm. All the world was lost in snow--snow,
snow, snow--whirling, biting, stinging, drifting snow--and the puffing,
monstrous engine was compelled to stop at the command of those tiny
feathery crystals of spotless purity.

Many strong hands with shovels came to the delicately curled snowdrifts
that barred our way, and in an hour the engine could pass--only to
stick in another drift yet farther on. It was dreary work--day after
day, night after night, sticking in the drifts, digging ourselves out,
and still the snow went whirling and playing about us.

"Twenty-two hours to Emerson," said the official; but nearly two weeks
of digging passed before we did reach Emerson, and the poplar country
where the thickets stop all drifting of the snow. Thenceforth the train
went swiftly, the poplar woods grew more thickly--we passed for miles
through solid forests, then perhaps through an open space. As we neared
St. Boniface, the eastern outskirts of Winnipeg, we dashed across a
little glade fifty yards wide, and there in the middle was a group that
stirred me to the very soul.

In plain view was a great rabble of Dogs, large and small, black,
white, and yellow, wriggling and heaving this way and that way in a
rude ring; to one side was a little yellow Dog stretched and quiet in
the snow; on the outer part of the ring was a huge black Dog bounding
about and barking, but keeping ever behind the moving mob. And in the
midst, the centre and cause of it all, was a great, grim, Wolf.

Wolf? He looked like a Lion. There he stood, all
alone--resolute-calm--with bristling mane, and legs braced firmly,
glancing this way and that, to be ready for an attack in any direction.
There was a curl on his lips--it looked like scorn, but I suppose it
was really the fighting snarl of tooth display. Led by a
wolfish-looking Dog that should have been ashamed, the pack dashed in,
for the twentieth time no doubt. But the great gray form leaped here
and there, and chop, chop, chop went those fearful jaws, no other sound
from the lonely warrior; but a death yelp from more than one of his
foes, as those that were able again sprang back, and left him
statuesque as before, untamed, unmaimed, and contemptuous of them all.

How I wished for the train to stick in a snowdrift now, as so often
before, for all my heart went out to that Gray-wolf; I longed to go and
help him. But the snow-deep glade flashed by, the poplar trunks shut
out the view, and we went on to our journey's end.

This was all I saw, and it seemed little; but before many days had
passed I knew surely that I had been favored with a view, in broad
daylight, of a rare and wonderful creature, none less than the Winnipeg
Wolf.

His was a strange history--a Wolf that preferred the city to the
country, that passed by the Sheep to kill the Dogs, and that always
hunted alone.

In telling the story of le Garou, as he was called by some, although I
speak of these things as locally familiar, it is very sure that to many
citizens of the town they were quite unknown. The smug shopkeeper on
the main street had scarcely heard of him until the day after the final
scene at the slaughter-house, when his great carcass was carried to
Hine's taxidermist shop and there mounted, to be exhibited later at the
Chicago World's Fair, and to be destroyed, alas! in the fire that
reduced the Mulvey Grammar School to ashes in 1896.

