parts spoken by Christ be nothing else but expositions unto the first
part of this commandment: for in very effect all these four parts be but
one commandment, that is to say, "Thou shalt not kill."  Yet
nevertheless, the last three parts do shew unto thee how many ways thou
mayest kill thy neighbour contrary to this commandment: yet, for all
Christ's exposition in the three last parts of this card, the terms be
not open enough to thee that dost read and hear them spoken.  No doubt,
the Jews understood Christ well enough, when he spake to them these three
last sentences; for he spake unto them in their own natural terms and
tongue.  Wherefore, seeing that these terms were natural terms of the
Jews, it shall be necessary to expound them, and compare them unto some
like terms of our natural speech, that we, in like manner, may understand
Christ as well as the Jews did.  We will begin first with the first part
of this card, and then after, with the other three parts.  You must
therefore understand that the Jews and the Pharisees of the old law, to
whom this first part, this commandment, "Thou shalt not kill," was
spoken, thought it sufficient and enough for their discharge, not to kill
with any manner of material weapon, as sword, dagger, or with any such
weapon; and they thought it no great fault whatsoever they said or did by
their neighbours, so that they did not harm or meddle with their corporal
bodies: which was a false opinion in them, as prove well the three last
other sentences following the first part of this card.

Now, as touching the three other sentences, you must note and take heed,
what difference is between these three manner of offences: to be angry
with your neighbour; to call your neighbour "brainless," or any such word
of disdain; or to call your neighbour "fool."  Whether these three manner
of offences be of themselves more grievous one than the other, it is to
be opened unto you.  Truly, as they be of themselves divers offences, so
they kill diversly, one more than the other; as you shall perceive by the
first of these three, and so forth.  A man which conceiveth against his
neighbour or brother ire or wrath in his mind, by some manner of occasion
given unto him, although he be angry in his mind against his said
neighbour, he will peradventure express his ire by no manner of sign,
either in word or deed: yet, nevertheless, he offendeth against God, and
breaketh this commandment in killing his own soul; and is therefore "in
danger of judgment."

Now, to the second part of these three: That man that is moved with ire
against his neighbour, and in his ire calleth his neighbour "brainless,"
or some other like word of displeasure; as a man might say in a fury, "I
shall handle thee well enough;" which words and countenances do more
represent and declare ire to be in this man, than in him that was but
angry, and spake no manner of word nor shewed any countenance to declare
his ire.  Wherefore as he that so declareth his ire either by word or
countenance offendeth more against God, so he both killeth his own soul,
and doth that in him is to kill his neighbour's soul in moving him unto
ire, wherein he is faulty himself; and so this man is "in danger of
council."

Now to the third offence, and last of these three: That man that calleth
his neighbour "fool," doth more declare his angry mind toward him, than
he that called his neighbour but "brainless," or any such words moving
ire: for to call a man "fool," that word representeth more envy in a man
than "brainless" doth.  Wherefore he doth most offend, because he doth
most earnestly with such words express his ire, and so he is "in danger
of hell-fire."

Wherefore you may understand now, these three parts of this card be three
offences, and that one is more grievous to God than the other, and that
one killeth more the soul of man than the other.

Now peradventure there be some that will marvel, that Christ did not
declare this commandment by some greater faults of ire, than by these
which seem but small faults, as to be angry and speak nothing of it, to
declare it and to call a man "brainless," and to call his neighbour
"fool:" truly these be the smallest and the least faults that belong to
ire, or to killing in ire.  Therefore beware how you offend in any kind
of ire: seeing that the smallest be damnable to offend in, see that you
offend not in the greatest.  For Christ thought, if he might bring you
from the smallest manner of faults, and give you warning to avoid the
least, he reckoned you would not offend in the greatest and worst, as to
call your neighbour thief, whoreson, whore, drab, and so forth, into more
blasphemous names; which offences must needs have punishment in hell,
considering how that Christ hath appointed these three small faults to
have three degrees of punishment in hell, as appeareth by these three
terms, judgment, council, and hell-fire.  These three terms do signify
nothing else but three divers punishments in hell, according to the
offences.  Judgment is less in degree than council, therefore it
signifieth a lesser pain in hell, and it is ordained for him that is
angry in his mind with his neighbour, and doth express his malice neither
by word nor countenance: council is a less degree in hell than hell-fire,
and is a greater degree in hell than judgment; and it is ordained for him
that calleth his neighbour "brainless," or any such word, that declareth
his ire and malice: wherefore it is more pain than judgment.  Hell-fire
is more pain in hell than council or judgment, and it is ordained for him
that calleth his neighbour "fool," by reason that in calling his
neighbour "fool," he declareth more his malice, in that it is an earnest
word of ire: wherefore hell-fire is appointed for it; that is, the most
pain of the three punishments.

Now you have heard, that to these divers offences of ire and killing be
appointed punishments according to their degrees: for look as the offence
is, so shall the pain be: if the offence be great, the pain shall be
according; if it be less, there shall be less pain for it.  I would not
now that you should think, because that here are but three degrees of
punishment spoken of, that there be no more in hell.  No doubt Christ
spake of no more here but of these three degrees of punishment, thinking
they were sufficient, enough for example, whereby we might understand
that there be as divers and many pains as there be offences: and so by
these three offences, and these three punishments, all other offences and
punishments may be compared with another.  Yet I would satisfy your minds
further in these three terms, of "judgment, council, and hell-fire."
Whereas you might say, What was the cause that Christ declared more the
pains of hell by these terms than by any other terms?  I told you afore
that he knew well to whom he spake them.  These terms were natural and
well known amongst the Jews and the Pharisees: wherefore Christ taught
them with their own terms, to the intent they might understand the better
his doctrine.  And these terms may be likened unto three terms which we
have common and usual amongst us, that is to say, the sessions of
inquirance, the sessions of deliverance, and the execution-day.  Sessions
of inquirance is like unto judgment; for when sessions of inquiry is,
then the judges cause twelve men to give verdict of the felon's crime,
whereby he shall be judged to be indicted: sessions of deliverance is
much like council; for at sessions of deliverance the judges go among
themselves to council, to determine sentence against the felon: execution-
day is to be compared unto hell-fire; for the Jews had amongst themselves
a place of execution, named "hell-fire:" and surely when a man goeth to
his death, it is the greatest pain in this world.  Wherefore you may see
that there are degrees in these our terms, as there be in those terms.

These evil-disposed affections and sensualities in us are always contrary
to the rule of our salvation.  What shall we do now or imagine to thrust
down these Turks and to subdue them?  It is a great ignominy and shame
for a christian man to be bond and subject unto a Turk: nay, it shall not
be so; we will first cast a trump in their way, and play with them at
cards, who shall have the better.  Let us play therefore on this fashion
with this card.  Whensoever it shall happen the foul passions and Turks
to rise in our stomachs against our brother or neighbour, either for
unkind words, injuries, or wrongs, which they have done unto us, contrary
unto our mind; straightways let us call unto our remembrance, and speak
this question unto ourselves, "Who art thou?"  The answer is, "I am a
christian man."  Then further we must say to ourselves, "What requireth
Christ of a christian man?"  Now turn up your trump, your heart (hearts
is trump, as I said before), and cast your trump, your heart, on this
card; and upon this card you shall learn what Christ requireth of a
christian man--not to be angry, nor moved to ire against his neighbour,
in mind, countenance, nor other ways, by word or deed.  Then take up this
card with your heart, and lay them together: that done, you have won the
game of the Turk, whereby you have defaced and overcome him by true and
lawful play.  But, alas for pity! the Rhodes are won and overcome by
these false Turks; the strong castle Faith is decayed, so that I fear it
is almost impossible to win it again.

The great occasion of the loss of this Rhodes is by reason that christian
men do so daily kill their own nation, that the very true number of
Christianity is decayed; which murder and killing one of another is
increased specially two ways, to the utter undoing of Christendom, that
is to say, by example and silence.  By example, as thus: when the father,
the mother, the lord, the lady, the master, the dame, be themselves
overcome by these Turks, they be continual swearers, avouterers,
disposers to malice, never in patience, and so forth in all other vices:
think you not, when the father, the mother, the master, the dame, be
disposed unto vice or impatience, but that their children and servants
shall incline and be disposed to the same?  No doubt, as the child shall
take disposition natural of the father and mother, so shall the servants
apply unto the vices of their masters and dames: if the heads be false in
their faculties and crafts, it is no marvel if the children, servants,
and apprentices do joy therein.  This is a great and shameful manner of
killing christian men, that the fathers, the mothers, the masters, and
the dames shall not alonely kill themselves, but all theirs, and all that
belongeth unto them: and so this way is a great number of christian
lineage murdered and spoiled.

The second manner of killing is silence.  By silence also is a great
number of christian men slain; which is on this fashion: although that
the father and mother, master and dame, of themselves be well disposed to
live according to the law of God, yet they may kill their children and
servants in suffering them to do evil before their own faces, and do not
use due correction according unto their offences.  The master seeth his
servant or apprentice take more of his neighbour than the king's laws, or
the order of his faculty, doth admit him; or that he suffereth him to
take more of his neighbour than he himself would be content to pay, if he
were in like condition: thus doing, I say, such men kill willingly their
children and servants, and shall go to hell for so doing; but also their
fathers and mothers, masters and dames, shall bear them company for so
suffering them.

Wherefore I exhort all true christian men and women to give good example
unto your children and servants, and suffer not them by silence to
offend.  Every man must be in his own house, according to St. Augustine's
mind, a bishop, not alonely giving good ensample, but teaching according
to it, rebuking and punishing vice; not suffering your children and
servants to forget the laws of God.  You ought to see them have their
belief, to know the commandments of God, to keep their holy-days, not to
lose their time in idleness: if they do so, you shall all suffer pain for
it, if God be true of his saying, as there is no doubt thereof.  And so
you may perceive that there be many a one that breaketh this card, "Thou
shalt not kill," and playeth therewith oftentime at the blind trump,
whereby they be no winners, but great losers.  But who be those now-a-
days that can clear themselves of these manifest murders used to their
children and servants?  I think not the contrary, but that many have
these two ways slain their own children unto their damnation; unless the
great mercy of God were ready to help them when they repent there-for.

Wherefore, considering that we be so prone and ready to continue in sin,
let us cast down ourselves with Mary Magdalene; and the more we bow down
with her toward Christ's feet, the more we shall be afraid to rise again
in sin; and the more we know and submit ourselves, the more we shall be
forgiven; and the less we know and submit ourselves, the less we shall be
forgiven; as appeareth by this example following:

Christ, when he was in this world, amongst the Jews and Pharisees, there
was a great Pharisee whose name was Simon: this Pharisee desired Christ
on a time to dine with him, thinking in himself that he was able and
worthy to give Christ a dinner.  Christ refused not his dinner, but came
unto him.  In time of their dinner it chanced there came into the house a
great and a common sinner named Mary Magdalene.  As soon as she perceived
Christ, she cast herself down, and called unto her remembrance what she
was of herself, and how greatly she had offended God; whereby she
conceived in Christ great love, and so came near unto him, and washed his
feet with bitter tears, and shed upon his head precious ointment,
thinking that by him she should be delivered from her sins.  This great
and proud Pharisee, seeing that Christ did accept her oblation in the
best part, had great indignation against this woman, and said to himself,
"If this man Christ were a holy prophet, as he is taken for, he would not
suffer this sinner to come so nigh him."  Christ, understanding the
naughty mind of this Pharisee, said unto him, "Simon, I have somewhat to
say unto thee."  "Say what you please," quod the Pharisee.  Then said
Christ, "I pray thee, tell me this: If there be a man to whom is owing
twenty pound by one, and forty by another, this man to whom this money is
owing, perceiving these two men be not able to pay him, he forgiveth them
both: which of these two debtors ought to love this man most?"  The
Pharisee said, "That man ought to love him best, that had most forgiven
him."  "Likewise," said Christ, "it is by this woman: she hath loved me
most, therefore most is forgiven her; she hath known her sins most,
whereby she hath most loved me.  And thou hast least loved me, because
thou hast least known thy sins: therefore, because thou hast least known
thine offences, thou art least forgiven."  So this proud Pharisee had an
answer to delay his pride.  And think you not, but that there be amongst
us a great number of these proud Pharisees, which think themselves worthy
to bid Christ to dinner; which will perk, and presume to sit by Christ in
the church, and have a disdain of this poor woman Magdalene, their poor
neighbour, with a high, disdainous, and solemn countenance?  And being
always desirous to climb highest in the church, reckoning themselves more
worthy to sit there than another, I fear me poor Magdalene under the
board, and in the belfry, hath more forgiven of Christ than they have:
for it is like that those Pharisees do less know themselves and their
offences, whereby they less love God, and so they be less forgiven.

I would to God we would follow this example, and be like unto Magdalene.
I doubt not but we be all Magdalenes in falling into sin and in
offending: but we be not again Magdalenes in knowing ourselves, and in
rising from sin.  If we be the true Magdalenes, we should be as willing
to forsake our sin and rise from sin, as we were willing to commit sin
and to continue in it; and we then should know ourselves best, and make
more perfect answer than ever we did unto this question, "Who art thou?"
to the which we might answer, that we be true christian men and women:
and then, I say, you should understand, and know how you ought to play at
this card, "Thou shalt not kill," without any interruption of your deadly
enemies the Turks; and so triumph at the last, by winning everlasting
life in glory.  Amen.



ANOTHER SERMON OF M. LATIMER, CONCERNING THE SAME MATTER.


Now you have heard what is meant by this first card, and how you ought to
play with it, I purpose again to deal unto you another card, almost of
the same suit; for they be of so nigh affinity, that one cannot be well
played without the other.  The first card declared, that you should not
kill, which might be done divers ways; as being angry with your
neighbour, in mind, in countenance, in word, or deed: it declared also,
how you should subdue the passions of ire, and so clear evermore
yourselves from them.  And whereas this first card doth kill in you these
stubborn Turks of ire; this second card will not only they should be
mortified in you, but that you yourselves shall cause them to be likewise
mortified in your neighbour, if that your said neighbour hath been
through your occasion moved unto ire, either in countenance, word, or
deed.  Now let us hear therefore the tenor of this card: "When thou
makest thine oblation at mine altar, and there dost remember that thy
neighbour hath any thing against thee, lay down there thy oblation, and
go first and reconcile thy neighbour, and then come and offer thy
oblation."

This card was spoken by Christ, as testifieth St. Matthew in his fifth
chapter, against all such as do presume to come unto the church to make
oblation unto God either by prayer, or any other deed of charity, not
having their neighbours reconciled.  Reconciling is as much to say as to
restore thy neighbour unto charity, which by thy words or deeds is moved
against thee: then, if so be it that thou hast spoken to or by thy
neighbour, whereby he is moved to ire or wrath, thou must lay down thy
oblation.  Oblations be prayers, alms-deeds, or any work of charity:
these be all called oblations to God.  Lay down therefore thine oblation;
begin to do none of these foresaid works before thou goest unto thy
neighbour, and confess thy fault unto him; declaring thy mind, that if
thou hast offended him, thou art glad and willing to make him amends, as
far forth as thy words and substance will extend, requiring him not to
take it at the worst: thou art sorry in thy mind, that thou shouldest be
occasion of his offending.

"What manner of card is this?" will some say: "Why, what have I to do
with my neighbour's or brother's malice?"  As Cain said, "Have I the
keeping of my brother? or shall I answer for him and for his faults?  This
were no reason--As for myself, I thank God I owe no man malice nor
displeasure: if others owe me any, at their own peril be it.  Let every
man answer for himself!"  Nay, sir, not so, as you may understand by this
card; for it saith, "If thy neighbour hath anything, any malice against
thee, through thine occasion, lay even down (saith Christ) thine
oblation: pray not to me; do no good deeds for me; but go first unto thy
neighbour, and bring him again unto my flock, which hath forsaken the
same through thy naughty words, mocks, scorns, or disdainous countenance,
and so forth; and then come and offer thine oblation; then do thy
devotion; then do thy alms-deeds; then pray, if thou wilt have me hear
thee."

"O good Lord! this is a hard reckoning, that I must go and seek him out
that is offended with me, before I pray or do any good deed.  I cannot go
unto him.  Peradventure he is a hundred miles from me, beyond the seas;
or else I cannot tell where: if he were here nigh, I would with all my
heart go unto him."  This is a lawful excuse before God on this fashion,
that thou wouldest in thy heart be glad to reconcile thy neighbour, if he
were present; and that thou thinkest in thy heart, whensoever thou shalt
meet with him, to go unto him, and require him charitably to forgive
thee; and so never intend to come from him, until the time that you both
depart one from the other true brethren in Christ.

Yet, peradventure, there be some in the world that be so devilish, and so
hard-hearted, that they will not apply in any condition unto charity.  For
all that, do what lieth in thee, by all charitable means, to bring him to
unity.  If he will in no wise apply thereunto, thou mayest be sorrowful
in thy heart, that by thine occasion that man or woman continueth in such
a damnable state.  This notwithstanding, if thou do the best that lieth
in thee to reconcile him, according to some doctors' mind, thou art
discharged towards God.  Nevertheless St. Augustine doubteth in this
case, whether thy oblations, prayers, or good deeds, shall avail thee
before God, or no, until thy neighbour come again to good state, whom
thou hast brought out of the way.  Doth this noble doctor doubt therein?
What aileth us to be so bold, and count it but a small fault, or none, to
bring our neighbour out of patience for every trifle that standeth not
with our mind?  You may see what a grievous thing this is, to bring
another man out of patience, that peradventure you cannot bring in again
with all the goods that you have: for surely, after the opinion of great
wise men, friendship once broken will be never well made whole again.
Wherefore you shall hear what Christ saith unto such persons.  Saith
Christ, "I came down into this world, and so took on me bitter passion
for man's sake, by the merits whereof I intended to make unity and peace
in mankind, to make man brother unto me, and so to expel the dominion of
Satan, the devil, which worketh nothing else but dissension: and yet now
there be a great number of you, that have professed my name, and say you
be christian men, which do rebel against my purpose and mind.  I go about
to make my fold: you go about to break the same, and kill my flock."  "How
darest thou," saith Christ, "presume to come unto my altar, unto my
church, or into my presence, to make oblation unto me, that takest on
thee to spoil my lambs?  I go about like a good shepherd to gather them
together; and thou dost the contrary, evermore ready to divide and lose
them.  Who made thee so bold to meddle with my silly beasts, which I
bought so dearly with my precious blood?  I warn thee out of my sight,
