a rich confusion that defies description.

The professor went into perplexed raptures, his mind being distracted by
the exuberant wealth of subjects which were presented to it all at the
same time.

"Look zere!" he cried, at one turning in the path which opened up a new
vista of exquisite beauty--"look at zat!"

"Ay, it is a Siamang ape--next in size to the orang-utan," said Van der
Kemp, who stood at his friend's elbow.

The animal in question was a fine full-grown specimen, with long
jet-black glancing hair. Its height might probably have been a few
inches over three feet, and the stretch of its arms over rather than
under five feet, but at the great height at which it was seen--not less
than eighty feet--it looked much like an ordinary monkey. It was hanging
in the most easy nonchalant way by one hand from the branch of a tree,
utterly indifferent to the fact that to drop was to die!

The instant the Siamang observed the travellers it set up a loud barking
howl which made the woods resound, but it did not alter its position or
seem to be alarmed in any degree.

"Vat a 'straordinary noise!" remarked the professor.

"It is indeed," returned the hermit, "and it has an extraordinary
appliance for producing it. There is a large bag under its throat
extending to its lips and cheeks which it can fill with air by means of
a valve in the windpipe. By expelling this air in sudden bursts it makes
the varied sounds you hear."

"Mos' vonderful! A sort of natural air-gun! I vill shoot it," said the
professor, raising his deadly rifle, and there is no doubt that the poor
Siamang would have dropped in another moment if Van der Kemp had not
quietly and gravely touched his friend's elbow just as the explosion
took place.

"Hah! you tooched me!" exclaimed the disappointed naturalist, looking
fiercely round, while the amazed ape sent forth a bursting crack of its
air-gun as it swung itself into the tree-top and made off.

"Yes, I touched you, and if you _will_ shoot when I am so close to you,
you cannot wonder at it--especially when you intend to take life
uselessly. The time now at the disposal of my friend Nigel Roy will not
permit of our delaying long enough to kill and preserve large specimens.
To say truth, my friend, we must press on now, as fast as we can, for we
have a very long way to go."

Verkimier was not quite pleased with this explanation, but there was a
sort of indescribable power about the hermit, when he was resolved to
have his way, that those whom he led found it impossible to resist.

On arriving at the village they were agreeably surprised to find a grand
banquet, consisting chiefly of fruit, with fowl, rice, and Indian corn,
spread out for them in the Balai or public hall, where also their
sleeping quarters were appointed. An event had recently occurred,
however, which somewhat damped the pleasure of their reception. A young
man had been killed by a tiger. The brute had leaped upon him while he
and a party of lads were traversing a narrow path through the jungle,
and had killed him with one blow of its paw. The other youths
courageously rushed at the beast with their spears and axes, and,
driving it off, carried the body of their comrade away.

"We have just buried the young man," said the chief of the village, "and
have set a trap for the tiger, for he will be sure to visit the grave."

"My friends would like to see this trap," said the hermit, who, of
course, acted the part of interpreter wherever they went, being well
acquainted with most of the languages and dialects of the archipelago.

"There will yet be daylight after you have finished eating," said the
chief.

Although anxious to go at once to see this trap, they felt the
propriety of doing justice to what had been provided for them, and sat
down to their meal, for which, to say truth, they were quite ready.

Then they went with a large band of armed natives to see this curious
tiger-trap, the bait of which was the grave of a human being!

The grave was close to the outskirts of the village, and, on one side,
the jungle came up to within a few yards of it. The spot was surrounded
by a strong and high bamboo fence, except at one point where a narrow
but very conspicuous opening had been left. Here a sharp spear was so
arranged beside the opening that it could be shot across it at a point
corresponding with the height of a tiger's heart from the ground--as
well, at least, as that point could be estimated by men who were pretty
familiar with tigers. The motive power to propel this spear was derived
from a green bamboo, so strong that it required several powerful men to
bend it in the form of a bow. A species of trigger was arranged to let
the bent bow fly, and a piece of fine cord passed from this across the
opening about breast-high for a tiger. The intention was that the
animal, in entering the enclosure, should become its own
executioner--should commit unintentional suicide, if we may so put it.

"I have an ambition to shoot a tiger," said Nigel to Van der Kemp that
evening. "Do you think the people would object to my getting up into a
tree with my rifle and watching beside the grave part of the night?"

"I am sure that they would not. But your watch will probably be in vain,
for tigers are uncommonly sagacious creatures and seem to me to have
exceptional powers for scenting danger."

"No matter, I will try."

Accordingly, a little before dark that evening our hero borrowed the
professor's double-barrelled rifle, being more suitable for large game
than his own gun, and sauntered with Moses down to the grave where he
ensconced himself in the branches of a large tree about thirty feet from
the ground. The form of the tree was such, that among its forks Nigel
could form a sort of nest in which he could sit, in full view of the
poor youth's grave, without the risk of falling to the ground even if he
should chance to drop asleep.

"Good-night, massa Nadgel," said Moses as he turned to leave his
companion to his solitary vigil. "See you not go to sleep."

"No fear of _that_!" said Nigel.

"An' whateber you do, don't miss."

"I'll do my best--Good-night."

While there was yet a little daylight, our hunter looked well about him;
took note of the exact position of the fence, the entrance to the
enclosure, and the grave; judged the various distances of objects, and
arranged the sights of the rifle, which was already loaded with a brace
of hardened balls. Then he looked up through the tree-tops and wished
for darkness.

It came sooner than he expected. Night always descends more suddenly in
tropical than in temperate regions. The sun had barely dipped below the
horizon when night seemed to descend like a pall over the jungle, and an
indescribable sensation of eerieness crept over Nigel's spirit. Objects
became very indistinct, and he fancied that he saw something moving on
the newly-made grave. With a startled feeling he grasped his weapon,
supposing that the tiger must have entered the enclosure with cat-like
stealth. On second thoughts, however, he discarded the idea, for the
entrance was between him and the grave, and still seemed quite visible.
Do what he would, however, the thought of ghosts insisted on intruding
upon him! He did not believe in ghosts--oh no!--had always scouted the
idea of their existence. Why, therefore, did he feel uncomfortable? He
could not tell. It must simply be the excitement natural to such a very
new and peculiar situation. He would think of something else. He would
devote his mind to the contemplation of tigers! In a short time the moon
would rise, he knew--then he would be able to see better.

While he was in this very uncomfortable state of mind, with the jungle
wrapped in profound silence as well as gloom, there broke on the night
air a wail so indescribable that the very marrow in Nigel's bones seemed
to shrivel up. It ceased, but again broke forth louder than before,
increasing in length and strength, until his ears seemed to tingle with
the sound, and then it died away to a sigh of unutterable woe.

"I have always," muttered Nigel, "believed myself to be a man of
ordinary courage, but _now_--I shall write myself a coward, if not an
ass!"

He attempted to laugh at this pleasantry, but the laugh was hollow and
seemed to freeze in his gullet as the wail broke forth again, ten times
more hideous than at first. After a time the wail became more
continuous, and the watcher began to get used to it. Then a happy
thought flashed into his mind--this was, perhaps, some sort of mourning
for the dead! He was right. The duty of the father of the poor youth who
had been killed was, for several days after the funeral, to sit alone in
his house and chant from sunset till daybreak a death-dirge, or, as it
is called, the _Tjerita bari_. It was not till next day that this was
told to him, but meanwhile the surmise afforded him instantaneous
relief.

As if nature sympathised with his feelings, the moon arose at the same
time and dispelled the thick darkness, though it was not till much
later that, sailing across a clear sky, she poured her bright beams
through the tree-tops and finally rested on the dead man's grave.

By that time Nigel had quite recovered his equanimity, and mentally
blotted out the writing of "coward" and "ass" which he had written
against himself. But another trouble now assailed him. He became sleepy!
Half-a-dozen times at least within half-an-hour he started wide awake
under the impression that he was falling off the tree.

"This will never do," he exclaimed, rising to his feet, resting his
rifle in a position of safety, and then stretching himself to his utmost
extent so that he became thoroughly awake. After this "rouser," as he
called it, he sat down again, and almost immediately fell fast asleep.

How long he sat in this condition it is impossible to say, but he opened
his eyes at length with an indescribable sensation that _something_
required attention, and the first thing they rested on (for daylight was
dawning) was an enormous tiger not forty yards away from him, gliding
like a shadow and with cat-like stealth towards the opening of the
enclosure. The sight was so sudden and so unexpected that, for the
moment, he was paralysed. Perhaps he thought it was a dream. Before he
could recover presence of mind to seize his rifle, the breast of the
animal had touched the fatal line; the trigger was drawn; the stout
bamboo straightened with a booming sound, and the spear--or, rather, the
giant arrow--was shot straight through the tiger's side!

Then occurred a scene which might well have induced Nigel to imagine
that he dreamt, for the transfixed creature bounded into the enclosure
with a terrific roar that rang fearfully through the arches of the
hitherto silent forest. Rushing across the grave, it sprang with one
tremendous bound right over the high fence, carrying the spear along
with it into the jungle beyond.

By that time Nigel was himself again, with rifle in hand, but too late
to fire. The moment he heard the thud of the tiger's descent, he slid
down the tree, and, forgetful or regardless of danger, went crashing
into the jungle, while the yells and shouts of hundreds of aroused
natives suggested the peopling of the region with an army of fiends.

But our hero had not to go far. In his haste he almost tumbled over the
tiger. It was lying stone dead on the spot where it had fallen!

A few minutes more and the natives came pouring round him, wild with
excitement and joy. Soon he was joined by his own comrades.

"Well, you've managed to shoot him, I see," said Van der Kemp as he
joined the group.

"Alas! no. I have not fired a shot," said Nigel, with a half
disappointed look.

"You's got de better ob him anyhow," remarked Moses as he pushed to the
front.

"The spear got the better of him, Moses."

"Veil now, zat is a splendid animal. Lat me see," said the professor,
pulling out his tape-measure.

It was with difficulty that the man of science made and noted his
measurements, for the people were pressing eagerly round the carcase to
gratify their revenge by running their spears into the still warm body.
They dipped the points in the blood and passed their krisses broadside
over the creature that they might absorb the courage and boldness which
were supposed to emanate from it! Then they skinned it, and pieces of
the heart and brain were eaten raw by some of those whose relatives had
been killed by tigers. Finally the skull was hacked to pieces for the
purpose of distributing the teeth, which are used by the natives as
charms.




CHAPTER XXI.

IN WHICH THE PROFESSOR DISTINGUISHES HIMSELF.


Leaving this village immediately after the slaying of the tiger, the
party continued to journey almost by forced marches, for not only was
Nigel Roy very anxious to keep tryst with his father, and to settle the
question of Kathleen's identity by bringing father and daughter
together, but Van der Kemp himself, strange to say, was filled with
intense and unaccountable anxiety to get back to his island home.

"I don't know how it is," he said to Nigel as they walked side by side
through the forest, followed by Moses and the professor, who had become
very friendly on the strength of a certain amount of vacant curiosity
displayed by the former in regard to scientific matters--"I don't know
how it is, but I feel an unusually strong desire to get back to my cave.
I have often been absent from home for long periods at a time, but have
never before experienced these strange longings. I say strange, because
there is no such thing as an effect without a cause."

"May not the cause be presentiment?" suggested Nigel, who, knowing what
a tremendous possibility for the hermit lay in the future, felt a little
inclined to be superstitious. It did not occur to him just then that an
equally, if not more, tremendous possibility lay in the future for
himself--touching his recent discovery or suspicion!

"I do not believe in presentiments," returned the hermit. "They are
probably the result of indigestion or a disordered intellect, from
neither of which complaints do I suffer--at least not consciously!"

"But you have never before left home in such peculiar circumstances,"
said Nigel. "Have you not told me that this is the first time for about
two hundred years that Krakatoa has broken out in active eruption?"

"True, but that cannot be to me the cause of longings or anxieties, for
I have seen many a long-dormant crater become active without any
important result either to me or to any one else."

"Stop, stop!" cried Professor Verkimier in a hoarse whisper at that
moment; "look! look at zee monkeys!"

Monkeys are very abundant in Sumatra, but the nest of them which the
travellers discovered at that time, and which had called forth the
professor's admiration, was enough--as Moses said--to make a "renocerus
laugh." The trees around absolutely swarmed with monkeys; those of a
slender form and with very long tails being most numerous. They were
engaged in some sort of game, swinging by arms, legs, and tails from
branches, holding on to or chasing each other, and taking the most
astonishing leaps in circumstances where a slip would have no doubt
resulted in broken limbs or in death.

"Stand still! Oh! _do_ stand still--like you vas petrivied," said the
professor in a low voice of entreaty.

Being quite willing to humour him, the whole party stood immovable, like
statues, and thus avoided attracting the attention of the monkeys, who
continued their game. It seemed to be a sort of "follow my leader," for
one big strong fellow led off with a bound from one branch to another
which evidently tried the nerves of his more timid and less agile
companions. They all succeeded, however, from the largest even to the
smallest--which last was a very tiny creature with a pink face, a sad
expression, and a corkscrew tail.

For a time they bounded actively among the branches, now high now low,
till suddenly the big leader took a tremendous leap, as if for the
express purpose of baffling or testing his companions. It was immensely
amusing to see the degrees of trepidation with which the others
followed. The last two seemed quite unable to make up their minds to
the leap, until the others seemed about to disappear, when one of them
took heart and bounded wildly across. Thus little pink-face with the
corkscrew tail was left alone! Twice did that little monkey make a
desperate resolution to jump, and twice did its little heart fail as it
measured the distance between the branches and glanced at the abyss
below. Its companions seemed to entertain a feeling of pity for it.
Numbers of them came back, as if to watch the jump and encourage the
little one. A third time it made an abortive effort to spring, and
looked round pitifully, whereupon Moses gave vent to an uncontrollable
snort of suppressed laughter.

"Vat you mean by zat?" growled the professor angrily.

The growl and snort together revealed the intruders, and all the
monkeys, except pink-face, crowding the trees above the spot where they
stood, gazed down upon them with expressions in which unparalleled
indignation and inconceivable surprise struggled for the mastery.

Then, with a wild shriek, the whole troop fled into the forest.

This was too much for poor, half-petrified pink-face with the twisted
tail. Seeing that its comrades were gone in earnest, it became
desperate, flung itself frantically into the air with an agonising
squeak, missed its mark, went crashing through the slender branches and
fell to the ground.

Fortunately these branches broke its fall so that it arose unhurt,
bounded into a bush, still squeaking with alarm, and made after its
friends.

"Why did you not shoot it, professor?" asked Nigel, laughing as much at
Verkimier's grave expression as at the little monkey's behaviour.

"Vy did I not shot it?" echoed the professor. "I vould as soon shot a
baby. Zee pluck of zat leetle creature is admirable. It vould be a
horrible shame to take his life. No! I do love to see ploock vezer in
man or beast! He could not shoomp zat. He _knew_ he could not shoomp it,
but he _tried_ to shoomp it. He vould not be beat, an' I vould not kill
him--zough I vant 'im very mooch for a specimen."

It seemed as if the professor was to be specially rewarded for his
generous self-denial on this occasion, for while he was yet speaking, a
soft "hush!" from Van der Kemp caused the whole party to halt in dead
silence and look at the hermit inquiringly.

"You are in luck, professor," he murmured, in a soft, low voice--very
different from that hissing whisper which so many people seem to imagine
is an inaudible utterance. "I see a splendid Argus pheasant over there
making himself agreeable to his wife!"

"Vare? oh! vare?" exclaimed the enthusiast with blazing eyes, for
although he had already seen and procured specimens of this most
beautiful creature, he had not yet seen it engage in the strange
love-dance--if we may so call it--which is peculiar to the bird.

"You'll never get near enough to see it if you hiss like a serpent,"
said the hermit. "Get out your binoculars, follow me, and hold your
tongue, all of you--that will be the safest plan. Tread lightly."

It was a sight to behold the professor crouching almost double in order
to render himself less conspicuous, with his hat pushed back, and the
blue glasses giving him the appearance of a great-eyed seal. He carried
his butterfly-net in one hand, and the unfailing rifle in the other.

Fortunately the hermit's sharp and practised eye had enabled him to
distinguish the birds in the distance before their advance had alarmed
them, so that they were able to reach a mound topped with low bushes
over which they could easily watch the birds.

"Zat is very koorious an' most interesting," murmured the professor
after a short silence.

He was right. There were two Argus pheasants, a male and female--the
male alone being decorated superbly. The Argus belongs to the same
family as the peacock, but is not so gaudy in colouring, and therefore,
perhaps, somewhat more pleasing. Its tail is formed chiefly by an
enormous elongation of the two tail quills, and of the secondary wing
feathers, no two of which are exactly the same, and the closer they are
examined the greater is seen to be the extreme beauty of their markings,
and the rich varied harmony of their colouring.

When a male Argus wishes to show off his magnificence to his spouse--or
when she asks him to show it off, we know not which--he makes a circle
in the forest some ten or twelve feet in diameter, which he clears of
every leaf, twig, and branch. On the margin of this circus there is
invariably a projecting branch, or overarching root a few feet above the
ground, on which the female takes her place to watch the exhibition.
This consists of the male strutting about, pluming his feathers, and
generally displaying his gorgeous beauty.

"Vat ineffable vanity!" exclaimed the professor, after gazing for some
time in silence.

His own folly in thus speaking was instantly proved by the two birds
bringing the exhibition to an abrupt close and hastily taking wing.

Not long after seeing this they came to a small but deep and rapid
river, which for a time checked their progress, for there was no ford,
and the porters who carried Verkimier's packages seemed to know nothing
about a bridge, either natural or artificial. After wandering for an
hour or so along its banks, however, they found a giant tree which had
fallen across the stream and formed a natural bridge.

On the other side of the stream the ground was more rugged and the
forest so dense that they had to walk in a sort of twilight--only a
glimpse of blue sky being visible here and there through the tree-tops.
In some places, however, there occurred bright little openings which
swarmed with species of metallic tiger-beetles and sand-bees, and where
sulphur, swallow-tailed, and other butterflies sported their brief life
away over the damp ground by the water's edge.

The native forest path which they followed was little better than a
tunnel cut through a grove of low rattan-palms, the delicate but
exceedingly tough tendrils of which hung down in all directions. These
were fringed with sharp hooks which caught their clothing and tore it,
or held on unrelentingly, so that the only way of escape was to step
quietly back and unhook themselves. This of itself would have rendered
their progress slow as well as painful, but other things tended to
increase the delay. At one place they came to a tree about seven feet in
diameter which lay across the path and had to be scrambled over, and
this was done with great difficulty. At another, a gigantic
mud-bath--the wallowing hole of a herd of elephants--obstructed the
way, and a yell from one of the porters told that in attempting to cross
it he had fallen in up to the waist. A comrade in trying to pull him out
also fell in and sank up to the armpits. But they got over it--as
resolute men always do--somehow!

"Zis is horrible!" exclaimed the professor, panting from his exertions,
and making a wild plunge with his insect-net at some living creature.
"Hah! zee brute! I have 'im."

The man of science was flat on his stomach as he spoke, with arm
outstretched and the net pressed close to the ground, while a smile of
triumph beamed through the mud and scratches on his face.

"What have you got?" asked Nigel, doing his best to restrain a laugh.

"A splendid _Ornit'optera_ a day-flying moss'," said Verkimier as he
cautiously rose, "vich mimics zee _Trepsichrois mulciber_. Ant zis very
morning I caught von _Leptocircus virescens_, vich derives protection
from mimicking zee habits ant appearance of a dragon-fly."

"What rubbish dat purfesser do talk!" remarked Moses in an undertone to
the hermit as they moved on again.

"Not such rubbish as it sounds to you, Moses. These are the scientific
names of the creatures, and you know as well as he does that many
creatures think they find it advantageous to pretend to be what they
are not. Man himself is not quite free from this characteristic. Indeed,
you have a little of it yourself," said the hermit with one of his
twinkling glances. "When you are almost terrified of your wits don't you
pretend that there's nothing the matter with you?"

"Nebber, massa, nebber!" answered the negro with remonstrative gravity.
"When I's nigh out ob my wits, so's my innards feels like nuffin' but
warmish water, I gits whitey-grey in de chops, so I's told, an' blue in
de lips, an' I _pretends_ nuffin'--I don't care _who_ sees it!"

The track for some distance beyond this point became worse and worse.
Then the nature of the ground changed somewhat--became more hilly, and
the path, if such it could be styled, more rugged in some places, more
swampy in others, while, to add to their discomfort, rain began to fall,
and night set in dark and dismal without any sign of the village of
which they were in search. By that time the porters who carried
Verkimier's boxes seemed so tired that the hermit thought it advisable
to encamp, but the ground was so wet and the leeches were so numerous
that they begged him to go on, assuring him that the village could not
be far distant. In another half-hour the darkness became intense, so
that a man could scarcely see his fellow even when within two paces of
him. Ominous mutterings and rumblings like distant thunder also were
heard, which appeared to indicate an approaching storm. In these
circumstances encamping became unavoidable, and the order was given to
make a huge fire to scare away the tigers, which were known to be
numerous, and the elephants whose fresh tracks had been crossed and
followed during the greater part of the day. The track of a rhinoceros
