The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heads of Apex, by Francis Flagg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Heads of Apex

Author: Francis Flagg

Release Date: June 5, 2009 [EBook #29046]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEADS OF APEX ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Astounding Stories October 1931.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


  [Illustration: I looked into the face of a girl about to be bled.]



                          The Heads of Apex


                           By Francis Flagg

       *       *       *       *       *




[Sidenote: Far under the sea-floor Solino's submarine carries two American
soldiers of fortune to startling adventure among the Vampire Heads of
Apex.]


Justus Miles was sitting on a bench in the park, down at the heels,
hungry, desperate, when a gust of wind whirled a paper to his feet. It
was the advertising section of the _New York Times_. Apathetically, he
picked it up, knowing from the past weeks' experience that few or no
jobs were being advertised. Then with a start he sat up, for in the
center of the page, encased in a small box and printed in slightly
larger type than the ordinary advertisement, he read the following
words: "Wanted: Soldier of Fortune, young, healthy; must have good
credentials. Apply 222 Reuter Place, between two and four." It was
to-day's advertising section he was scanning, and the hour not yet
one.

Reuter Place was some distance away, he knew, a good hour's walk on
hard pavement and through considerable heat. But he had made forced
marches in Sonora as badly shod and on even an emptier stomach. For
Justus Miles, though he might not have looked it, was a bona fide
soldier of fortune, stranded in New York. Five feet eight in height,
he was, loose and rangy in build, and with deceptively mild blue eyes.
He had fought through the World War, served under Kemal Pasha in
Turkey, helped the Riffs in Morocco, filibustered in South America and
handled a machine-gun for revolutionary forces in Mexico. Surely, he
thought grimly, if anyone could fill the bill for a soldier of fortune
it was himself.

222 Reuter Place proved to be a large residence in a shabby
neighborhood. On the sidewalk, a queue of men was being held in line
by a burly cop. The door of the house opened, and an individual,
broad-shouldered and with flaming red hair, looked over the crowd.
Instantly Justus Miles let out a yell, "Rusty! By God, Rusty!" and
waved his hands.

"Hey, feller, who do you think you're shovin'?" growled a hard-looking
fellow at the head of the line, but Justus Miles paid no attention to
him. The man in the doorway also let out an excited yell.

"Well, well, if it isn't the Kid! Hey, Officer, let that fellow
through: I want to speak to him."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the door shut on the blasphemous mob, the two men wrung each
other's hands. Ex-Sergeant Harry Ward, known to his intimates as
"Rusty," led Justus Miles into a large office and shoved him into a
chair.

"I didn't know you were in New York, kid. The last I saw of you was
when we quit Sandino."

"And I never suspected that 222 Reuter Place would be you, Rusty.
What's the lay, old man, and is there any chance to connect?"

"You bet your life there's a chance. Three hundred a month and found.
But the boss has the final say-so, though I'm sure he'll take you on
my recommendation."

He opened a door, led Justus Miles through an inner room, knocked at a
far door and ushered him into the presence of a man who sat behind a
roll-topped desk. There was something odd about this old man, and
after a moment's inspection Justus Miles saw what it was. He was
evidently a cripple, propped up in a strange wheelchair. He had an
abnormally large and hairless head, and his body was muffled to the
throat in a voluminous cloak, the folds of which fell over and
enveloped most of the wheelchair itself. The face of this old
gentleman--though the features were finely molded--was swarthy: its
color was almost that of a negro--or an Egyptian. He regarded the two
men with large and peculiarly colored eyes--eyes that probed them
sharply.

"Well, Ward, what is it?"

"The man you advertised for, Mr. Solino."

       *       *       *       *       *

Solino regarded Justus Miles critically.

"You have been a soldier of fortune?" he asked. He spoke English with
the preciseness of an educated foreigner.

"Yes, sir. Rusty--that is, Mr. Ward knows my record."

"I was his sergeant in France, sir; saw fighting with him in Morocco,
Turkey, Nicaragua--"

"You can vouch for him, then; his character, courage--"

"You couldn't get a better man, sir. If I had known he was in town I
would have sent for him."

"Very well; that is sufficient. But Mr.--Miles did you
say?--understands he is embarking on a dangerous adventure with grave
