
"Westinghouse," Burris said. "And let's get there in a hurry."

"Right," Malone said, and started the car.

"We just haven't had a single lead," Burris said. "I was hoping you'd
come up with something. Your telegram detailed the fight, of course,
and the rest of what's been happening--but I hoped there'd be
something more."

"There isn't," Malone was forced to admit. "All we can do is try to
persuade Her Majesty to tell us--"

"Oh, I know it isn't easy," Burris said. "But it seems to me...."

By the time they'd arrived at the administrative offices of
Westinghouse's psionics research area, Malone found himself wishing
that something would happen. Possibly, he thought, lightning might
strike, or an earthquake swallow everything up. He was, suddenly,
profoundly tired of the entire affair.


                                  8

Four days later, he was more than tired. He was exhausted. The six
psychopaths--including Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth I--had been housed
in a converted dormitory in the Westinghouse area, together with four
highly nervous and even more highly trained and investigated
psychiatrists from St. Elizabeths in Washington. The Convention of
Nuts, as Malone called it privately, was in full swing.

And it was every bit as strange as he'd thought it was going to be.
Unfortunately, five of the six (Her Majesty being the only exception)
were completely out of contact with the world. The psychiatrists
referred to them in worried tones as "unavailable for therapy," and
spent most of their time brooding over possible ways of bringing them
back into the real world for a while, at least far enough so that they
could be spoken with.

Malone stayed away from the five who were completely psychotic. The
weird babblings of fifty-year-old Barry Miles disconcerted him. They
sounded like little Charlie O'Neill's strange semi-connected jabber,
but Westinghouse's Dr. O'Connor said that it seemed to represent
another phenomenon entirely. William Logan's blank face was a memory
of horror, but the constant tinkling giggles of Ardith Parker, the
studied and concentrated way that Gordon Macklin wove meaningless
patterns in the air with his waving fingers, and the rhythmless,
melodyless humming that seemed to be all there was to the personality
of Robert Cassiday were simply too much for Malone. Taken singly, each
was frightening and remote; all together, they wove a picture of
insanity that chilled him more than he wanted to admit.

When the seventh telepath was flown in from Honolulu, Malone didn't
even bother to see her. He let the psychiatrists take over directly,
and simply avoided their sessions.

Queen Elizabeth I, on the other hand, he found genuinely likeable.

According to the psych boys, she had been (as both Malone and Her
Majesty had theorized) heavily frustrated by being the possessor of a
talent which no one else recognized. Beyond that, the impact of other
minds was disturbing; there was a slight loss of identity which seemed
to be a major factor in every case of telepathic insanity. But the
Queen had compensated for her frustrations in the easiest possible
way; she had simply traded her identity for another one, and had
rationalized a single, overruling delusion: that she was Queen
Elizabeth I of England, still alive and wrongfully deprived of her
throne.

"It's a beautiful rationalization," one of the psychiatrists said with
more than a trace of admiration in his voice. "Complete and thoroughly
consistent. She's just traded identities--and everything else she
does--_everything_ else--stems logically out of her delusional
premise. Beautiful."

She may have been crazy, Malone realized. But she was a long way from
stupid.

The project was in full swing. The only trouble was that they were no
nearer finding the telepath than they had been three weeks before.
With five completely blank human beings to work with, and the sixth
Queen Elizabeth (Malone heard privately that the last telepath, the
girl from Honolulu, was no better than the first five; she had
apparently regressed into what one of the psychiatrists called a "non-
identity childhood syndrome." Malone didn't know what it meant, but it
sounded terrible.)--with that crew, Malone could see why progress was
their most difficult commodity.

Dr. Harry Gamble, the head of Project Isle, was losing poundage by the
hour with worry. And, Malone reflected, he could ill afford it.

Burris, Malone and Boyd had set themselves up in a temporary office
within the Westinghouse area. The Director had left his assistant in
charge in Washington. Nothing, he said over and over again, was as
important as the spy in Project Isle.

Apparently Boyd had come to believe that, too. At any rate, though he
was still truculent, there were no more outbursts of rebellion.

But, on the fourth day:

"What do we do now?" Burris asked.

"Shoot ourselves," Boyd said promptly.

"Now, look here--" Malone began, but he was overruled.

"Boyd," Burris said levelly, "if I hear any more of that sort of
pessimism, you're going to be an exception to the beard rule. One more
crack out of you, and you can go out and buy yourself a razor."

Boyd put his hand over his chin protectively, and said nothing at all.

"Wait a minute," Malone said. "Aren't there any _sane_ telepaths in
the world?"

"We can't find any," Burris said. "We--"

There was a knock at the office door. "Who's there?" Burris called.
"Dr. Gamble," said the man's surprisingly baritone voice.

Burris called: "Come in, Doctor," and the door opened. Dr. Gamble's
lean face looked almost haggard.

"Mr. Burris," he said, extending his arms a trifle, "can't anything be
done?" Malone had seen Gamble speaking before, and had wondered if it
would be possible for the man to talk with his hands tied behind his
back. Apparently it wouldn't be. "We feel that we are approaching a
critical stage in Project Isle," the scientist said, enclosing one
fist within the other hand. "If anything more gets out to the Soviets,
we might as well publish our findings--" a wide, outflung gesture of
both arms--"in the newspapers."

Burris stepped back. "We're doing the best we can, Dr. Gamble," he
said. All things considered, his obvious try at radiating confidence
was nearly successful. "After all," he went on, "we know a great deal
more than we did four days ago. Miss Thompson has assured us that the
spy is right here, within the compound of Yucca Flats Labs. We've
bottled everything up in this compound, and I'm confident that no
information is at present getting through to the Soviet Government.
Miss Thompson agrees with me."

"Miss Thompson?" Gamble said, one hand at his bearded chin.

"The Queen," Burris said.

Gamble nodded and two fingers touched his forehead. "Ah," he said. "Of
course." He rubbed at the back of his neck. "But we can't keep
everybody who's here now locked up forever. Sooner or later we'll have
to let them--" His left hand described the gesture of a man tossing
away a wad of paper--"go." His hands fell to his sides. "We're lost,
unless we can find that spy."

"We'll find him," Burris said with a show of great confidence.

"But--"

"Give her time," Burris said. "Give her time. Remember her mental
condition."

Boyd looked up. "Rome," he said in an absent fashion, "wasn't built in
a daze."

Burris glared at him, but said nothing. Malone filled the
conversational hole with what he thought would be nice, and hopeful,
and untrue.

"We know he's someone on the reservation, so we'll catch him
eventually," he said. "And as long as his information isn't getting
into Soviet hands, we're safe." He glanced at his wristwatch.

Dr. Gamble said: "But--"

"My, my," Malone said. "Almost lunchtime. I have to go over and have
lunch with Her Majesty. Maybe she's dug up something more."

"I hope so," Dr. Gamble said, apparently successfully deflected. "I do
hope so."

"Well," Malone said, "pardon me." He shucked off his coat and
trousers. Then he proceeded to put on the doublet and hose that hung
in the little office closet. He shrugged into the fur-trimmed, slash-
sleeved coat, adjusted the plumed hat to his satisfaction with great
care, and gave Burris and the others a small bow. "I go to an audience
with Her Majesty, gentlemen," he said in a grave, well-modulated
voice. "I shall return anon."

He went out the door and closed it carefully behind him. When he had
gone a few steps he allowed himself the luxury of a deep sigh.

Then he went outside and across the dusty street to the barracks where
Her Majesty and the other telepaths were housed. No one paid any
attention to him, and he rather missed the stares he'd become used to
drawing. But by now, everybody was used to seeing Elizabethan
clothing. Her Majesty had arrived at a new plateau.

She would now allow no one to have audience with her unless he was
properly dressed. Even the psychiatrists--whom she had, with a careful
sense of meiosis, appointed Physicians to the Royal House--had to wear
the stuff.

Malone went over the whole case in his mind--for about the thousandth
time, he told himself bitterly.

Who could the telepathic spy be? It was like looking for a needle in a
rolling stone, he thought. Or something. He did remember clearly that
a stitch in time saved nine, but he didn't know nine what, and
suspected it had nothing to do with his present problem.

How about Dr. Harry Gamble, Malone thought. It seemed a little
unlikely that the head of Project Isle would be spying on his own
men--particularly since he already had all the information. But, on
the other hand, he was just as probable a spy as anybody else.

Malone moved onward. Dr. Thomas O'Connor, the Westinghouse psionics
man, was the next nominee. Before Malone had actually found Her
Majesty, he had had a suspicion that O'Connor had cooked the whole
thing up to throw the FBI off the trail and confuse everybody, and
that he'd intended merely to have the FBI chase ghosts while the real
spy did his work undetected.

But what if O'Connor were the spy himself--a telepath? What if he were
so confident of his ability to throw the Queen off the track that he
had allowed the FBI to find all the other telepaths? There was another
argument for that: he'd had to report the findings of his machine no
matter what it cost him; there were too many other men on his staff
who knew about it.

O'Connor was a perfectly plausible spy, too. But he didn't seem very
likely. The head of a government project is likely to be a much-
investigated man. Could any tie-up with Russia--even a psionic one--
stand up against that kind of investigation? It was possible.
Anything, after all, was possible. You eliminated the impossible, and
then whatever remained, however improbable....

Malone told himself morosely to shut up and think.

O'Connor, he told himself, might be the spy. It would be a pleasure,
he realized, to go to the office of that superior scientist and arrest
him. "I know your true name," he muttered. "It isn't O'Connor, it's
Moriarty." He wondered if the Westinghouse man had ever done any work
on the dynamics of an asteroid. Then he wondered what the dynamics of
an asteroid were.

But if O'Connor were the spy, nothing made sense. Why would he have
disclosed the fact that people were having their minds read in the
first place?

Sadly, Malone gave up the idea. But, then, there were other ideas. The
other psychiatrists, for instance....

The only trouble with them, Malone realized, was that there seemed to
be neither motive nor anything else to connect them to the case. There
was no evidence, none in any direction.

Why, there was just as much evidence that the spy was really Kenneth
J. Malone, he told himself.

And then he stopped.

Maybe Tom Boyd had been thinking that way about him. Maybe Boyd
suspected that he, Malone, was really the spy.

Certainly it worked in reverse. Boyd...

No, Malone told himself firmly. That was silly.

If he were going to consider Boyd, he realized, he might as well go
whole hog and think about Andrew J. Burris.

And that really _was_ ridiculous. Absolutely ridic....

Well, Queen Elizabeth had seemed pretty certain when she'd pointed him
out in Dr. Dowson's office. And the fact that she'd apparently changed
her mind didn't have to mean very much. After all, how much faith
could you place in Her Majesty at the best of times? If she'd made a
mistake about Burris in the first place, she could just as well have
made a mistake in the second place. Or about the spy's being at Yucca
Flats at all.

In which case, Malone thought sadly, they were right back where they'd
started from.

Behind their own goal line.

One way or another, though, Her Majesty had made a mistake. She'd
pointed Burris out as the spy, and then she'd said she'd been wrong.
Either Burris was a spy, or else he wasn't. You couldn't have it both
ways.

And if Burris really were the spy, Malone thought, then why had he
started the investigation in the first place? You came back to the
same question with Burris, he realized, that you had with Dr.
O'Connor: it didn't make sense for a man to play one hand against the
other. Maybe the right hand sometimes didn't know what the left hand
was doing, but this was ridiculous.

So Burris wasn't the spy. And Her Majesty had made a mistake when
she'd said....

"Wait a minute," Malone told himself suddenly.

Had she?

Maybe, after all, you _could_ have it both ways. The thought occurred
to him with a startling suddenness and he stood silent upon a peak in
Yucca Flats, contemplating it. A second went by.

And then something Burris himself had said came back to him, something
that--
