
She came in and half closed the door upon us, leaving it open enough
so that we could make sure that Coniston did not advance.

I stepped back where he could not see us. "Anita!"

She flung herself into my opened arms.




XV


A moment when, beyond the thought of the nearby brigand--or the
possibility of an eavesdropping ray trained now upon my cubby--a
moment while Anita and I held each other, and whispered those things
which could mean nothing to the world, but which were all the world to
us!

Then it was she whose wits brought us back from the shining fairyland
of our love, into the sinister reality of the _Planetara_.

"Gregg, if they are listening--"

I pushed her away. This brave little masquerader! Not for my life, or
for all the lives on the ship, would I consciously have endangered
her.

"But Grantline's findings!" I said aloud. "In his message--see here,
Prince--"

Coniston was too far away on the deck to hear us. Anita went to my
door again and waved at him reassuringly. I put my ear to the door
opening and listened at the space across the grid of the ventilator
over my bunk. The hum of a vibration would have been audible at those
two points. But there was nothing.

"It's all right," I whispered, and she clung to me--so small beside
me. With the black robe thrown aside, it seemed that I could not miss
the curves of her woman's figure. A dangerous game she was playing.
Her hair had been cut short to the base of her neck, in the fashion of
her dead brother. Her eyelashes had been clipped: the line of her
brows altered. And now, in the light of my tube as it shone upon her
earnest face, I could remark other changes. Glutz, the little beauty
specialist, was in this secret. With plastic skill he had altered the
set of her jaw--put masculinity here.

She was whispering: "It was--was poor George whom Miko shot."

I had now the true version of what had occurred. Miko had been forcing
his wooing upon Anita. George Prince was a weakling whose only good
quality was his love for his sister. Some years ago he had fallen into
evil ways. Been arrested, and then been discharged from his position
with the Federated Corporation. He had taken up with evil companions
in Greater New York. Mostly Martians. And Miko had met him. His
technical knowledge, his training with the Federated Corporation, made
him valuable to Miko's enterprise. And so Prince had joined the
brigands.

Of all this, Anita had been unaware. She had never liked Miko. Feared
him. But it seemed that the Martian had some hold upon her brother,
which puzzled and frightened Anita.

Then Miko had fallen in love with her. George had not liked it. And
that night on the _Planetara_, Miko had come and knocked upon Anita's
door, and incautiously she had opened it. He forced himself in. And
when she repulsed him, struggled with him, George had been awakened.

She was whispering to me now. "My room was dark. We were all three
struggling. George was holding me--the shot came--and I screamed."

And Miko had fled, not knowing whom his shot had hit in the darkness.

"And when George died, Captain Carter wanted me to impersonate him. We
planned it with Dr. Frank to try and learn what Miko and the others
were doing; because I didn't know that poor George had fallen into
such evil ways."

She whispered, "But I love you, Gregg. I want to be the first to say
it: I love you--I love you."

We had the sanity to try and plan.

"Anita, tell Miko we discussed the multiple powers of the catalyst.
Discussed how carefully it would have to be transported; how to gauge
its worth. You'll have to be careful, clever. Don't say too much. Tell
him we estimate the value at about a hundred and thirty millions."

I repeated what Miko had told me of his plans. She knew all that. And
Snap knew it. She had a few moments alone with Snap and gave me now a
message from him, "We'll pull out of this, Gregg."

With Snap she had worked out a plan. There were Snap and I; and Shac
and Dud Ardley upon whom we could doubtless depend. And Dr. Frank.
Against us were Miko and his sister, and Coniston and Hahn. Of course,
there were the members of the crew. But we were numerically the
stronger when it came to true leadership. Unarmed and guarded now. But
if we could break loose--recapture the ship....

I sat listening to Anita's eager whispers. It seemed feasible. Miko
did not altogether trust George Prince; Anita was now unarmed.

"But I can make opportunity! I can get one of their ray cylinders, and
an invisible cloak equipment."

That cloak, that had been hidden in Miko's room when Carter searched
for it in A20 was now in the chart room by Johnson's body. It had been
repaired now. Anita thought she could get possession of it.

We worked out the details of the plan. Anita would arm herself, and
come and release me. Together, with a paralyzing ray, we could creep
about the ship, overcome these brigands, one by one. There were so few
of the leaders. With them felled, and with us in control of the turret
and the radio room, we could force the crew to stay at their posts.
There were, Anita said, no navigators among Miko's crew. They would
not dare oppose us.

"But it should be done at once, Anita. In a few hours we will be at
the asteroid."

"Yes. I will go now and try to get the weapons."

"Where is Snap?"

"Still in the radio room. One of the crew guards him."

Coniston was roaming the ship. He was still loitering on the deck,
watching my door. Hahn was in the turret. The morning watch of the
crew were at their posts in the hull corridors. The stewards were
preparing a morning meal. There were nine members of subordinates
altogether, Anita had calculated. Six of them were in Miko's pay. The
other three--our own men who had not been killed in the fighting--had
joined the brigands.

"And Dr. Frank, Anita?"

He was in the lounge. All the passengers were herded there, with Miko
and Moa alternating on guard.

"I will arrange it with Venza," Anita whispered swiftly. "She will
tell the others. Dr. Frank knows about it now. He thinks it can be
done."

The possibility of it swept me anew. The brigands were of necessity
scattered singly about the ship. One by one, creeping under cover of
an invisible cloak, I could fell them, and replace them without
alarming others. My thoughts leaped to it. We would strike down the
guard in the radio room. Release Snap. At the turret we could assail
Hahn, and replace him with Snap.

Coniston's voice outside broke in upon us. "Prince."

He was coming forward. Anita stood in the doorway. "I have the
figures, Coniston. By God, this Haljan is with us! And clever! We
think it will total a hundred and thirty millions. What a stake!"

She whispered, "Gregg dear, I'll be back soon. We can do it--be
ready!"

"Anita--be careful of yourself! If they should suspect you...."

"I'll be careful. In an hour, Gregg, or less, I'll come back.... All
right, Coniston. Where is Miko? I want to see him. Stay where you are,
Haljan. In good time Miko will trust you with your liberty. You'll be
rich like all of us. Never fear."

She swaggered out upon the deck, waved at the brigand, and banged my
cubby door in my face.

I sat upon my bunk. Waiting. Would she come back? Would she be
successful?




XVI


She came. I suppose it was no more than an hour: It seemed an eternity
of apprehension. There was the slight hissing of the seal of my door.
The panel slid. I had leaped from my bunk where in the darkness I was
lying tense.

"Prince?" I did not dare say "Anita."

"Gregg."

Her voice. My gaze swept the deck as the panel opened. Neither
Coniston nor anyone else was in sight, save Anita's dark-robed figure
which came into my room.

"You got it?" I asked in a low whisper.

I held her for an instant, kissed her. But she pushed me away with
quick hands. She was breathless.

"Yes, I have it. Give us a little light--we must hurry!"

In the blue dimness I saw that she was holding one of the Martian
cylinders. The smaller size: it would paralyze but not kill.

"Only one, Anita?"

"Yes. And this--"

The invisible cloak. We laid it on my grid, and I adjusted its
mechanism. I donned it and drew its hood, and threw on its current.

"All right, Anita?"

"Yes."

"Can you see me?"

"No." She had stepped back a foot or two. "Not from here. But you must
let no one approach too close."

Then she came forward, put out her hand, fumbled until she found me.

It was our plan to have me follow her out. Anyone observing us would
see only the robed figure of the supposed George Prince, and I would
escape unnoticed.

The situation about the ship was almost unchanged. Anita had secured
the weapon and the cloak and slipped away to my cubby without being
observed.

"You're sure of that?"

"I think so, Gregg. I was careful."

Moa was now in the lounge, guarding the passengers. Hahn was asleep in
the chart room. Coniston was in the turret. Coniston would be off duty
presently, Anita said, with Hahn taking his place. There were lookouts
in the forward and stern watch towers, and a guard upon Snap in the
radio room.

"Is he inside the room, Anita?"

"Snap? Yes."

"No--the guard."

"The guard was sitting on the spider bridge at the door."

This was unfortunate. That guard could see all the deck clearly. He
might be suspicious of George Prince wandering around: it would be
difficult to get near enough to assail him. This cylinder, I knew, had
an effective range of only some twenty feet.

"Coniston is the sharpest, Gregg. He will be the hardest to get near."

"Where is Miko?"

The brigand leader had gone below a few moments ago, down into the
hull corridor. Anita had seized the opportunity to come to me.

"We can attack Hahn in the chart room first," I whispered. "And get
the other weapons. Are they still there?"

"Yes. But the forward deck is very bright, Gregg."

We were approaching the asteroid. Already its light, like a brilliant
moon, was brightening the forward deck space. It made me realize how
much haste was necessary.

We decided to go down into the hull corridors. Locate Miko. Fell him
and hide him. His nonappearance back on deck would very soon throw the
others into confusion, especially now with our impending landing upon
the asteroid. And, under cover of this confusion, we would try to
release Snap.

We were ready. Anita slid my door open. She stepped through, with me
soundlessly scurrying after her. The empty, silent deck was
alternately dark with shadow patches and bright with blobs of
starlight. A sheen of the Sun's corona was mingled with it; and from
forward came the radiance of the asteroid's mellow silver glow.

Anita turned to seal my door; within my faintly humming cloak I stood
beside her. Was I invisible in this light? Almost directly over us,
close under the dome, the lookout sat in his little tower. He gazed
down at Anita.

Amidships, high over the cabin superstructure, the radio room hung
dark and silent. The guard on its bridge was visible. He too, looked
down.

A tense instant. Then I breathed again. There was no alarm. The two
guards answered Anita's gesture.

Anita said aloud into my empty cubby: "Miko will come for you
presently, Haljan. He told me that he wants you at the turret controls
to land us on the asteroid."

She finished sealing my door and turned away; started forward along
the deck. I followed. My steps were soundless in my elastic-bottomed
shoes. Anita swaggered with a noisy tread. Near the door of the
smoking room a small incline passage led downward. We went into it.

The passage was dimly blue lit. We descended its length, came to the
main corridor, which ran the length of the hull. A vaulted metal
passage, with doors to the control rooms opening from it. Dim lights
showed at intervals.

The humming of the ship was more apparent here. It drowned the light
humming of my cloak. I crept after Anita; my hand under the cloak
clutched the ray weapon.

A steward passed us. I shrank aside to avoid him.

Anita spoke to him. "Where is Miko, Ellis?"

"In the ventilator room, Miss. Prince. There was difficulty with the
air renewal."

Anita nodded and moved on. I could have felled that steward as he
passed me. Oh, if I only had, how different things might have been!

But it seemed needless. I let him go, and he turned into a nearby door
which led to the galley.

Anita moved forward. If we could come upon Miko alone! Abruptly she
turned and whispered, "Gregg, if other men are with him, I'll draw him
away. You watch your chance."

What little things can overthrow one's careful plans! Anita had not
realized how close to her I was following. And her turning so
unexpectedly caused me to collide with her sharply.

"Oh!" She exclaimed it involuntarily. Her outflung hand had
unwittingly gripped my wrist, caught the electrode there. The touch
burned her, and short-circuited my robe. There was a hiss. My current
burned out the tiny fuses.

My invisibility was gone! I stood, a tall, blackhooded figure,
revealed to the gaze of anyone who might be near!

The futile plans of humans! We had planned so carefully! Our
calculations, our hopes of what we could do, came clattering now in a
