delicacies. Did you know, my friend, I am superior in every way to you?
I feed more people, so what I produce is superior to what you produce. I
charge them less money, and so I am financially more benevolent than
you. I make more money than you do, so I am also financially superior.
Also, later this morning my daughter is coming back from the university,
and this evening I will give her a party so great and so lavish that she
will love me more than any daughter has ever loved a father before."

Here the self-satisfied merchant laughed again, and turned down the
wharf to inspect a cargo of tetron ore that was coming in from the
mainland.

As the merchant of imported fish turned up another inventory slip,
another man approached him. "What was old Koshar laughing about?" he
asked.

"He was gloating over his good fortune in backing that hairbrained
aquarium idea. He was also trying to make me jealous of his daughter.
He's giving her a party tonight to which I am no doubt invited; but the
invitation will come late this afternoon with no time for me to reply
properly."

The other man shook his head. "He's a proud man. But you can bring him
to his place. Next time he mentions his daughter, ask him about his son,
and watch the shame storm into his face."

"He may be proud," said the other, "but I am not cruel. Why should I
move to hurt him? Time takes care of her own. This coming war will see."

"Perhaps," said the other merchant. "Perhaps."

       *       *       *       *       *

Once over the island city of Toron, capital of Toromon, the transit
ribbon breaks from its even course and bends among the towers, weaves
among the elevated highways, till finally it crosses near a wide splash
of bare concrete, edged with block-long aircraft hangars. Several
airships had just arrived, and at one of the passenger gates the people
waiting for arrivals crowded closely to the metal fence.

Among them was one young man in military uniform. A brush of red hair,
eyes that seemed doubly dark in his pale face, along with a squat,
taurine power in his legs and shoulders; these were what struck you in
the swift glance. A close look brought you the incongruity of the
major's insignia and his obvious youth.

He watched the passengers coming through the gate with more than
military interest.

Someone called, "Tomar!"

And he turned, a grin leaping to his face.

"Tomar," she called again. "I'm over here."

A little too bumptiously, he rammed through the crowd until at last he
almost collided with her. Then he stopped, looking bewildered and happy.

"Gee, I'm glad you came," she said. "Come on. You can walk me back to
father's." Her black hair fell close to broad, nearly oriental
cheekbones. Then the smile on her first strangely, then attractively
pale mouth fell.

Tomar shook his head, as they turned now, arm in arm, among the people
wandering over the field.

"No?" she asked. "Why not?"

"I don't have time, Clea," he answered. "I had to sneak an hour off just
to get here. I'm supposed to be back at the Military Ministry in forty
minutes. Hey, do you have any bags I can carry?"

Clea held up a slide rule and a notebook. "I'm traveling light. In a
week I'll be back at the university for summer courses, so I didn't
bring any clothes. Wait a minute. You're not going to be too busy to get
to the party Dad's giving me tonight, are you?"

Tomar shrugged.

Clea began a word, but pushed her tongue hard against the roof of her
mouth. "Tomar?" she asked after a moment.

"Yes?" He had a rough voice, which, when he was sad, took on the
undertones of a bear's growl.

"What's happening about the war? Will there really be one?"

Again he shrugged. "More soldiers, more planes, and at the Ministry
there's more and more work to do. I was up before dawn this morning
getting a fleet of survey planes off for a scouting trip to the mainland
over the radiation barrier. If they come back this evening, I'll be
busy all night with the reports and I won't be able to make the party.

"Oh," said Clea. "Tomar?"

"Yes, Clea Koshar?"

"Oh, don't be formal with me, please. You've been in the City long
enough and known me long enough. Tomar, if the war comes, do you think
they'll draft prisoners from the tetron mines into the army?"

"They talk about it."

"Because my brother...."

"I know," said Tomar.

"And if a prisoner from the mines distinguished himself as a soldier,
would he be freed at the end of the war? They wouldn't send him back to
the mines, would they?"

"The war hasn't even begun yet," said Tomar. "No one knows how it will
end."

"You're right," she said, "as usual." They reached the gate. "Look,
Tomar, I don't want to keep you if you're busy. But you've got to
promise to come see me and spend at least an afternoon before I go back
to school."

"If the war starts, you won't be going back to school."

"Why not?"

"You already have your degree in theoretical physics. Now you're only
doing advanced work. Not only will they conscript prisoners from the
mines, but all scientists, engineers, and mathematicians will have to
lend their efforts to the cause as well."

"I was afraid of that," Clea said. "You believe the war will actually
come, don't you, Tomar?"

"They get ready for it night and day," Tomar said. "What is there to
stop it? When I was a boy on my father's farm on the mainland, there was
too much work, and no food. I was a strong boy, with a strong boy's
stomach. I came to the City and I took my strength to the army. Now I
have work that I like. I'm not hungry. With the war, there will be work
for a lot more people. Your father will be richer. Your brother may come
back to you, and even the thieves and beggars in the Devil's Pot will
have a chance to do some honest work."

"Perhaps," said Clea. "Look, like I said, I don't want to keep you--I
mean I do, but. Well, when will you have some time?"

"Probably tomorrow afternoon."

"Fine," said Clea. "We'll have a picnic then, all right?"

Tomar grinned. "Yes," he said. "Yes." He took both her hands, and she
smiled back at him. Then he turned away, and was gone through the crowd.

Clea watched a moment, and then turned toward the taxi stand. The sun
was beginning to warm the air as she pushed into the shadow of the great
transit ribbon that soared above her between the towers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Buildings dropped bands of shadow across the ribbon, as it wound through
the city, although occasional streaks of light from an eastward street
still made silver half-rings around it. At the center of the city it
raised a final two hundred feet and entered the window of the laboratory
tower in the west wing of the royal palace of Toron.

The room in which the transit ribbon ended was deserted. At the end of
the metal band was a transparent crystal sphere, fifteen feet in
diameter which hovered above the receiving platform. A dozen small
tetron units of varying sizes sat around the room. The viewing screens
were dead gray. On a control panel by one ornate window, a bank of
forty-nine scarlet-knobbed switches pointed to off. The metal catwalks
that ran over the receiving platform were empty.

In another room of the palace, however, someone was screaming.

"Tetron!"

"... if your Highness would only wait a moment to hear the report,"
began the aged minister, "I believe...."

"Tetron!"

"... you would understand the necessity," he continued in an amazingly
calm voice, "of disturbing you at such an ungodly hour ..."

"I never want to hear the word tetron again!"

"... of the morning."

"Go away, Chargill; I'm sleeping!" King Uske, who had just turned
twenty-one though he had been the official ruler of Toromon since the
age of seven, jammed his pale blond head beneath three over-stuffed
pillows that lay about the purple silken sheets of his bed. With one
too-slender hand he sought feebly around for the covers to hide himself
completely.

The old minister quietly picked up the edge of the ermine-rimmed
coverlet and held it out of reach. After several half-hearted swipes,
the pale head emerged once more and asked in a coldly quiet voice,
"Chargill, why is it that roads have been built, prisoners have been
reprieved, and traitors have been disemboweled at every hour of the
afternoon and evening without anyone expressing the least concern for
what I thought? Now, suddenly, at--" Uske peered at the jewel-crusted
chronometer by his bed in which a shimmering gold light fixed the hour,
"--my God, ten o'clock in the morning! Why must I suddenly be consulted
at every little twist and turn of empire?"

"First," explained Chargill, "you are now of age. Secondly, we are about
to enter a war, and in times of stress, responsibility is passed to the
top, and you, sir, are in the unfortunate position."

"Why can't we have a war and get it over with?" said Uske, rolling over
to face Chargill and becoming a trifle more amenable. "I'm tired of all
this idiocy. You don't think I'm a very good king, do you?" The young
man sat up and planted his slender feet as firmly as possible on the
three-inch thick fur rug. "Well, if we had a war," he continued,
scratching his stomach through his pink sateen pajama top, "I'd ride in
the first line of fire, in the most splendid uniform imaginable, and
lead my soldiers to a _sweeping_ victory." At the word sweeping, he
threw himself under the covers.

"Commendable sentiment," stated Chargill dryly. "And seeing that there
may just be a war before the afternoon arrives, why don't you listen to
the report, which merely says that another scouting flight of planes
has been crippled trying to observe the enemy just beyond the tetron
mines over the radiation barrier."

"Let me continue it for you. No one knows how the planes have been
crippled, but the efficacy of their methods has lead the council to
suggest that we consider the possibility of open war even more strongly.
Isn't this more or less what the reports have been for weeks?"

"It is," replied Chargill.

"Then why bother me. Incidentally, must we really go to that imbecilic
party for that stupid fish-peddler's daughter this evening? And talk
about tetron as little as possible, please."

"I need not remind you," went on the patient Chargill, "that this stupid
fish-peddler has amassed a fortune nearly as large as that in the royal
treasury--though I doubt if he is aware of the comparison--through the
proper exploitation of the unmentionable metal. If there is a war, and
we should need to borrow funds, it should be done with as much good will
as possible. Therefore, you will attend his party to which he has so
kindly invited you."

"Listen a minute, Chargill," said Uske. "And I'm being serious now. This
war business is completely ridiculous, and if you expect me to take it
seriously, then the council is going to have to take it seriously. How
can we have a war with whatever is behind the radiation barrier? We
don't know anything about it. Is it a country? Is it a city? Is it an
empire? We don't even know if it's got a name. We don't know how they've
crippled our scouting planes. We can't monitor any radio communication.
Of course we couldn't do that anyway with the radiation barrier. We
don't even know if it's people. One of our silly planes gets its tetron
(Pardon me. If you can't say it, I shouldn't say it either.) device
knocked out and a missile hurled at it. Bango! The council says war.
Well, I refuse to take it seriously. Why do we keep on wasting planes
anyway? Why not send a few people through the transit ribbon to do some
spying?"

Chargill looked amazed.

"Before we instituted the penal mines, and just after we annexed the
forest people, the transit ribbon was built. Correct? Now, where does it
go?"

"Into the dead city of Telphar," answered Chargill.

"Exactly. And Telphar was not at all dead when we built it, sixty years
ago. The radiation hadn't progressed that far. Well, why not send spies
into Telphar and from there, across the barrier and into enemy
territory. Then they can come back and tell us everything." Uske smiled.

"Of course your Majesty is joking." Chargill smiled. "May I remind your
Majesty that the radiation level in Telphar today is fatal to human
beings. Completely fatal. The enemy seems to be well beyond the barrier.
Only recently, with the great amount of tetron--eh, excuse me--coming
from the mines have we been able to develop planes that can perhaps go
over it. And that, when and if we can do it, is the only way."

Uske had started out smiling. It turned to a giggle. Then to a laugh.
Suddenly he cried out and threw himself down on the bed. "Nobody listens
to me! Nobody takes any of my suggestions!" He moaned and stuck his head
under the pillows. "No one does anything but contradict me. Go away. Get
out. Let me sleep."

Chargill sighed and withdrew from the royal bedchamber.




CHAPTER II


It had been silent for sixty years. Then, above the receiving stage in
the laboratory tower of the royal place of Toromon, the great
transparent crystal sphere glowed.

On the stage a blue haze shimmered. Red flame shot through the mist, a
net of scarlet, contracting, pulsing, outlining the recognizable
patterning of veins and arteries. Among the running fires, the shadow of
bones formed a human skeleton in the blue, till suddenly the shape was
laced with sudden silver, the net of nerves that held the body
imprisoned in sensation. The blue became opaque. Then the black-haired
man, barefooted, in rags, staggered forward to the rail and held on for
a moment. Above, the crystal faded.

He blinked his eyes hard before he looked up. He looked around. "All
right," he said out loud. "Where the hell are you?" He paused. "Okay.
Okay. I know. I'm not supposed to get dependent on you. I guess I'm all
right now, aren't I?" Another pause. "Well, I feel fine." He let go of
the rail and looked at his hands, back and palms. "Dirty as hell," he
mumbled. "Wonder where I can get washed up." He looked up. "Yeah, sure.
Why not?" He ducked under the railing and vaulted to the floor. Once
again he looked around. "So I'm really in the castle. After all these
years. I never thought I'd see it. Yeah, I guess it really is."

He started forward, but as he passed under the shadow of the great
ribbon's end, something happened.

He faded.

At least the exposed parts of his body--head, hands, and feet--faded. He
stopped and looked down. Through his ghost-like feet, he could see the
rivets that held down the metal floor. He made a disgusted face, and
continued toward the door. Once in the sunlight, he solidified again.
