"No, except to seek a new position!" answered Crabb. "I fear," he
added, despondently, "that it may be some time before I am so fortunate.
Roscoe, I don't know what to do when I leave the school. I shall barely
have five dollars, and you know I have not only myself, but another to
support."

"Keep up your courage, Mr. Crabb! It is nearly time for me to hear from
the friend in New York to whom I wrote is your behalf. If you can secure
the position of his private tutor--"

"If I can, I will hail it as providential. It will relieve me at once
from all anxiety."

"I don't think I shall long remain here myself, Mr. Crabb," said
Hector. "I came here with the full intention of making the most of the
facilities the institute affords for education, but I find the principal
incompetent, and disposed to connive at injustice and brutality. The
only good I have got here has been derived from your instructions."

"Thank you, Roscoe. Such a tribute is, indeed, welcome," said the usher,
warmly.

"It is quite sincere, Mr. Crabb, and I hope my good wishes may bring you
the advantage which I have in view."

"Thank you, Roscoe. I don't blame you for being disgusted with the
management of the school. You have yourself suffered injustice."

"Yes; in writing home, and charging me with theft, before he had
investigated the circumstances, Mr. Smith did me a great injustice. I
doubt whether he has since written to correct the false charge, as
I required him to do. If not, I shall owe it to myself to leave the
school."

"You will be justified in doing so." The next day brought Hector two
letters. One was from Allan Roscoe, and read as follows:

"HECTOR: I have received from your worthy teacher a letter which has
filled me with grief and displeasure. I knew you had great faults, but
I did not dream that you would stoop so low as to purloin money, as it
seems you have done. Mr. Smith writes me that there is no room to doubt
your guilt. He himself discovered in the pocket of your pantaloons a
wallet containing a large sum of money, which he had missed only a short
time before. He learned that you had entered his chamber, and taken the
money, being tempted by your own dishonest and depraved heart.

"I cannot express the shame I feel at this revelation of baseness. I
am truly glad that you are not connected with me by blood. Yet I cannot
forget that my poor brother treated you as a son; and took pains to
train you up in right ideas. It would give him deep pain could he know
how the boy whom he so heaped with benefits has turned out! I may say
that Guy is as much shocked as I am, but he, it seems, had a better
knowledge of you than I; for he tells me he is not surprised to hear it.
I confess I am, for I thought better of you.

"Under the circumstances I shall not feel justified in doing for you as
much as I intended. I proposed to keep you at school for two years more,
but I have now to announce that this is your last term, and I advise you
to make the most of it. I will try, when the term closes, to find some
situation for you, where your employer's money will not pass through
your hands. ALLAN ROSCOE."

Hector read the letter with conflicting feelings, the most prominent
being indignation and contempt for the man who so easily allowed himself
to think evil of him.

The other letter he found more satisfactory.

It was from his young friend in New York, Walter Boss. As it is short, I
subjoin it:

"DEAR HECTOR: I am ever so glad to hear from you, but I should like much
better to see you. I read to papa what you said of Mr. Crabb, and he
says it is very apropos, as he had made up his mind to get me a tutor.
I am rather backward, you see, not having your taste for study, and papa
thinks I need special attention. He says that your recommendation is
sufficient, and he will engage Mr. Crabb without any further inquiry;
and he says he can come at once. He will give him sixty dollars a month
and board, and he will have considerable time for himself, if he wants
to study law or any other profession. I don't know but a cousin may join
me in my studies, in which case he will pay a hundred dollars per month,
if that will be sastisfactory.

"Why can't you come and make me a visit? We'll have jolly fun. Come
and stay a month, old chap. There is no one I should like better. Your
friend, WALTER Boss."

Hector read this letter with genuine delight. It offered a way of
escape, both for the unfortunate usher and himself. Nothing could be
more "apropos" to quote Walter's expression.

Our hero lost no time in seeking out Mr. Crabb.

"You seem in good spirits, Roscoe," said the usher, his careworn face
contrasting with the beaming countenance of his pupil.

"Yes, Mr. Crabb, I have reason to be, and so have you."

"Have you heard from your friend?" asked the usher, hopefully.

"Yes, and it's all right."

Mr. Crabb looked ten years younger.

"Is it really true?" he asked.

"It is true that you are engaged as private tutor to my friend, Walter.
You'll find him a splendid fellow, but I don't know if the pay is
sufficient," continued Hector, gravely.

"I am willing to take less pay than I get here," said the usher, "for
the sake of getting away."

"How much do you receive here?"

"Twenty dollar a month and board. I might, perhaps, get along on a
little less," he added doubtfully.

"You won't have to, Mr. Crabb. You are offered sixty dollars a month and
a home."

"You are not in earnest, Roscoe?" asked the usher, who could not believe
in his good fortune.

"I will read you the letter, Mr. Crabb."

When it was read the usher looked radiant. "Roscoe," he said, "you come
to me like an angel from heaven. Just now I was sad and depressed; now
it seems to me that the whole future is radiant. Sixty dollars a month!
Why, it will make me a rich man."

"Mr. Crabb," said Hector, with a lurking spirit of fun, "can you really
make up your mind to leave Smith Institute, and its kind and benevolent
principal?"

"I don't think any prisoner ever welcomed his release with deeper
thankfulness," said the usher. "To be in the employ of a man whom you
despise, yet to feel yourself a helpless and hopeless dependent on him
is, I assure you, Roscoe, a position by no means to be envied. For two
years that has been my lot."

"But it will soon be over."

"Yes, thanks to you. Why can't you accompany me, Hector? I ought not,
perhaps, to draw you away, but--"

"But listen to the letter I have received from my kind and considerate
guardian, as he styles himself," said Hector.

He read Allan Roscoe's letter to the usher.

"He seems in a great hurry to condemn you," said Mr. Crabb.

"Yes, and to get me off his hands," said Hector, proudly. "Well, he
shall be gratified in the last. I shall accept Walter's invitation, and
we will go up to New York together."

"That will, indeed, please me. Of course, you will undeceive your
guardian."

"Yes. I will get Wilkins and Platt to prepare a statement of the facts
in the case, and accompany it by a note releasing Mr. Roscoe from any
further care or expense for me."

"But, Hector, can you afford to do this?"

"I cannot afford to do otherwise, Mr. Crabb. I shall find friends, and I
am willing to work for my living, if need be."

At this point one of the boys came to Mr. Crabb with a message from
Socrates, desiring the usher to wait upon him at once.




CHAPTER XXIII. ANOTHER CHANCE FOR THE USHER.



Mr. Smith had been thinking it over. He had discharged Mr. Crabb in the
anger of the moment, but after his anger had abated, he considered that
it was not for his interest to part with him. Mr. Crabb was a competent
teacher, and it would be well-nigh impossible to obtain another so
cheap. Twenty dollars a month for a teacher qualified to instruct in
Latin and Greek was certainly a beggarly sum, but Mr. Crabb's dire
necessity had compelled him to accept it. Where could he look for
another teacher as cheap? Socrates Smith appreciated the difficulty,
and decided to take Mr. Crabb back, on condition that he would make an
apology to Jim.

To do Mr. Crabb justice, it may be said that he would not have done this
even if he saw no chance of another situation. But this Mr. Smith did
not know. He did observe, however, that the usher entered his presence
calm, erect and appearing by no means depressed, as he had expected.

"You sent for me, sir?" said the usher interrogatively.

"Yes, Mr. Crabb. You will remember that I had occasion to rebuke you,
when we last conferred together, for overstepping the limits of your
authority?"

"I remember, Mr. Smith, that you showed anger, and found fault with me."

"Exactly so."

"Why doesn't he ask to be taken back?" thought Socrates.

"I have thought the matter over since," continued the principal, "and
have concluded we might be able to arrange matters."

The usher was surprised. He had not expected that Mr. Smith would make
overtures of reconciliation. He decided not to mention at present his
brighter prospects in New York, but to wait and see what further his
employer had to say.

Mr. Crabb bowed, but did not make any reply.

"I take it for granted, Mr. Crabb, that your means are limited,"
proceeded Socrates.

"You are right there, sir. If I had not been poor I should not have
accepted the position of teacher in Smith Institute for the pitiful
salary of twenty dollars a month."

"Twenty dollars a month and your board, Mr. Crabb," said Socrates, with
dignity, "I consider a very fair remuneration."

"I do not, Mr. Smith," said the usher, in a decided tone.

"I apprehend you will find it considerably better than to be out of
employment," said Socrates, rather angry.

"You are right there, sir."

"I am glad you show signs of returning reason. Well, Mr. Crabb, I have
thought the matter over, and I have a proposal to make to you."

"Very well, sir!"

"I do not wish to distress you by taking away your means of livelihood."

"You are very considerate, sir."

There was something in Mr. Crabb's tone that Socrates did not
understand. It really seemed that he did not care whether he was taken
back or not. But, of course, this could not be. It was absolutely
necessary for him, poor as he was, that he should be reinstated. So Mr.
Smith proceeded.

"To cut the matter short, I am willing to take you back on two
conditions."

"May I ask you to name them?"

"The first is, that you shall apologize to my nephew for your
unjustifiable attack upon him day before yesterday."

"What is the other, Mr. Smith?"

"The other is, that hereafter you will not exceed the limits of your
authority."

"And you wish my answer?" asked the usher, raising his eyes, and looking
fixedly at his employer.

"If you please, Mr. Crabb."

"Then, sir, you shall have it. Your proposal that I should apologize to
that overgrown bully for restraining him in his savage treatment of a
fellow-pupil is both ridiculous and insulting."

"You forget yourself, Mr. Crabb," said Socrates, gazing at the hitherto
humble usher in stupefaction.

"As to promising not to do it again, you will understand that I shall
make no such engagement."

"Then, Mr. Crabb," said Socrates, angrily, "I shall adhere to what I
said the other day. At the end of this week you must leave me."

"Of course, sir, that is understood!"

"You haven't another engagement, I take it," said Mr. Smith, very much
puzzled by the usher's extraordinary independence.

"Yes, sir, I have."

"Indeed!" said Socrates, amazed. "Where do you go?" Then was Mr. Crabb's
time for triumph.

"I have received this morning an offer from the city of New York," he
said.

"From New York! Is it in a school?"

"No, sir; I am to be private tutor in a family."

"Indeed! Do you receive as good pay as here?"

"As good!" echoed the usher. "I am offered sixty dollars a month and
board, with the possibility of a larger sum, in the event of extra
service being demanded."

Socrates Smith had never been more surprised.

This Mr. Crabb, whom he had considered to be under his thumb, as being
wholly dependent upon him, was to receive a salary which he considered
princely.

"How did you get this office?" he asked.

"Through my friend, Hector Roscoe," answered the usher.

"Probably he is deceiving you. It is ridiculous to offer you such a
sum."

"I am quite aware that you would never think of offering it, but, Mr.
Smith, there are other employers more generous."

Mr. Crabb left the office with the satisfied feeling that he had the
best of the encounter.. He would have felt gratified could he have known
the increased respect with which he was regarded by the principal as a
teacher who could command so lucrative an engagement in the great city
of New York.

Before closing this chapter I must take notice of one circumstance which
troubled Mr. Smith, and in the end worked him additional loss.

I have already said that Jim Smith, in appropriating his uncle's wallet,
abstracted therefrom a five-dollar bill before concealing it in Hector's
pocket.

This loss Mr. Smith speedily discovered, and he questioned Jim about it.

"I suppose Roscoe took it," said Jim, glibly.

"But he says he did not take the wallet," said Socrates, who was assured
in his own mind that his nephew was the one who found it on the bureau.
Without stigmatizing him as a thief, he concluded that Jim meant to get
Hector into trouble.

"Wasn't it found in his pants' pocket?" queried Jim.

"Yes, but why should he take five dollars out of the wallet?"

"I don't know."

"It doesn't look likely that he would!" said Socrates, eying Jim keenly.

"Then it may have been Ben Platt or Wilkins," said Jim, with a bright
idea.

"So it might," said the principal, with a feeling of relief.

"They said they were in the room--at any rate, Platt said so--at the
time it was concealed, only he made a mistake and took Roscoe for me."

"There is something in that, James. It may be as you suggest."

"They are both sneaks," said Jim, who designated all his enemies by that
name. "They'd just as lieve do it as not. I never liked them."

"I must look into this matter. It's clear that some one has got this
money, and whoever has it has got possession of it dishonestly."

"To be sure," answered Jim, with unblushing assurance. "If I were you I
would find out who did it, that is, if you don't think Roscoe did it."

"No, I don't think Roscoe did it, now. You may tell Platt and Wilkins
that I wish to see them."

Jim could not have been assigned a more pleasing duty. He hated the two
boys quite as much as he did Hector, and he was glad to feel that they
were likely to get into hot water.

He looked about for some time before he found the two boys. At length he
espied them returning from a walk.

"Here, you two!" he called out, in a voice ef authority. "You're
wanted!"

"Who wants us?" asked Ben Platt.

"My uncle wants you," answered Jim, with malicious satisfaction. "You'd
better go and see him right off, too. You won't find it a trifling
matter, either."

"Probably Jim has been hatchng some mischief," said Wilkins. "He owes us
a grudge. We'll go and see what it is."




CHAPTER XXIV. THE YOUNG DETECTIVES.



When Mr. Smith had made the two boys' understand that he suspected them
of purloining the missing five-dollar bill, they were naturally very
