Goer., Orelli) is far too strong for the passage, and cannot be supported
by 12, _Brut._ 306, _Ad Fam._ II. 8, or such like passages. _Attius_: the
old spelling _Accius_ is wrong. _Si qui ... imitati_: note the collocation,
and cf. 17. Halm needlessly writes _sint_ for MSS. _sunt_. For this section
throughout cf. the prologues to _D.F._ I., _T.D._ I. and II.

Sec.11. _Procuratio_: for the proper meaning of _procurator_ and _procuratio_
see Jordan on _Pro Caecina_ 55. _Implacatum et constrictum_: the
conjunction introduces the intenser word, as usual; cf. 17 _plenam ac
refertam_, II. 127 _exigua et minima_, so [Greek: kai] in Greek. _Inclusa
habebam_: cf. _T.D._ I. 1. _Obsolescerent_, used of _individual_ memory, is
noteworthy. _Percussus volnere_: many edd. give the frequent variant
_perculsus_. The _volnus_, which Goer. finds so mysterious, is the death of
Tullia, cf. _N.D._ I. 9, _De Consolatione_, fragment 7, ed. Nobbe, and
Introd. p. 32. _Aut ... aut ... aut ... aut_: This casting about for an
excuse shows how low philosophy stood in public estimation at Rome. See
Introd. p. 29. The same elaborate apologies often recur, cf. esp the
exordium of _N.D._ I.

Sec.12. _Brutus_: the same praise often recurs in _D.F._ and the _Brutus
Graecia desideret_ so all Halm's MSS., except G, which has _Graeca_. Halm
(and after him Baiter) adopts the conj. of Aldus the younger, _Graeca
desideres_. A reviewer of Halm, in Schneidewin's _Philologus_ XXIV. 483,
approves the reading on the curious ground that Brutus was not anxious to
satisfy Greek requirements, but rather to render it unnecessary for Romans
to have recourse to Greece for philosophy. I keep the MSS. reading, for
Greece with Cicero is the supreme arbiter of performance in philosophy, if
she is satisfied the philosophic world is tranquil. Cf. _Ad Att._ I. 20, 6,
_D.F._ I. 8, _Ad Qu. Fr._ II. 16, 5. I just note the em. of Turnebus, _a
Graecia desideres_, and that of Dav. _Graecia desideretur_. _Eandem
sententiam_: cf. Introd. p. 56. _Aristum_: cf. II. 11, and _M.D.F._ V. 8.

Sec.13. _Sine te_: = [Greek: sou dicha]. _Relictam_: Cic. very rarely omits
_esse_, see note on II. 77, for Cicero's supposed conversion see Introd. p.
20. _Veterem illam_: MSS. have _iam_ for _illam_. The position of _iam_
would be strange, in the passage which used to be compared, _Pro Cluentio_
16, Classen and Baiter now om. the word. Further, _vetus_ and _nova_ can
scarcely be so barely used to denote the Old and the New Academy. The
reading _illam_ is from Madv. (_Em._ 115), and is supported by _illam
veterem_ (18), _illa antiqua_ (22), _istius veteris_ (_D.F._ V. 8), and
similar uses. Bentl. (followed by Halm and Bait.) thinks _iam_ comprises
the last two syllables of _Academiam_, which he reads. _Correcta et
emendata_: a fine sentiment to come from a conservative like Cic. The words
often occur together and illustrate Cic.'s love for small diversities of
expression, cf. _De Leg._ III. 30, _D.F._ IV. 21, also Tac. _Hist._ I. 37.
_Negat_: MSS. have _negaret_, but Cic. never writes the subj. after
_quamquam_ in _oratio recta_, as Tac. does, unless there is some
conditional or potential force in the sentence; see _M.D.F._ III. 70.
Nothing is commoner in the MSS. than the substitution of the imp. subj. for
the pres. ind. of verbs of the first conjug. and _vice versa_. _In libris_:
see II. 11. _Duas Academias_: for the various modes of dividing the Academy
refer to R. and P. 404. _Contra ea Philonis_: MSS. have _contra Philonis_
merely, exc. Halm's V., which gives _Philonem_, as does the ed. Rom.
(1471). I have added _ea_. Orelli quotes _Ad Att._ XII. 23, 2, _ex
Apollodori_. Possibly the MSS. may be right, and _libros_ may be supplied
from _libris_ above, so in _Ad Att._ XIII. 32, 2, _Dicaearchi_ [Greek: peri
psyches] _utrosque_, the word _libros_ has to be supplied from the
preceding letter, cf. a similar ellipse of _bona_ in 19, 22. Madvig's
_Philonia_ is improbable from its non-appearance elsewhere, while the
companion adjective _Antiochius_ is frequent. Halm inserts _sententiam_, a
heroic remedy. To make _contra_ an adv. and construe _Philonis Antiochus_
together, supplying _auditor_, as is done by some unknown commentators who
probably only exist in Goerenz's note, is wild, and cannot be justified by
_D.F._ V. 13.

Sec.14. _A qua absum iam diu_: MSS. have strangely _aqua absumtam diu_,
changed by Manut. _Renovari_: the vulg. _revocari_ is a curious instance of
oversight. It crept into the text of Goer. by mistake, for in his note he
gave _renovari_. Orelli--who speaks of Goerenz's "_praestantissima
recensio_," and founds his own text upon it two years after Madvig's
crushing exposure in his _Em._ often quoted by me--not only reads
_revocari_, but quotes _renovari_ as an em. of the ed. Victoriana of 1536.
From Orelli, Klotz, whose text has no independent value, took it.
_Renovare_ in Cic. often means "to refresh the memory," e.g. 11, _Brut._
315. _Nisi molestum est_: like _nisi alienum putas_, a variation on the
common _si placet, si videtur_. _Adsidamus_: some MSS. have _adsideamus_,
which would be wrong here. _Sane istud_: Halm _istuc_ from G. _Inquit_: for
the late position of this word, which is often caused by its affinity for
_quoniam_, _quidem_, etc., cf. _M.D.F._ III. 20 _Quae cum essent dicta, in
conspectu consedimus (omnes)_: most edd. since Gulielmus print this without
_essent_ as a hexameter, and suppose it a quotation. But firstly, a verse
so commonplace, if familiar, would occur elsewhere in Cic. as others do, if
not familiar, would not be given without the name of its author. Secondly,
most MSS. have _sint_ or _essent_ before _dicta_. It is more probable
therefore that _omnes_ was added from an involuntary desire to make up the
hexameter rhythm. Phrases like _quae cum essent dicta consedimus_ often
occur in similar places in Cic.'s dialogues cf. _De Div._ II. 150, and
Augustine, the imitator of Cic., _Contra Academicos_, I. 25, also
_consedimus_ at the end of a clause in _Brut._ 24, and _considitur_ in _De
Or._ III. 18. _Mihi vero_: the omission of _inquit_, which is strange to
Goer., is well illustrated in _M.D.F._ I. 9. There is an odd ellipse of
_laudasti_ in _D.F._ V. 81.

    Sec.Sec.15--42. Antiochus' view of the history of Philosophy. First part of
    Varro's Exposition, 15--18. Summary. Socrates rejected physics and made
    ethics supreme in philosophy (15). He had no fixed tenets, his one
    doctrine being that wisdom consists in a consciousness of ignorance.
    Moral exhortation was his task (16). Plato added to and enriched the
    teaching of his master, from him sprang two schools which abandoned the
    negative position of Socrates and adopted definite tenets, yet remained
    in essential agreement with one another--the Peripatetic and the
    Academic (17, 18).

Sec.15. _A rebus ... involutis_: physical phenomena are often spoken of in
these words by Cic., cf. 19, _Timaeus_ c. 1, _D.F._ I. 64, IV. 18, V. 10,
_N.D._ I. 49. Ursinus rejected _ab_ here, but the insertion or omission of
_ab_ after the passive verb depends on the degree to which _natura_ is
personified, if 28 be compared with _Tim._ c. 1, this will be clear.
_Involutis_ = veiled; cf. _involucrum_. Cic. shows his feeling of the
metaphor by adding _quasi_ in II. 26, and often. _Avocavisse philosophiam_:
this, the Xenophontic view of Socrates, was the popular one in Cicero's
time, cf. II. 123, _T.D._ V. 10, _D.F._ V. 87, 88, also Varro in Aug. _De
Civ. Dei_, VIII. 3. Objections to it, however occurred to Cic., and were
curiously answered in _De Rep._ I. 16 (cf. also Varro in Aug. _De Civ.
Dei_, VIII. 4). The same view is supposed to be found in Aristotle, see the
passages quoted by R. and P. 141. To form an opinion on this difficult
question the student should read Schleiermacher's _Essay on the Worth of
Socrates as a Philosopher_ (trans. by Thirlwall), and Zeller's _Socrates
and the Socratic Schools_, Eng. Trans., pp. 112--116 [I dissent from his
view of Aristotle's evidence], also Schwegler's _Handbook_, so far as it
relates to Socrates and Plato. _Nihil tamen ad bene vivendum valere_:
_valere_ is absent from MSS., and is inserted by Halm, its use in 21 makes
it more probable than _conferre_, which is in ed. Rom. (1471). Gronovius
vainly tries to justify the MSS. reading by such passages as _D.F._ I. 39,
_T.D._ I. 70. The strangest ellipse with _nihil ad_ elsewhere in Cic. is in
_De Leg._ I. 6.

Sec.16. _Hic ... illum_: for this repetition of pronouns see _M.D.F._ IV. 43.
_Varie et copiose_: MSS. omit _et_, but it may be doubted whether Cic.
would let two _adverbs_ stand together without _et_, though three may (cf.
II. 63), and though with pairs of _nouns_ and _adjectives, et_ often is
left out, as in the passages quoted here by Manut. _Ad Att._ IV. 3, 3, _Ad
Fam._ XIII. 24, XIII. 28, cf. also the learned note of Wesenberg, reprinted
in Baiter and Halm's edition, of Cic.'s philosophical works (1861), on
_T.D._ III. 6. _Varie et copiose_ is also in _De Or._ II. 240. Cf. the
omission of _que_ in 23, also II. 63. _Perscripti_: Cic. like Aristotle
often speaks of Plato's dialogues as though they were authentic reports of
Socratic conversations, cf. II. 74. _Nihil adfirmet_: so _T.D._ I. 99.
"_Eoque praestare ceteris_" this is evidently from Plato _Apol._ p. 21, as
to the proper understanding of which see note on II. 74. _Ab Apolline_,
Plato _Apol._ 21 A, _Omnium_: Dav. conj. _hominum_ needlessly. _Dictum_:
Lamb., followed by Schutz, reads _iudicatum_, it is remarkable that in four
passages where Cic. speaks of this very oracle (_Cato Mai._ 78, _Lael._ 7,
9, 13) he uses the verb _iudicare_. _Una omnis_: Lamb. _hominis_, Baiter
also. _Omnis eius oratio tamen_: _notwithstanding_ his negative dialectic
he gave positive teaching in morals. _Tamen_: for MSS. _tam_ or _tum_ is
due to Gruter, Halm has _tantum_. _Tam_, _tum_ and _tamen_ are often
confused in MSS., e.g. _In Veri_ (_Act_ II.) I. 3, 65, II. 55, 112, V. 78,
where see Zumpt. Goer. abuses edd. for not knowing that _tum ... et_, _tum
... que_, _et ... tum_, correspond in Cic. like _tum ... cum_, _tum ...
tum_. His proofs of this new Latin may be sampled by _Ac._ II. 1, 43. _Ad
virtutis studium cohortandis_: this broad assertion is distinctly untrue;
see Zeller's _Socrates_ 88, with footnote.

Sec.17. _Varius et multiplex, et copiosus_: these characteristics are named to
account for the branching off from Plato of the later schools. For
_multiplex_ "many sided," cf. _T.D._ V. 11. _Una et consentiens_: this is
an opinion of Antiochus often adopted by Cic. in his own person, as in
_D.F._ IV. 5 _De Leg._ I. 38, _De Or._ III. 67. Five ancient philosophers
are generally included in this supposed harmonious Academico-Peripatetic
school, viz. Aristotle, Theophrastus, Speusippus, Xenocrates, Polemo (cf.
_D.F._ IV. 2), sometimes Crantor is added. The harmony was supposed to have
been first broken by Polemo's pupils; so Varro says (from Antiochus) in
Aug. _De Civ. Dei_ XIX. 1, cf. also 34. Antiochus doubtless rested his
theory almost entirely on the ethical resemblances of the two schools. In
_D.F._ V. 21, which is taken direct from Antiochus, this appears, as also
in Varro (in Aug. as above) who often spoke as though ethics were the whole
of philosophy (cf. also _De Off._ III. 20). Antiochus probably made light
of such dialectical controversies between the two schools as that about
[Greek: ideai], which had long ceased. Krische _Uber Cicero's Akademika_ p.
51, has some good remarks. _Nominibus_: the same as _vocabulis_ above. Cic.
does not observe Varro's distinction (_De L. L._ IX. 1) which confines
_nomen_ to proper nouns, _vocabulum_ to common nouns, though he would not
use _vocabulum_ as Tac. does, for the name of a person (_Annals_ XII. 66,
etc.). _Quasi heredem ... duos autem_: the conj. of Ciaconus "_ex asse
heredem, secundos autem_" is as acute as it is absurd. _Duos_: it is
difficult to decide whether this or _duo_ is right in Cic., he can scarcely
have been so inconsistent as the MSS. and edd. make him (cf. Baiter and
Halm's ed., _Ac._ II. 11, 13 with _De Div._ I. 6). The older inscr. in the
_Corpus_ vol. I. have _duo_, but only in _duoviros_, two near the time of
Cic. (_C.I._ vol. I. nos. 571 and 1007) give _duos_, which Cic. probably
wrote. _Duo_ is in old Latin poets and Virgil. _Chalcedonium_: not
_Calchedonium_ as Klotz, cf. Gk. [Greek: Chalkedonion]. _Praestantissimos_:
Halm wrongly, cf. _Brut._ 125. _Stagiritem_: not _Stagiritam_ as Lamb., for
Cic., exc. in a few nouns like _Persa_, _pirata_, etc., which came down
from antiquity, did not make Greek nouns in [Greek: -es] into Latin nouns
in _-a_. See _M.D.F._ II. 94. _Coetus ... soliti_: cf. 10. _Platonis
ubertate_: cf. Quintilian's "_illa Livii lactea ubertas_." _Plenum ac
refertam_: n. on 11. _Dubitationem_: Halm with one MS., G, gives
_dubitantem_, Baiter _dubitanter_, Why alter? _Ars quaedam philosophiae_:
before these words all Halm's MSS., exc G, insert _disserendi_, probably
from the line above, Lipsius keeps it and ejects _philosophiae_, while
Lamb., Day read _philosophia_ in the nom. Varro, however, would never say
that philosophy became entirely dialectical in the hands of the old
Academics and Peripatetics. _Ars_ = [Greek: techne], a set of definite
rules, so Varro in Aug. (as above) speaks of the _certa dogmata_ of this
old school as opposed to the incertitude of the New Academy. _Descriptio_:
so Halm here, but often _discriptio_. The _Corp. Inscr._, vol. I. nos. 198
and 200, has thrice _discriptos_ or _discriptum_, the other spelling never.

Sec.18. _Ut mihi quidem videtur_: MSS. transpose _quidem_ and _videtur_, as in
44. _Quidem_, however nearly always comes closely after the pronoun, see
_M.D.F._ IV. 43, cf. also I. 71, III. 28, _Opusc._ I. 406. _Expetendarum
fugiendarumque_: [Greek: haireton kai pheukton], about which more in n. on
36. The Platonic and Aristotelian ethics have indeed an external
resemblance, but the ultimate bases of the two are quite different. In
rejecting the Idea of the Good, Aristotle did away with what Plato would
have considered most valuable in his system. The ideal theory, however, was
practically defunct in the time of Antiochus, so that the similarity
between the two schools seemed much greater than it was. _Non sus
Minervam_: a Greek proverb, cf. Theocr. _Id._ V. 23, _De Or._ II. 233, _Ad
Fam._ IX. 18, 3. Binder, in his German translation of the _Academica_, also
quotes Plutarch _Praec. Polit._ 7. _Inepte ... docet_: elliptic for _inepte
docet, quisquis docet_. _Nostra atque nostros_: few of the editors have
understood this. Atticus affects everything Athenian, and speaks as though
he were one of them; in Cic.'s letters to him the words "_tui cives_,"
meaning the Athenians, often occur. _Quid me putas_: i.e. _velle_.
_Exhibiturum_: Halm inserts _me_ before this from his one MS. G, evidently
emended here by its copyist. For the omission of _me_, cf. note on 7.

    Sec.Sec.19--23. Part II. of Varro's Exposition: Antiochus' _Ethics_. Summary.
    The threefold division of philosophy into [Greek: ethike, physike,
    dialektike]. Goodness means obedience to nature, happiness the
    acquisition of natural advantages. These are of three kinds, mental,
    bodily, and external. The bodily are described (19); then the mental,
    which fall into two classes, congenital and acquired, virtue being the
    chief of the acquired (20), then the external, which form with the
    bodily advantages a kind of exercise-ground for virtue (21). The
    ethical standard is then succinctly stated, in which virtue has chief
    part, and is capable in itself of producing happiness, though not the
    greatest happiness possible, which requires the possession of all three
    classes of advantages (22). With this ethical standard, it is possible
    to give an intelligent account of action and duty (23).

Sec.19. _Ratio triplex_: Plato has not this division, either consciously or
unconsciously, though it was generally attributed to him in Cicero's time,
so by Varro himself (from Antiochus) in Aug. _De Civ. Dei_ VIII. 4, and by
Diog. Laert. III. 56 (see R. and P., p. 195). The division itself cannot be
traced farther back than Xenocrates and the post-Aristotelian Peripatetics,
to whom it is assigned by Sext. Emp. _Adv. Math._ VII. 16. It was probably
first brought into strong prominence by the Stoics, whom it enabled more
sharply and decisively to subordinate to Ethics all else in philosophy. Cf.
esp. _M.D.F._ IV. 3. _Quid verum ... repugnans iudicando_: MSS. exc. G have
_et_ before _quid falsum_, whence Klotz conj. _sit_ in order to obviate the
awkwardness of _repugnet_ which MSS. have for _repugnans_. Krische wishes
to read _consequens_ for _consentiens_, comparing _Orator_ 115, _T.D._ V.
68, _De Div._ II. 150, to which add _T.D._ V. 21 On the other hand cf. II.
22, 91. Notice the double translations of the Greek terms, _de vita et
moribus_ for [Greek: ethike], etc. This is very characteristic of Cic., as
we shall see later. _Ac primum_: many MSS. and edd. _primam_, cf. 23, 30.
_A natura petebant_: how Antiochus could have found this in Plato and
Aristotle is difficult to see; that he did so, however, is indubitable; see
_D.F._ V. 24--27, which should be closely compared with our passage, and
Varro in Aug. XIX. 3. The root of Plato's system is the [Greek: idea] of
the Good, while so far is Aristotle from founding his system on the
abstract [Greek: physis], that he scarcely appeals even incidentally to
[Greek: physis] in his ethical works. The abstract conception of nature in
relation to ethics is first strongly apparent in Polemo, from whom it
passed into Stoic hands and then into those of Antiochus. _Adeptum esse
omnia_: put rather differently in _D.F._ V. 24, 26, cf. also _D.F._ II. 33,
34, _Ac._ II. 131. _Et animo et corpore et vita_: this is the [Greek:
trias] or [Greek: trilogia ton agathon], which belongs in this form to late
Peripateticism (cf. _M.D.F._ III. 43), the third division is a development
from the [Greek: bios teleios] of Aristotle. The [Greek: trias] in this
distinct shape is foreign both to Plato and Arist, though Stobaeus,
_Ethica_ II. 6, 4, tries hard to point it out in Plato; Varro seems to
merge the two last divisions into one in Aug. _De Civ. Dei_ XIX 3. This
agrees better with _D.F._ V. 34--36, cf. also Aug. VIII. 8. On the
Antiochean _finis_ see more in note on 22. _Corporis alia_: for ellipse of
_bona_, see n. on 13. _Ponebant esse_: n. on 36. _In toto in partibus_: the
same distinction is in Stob. _Eth._ II. 6, 7; cf. also _D.F._ V. 35.
_Pulchritudinem_: Cic. _Orator_ 160, puts the spelling _pulcher_ beyond a
doubt; it often appears in inscr. of the Republic. On the other hand only
_pulcrai_, _pulcrum_, etc., occur in inscr., exc. _pulchre_, which is found
once (_Corp. Inscr._ I. no 1019). _Sepulchrum_, however, is frequent at an
early time. On the tendency to aspirate even native Latin words see Boscher
in Curtius' _Studien_ II. 1, p. 145. In the case of _pulcher_ the false
derivation from [Greek: polychroos] may have aided the corruption.
Similarly in modern times J.C. Scaliger derived it from [Greek: poly cheir]
(Curtius' _Grundz_ ed. 3, p. 8) For _valetudinem viris pulchritudinem_, cf.
the [Greek: hygieia ischys kallos] of Stob. _Eth_. II. 6, 7, and _T.D._ V.
22. _Sensus integros_ [Greek: euaisthesia] in Stob., cf. also _D.F._ V. 36
(_in sensibus est sua cuiusque virtus_). _Celeritatem_: so [Greek:
podokeia] in Stob., _bene currere_ in Aug. XIX. 3. _Claritatem in voce_:
cf. _De Off._ I. 133. _Impressionem_: al. _expressionem_. For the former
cf. _De Or._ III. 185, which will show the meaning to be the distinct
marking of each sound; for the latter _De Or._ III. 41, which will disprove
Klotz's remark "_imprimit lingua voces, non exprimit_." See also _De Off._
I. 133. One old ed. has _pressionem_, which, though not itself Ciceronian,
recalls _presse loqui_, and _N.D._ II. 149. Pliny, _Panegyric_, c. 64, has
_expressit explanavitque verba_; he and Quintilian often so use
_exprimere_.

Sec.20. _Ingeniis_: rejected by many (so Halm), but cf. _T.D._ III. 2, and
_animis_ below and in _N.D._ II. 58. _In naturam et mores_: for _in ea quae
natura et moribus fiunt_. A similar inaccuracy of expression is found in
II. 42. The division is practically Aristotle's, who severs [Greek: aretai]
into [Greek: dianoetikai] and [Greek: ethikai] (_Nic. Eth._ I. c. 13,
_Magna Mor._ I. c. 5). In _D.F._ V. 38 the [Greek: dianoetikai] are called
_non voluntariae_, the [Greek: ethikai] _voluntariae_. _Celeritatem ad
discendum et memoriam_: cf. the [Greek: eumatheia, mneme] of Arist. (who
adds [Greek: anchinoia sophia phronesis]), and the _docilitas, memoria_ of
_D.F._ V. 36. _Quasi consuetudinem_: the _quasi_ marks a translation from
the Greek, as frequently, here probably of [Greek: ethismos] (_Nic. Eth._
II. c. 1). _Partim ratione formabant_: the relation which reason bears to
virtue is set forth in _Nic. Eth._ VI. c. 2. _In quibus_: i.e. _in
moribus_. All the late schools held that ethics formed the sole ultimate
aim of philosophy. _Erat_: note the change from _oratio obliqua_ to
_recta_, and cf. the opposite change in II. 40. _Progressio_: this, like
the whole of the sentence in which it stands, is intensely Stoic. For the
Stoic [Greek: prokore, prokoptein eis areten], cf. _M.D.F._ IV. 64, 66, R.
and P. 392, sq., Zeller, _Stoics_ 258, 276. The phrases are sometimes said
to be Peripatetic, if so, they must belong only to the late Stoicised
Peripateticism of which we find so much in Stobaeus. _Perfectio naturae_:
cf. esp. _De Leg._ I. 25. More Stoic still is the definition of virtue as
the perfection of the _reason_, cf. II. 26, _D.F._ IV. 35, V. 38, and
Madvig's note on _D.F._ II. 88. Faber quotes Galen _De Decr. Hipp. et
Plat._ c. 5, [Greek: he arete teleiotes esti tes hekastou physeos]. _Una
res optima_: the supremacy of virtue is also asserted by Varro in Aug. XIX.
3, cf. also _D.F._ V. 36, 38.

Sec.21. _Virtutis usum_: so the Stoics speak of their [Greek: adiaphora] as
the practising ground for virtue (_D.F._ III. 50), cf. _virtutis usum_ in
Aug. XIX. 1. _Nam virtus_: most MSS. have _iam_, which is out of place
here. _Animi bonis et corporis cernitur et in quibusdam_: MSS. omit _et_
between _cernitur_ and _in_, exc. Halm's G which has _in_ before _animi_
and also before _corporis_. These last insertions are not necessary, as may
be seen from _Topica_ 80, _causa certis personis locis temporibus
actionibus negotiis cernitur aut_ in _omnibus aut_ in _plerisque_, also
_T.D._ V. 22. In Stob. II. 6, 8, the [Greek: telos] of the Peripatetics is
stated to be [Greek: to kat' areten zen en tois peri soma kai tois exothen
agathois], here _quibusdam quae_ etc., denote the [Greek: exothen] or
[Greek: ektos agatha], the third class in 19. _Hominem ... societate_: all
this is strongly Stoic, though also attributed to the Peripatetics by Stob.
