awakened to witness scenes of violence, produced a condition of inaction
which resulted in his being left, and afterwards classed, with the
mutineers.

Shortly after five o'clock the armed men streamed quietly up the
fore-hatch and took possession of the deck.  Sentinels were placed below
at the doors of the officers' berths, and above at the hatchways.  Then
Fletcher Christian, John Adams, Matthew Quintal, William McCoy, Isaac
Martin, and several others went aft, armed with muskets, bayonets, and
cutlasses.  Leaving Martin in charge of the quarter-deck, they descended
to Captain Bligh's cabin.

The commander of the _Bounty_, all ignorant of the coming storm which
his ungentlemanly and cruel conduct had raised, was sleeping calmly in
his berth.

He was roughly awakened and bidden to rise.

"What is the reason of such violence?" he demanded, addressing
Christian, as they half forced him out of bed.

"Silence, sir," said Christian, sternly; "you know the reason well
enough.  Tie his hands, lads."

Disregarding the order to be silent, Bligh shouted "murder!" at the top
of his voice.

"Hold your tongue, sir, else you're a dead man," said Christian, seizing
him by the tied hands with a powerful grasp, and holding a bayonet to
his breast.

Of course no one responded to the Captain's cry, the hatchways,
etcetera, being guarded.  They gave him no time to dress, but hurried
him on deck, where, amid much confusion and many abusive cries,
preparations were being made for getting out a boat, for it was resolved
to set Bligh and his friends adrift.  At first there was some disputing
among the mutineers as to which boat should be given to them.
Eventually the launch was decided on.

"Hoist her out, bo's'n.  Do it smartly and instantly, or look-out for
yourself."

The order was given sternly, for the boatswain was known to be friendly
to Bligh.  He obeyed at once, with the assistance of willing men who
were only too glad to get rid of their tyrannical commander.

"Now, Mr Hayward and Mr Hallet, get into the boat," said Christian,
who seemed to be torn with conflicting emotions.  His tone and look were
sufficient for those young midshipmen.  They obeyed promptly.

Mr Samuel the clerk and several more of the crew were then ordered into
the boat.  At this point Captain Bligh attempted to interfere.  He
demanded the intentions of the mutineers, but was told to hold his
tongue, with threats of instant death if he did not obey.  Particular
persons were then called on to go into the boat, and some of these were
allowed to collect twine, canvas, lines, sails, cordage, and other
things to take with them.  They were also allowed an eight-and-twenty
gallon cask of water, fifty pounds of bread, a small quantity of rum and
wine, a quadrant, and a compass.

When all the men obnoxious to the mutineers were in the boat, Captain
Bligh was ordered into it.  Isaac Martin had been placed as a guard over
the Captain, and appeared to favour him, as he enabled him to moisten
his parched lips with a shaddock.  For this he was removed, and Adams
took his place.  Bligh looked round, but no friendly eye met his.  He
had forfeited the regard of all on board, though there were undoubtedly
men there whose detestation of mutiny and whose sense of honour would
have inclined them to aid him if they had not been overawed by the
numbers and resolution of the mutineers.  The master, indeed, had
already made an attempt to rally some of the men round him, but had
failed, and been sent to his cabin.  He, with the others, was now in the
boat.  Poor young Peter Heywood the middy looked on bewildered as if in
a dream.  He could not be said in any sense, either by look or act, to
have taken part with the mutineers.

At last he went below for some things, intending to go in the boat, but
was ordered to remain below.  So also, it is thought, was Edward Young,
another midshipman, who did not make his appearance on deck at all
during the progress of the mutiny.  It was afterwards said that the
leading seamen among the mutineers had purposely ordered these officers
below, and detained them with a view to their working the ship in the
event of anything happening to Christian.

Bligh now made a last appeal.

"I'll give you my honour, Mr Christian," he said, "never to think of
what has passed this day if you will desist.  To cast us adrift here in
an open boat is to consign us to destruction.  Think of my wife and
family!"

"No, Captain Bligh," replied Christian, sternly; "if you had any honour
things had not come to this; and if you had any regard for your wife and
family, you should have thought of them before and not behaved so much
like a villain.  It is too late.  You have treated me like a dog all the
voyage.  Come, sir, your officers and men are now in the boat, and you
must go with them.  If you attempt resistance you shall be put to
death."

Seeing that further appeal would be useless, Bligh allowed himself to be
forced over the side.  When in the boat his hands were untied.

"You will at least allow us arms, to defend ourselves from the savages,"
he said.  Fire-arms were refused, but four cutlasses were ultimately
allowed him.  At this point Isaac Martin quietly descended into the
boat, but Quintal, pointing a musket at him, threatened to shoot him if
he did not return to the ship.  He obeyed the order with reluctance, and
soon after the boat was cast adrift.

The crew of the _Bounty_ at the time consisted of forty-four souls, all
told.  Eighteen of these went adrift with the Captain.  The remaining
twenty-five steered back to the sunny isles of the Pacific.



CHAPTER TWO.

RECORDS THE DUTIES AND TROUBLES OF THE MUTINEERS.

It is not our purpose to follow the fortunes of Captain Bligh.  The
mutineers in the _Bounty_ claim our undivided attention.

As regards Bligh, it is sufficient to say that he performed one of the
most remarkable boat-voyages on record.  In an overloaded and open boat,
on the shortest allowance of provision compatible with existence,
through calm and tempest, heat and cold, exposed to the attacks of
cannibals and to the reproaches of worn-out and mutinous men, he
traversed 3618 miles of ocean in forty-one days, and brought himself and
his followers to land, with the exception of one man who was killed by
the natives.  In this achievement he displayed those qualities of
indomitable resolution and unflagging courage which ultimately raised
him to high rank in the navy.  But we leave him now to trace those
incidents which result from the display of his other qualities--
ungovernable passion, overbearing impetuosity, and incomprehensible
meanness.

The first act of Fletcher Christian, after taking command of the ship,
was to serve out a glass of grog all round.  He then called a council of
war, in which the mutineers discussed the question what they should do.

"You see, lads," said Christian, "it is absolutely certain that we
shan't be left among these islands in peace.  Whether Bligh manages to
get home or not, the British Government is sure to send out to see what
has become of us.  My notion is that we should bear away to the
south'ard, far out of the usual track of ships, find out some
uninhabited and suitable island, and establish ourselves thereon?"

"What! without wives, or sisters, or mothers, or grandmothers, to say
nothin' o' mothers-in-law, to cook our victuals an' look after our
shirt-buttons?" said Isaac Martin, who, having been detained against his
will, had become lugubriously, or recklessly, facetious, and was
stimulated to a sort of fierce hilarity by his glass of rum.

"You're right, Martin," said Brown, the assistant botanist, "we couldn't
get along without wives, so I vote that we go back to Otaheite, get
married, every man of us, an' ho! for the South Pole.  The British
cruisers would never find us there."

There was a general laugh at this sally, but gravity returned almost
instantly to every face, for they were in no humour just then for
jesting.  It is probable that each man began to realise the dreadful
nature of his position as an outlaw whose life was forfeited to his
country, and who could never more hope to tread the shores of Old
England, or look upon the faces of kindred or friends.  In such
circumstances men sometimes try to hide their true feelings under a veil
of recklessness or forced mirth, but seldom succeed in the attempt.

"No man in his senses would go back to Otaheite--at least not to stay
there," said John Adams, gravely; "it's the first place they will send
to look for us."

"What's the odds?" growled one of the seamen.  "They won't look there
for us for a long time to come, unless Cap'n Bligh borrows a pair of
wings from an albatross, an' goes home as the crow flies."

At this point John Mills, the gunner's mate, a man of about forty,
cleared his throat and gave it as his opinion that they should not go
back to Otaheite, but should leave the matter of their future
destination in the hands of Mr Christian, who was well able to guide
them.

This proposal was heartily backed by Edward Young, midshipman, a stout
young fellow of twenty-two, who was fond of Christian; but there were
one or two dissentient voices, among which were the little middy Peter
Heywood, his brother-officer George Stewart, and James Morrison the
boatswain's mate.  These wished to return to Otaheite, but the counsel
of the majority prevailed, and Christian ultimately steered for the
island of Toubouai, which lay some five hundred miles to the south of
Otaheite.  There he expected to be safe from pursuit, and there it was
resolved that the mutineers should take up their abode if the natives
proved friendly.

That night, while the _Bounty_ was skimming gently over the starlit sea
before a light breeze, the three officers, Heywood, Stewart, and Young,
leaned over the weather side of the quarter-deck, and held a whispered
conversation.

"Why did you vote for going back to Otaheite, Heywood?" asked Young.

"Because it is to Otaheite that they will send to look after us, and I
should like to be there to give myself up, the instant a man-of-war
arrives, and declare my innocence of the crime of mutiny."

"You are right, Heywood," said Stewart; "I, too, would like to give
myself up the moment I get the chance.  Captain Bligh knows that you and
I had no hand in the mutiny, and if he reaches England will clear us of
so foul a stain.  It's a pity that those who voted for Otaheite were not
in the majority."

"That's all very well for you, who were seen to go below to fetch your
clothes, and were detained against your will," said Young, "but it was
not so with me.  I was forcibly detained below.  They would not allow me
to go on deck at all until the launch had left, so that it would go hard
with me before a court-martial.  But the die is now cast, and there's no
help for it.  Although I took no part in the mutiny, I won't risk
falling into the hands of justice, with such an unprincipled scoundrel
as Bligh to witness against me.  My future fortunes now lie with
Fletcher Christian.  I cannot avoid my fate."

Young spoke sadly, yet with some bitterness of tone, like one who has
made up his mind to face and endure the worst.

On reaching the remote island of Toubouai the mutineers were much
impressed with its beauty.  It seemed exceedingly fertile, was wooded to
the water's edge, and surrounded by a coral reef, with one opening
through which a ship might enter.  Altogether it seemed a most suitable
refuge, but here they met with an insurmountable difficulty.  On drawing
near to the shore they saw hundreds of natives, who, armed with clubs
and spears, lined the beach, blew their shell-horns, and resolutely
opposed the landing of the strangers.

As all efforts to conciliate them were fruitless, resort was had to
cannon and musketry.  Of course the terrible thunder of the white man's
artillery had its usual effect on the savages.  They fled inland, and
the mutineers gained a footing on the island.

But the natives continued their opposition so vigorously, that this
refuge proved to be the reverse of a place of rest.

Christian therefore changed his plan, and, re-embarking in the _Bounty_,
set sail for Otaheite.

On the way thither the mutineers disagreed among themselves.  Some of
those who had been forcibly detained even began to plot the retaking of
the ship, but their intentions were discovered and prevented.

On the 6th of June they reached their former anchorage in Otaheite,
where the natives received them with much joy and some surprise, but a
story was trumped up to account for this sudden re-appearance of the
mutineers.

Christian, however, had not yet given up his intention of settling on
the island of Toubouai.  He foresaw the doom that awaited him if he
should remain at Otaheite, and resolved to return to the former island
with a quantity of livestock.  He began to barter with the friendly
Otaheitans, and soon had as many hogs, goats, fowls, cats, and dogs as
he required, besides a bull and a cow which had been left there by
Captain Cook.  With these and several natives he sailed again for
Toubouai.  Arriving there in nine days, he found that a change had come
over the spirit of the natives.  They were decidedly and unaccountably
amiable.  They not only permitted the white men to land, but assisted
them in warping the ship into a place of shelter, as well as in landing
provisions and stores.

Fletcher Christian, whatever his faults may have been, seems to have had
peaceful tendencies.  He had not only secured the friendship of the
Otaheitans by his just and considerate treatment of them while engaged
in barter, but he now managed to conciliate some of the chiefs of
Toubouai.  As a precaution, however, he set about building an entrenched
fortress, in the labours connected with which he took his full share of
work with the men.  While the building was in progress the natives,
despite the friendly chiefs, threw off the mask of good-will, which had
doubtless been put on for the purpose of getting the white men into
their power.  Strong in overwhelming numbers, they made frequent attacks
on the mutineers, which these latter, being strong in arms, successfully
repelled.  It soon became evident that warfare, not peace, was to be the
lot of the residents on Toubouai, and, finally, it was agreed that the
_Bounty_ should be got ready for sea, and the whole party should return
to Otaheite.

The resolution was soon carried into effect, and the mutineers ere long
found themselves once again drawing near to the island.

As they approached it under full sail, for the wind was light, the men
stood looking at it, commenting on its beauty and the amiableness of its
people, but Fletcher Christian stood apart by himself, with his back to
the shore, gazing in the opposite direction.

Edward Young went up to him.

"If this breeze holds, sir, we shall soon be at anchor in our old
quarters."

The midshipman spoke in the respectful tone of one addressing his
superior officer.  Indeed, although Christian had, by his rash and
desperate act of mutiny, forfeited his position, and lowered himself to
a level with the worst of his associates, he never lost their respect.
It is recorded that they styled him _Mister_ Christian to the end.

"At anchor!" said Christian, in a tone of deepest despondency.  "Ah,
Edward Young, there is no anchorage for us now in this world!  We may
anchor in Matavai Bay to-night, but it will only be to up anchor and off
again in a few days."

"Come, come, sir," said Young, heartily, "don't give way to despondency.
You know we were driven to act as we did, and it can't be helped now."

"_We_ were driven!  My poor fellow," returned Christian, laying a hand
on the midshipman's shoulder, "_you_ had no part in this miserable
business.  It is I who have drawn you all into it, but--well, well, as
you say, it can't be helped now.  We must make the best of it,--God help
us!"

He spoke in a low, soft tone of profound sadness, and continued his
wistful gaze over the stern of the _Bounty_.  Presently he looked
quickly round, and, taking Young's arm, began to pace the deck while he
spoke to him.

"As you say, Edward, we shall anchor once more in Matavai Bay, but I am
firmly resolved not to remain there."

"I'm sorry to hear it, sir," said Young, "for most of the men are as
firmly resolved to stay, and you know several of them are resolute, not
to say desperate, characters."

"I am quite aware of that, but I shall make a proposal to them, which I
think they will accept.  I will first of all propose to leave Otaheite
for some safer place of refuge, and when they object to that, I will
propose to divide the whole of the ship's stores and property among us
all, landing that portion which belongs to those who elect to remain on
the island, and sailing away with the rest, and with those who choose to
follow my fortunes, to seek a more distant and a safer home."

"That may perhaps suit them," said Young.

"Suit _them_," rejoined Christian, with a quick glance; "then _you_
don't count yourself one of them?"

"No," returned the midshipman with a frank look, "I will follow you now,
sir, to the end.  How far I am guilty is a question that does not
concern me at present.  If the British Government gets hold of me, my
fate is sealed.  I am in the same boat with yourself, Mr Christian, and
I mean to stick by it."

There was a strange spasm on Christian's countenance, as if of
conflicting emotions, while he grasped the youth's hand and squeezed it.

"Thank you, Edward, thank you.  Go now and see the anchor cleared to let
go."

He descended quickly to the cabin, while the unfortunate midshipman went
forward to give the order.

