persons unacquainted with science, who adopt indiscriminately both the
facts and the hypotheses of the author. And this is no doubt the cause
of the vary different estimation in which the work of the Giessen
Professor was held by scientific and practical men.

Liebig's treatise was followed, in the year 1844, by the publication of
Boussingault's _Economic Rurale_, a work winch excited at the time
infinitely less interest than Liebig's, although it is really quite as
important a contribution to scientific agriculture. It is distinguished
by entering more fully into the special details of the application of
chemistry to agriculture, and contains the results of the author's
numerous searches both in the laboratory and the field. Boussingault
possesses the qualification, at present somewhat rare, of combining a
thorough knowledge of practical agriculture with extended scientific
attainments; and his investigations, which have been made with direct
reference to practice, and their results tested in the field, are the
largest and most valuable contribution to the exact data of scientific
agriculture which has yet been made public.

The year 1844 was also distinguished by the foundation of the
Agricultural Chemistry Association of Scotland, an event of no small
importance in the history of scientific agriculture. That association
was instituted through the exertions of a small number of practical
farmers, for the purpose of pursuing investigations in agricultural
chemistry, and affording to its members assistance in all matters
connected with the cultivation of the soil, and has formed the model of
similar establishments in London, Dublin, and Belfast, as well as in
Germany; and it is peculiarly creditable to the intelligence and energy
of the practical farmers of Scotland, that with them commenced a
movement, which has already found imitators in so many quarters, and
conferred such great benefits on agriculture. Within the last ten or
twelve years, and mainly owing to the establishment of agricultural
laboratories, great progress has been made in accumulating facts on
which to found an accurate knowledge of the principles of agricultural
chemistry, and the number of chemists who have devoted themselves to
this subject has considerably increased, though still greatly less than
its exigencies require.

Notwithstanding all that has recently been done, it must not be
forgotten that we have scarcely advanced beyond the threshold, and that
it is only by numerous and frequently repeated experiments that it is
possible to arrive at satisfactory results. Agricultural inquiries are
liable to peculiar fallacies due to the perturbing influence of climate,
season, and many other causes, the individual effects of which can only
be eliminated with difficulty, and much error has been introduced, by
hastily generalising from single experiments, in place of awaiting the
results of repeated trials. Hence it is that the progress of scientific
agriculture must necessarily be slow and gradual, and is not likely to
be marked by any great or startling discoveries. Now that the relations
of science to practice are better understood, the extravagant
expectations at one time entertained have been abandoned, and, as a
necessary consequence, the interest in agricultural chemistry has again
increased, and the conviction daily gains ground that no one who wishes
to farm with success, can afford to be without some knowledge of the
scientific principles of his art.




CHAPTER I.

THE ORGANIC CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS.


When the water naturally existing in plants is expelled by exposure to
the air or a gentle heat, the residual dry matter is found to be
composed of a considerable number of different substances, which have
been divided into two great classes, called the organic and the
inorganic, or mineral constituents of plants. The former are readily
combustible, and on the application of heat, catch fire, and are
entirely consumed, leaving the inorganic matters in the form of a white
residuum or ash. All plants contain both classes of substances; and
though their relative proportions vary within very wide limits, the
former always greatly exceed the latter, which in many cases form only a
very minute proportion of the whole weight of the plant. Owing to the
great preponderance of the organic or combustible matters, it was at one
time believed that the inorganic substances formed no part of the true
structure of plants, and consisted only of a small portion of the
mineral matters of the soil, which had been absorbed along with their
organic food; but this opinion, which probably was never universally
entertained, is now entirely abandoned, and it is no longer doubted that
both classes of substances are equally essential to their existence.

Although they form so large a proportion of the plant, its organic
constituents are composed of no more than four elements, viz.:--

     Carbon.
     Hydrogen.
     Nitrogen.
     Oxygen.

The inorganic constituents are much more numerous, not less than
thirteen substances, which appear to be essential, having been observed.
These are--

     Potash.
     Soda.
     Lime.
     Magnesia.
     Peroxide of Iron.
     Silicic Acid.
     Phosphoric Acid.
     Sulphuric Acid.
     Chlorine.

And more rarely

     Manganese.
     Iodine.
     Bromine.
     Fluorine.

Several other substances, among which may be mentioned alumina and
copper, have also been enumerated; but there is every reason to believe
that they are not essential, and the cases in which they have been found
are quite exceptional.

It is to be especially noticed that none of these substances occur in
plants in the free or uncombined state, but always in the form of
compounds of greater or less complexity, and extremely varied both in
their properties and composition.

It would be out of place, in a work like the present, to enter into
complete details of the properties of the elements of which plants are
composed, which belongs strictly to pure chemistry, but it is necessary
to premise a few observations regarding the organic elements, and their
more important compounds.

_Carbon._--When a piece of wood is heated in a close vessel, it is
charred, and converted into charcoal. This charcoal is the most familiar
form of carbon, but it is not absolutely pure, as it necessarily
contains the ash of the wood from which it was made. In its purest form
it occurs in the diamond, which is believed to be produced by the
decomposition of vegetable matters, and it is there crystallized and
remarkably transparent; but when produced by artificial processes,
carbon is always black, more or less porous, and soils the fingers. It
is insoluble in water, burns readily, and is converted into carbonic
acid. Carbon is the largest constituent of plants, and forms, in round
numbers, about 50 per cent of their weight when dry.

_Carbonic Acid._--This, the most important compound of carbon and
oxygen, is best obtained by pouring a strong acid upon chalk or
limestone, when it escapes with effervescence. It is a colourless gas,
extinguishing flame, incapable of supporting respiration, much heavier
than atmospheric air, and slightly soluble in water, which takes up its
own volume of the gas. It is produced abundantly when vegetable matters
are burnt, as also during respiration, fermentation, and many other
processes. It is likewise formed daring the decay of animal and
vegetable matters, and is consequently evolved from dung and compost
heaps.

_Hydrogen_ occurs in nature only in combination. Its principal compound
is water, from which it is separated by the simultaneous action of an
acid, such as sulphuric acid and a metal, in the form of a transparent
gas, lighter than any other substance. It is very combustible, burns
with a pale blue flame, and is converted into water. It is found in all
plants, although in comparatively small quantity, for, when dry, they
rarely contain more than four or five per cent. Its most important
compound is water, of which it forms one-ninth, the other eight-ninths
consisting of oxygen.

_Nitrogen_ exists abundantly in the atmosphere, of which it forms nearly
four-fifths, or, more exactly, 79 per cent. It is there mixed, but not
combined with oxygen; and when the latter gas is removed, by introducing
into a bottle of air some substance for which the former has an
affinity, the nitrogen is left in a state of purity. It is a transparent
gas, which is incombustible and extinguishes flame. It is a singularly
inert substance, and is incapable of directly entering into union with
any other element except oxygen, and with that it combines with the
greatest difficulty, and only by the action of the electric spark--a
peculiarity which has very important bearings on many points we shall
afterwards have to discuss. Nitrogen is found in plants to the extent of
from 1 to 4 per cent.

_Nitric Acid._--This, the most important compound of nitrogen and
oxygen, can be produced by sending a current of electric sparks through
a mixture of its constituents, but in this way it can be obtained only
in extremely small quantity. It is much more abundantly produced when
organic matters are decomposed with free access of air, in which case
the greater proportion of their nitrogen combines with the atmospheric
oxygen. This process, which is known by the name of nitrification, is
greatly promoted by the presence of lime or some other substance, with
which the nitric acid may combine in proportion as it is formed. It
takes place, to a great extent, in the soil in India and other hot
climates; and our chief supplies of saltpetre, or nitrate of potash, are
derived from the soil in these countries, where it has been formed in
this manner. The same change occurs, though to a much smaller extent, in
the soil in temperate climates.

_Ammonia_ is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen, but it cannot be
formed by the direct union of these gases. It is a product of the
decomposition of organic substances containing nitrogen, and is produced
when they are distilled at a high temperature, or allowed to putrefy out
of contact of the air. In its pure state it is a transparent and
colourless gas, having a peculiar pungent smell, and highly soluble in
water. It is an alkali resembling potash and soda, and, like these
substances, unites with the acids and forms salts, of which the sulphate
and muriate are the most familiar. In these salts it is fixed, and does
not escape from them unless they be mixed with lime, or some other
substance possessing a more powerful affinity for the acid with which it
is united.

_Oxygen_ is one of the most widely distributed of all the elements, and,
owing to its powerful affinities, is the most important agent in almost
all natural changes. It is found in the air, of which it forms 21 per
cent, and in combination with hydrogen, and almost all the other
chemical elements. In the pure state it possesses very remarkable
properties. All substances burn in it with greater brilliancy than they
do in atmospheric air, and its affinity for most of the elements is
extremely powerful. When diluted with nitrogen, it supports the
respiration of animals; but in the pure state it proves fatal after the
lapse of an hour or two. It is found in plants, in quantities varying
from 30 to 36 per cent.

It is worthy of observation, that of the four organic elements, carbon
only is fixed, and the other three are gases; and likewise, when any two
of them unite, their compound is either a gaseous or a volatile
substance. The charring of organic substances, which is one of their
most characteristic properties, and constantly made use of by chemists
as a distinctive reaction, is due to this peculiarity; for when they are
heated, a simpler arrangement of their particles takes place, the
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen unite among themselves, and carry off a
small quantity of carbon, while the remainder is left behind in the form
of charcoal, and is only consumed when access of the external air is
permitted.

Now, in order that a plant may grow, its four organic constituents must
be absorbed by it, and that this absorption may take place, it is
essential that they be presented to it in suitable forms. A seed may be
planted in pure carbon, and supplied with unlimited quantities of
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and inorganic substances, and it will not
germinate; and a plant, when placed in similar circumstances, shows no
disposition to increase, but rapidly languishes and dies. The obvious
inference from these facts is, that these substances cannot be absorbed
when in the _elementary_ state, but that it is only after they have
entered into certain forms of combination that they acquire the property
of being readily taken up, and assimilated by the organs of the plant.

It was at one time believed that many different compounds of these
elements might be absorbed and elaborated, but later and more accurate
experiments have reduced the number to four--namely, carbonic acid,
water, ammonia, and nitric acid. The first supplies carbon, the second
hydrogen, the two last nitrogen, while all of them, with the exception
of ammonia, may supply the plant with oxygen as well as with that
element of which it is the particular source.

There are only two sources from which these substances can be obtained
by the plant, viz. the atmosphere and the soil, and it is necessary that
we should here consider the mode in which they may be obtained from
each.

_The Atmosphere as a source of the Organic Constituents of
Plants._--Atmospheric air consists of a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen
gases, watery vapour, carbonic acid, ammonia, and nitric acid. The two
first are the largest constituents, and the others, though equally
essential, are present in small, and some of them in extremely minute
quantity. When deprived of moisture and its minor constituents, 100
volumes of air are found to contain 21 of oxygen and 79 of nitrogen.
Although these gases are not chemically combined in the air, but only
mechanically mixed, their proportion is exceedingly uniform, for
analyses completely corresponding with these numbers have been made by
Humboldt, Gay-Lussac, and Dumas at Paris, by Saussure at Geneva, and by
Lewy at Copenhagen; and similar results have also been obtained from air
collected by Gay-Lussac during his ascent in a balloon at the height of
21,430 feet, and by Humboldt on the mountain of Antisano in South
America at a height of 16,640 feet. In short, under all circumstances,
and in all places, the relation subsisting between the oxygen and
nitrogen is constant; and though, no doubt, many local circumstances
exist which may tend to modify their proportions, these are so slow and
partial in their operations, and so counterbalanced by others acting in
an opposite direction, as to retain a uniform proportion between the
main constituents of the atmosphere, and to prevent the undue
accumulation of one or other of them at any one point.

No such uniformity exists in the proportion of the minor constituents.
The variation in the quantity of watery vapour is a familiar fact, the
difference between a dry and moist atmosphere being known to the most
careless observer, and the proportions of the other constituents are
also liable to considerable variations.

_Carbonic Acid._--The proportion of carbonic acid in the air has been
investigated by Saussure. From his experiments, made at the village of
Chambeisy, near Geneva, it appears that the quantity is not constant,
but varies from 3.15 to 5.75 volumes in 10,000; the mean being 4.15.
These variations are dependent on different circumstances. It was found
that the carbonic acid was always more abundant during the night than
during the day--the mean quantity in the former case being 4.32, in the
latter 3.38. The largest quantity found during the night was 5.74,
during the day 5.4. Heavy and continued rain diminishes the quantity of
carbonic acid, by dissolving and carrying it down into the soil.
Saussure found that in the month of July 1827, during the time when nine
millimetres of rain fell, the average quantity of carbonic acid amounted
to 5.18 volumes in 10,000; while in September 1829, when 254 millimetres
fell, it was only 3.57. A moist state of the soil, which is favourable
to the absorption of carbonic acid, also diminishes the quantity
contained in the air, while, on the other hand, continued frosts, by
retaining the atmosphere and soil in a dry state, have an opposite
effect. High winds increase the carbonic acid to a small extent. It was
also found to be greater over the cultivated lands than over the lake of
Geneva; at the tops of mountains than at the level of the sea; in towns
than in the country. The differences observed in all these cases, though
small, are quite distinct, and have been confirmed by subsequent
experimenters.

_Ammonia._--The presence of ammonia in the atmosphere appears to have
been first observed by Saussure, who found that when the sulphate of
alumina is exposed to the air, it is gradually converted into the double
sulphate of alumina and ammonia. Liebig more recently showed that
ammonia can always be detected in rain and snow water, and it could not
be doubted that it had been absorbed from the atmosphere. Experiments
have since been made by different observers with the view of determining
the quantity of atmospheric ammonia, and their results are contained in
the subjoined table, which gives the quantity found in a million parts
of air.

Kemp                                         3.6800

        { 12 feet above the surface          3.5000
Pierre  { 25 feet  do.  do.                  0.5000

Graeger                                      0.3230

          { By day                           0.0980
Fresenius { By night                         0.1690

      {          { Maximum                   0.0317
      { In Paris { Minimum                   0.0177
      {          { Mean                      0.0237
Ville {
      {          { Maximum                   0.0276
      { Environs { Minimum                   0.0165
      { of Paris { Mean                      0.0210

Of these results, the earlier ones of Kemp, Pierre, and Graeger are
undoubtedly erroneous, as they were made without those precautions which
subsequent experience has shown to be necessary. Even those of the other
observers must be taken as giving only a very general idea of the
quantity of ammonia in the air, for a proportion so minute as one
fifty-millionth cannot be accurately determined even by the most
delicate experiments. For this reason, more recent experimenters have
endeavoured to arrive at conclusions bearing more immediately upon
agricultural questions, by determining the quantity of ammonia brought
down by the rain. The first observations on this subject were made by
Barral in 1851, and they have been repeated during the years 1855 and
1856 by Mr. Way. In 1853, Boussingault also made numerous experiments
on the quantity of ammonia in the rain falling at different places, as
well as in dew and the moisture of fogs. He found in the imperial
gallon--

                                                            Grs.
Rain         { Paris                                        0.2100
             { Liebfrauenberg                               0.0350


Dew,          Liebfrauenberg           { Maximum            0.4340
                                       { Minimum            0.0714

            { Liebfrauenberg                                0.1790
Fog         { Paris                                         9.6000

It thus appears that in Paris the quantity of ammonia in rain-water is
just six times as great as it is in the country, a result, no doubt, due
to the ammonia evolved during the combustion of fuel, and to animal
exhalations, and to the same cause, the large quantity contained in the
moisture of fogs in Paris may also be attributed. Barral and Way have
made determinations of the quantity of ammonia carried down by the rain
in each month of the year, the former using for this purpose the water
collected in the rain-gauges of the Paris Observatory, and representing,
therefore, a town atmosphere; the latter, that from a large rain-gauge
at Rothamsted, at a distance from any town. According to Barral the
ammonia annually deposited on an acre of land amounts to 12.28 lbs., a
quantity considerably exceeding that obtained by Way, whose experiments
being made at a distance from towns, must be considered as representing
more accurately the normal condition of the air. His results for the
years 1855 and 1856 are given below, along with the quantities of nitric
acid found at the same time.

_Nitric Acid._--The presence of nitric acid in the air appears to have
been first observed by Priestley at the end of the last century, but
Liebig, in 1825, showed that it was always to be found after
thunder-storms, although he failed to detect it at other times. In 1851
Barral proved that it is invariably present in rain-water, and stated
the quantity annually carried down to an acre of land at no less than
41.29 lbs. But at the time his experiments were made, the methods of
determining very minute quantities of nitric acid were exceedingly
defective, and Way, by the adoption of an improved process, has shown
that the quantity is very much smaller than Barral supposed, and really
falls short of three pounds. His results for ammonia, as well as nitric
acid, are given in the subjoined table.

