
The Decline of American Shipping.


At a meeting of the New York Chamber of Commerce, held December 16, to
consider means for reviving American commerce, the following resolutions
were adopted:

Resolved, That this Chamber recommend to the Congress of the United
States, about to assemble, the modification of existing laws, so that

I. Foreign-built steamers may be imported free of duty, and privileged
to carry the American flag, provided they are American owned and not to
be employed in our coastwise trade.

II. That iron plates and such other material for the construction of
steamers as may be deemed advisable, be admitted free of duty.

III. That on all ship stores procurable in bond, drawback be returned,
as upon goods shipped for sale to foreign lands; and

Finally, That ample subsidies be granted to lines of steamers built
in American yards, to the end that competition with powerful foreign
organizations may be successfully inaugurated and sustained.

The Chamber ordered the resolutions engrossed, accompanied by a memorial
forwarded to Congress.

These resolutions, in our opinion, embody the solution of the question
under consideration, and we trust they may be speedily and favorably
acted upon by Congress.

       *       *       *       *       *

Young men out of employment can easily obtain enough subscribers for the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN to receive a cash prize of sufficient magnitude to
insure them a good salary for six weeks' work. Send for prospectus and
circulars.

       *       *       *       *       *




CORRESPONDENCE.


_The Editors are not responsible for the Opinions expressed by their
Correspondents_.

       *       *       *       *       *




Aerial Navigation--A Suggestion.


Messrs. Editors:--As a constant reader of your invaluable paper, many
subjects of deep interest come under my observation, and doubtless no
journal throughout the land contains more instructive reading--that
which tends to accelerate the progress of scientific investigation,
and promote the general interest of the people--than the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN. The series of articles under the head of "Aerial Navigation,"
commenced on page 309, volume XXI., has, perhaps, been read with as much
pleasure and interest as anything published in your valuable journal. I
say with pleasure--because it is really gratifying to mark the advancing
steps which inventors are making in this branch of science; and with
interest--because every new idea set forth, calculated to further the
success of aerial navigation, should be, and no doubt will be, regarded
as of great importance by every one. And, as the more suggestions placed
before the minds of those working for the improvement of any invention,
the greater number will they have from which to choose or experiment
upon, I would like to make one suggestion here, which may be of some
importance in the construction and operation of the "Aeroport," under
the supervision of Mr. Porter, of your city, a description of which is
given on pages 346-7, volume XXI., of your paper.

I suggest that the propelling wheels be placed in some other position
than that given in the said description. From what little knowledge I
possess of aerial navigation, I am persuaded that it would take less
power to propel the "Aeroport" at a given speed, if the wheels were
placed at the rear or front portion of the flying ship. My reason for
being thus persuaded is, that as the forward and aft halves of the float
are cone-shaped--the center being the base, and the front and rear
ends being the vertexes--there must be an increased velocity of the
atmosphere from front to aft as the aeroport advances. Consequently the
driving wheels being placed under the center or largest diameter of the
float, they must evidently revolve with greater rapidity in the current
of air passing between the float and the saloon, going in opposite
direction to that in which the aeroport is flying at a given speed, than
they would were they placed in front or behind where the atmosphere is
comparatively at rest. I take this view from the fact that steamboats
and other vessels proceed with greater speed, with a given power, _down_
stream than they do _up_ stream, mostly on account of the paddles
striking against the current flowing in the same direction in which the
vessel is rowing. The propelling wheels placed either at the front or
rear may have the axle extended through the end of the float to the
center, and the cog-wheel, for the chain, placed on the inner end of
the axle, and the chain descending through the bottom of the float, and
connected to the engine in the same manner as given in your paper. The
chain should be inclosed from the float to the saloon below, with a pipe
of the same material as the float, and sufficiently large to insure the
free action of the chain, and the axle of the propellers should be made
tight with suitable packing to prevent the escape of gas. However there
may be different arrangements employed for connecting the engine to the
wheels. A shaft extending directly under the float, and reaching
from the center to the axle supporting the propellers, and connected
therewith by means of side cog-wheels, might be used; and as the shaft
would necessarily diverge from a straight line with the said axle, the
shaft having the chain-wheel on the end directly over the engine and
connected therewith in the manner proposed by Mr. Porter, I would
suggest further that it would, perhaps, be preferable to place the
wheels at the front end, that the rudder might remain in its original
position, and the aeroport could swing behind the propellers on
encountering side currents of air, and could thus be more easily guided.
I firmly believe that Mr. Porter has taken "the right step in the right
direction" to accomplish that which has been so long sought, and which
evidently will be accomplished at some future time. The air will yet be
navigated by numerous flying ships, going from one city to another like
those that now cover the broad bosom of our oceans.

HIRAM VAN METER.

Macomb, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *




Puttying Floors of Jewelers Shops and Otherwise.


Messrs. Editors:--I am a reader of your valuable paper and find in
it much to interest, and many practical hints that are useful in my
vocation; I would not be without it for any consideration and I think
every mechanic in the land should take it, read it, and profit by the
reading.

I notice, in Vol. XXI, page 371, a communication headed, "Watch
Repairers' Shop," in which directions are given to fill the chinks in
the floor around the work-bench with soft pine and putty, etc., etc.;
this is all well enough, but will not prevent the breaking of pivots
should a balance wheel be dropped, neither will it prevent the wheel
being stepped upon and so rendered useless, as often happens.

I am a watch-maker and jeweler, and I never drop a wheel or part of a
watch on the floor. I have an apron about one yard wide, and in the
corners of it are eyelet-holes, so that I can pin it to the bench when I
am working; I have strings to it, but do not generally tie them around
me, but let it be loose in my lap as I have to jump up, to attend to
customers in the shop. In the shop where I learned my trade (in London,
England), every workman was _compelled_ to wear an apron, and so much
waste of property and valuable time was saved; the saving of _time_ in
_one week_ will more than pay the cost of the aprons.

Sidney Plains, N. Y,

GEO. C.L. KENT.

       *       *       *       *       *




Western Demand for Agricultural Implements.


Messrs. Editors:--I often think, on perusing your very valuable journal
of science, and the numerous mechanical and scientific problems it
unfolds, that the tendency of the age is to supersede all manual labor
by machinery. Whether such a thing is possible is not the question for
me to consider; I only know that the tendency of universal human genius
seems directed to that end.

I make the above observation casually, in order to introduce a few ideas
on the subject of improvement in agricultural implements--the great
_desideratum_ of the West at this moment. Here nature has opened her
stores so munificently, that all the husbandman has to do is to plow,
sow, and garner the fruits of his labor. But two great improvements are
needed to enable the western farmer to keep pace with improvements in
the mechanic arts and other kindred employment. Indeed, we at the
West, particularly, need a good, cheap, steam plow that can be made
practicable for at least the better grade of farmers. The English plan
of moldboards, that overcome all possible traction and necessitate the
duplex stationary engines, with the cumbrous "artillery of attachments,"
may do for sluggish people but will never meet the wants of the Yankee
nation.

The steam plow suited to the genius of our people, must, to use a
vulgarism, "get up and go." It must possess sufficient power of
propulsion and traction to pulverize the ground better, deeper, and
more rapidly than the "old way." Such is the want of the great West
in reference to preparing the soil for crops. I do not know of such a
machine in use, nor do I believe in the theory of Dr. Brainard, that the
moldboard is the only plan for properly pulverizing the soil; for I am
satisfied that such plan is wholly inadmissible in steam plowing in
this country, for want of sufficient traction for self-propulsion, and
observation has taught me that a self-propelling plow is the only steam
plow our people will tolerate.

I have lately examined the drawings of a steam plow invented by a
gentleman of this city (which I am not at liberty to explain in detail)
that seems to meet the great want I have spoken of. The invention
consists in a very simple device, by which the whole force of
pulverizing the ground is applied to propel the machine, and if this be
not sufficient, an independent force may be applied, so arranged as to
govern the speed of the machine at the will of the operator. You will,
no doubt, in due time hear more of this machine, which seems to me to
meet the great want so long experienced in Western cultivation.

The next great want of the West is a practical grain binder, that shall
securely bind the grain as cut. The scarcity and high price of labor
renders such a machine an absolute necessity. The efforts to supply this
great want have been numerous, but with no flattering success so far as
I am able to learn, except the machine invented by a citizen of this
place, which has already made its mark by demonstrating that automatic
machinery can and does bind the grain as fast as cut. The machine I
speak of is yet in a chrysalis state, so to speak, but it has been
worked two years in the field, the last season without missing a bundle,
though not without the usual difficulties of all new machines in respect
to the workings of some parts--too weak, etc. It is believed that
the coming harvest will witness its triumphant success. If so, the
production of our staple cereal will be greatly cheapened. I shall
be glad to renew "old acquaintance," by a more detailed statement
hereafter.

I send enclosed the pay for another year of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN,
which I can no more do without than my accustomed dinner.

C.

Madison, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *




Economical Steam Engine.


Messrs. Editors:--Permit me now to make a few remarks in regard to an
article on page 844, last volume of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, entitled
"Which is the Most Economical Steam Engine?" The principles laid down in
that article, I think are correct.

I run a saw-mill with an engine which fills those conditions nearer than
I ever saw, and I would like to give your readers a brief description
of it. The cylinder is 10-inch bore, and 14-inch stroke; steam chest
extends enough beyond the ends of the cylinder so that the steam travels
only 21/2 inches, the shortest distance possible, after leaving the valve
before it reaches the piston-head, and the space between the piston-head
and cylinder-head is only one-fourth of an inch, the bolt heads
being counter-sunk until even. Other things about this engine are in
proportion. With this engine attached to a direct acting circular mill,
I can saw 2,000 feet of hard-wood inch boards in one hour.

If any of your readers can beat this, I would like to hear from them.

JOHN CARNES.

       *       *       *       *       *




Friction and Percussion.


Messrs. Editors:--In reply to "Spectrum," page 358, of last volume,
I will be brief. In his third paragraph he claims that he has merely
_suggested_ that friction and percussion may often be one and the same
thing; and immediately claims that in the case of the polished button
rubbing a planed pine board, the force which overcomes and levels the
undulations of the wood, is percussion, and that percussion is also the
cause of the heat; the microscopic hills and hollows on the shining
brass button skipping and jumping along the pine, produces little
infinitesimal bumpings, and so pound out the heat. This _little_ theory
should be known to the homeopaths--they could illustrate infinitesimal
quantities by it!

"Spectrum" treats my hammered horsenail illustration shabbily. After
indirectly acknowledging that there is a point where hammering will
no longer produce heat, he puts it on the grindstone, subjects it to
friction, and when it burns his fingers, throws his hat in the air and
shouts "Hurrah for _percussion!_" We agree perfectly, except that he
calls hammering, _condensation_; calls friction, _percussion_; and drops
friction from the mechanical dictionary altogether.

A railway car axle often heats and sets fire to the packing, when the
journal is smooth as polished glass; but I never heard of those parts
of the car which are constantly undergoing percussion, even getting
uncomfortably warm. The natives of the South Pacific produce fire by
rubbing pieces of dry wood together, but I never heard of their rapping
sticks for the same purpose. I have seen a new, sharp knife made hot
enough to raise a blister, whittling a clean dry stick of pine, and
I would like to have "Spectrum" tell us, if in all the above cases
percussion is the cause of the evolution of of heat, and what is
friction doing in the mean time.

New Albany, Ind.

C.C.H.

       *       *       *       *       *




Oiling a Preservative of Brown Stone.


Messrs. Editors:--I have read the article entitled, "What is to Become
of our Brown Stone Fronts," and have waited to see what others have to
say. But with so much at stake, no body seems to know what to do or say.
Being a practical painter, it has been my lot to oil some of the best
fronts in New York, namely corner of 23d Street and 5th Avenue, No. 2,
West 23rd Street, also No. 1, West 30th Street; also the residence of
E.S. Higgins, the carpet manufacturer, done by other journeymen.

