they were.

I remembered one of them well.  It came after two weeks' omission on
Tom's part, and ran thus:--

  "Dear Tom,

  "A pretty fellow you are to correspond with!  Here am I, piping to you
  with all my might, but I can't get you to dance.  I know what you'll
  tell me, you old humbug--`awfully hard grind'--`exam coming
  on'--`lectures day and night,' and rubbish like that.  All very well,
  but look here, Thomas, don't fancy that your diligence in cutting off
  legs and arms can be an excuse for cutting yours truly in this
  heartless manner.  Not having a letter of yours to answer, I don't
  know how I shall scrape up material enough for a yarn.  There was a
  big football-match on Saturday, and Jim and I were in it.  You should
  have seen me turning somersaults, and butting my head into the
  fellows' stomachs.  Jim and I got shoulder to shoulder once in the
  game.  You know old Howe?  Well, he was running with the ball to wards
  our goal, and Jim and I were in front of him.

  I was nearest, and charged, and over I went like a ninepin; then Jim
  was on him, and over _he_ went too.  However, I was up again in time
  to jump on Howe's back; but he shook me off on to the ground on my
  nose.  Then Jim, having recovered, took _his_ fling, and a rare fling
  it was, for Howe dodged him just as he was at the top of a kangaroo
  leap, and left him looking very foolish in a sitting posture on the
  ground.  However, in dodging, Howe had allowed me time to extricate my
  nose from the earth and make my third attempt.  This time was more
  successful, for I got my hands round the ball; but I shouldn't have
  kept them there if Jim hadn't taken the opportunity of executing
  another astounding buck-jump, which landed him safe on his man's
  shoulders, where he stuck like a scared cat on the back of a
  somnambulist.  So between us we brought our quarry to earth and gained
  no end of applause.  Wasn't it prime?

  That's about all the news here, except that Willoughby is going to
  Trinity at Midsummer, and that Salter is laid up from the effects of
  an explosion of crackers in his trousers pockets.

  "I've taken a turn at reading hard, which may astonish you.  The
  doctor told me, if I really thought of some day arraying my manly form
  in a scarlet jacket and wearing a sword, I ought to put it on with my
  mathematics, which are not my _forte_, you know.  So now I'm drawing
  circles and triangles at every available moment, and my logarithm
  tables are thumbed almost to death.  Don't imagine _you're_ the only
  burner of midnight oil.

  "I had a letter from home to-day.  They were saying they hadn't seen
  you lately.  I hope you'll go up when you can; it would be a charity
  to the dear old folk; besides, they are very fond of you--queer taste!
  How's the ticker?  Give it a cuff from me for not reminding you to
  write the last two weeks.

  The repeater goes on all serene.  It has already gained some
  notoriety, as I was publicly requested, before the whole Fifth, the
  other day, to abstain from evoking its musical talents in the course
  of the Latin prose lesson.  Now I must shut up.  Seriously, old man,
  don't overwork yourself, and don't bother to write unless you've time;
  but you know how welcome your letters are to

  "Your affectionate chum,

  "C.N."

Of course Tom sat down and answered this letter at once, much
reproaching himself for his past neglect.

With the vision of Charlie before his eyes, and with the sound of his
voice again in his ears, all his old resolutions and impulses returned
that morning.  He worked hard, and flung the trashy novel, over which he
had been wasting his time the day before, into the fire; he went off to
lectures with something like his old eagerness, and discharged his
duties in the wards with interest and thoroughness; he refused to allow
his mind to be distracted by the proceedings of his fellow-students, and
he resolved to spend that very evening at Mr Newcome's.

Tom Drift would probably have laughed at the idea that this sudden
change was due entirely to Charlie's letter.  To him it seemed like a
spontaneous reassertion of its natural self by his mind, and a matter
for such self-congratulation and satisfaction, that it at once covered
the multitude of past omissions.

Indeed, Tom felt very virtuous as he returned that afternoon to his
lodgings; and so felt no need to look away from self to Him who alone
can keep us from falling.

He read Charlie's letter over again, and smiled at the idea of _his_
getting up mathematics in his spare time.

"He's not the sort of fellow to stick to work of that sort," said Tom to
himself, secretly comparing his own remarkable powers of application
with those of his Randlebury friend.

Then he sat down, and more than ever admiring and wondering at his own
greediness for hard work, read till it was time to start for Mr
Newcome's.

It was a good long way, but being a fine evening, Tom determined to
walk.  He felt that after his work the fresh air would do him good, and
besides, as he was in plenty of time, he could indulge himself in that
very cheap and harmless luxury, an inspection of the shop windows as he
went along.  He therefore selected a longer and more crowded route than
perhaps he need have done, and certainly, as far as the shops went, was
rewarded for his pains.

However, Tom seemed to me to have as much interest in watching the
people who passed to and fro as in the shops.  He amused himself by
wondering where this one was going and what that one was doing.  With
his usual tendency, he chose to imagine they were all bent on mischief
or folly, and because they happened to be in a certain street, and
because in that street he had frequently heard some of his fellow-
students speak of a low theatre, he jumped to the conclusion that every
one he saw was bound for this place.  Something impelled him to go
himself and take an exterior survey of this mysterious and much-spoken-
of building.  He found it; and, as he expected, he found people
thronging in, though not in the numbers he had anticipated.  He stood
and watched them for some time, and wondered what they were going to
see.

He went up and read the playbill.  He read the name of the play, the
titles of its acts, and the names of its actors.  He wondered if the man
who just then drove up in a hansom was one of the heroes of the piece,
or whether he was one of the performers in the farce announced to follow
the play.  Still the people streamed in.  There was no one he knew, and
no one knew him.

"Strange," thought he, "there are so many places in London where one
could go and no one ever know it."

He wished he could see what the place was like inside; it must surely be
crowded by this time.

Thus he dawdled for some time; then with a sigh and an effort he tore
himself away and walked quickly on to the Newcomes' house.  Their
welcome was most cordial.

"We were afraid," said Mr Newcome, "you had quite deserted us.  Come
in, it is pleasant to see you.  We had a letter from Charlie only to-
day, telling us to see you did not overwork yourself, and to make you
come up here whether you would or not.  Of course we could hardly follow
such instructions literally."

Tom spent a pleasant evening with the two good people.

He always had found Mr Newcome a clever and very entertaining man--a
man whom one feels all the better for talking to, and who naturally sets
every guest in his house at ease.  They talked much about Charlie and
his prospects.  They even consulted Tom as to the wisdom of yielding to
the boy's desire for a military career, and Tom strongly supported the
idea.

Then Tom's own prospects were canvassed and highly approved of by both
Mr, and Mrs Newcome.

Tom already pictured himself settled down in his country practice,
enjoying himself, doing good to others, and laying by a comfortable
competency for future years.  On the whole, he felt, as he quitted the
hospitable roof of his genial friends, that he had rarely spent a more
pleasant or profitable evening.

People were thronging out of the theatre as he returned, and he could
not resist the desire to stand and watch them; for a little.  He
wondered what they had seen, and whether those he saw had waited for the
"farce," or was that still going on?--and he wondered if any people ever
went into a theatre at so late an hour as eleven.

Ah, Tom! he did not go in that night, or the next, but he was getting
himself ready for the first step.

Reader, do not mistake Tom's weakness and folly.  He was not trying to
persuade himself this place was a good one for him to enter; he was not
thoughtlessly going in to discover too late that he had better have
stayed out.  No, Tom--rightly or wrongly--had made up his own mind that
this theatre was a bad place, and _yet_ he had a desire to enter in!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

HOW TOM DRIFT BEGINS TO GO DOWNHILL.

Time went on, and Tom Drift advanced inch by inch nearer the brink.  He
slipped, not without many an effort to recover himself, many a pang of
self-reproach, many a vague hope of deliverance.

"Be good to Tom Drift!" was ever ringing in my ears.  But what could I
do?  He often neglected me for days.  All I could do was to watch and
tremble for what was coming.

You who are so ready to call Tom a fool, and hug yourselves that you
have more strength of character and resolution than he had, try to
realise what were his perils and what were his temptations at that time,
before you pass judgment.

The dulness of those lodgings in Grime Street was often almost
unbearable.  When his work was done, and Tom looked out of the window
and saw nothing but carts and cabs and tradesmen, and the dismal houses
opposite, what wonder if he sometimes felt miserable?  When he heard
nothing but pattering footsteps down the pavement, the rumble of wheels
and the street cries under his window, what wonder if he felt lonely and
friendless?  No footsteps stopped at _his_ door, no friendly face
lightened _his_ dull study, no cheery laughter brought music to _his_
life.  What wonder, I say, if he moped and felt discontented?

What wonder if his thoughts wandered to scenes and places that
contrasted forcibly with his dead-alive occupation?  What wonder if he
hankered after a "little excitement," to break the monotony of lectures,
hard reading, and stupid evenings?

"Ah," I hear you say, "there are plenty of things he might have done.
It was his own fault if he was dull in London.  I would have gone to the
museums, the libraries, the concerts, the parks, the river, the picture
galleries, and other harmless and delightful places of amusement.  Why,
I could not be dull in London if I tried.  Tom Drift was an idiot."

My dear friend, what a pity Tom Drift had not the advantage of your
acquaintance when he was in London!  But he had not.  He had no friends,
as I have said, except the Newcomes, whom he only visited occasionally,
and as a matter chiefly of duty, and his anxiety to keep right at first
had led him to reject and fight shy of friendships with his fellow-
students.  Doubtless it was his own fault to a large extent that he
allowed himself to get into this dull, dissatisfied condition.  If he
had had a healthy mind like you, friend, it would not have happened.
But instead of utterly scouting him as an idiot, rather thank God you
have been spared all his weaknesses and all his temptations.

Was Tom never to learn that there was a way--"The Way, the Truth, and
the Life"--better than any he had yet tried, which would lead him
straight through the tangled mazes of his London life?  Was he never to
discover that Friend, truer than all earthly friends, at Whose side he
might brave each trial and overcome each temptation?

Poor Tom! he walked in a way of his own? and trusted in no one better
than himself; and that was why he fell.

As I have said, he did not fall without an effort.  I have known him one
day buy a bad, trashy book, and the same evening, in a fit of
repentance--for God's Spirit wonderfully strives with men--take and burn
it to ashes in his grate.  But I have also known him to buy the same
book again the next day.  I have known him to walk a mile out of his way
to avoid a place of temptation; and yet, before his walk was done, find
himself, after all, under the glare of its lamps.  The moth hovers in
wide circles round the candle before it ventures its wings in the flame.
And so it was with Tom; but the catastrophe came at last.

One evening about three weeks before the time fixed for the Easter trip
with Charlie, Tom felt in tolerably dull.  He had been neglecting his
work during several days for novels of the lowest and most sensational
type.  Over these he had dawdled till his brain had become muddled with
their unreal incidents and impure suggestions, and now that they were
done he felt fit for nothing.  He could not settle down to work, he had
no friends to turn to, and so he put his hat on his head and sallied out
into the streets to seek there the variety he could not find indoors.

As usual, his steps led him to the low theatre about which he was so
curious, and of which he heard so much from his fellow-students.  It was
half-past seven, and people were beginning to crowd round the door,
waiting for it to open.  Tom, standing on the other side of the
pavement, watched them with a painful fascination.

"Shall I go for once?" he asked himself.  Then he strolled up to the
playbill and read it.

As he was doing so some one slapped him on the shoulder, and, turning
quickly round, he found himself face to face with his old acquaintance
Gus Burke and another youth.

Gus, who was still small of stature, though fully nineteen years of age,
was arrayed in the height of the fashion.  As Tom regarded him he felt
his own coat become more shabby and his hat older, and he wished he had
brought his dogskin gloves and cane.  Gus was smoking, too, a cigarette,
and very distinguished and gentlemanly Tom thought it looked.  He felt,
as he regarded his brilliant and unexpected acquaintance, that he was
rather glad those people who were standing at the theatre door should
see him accosted in so familiar a way by such a hero.  And Gus's friend
was no less imposing--more so, indeed, for he wore an eyeglass.

Tom was so astonished at this unexpected meeting that he had noticed all
this long before he found words to return his old schoolfellow's
salutation.

Gus, however, relieved him of his embarrassment.

"Tom Drift, upon my honour!  How are you, old horse, and how's your
mother?  Who'd have thought of running up against you like this?"

Tom tried to look as much at his ease as he could as he replied,--

"Why, Gus, old man, where _did_ you spring from?  I didn't know you were
in London."

"Ain't I, though!" replied Gus, tapping the end of his cigarette on his
cane.  "But what are you up to, Tom?--you're not going in here, are
you?" pointing over his shoulder to the theatre.

"Well, no," said Tom; "that is," added he, with as much of a swagger as
he could assume on the spur of the moment, "I had been half thinking of
just seeing what it was like.  Some of our fellows, you know, fancy the
place."

How suddenly and easily he was, under the eyes of these two "swells,"
casting off the few slender cords that still held him moored to the
shore.

"Oh, don't go in there," said Gus, with a look of disgust; "it's the
slowest place in London--nothing on but that old fool Shakespeare's
plays, or somebody's equally stupid.  You come along with us, Tom, we'll
take you to a place where you'll get your money's worth and no mistake.
Won't we, Jack?"

The youth appealed to as Jack answered with a most affected drawl, and
with an effort which appeared to cause him no little fatigue, "Wathah."

"Come along," said Gus, lighting a fresh cigarette.

Tom was uncomfortable.  He would not for worlds seem unwilling to go,
and yet he wished he could get out of it somehow.

"Very kind of you," he said, "I'd like it awfully; but I must get back
to do some work, you know, I've an exam coming on.  It's an awful
nuisance!"
