loath to do, were it not that the Prince urged upon me that it was of
advantage that I should make myself known."

"One would think, Master Cyril, that this honour which has suddenly
befallen you is regarded by you as a misfortune," Mrs. Dowsett said,
laughing. "Most youths would be overjoyed at such a change in their
fortune."

"It would be all very pleasant," Cyril said, "had I the income of my
father's estate at my back; but I feel that I shall be in a false
position, thus thrusting myself among men who have more guineas in
their pockets than I have pennies. However, it seems that the matter
has been taken out of my own hands, and that, as things have turned
out, so I must travel. Who would have thought, when John Wilkes
fetched me out last night to go to the fire, it would make an
alteration in my whole life, and that such a little thing as climbing
up a ladder and helping to get three girls out of a room full of
smoke--and John Wilkes did the most difficult part of the work--was
to change all my prospects?"

"There was a Providence in it, Cyril," Mrs. Dowsett said gently.
"Why, else, should you have gone up that ladder, when, to all
seeming, there was no one there. The maids were so frightened, John
says, that they would never have said a word about there being anyone
in that room, and the girls would have perished had you not gone up.
Now as, owing to that, everything has turned out according to your
wishes, it would be a sin not to take advantage of it, for you may be
sure that, as the way has thus been suddenly opened to you, so will
all other things follow in due course."

"Thank you, madam," Cyril said simply. "I had not thought of it in
that light, but assuredly you are right, and I will not suffer myself
to be daunted by the difficulties there may be in my way."

John Wilkes now came in and sat down to the meal. He was vastly
pleased when he heard of the good fortune that had befallen Cyril.

"It seems to me," Cyril said, "that I am but an impostor, and that at
least some share in the good luck ought to have fallen to you, John,
seeing that you carried them all down the ladder."

"I have carried heavier bales, many a time, much longer distances
than that--though I do not say that the woman was not a tidy weight,
for, indeed, she was; but I would have carried down ten of them for
the honour I had in being shaken by the hand by Prince Rupert, as
gallant a sailor as ever sailed a ship. No, no; what I did was all in
a day's work, and no more than lifting anchors and chains about in
the storehouse. As for honours, I want none of them. I am moored in a
snug port here, and would not leave Captain Dave if they would make a
Duke of me."

Nellie had said no word of congratulation to Cyril, but as they rose
from dinner, she said, in low tones,--

"You know I am pleased, and hope that you will have all the good
fortune you deserve."

Cyril set out at once to make a round of the shops where he worked.
The announcement that he must at once terminate his connection with
them, as he was going on board the Fleet, was everywhere received
with great regret.

"I would gladly pay double," one said, "rather than that you should
go, for, indeed, it has taken a heavy load off my shoulders, and I
know not how I shall get on in the future."

"I should think there would be no difficulty in getting some other
young clerk to do the work," Cyril said.

"Not so easy," the man replied. "I had tried one or two before, and
found they were more trouble than they were worth. There are not many
who write as neatly as you do, and you do as much in an hour as some
would take a day over. However, I wish you good luck, and if you
should come back, and take up the work again, or start as a scrivener
in the City, I can promise you that you shall have my books again,
and that among my friends I can find you as much work as you can get
through."

Something similar was said to him at each of the houses where he
called, and he felt much gratified at finding that his work had given
such satisfaction.

When he came in to supper, Cyril was conscious that something had
occurred of an unusual nature. Nellie's eyes were swollen with
crying; Mrs. Dowsett had also evidently been in tears; while Captain
Dave was walking up and down the room restlessly.

The servant was placing the things upon the table, and, just as they
were about to take their seats, the bell of the front door rang
loudly.

"See who it is, John," Captain Dave said. "Whoever it is seems to be
in a mighty hurry."

In a minute or two John returned, followed by a gentleman. The latter
paused at the door, and then said, bowing courteously, as he
advanced, to Mrs. Dowsett,--

"I must ask pardon for intruding on your meal, madam, but my business
is urgent. I am the Earl of Wisbech, and I have called to see Sir
Cyril Shenstone, to offer him my heartfelt thanks for the service he
has rendered me by saving the lives of my daughters."

All had risen to their feet as he entered, and there was a slight
exclamation of surprise from the Captain, his wife, and daughter, as
the Earl said "Sir Cyril Shenstone."

Cyril stepped forward.

"I am Cyril Shenstone, my Lord," he said, "and had the good fortune
to be able, with the assistance of my friend here, John Wilkes, to
rescue your daughters, though, at the time, indeed, I was altogether
ignorant of their rank. It was a fortunate occurrence, but I must
disclaim any merit in the action, for it was by mere accident that,
mounting to the window by a ladder, I saw them lying insensible on
the ground."

"Your modesty does you credit, sir," the Earl said, shaking him
warmly by the hand. "But such is not the opinion of Prince Rupert,
who described it to me as a very gallant action; and, moreover, he
said that it was you who first brought him the news that there were
females in the house, which he and others had supposed to be empty,
and that it was solely owing to you that the ladders were taken
round."

"Will you allow me, my Lord, to introduce to you Captain Dowsett, his
wife, and daughter, who have been to me the kindest of friends?"

"A kindness, my Lord," Captain Dave said earnestly, "that has been
repaid a thousandfold by this good youth, of whose rank we were
indeed ignorant until you named it. May I ask you to honour us by
joining in our meal?"

"That will I right gladly, sir," the Earl said, "for, in truth, I
have scarce broke my fast to-day. I was down at my place in Kent when
I was awoke this morning by one of my grooms, who had ridden down
with the news that my mansion in the Savoy had been burned, and that
my daughters had had a most narrow escape of their lives. Of course,
I mounted at once and rode to town, where I was happy in finding that
they had well-nigh recovered from the effects of their fright and the
smoke. Neither they nor the nurse who was with them could give me any
account of what had happened, save that they had, as they supposed,
become insensible from the smoke. When they recovered, they found
themselves in the Earl of Surrey's house, to which it seems they had
been carried. After inquiry, I learned that the Duke of Albemarle and
Prince Rupert had both been on the scene directing operations. I went
to the latter, with whom I have the honour of being well acquainted,
and he told me the whole story, saying that had it not been for Sir
Cyril Shenstone, my daughters would certainly have perished. He gave
credit, too, to Sir Cyril's companion, who, he said, carried them
down the ladder, and himself entered the burning room the last time,
to aid in bringing out the nurse, who was too heavy for the rescuer
of my daughters to lift. Save a cup of wine and a piece of bread,
that I took on my first arrival, I have not broken my fast to-day."

Then he seated himself on a chair that Cyril had placed for him
between Mrs. Dowsett and Nellie.

Captain Dave whispered to John Wilkes, who went out, and returned in
two or three minutes with three or four flasks of rare Spanish wine
which the Captain had brought back on his last voyage, and kept for
drinking on special occasions. The dame always kept an excellent
table, and although she made many apologies to the Earl, he assured
her that none were needed, for that he could have supped no better in
his own house.

"I hear," he said presently to Cyril, "that you are going out as a
Volunteer in Prince Rupert's ship. My son is also going with him, and
I hope, in a day or two, to introduce him to you. He is at present at
Cambridge, but, having set his mind on sailing with the Prince, I
have been fain to allow him to give up his studies. I heard from
Prince Rupert that you had recently been kidnapped and taken to
Holland. He gave me no particulars, nor did I ask them, being
desirous of hurrying off at once to express my gratitude to you. How
was it that such an adventure befell you--for it would hardly seem
likely that you could have provoked the enmity of persons capable of
such an outrage?"

"It was the result of his services to me, my Lord," Captain Dave
said. "Having been a sea-captain, I am but a poor hand at accounts;
but, having fallen into this business at the death of my father, it
seemed simple enough for me to get on without much book-learning. I
made but a bad shape at it; and when Master Shenstone, as he then
called himself, offered to keep my books for me, it seemed to me an
excellent mode of saving myself worry and trouble. However, when he
set himself to making up the accounts of my stock, he found that I
was nigh eight hundred pounds short; and, setting himself to watch,
discovered that my apprentices were in alliance with a band of
thieves, and were nightly robbing me. We caught them and two of the
thieves in the act. One of the latter was the receiver, and on his
premises the proceeds of a great number of robberies were found, and
there was no doubt that he was the chief of a notorious gang, called
the 'Black Gang,' which had for a long time infested the City and the
surrounding country. It was to prevent Sir Cyril from giving evidence
at the trial that he was kidnapped and sent away. He was placed in
the house of a diamond merchant, to whom the thieves were in the
habit of consigning jewels; and this might well have turned out fatal
to him, for to the same house came my elder apprentice and one of the
men captured with him--a notorious ruffian--who had been rescued from
the constables by a gang of their fellows, in open daylight, in the
City. These, doubtless, would have compassed his death had he not
happily seen them enter the house, and made his escape, taking
passage in a coaster bound for Dunkirk, from which place he took
another ship to England. Thus you see, my Lord, that I am indebted to
him for saving me from a further loss that might well have ruined
me."

He paused, and glanced at Nellie, who rose at once, saying to the
Earl,--

"I trust that your Lordship will excuse my mother and myself. My
father has more to tell you; at least, I should wish him to do so."

Then, taking her mother's hand, she curtsied deeply, and they left
the room together.

"Such, my Lord, as I have told you, is the service, so far as I knew
till this afternoon, Sir Cyril Shenstone has rendered me. That was no
small thing, but it is very little to what I know now that I am
indebted to him. After he went out I was speaking with my wife on
money matters, desiring much to be of assistance to him in the matter
of the expedition on which he is going. Suddenly my daughter burst
into tears and left the room. I naturally bade my wife follow her and
learn what ailed her. Then, with many sobs and tears, she told her
mother that we little knew how much we were indebted to him. She said
she had been a wicked girl, having permitted herself to be accosted
several times by a well-dressed gallant, who told her that he was the
Earl of Harwich, who had professed great love for her, and urged her
to marry him privately.

"He was about to speak to her one day when she was out under Master
Cyril's escort. The latter interfered, and there was well-nigh a
_fracas_ between them. Being afraid that some of the lookers-on
might know her, and bring the matter to our ears, she mentioned so
much to us, and, in consequence, we did not allow her to go out
afterwards, save in the company of her mother. Nevertheless, the man
continued to meet her, and, as he was unknown to her mother, passed
notes into her hand. To these she similarly replied, and at last
consented to fly with him. She did so at night, and was about to
enter a sedan chair in the lane near this house when they were
interrupted by the arrival of Master Shenstone and my friend John
Wilkes. The former, it seems, had his suspicions, and setting himself
to watch, had discovered that she was corresponding with this
man--whom he had found was not the personage he pretended to be, but
a disreputable hanger-on of the Court, one John Harvey--and had then
kept up an incessant watch, with the aid of John Wilkes, outside the
house at night, until he saw her come out and join the fellow with
two associates, when he followed her to the chair they had in
readiness for her.

"There was, she says, a terrible scene. Swords were drawn. John
Wilkes knocked down one of the men, and Master Shenstone ran John
Harvey through the shoulder. Appalled now at seeing how she had been
deceived, and how narrowly she had escaped destruction, she returned
with her rescuers to the house, and no word was ever said on the
subject until she spoke this afternoon. We had noticed that a great
change had come over her, and that she seemed to have lost all her
tastes for shows and finery, but little did we dream of the cause.
She said that she could not have kept the secret much longer in any
case, being utterly miserable at the thought of how she had degraded
herself and deceived us.

"It was a sad story to have to hear, my Lord, but we have fully
forgiven her, having, indeed, cause to thank God both for her
preservation and for the good that this seems to have wrought in her.
She had been a spoilt child, and, being well-favoured, her head had
been turned by flattery, and she indulged in all sorts of foolish
dreams. Now she is truly penitent for her folly. Had you not arrived,
my Lord, I should, when we had finished our supper, have told Master
Shenstone that I knew of this vast service he has rendered us--a
service to which the other was as nothing. That touched my pocket
only; this my only child's happiness. I have told you the story, my
Lord, by her consent, in order that you might know what sort of a
young fellow this gentleman who has rescued your daughter is. John, I
thank you for your share in this matter," and, with tears in his
eyes, he held out his hand to his faithful companion.

"I thank you deeply, Captain Dowsett, for having told me this story,"
the Earl said gravely. "It was a painful one to tell, and I feel sure
that the circumstance will, as you say, be of lasting benefit to your
daughter. It shows that her heart is a true and loyal one, or she
would not have had so painful a story told to a stranger, simply that
the true character of her preserver should be known. I need not say
that it has had the effect she desired of raising Sir Cyril Shenstone
highly in my esteem. Prince Rupert spoke of him very highly and told
me how he had been honourably supporting himself and his father,
until the death of the latter. Now I see that he possesses unusual
discretion and acuteness, as well as bravery. Now I will take my
leave, thanking you for the good entertainment that you have given
me. I am staying at the house of the Earl of Surrey, Sir Cyril, and I
hope that you will call to-morrow morning, in order that my daughters
may thank you in person."

Captain Dave and Cyril escorted the Earl to the door and then
returned to the chamber above.




CHAPTER XII

NEW FRIENDS


On arriving at the room upstairs, Captain Dave placed his hand on
Cyril's shoulder and said:

"How can I thank you, lad, for what you have done for us?"

"By saying nothing further about it, Captain Dave. I had hoped that
the matter would never have come to your ears, and yet I rejoice, for
her own sake, that Mistress Nellie has told you all. I thought that
she would do so some day, for I, too, have seen how much she has been
changed since then, and though it becomes me not to speak of one
older than myself, I think that the experience has been for her good,
and, above all, I am rejoiced to find that you have fully forgiven
her, for indeed I am sure that she has been grievously punished."

"Well, well, lad, it shall be as you say, for indeed I am but a poor
hand at talking, but believe me that I feel as grateful as if I could
express myself rightly, and that the Earl of Wisbech cannot feel one
whit more thankful to you for having saved the lives of his three
children than I do for your having saved my Nellie from the
consequences of her own folly. There is one thing that you must let
me do--it is but a small thing, but at present I have no other way of
showing what I feel: you must let me take upon myself, as if you had
been my son, the expenses of this outfit of yours. I was talking of
the matter, as you may have guessed by what I said to the Earl, when
Nellie burst into tears; and if I contemplated this when I knew only
you had saved me from ruin, how much more do I feel it now that you
have done this greater thing? I trust that you will not refuse me and
my wife this small opportunity of showing our gratitude. What say
you, John Wilkes?"

"I say, Captain Dave, that it is well spoken, and I am sure Master
Cyril will not refuse your offer."

"I will not, Captain Dave, providing that you let it be as a loan
that I may perhaps some day be enabled to repay you. I feel that it
would be churlish to refuse so kind an offer, and it will relieve me
of the one difficulty that troubled me when the prospects in all
other respects seemed so fair."

"That is right, lad, and you have taken a load off my mind. You have
not acted quite fairly by us in one respect, Master Cyril!"

"How is that?" Cyril asked in surprise.

"In not telling us that you were Sir Cyril Shenstone, and in letting
us put you up in an attic, and letting you go about as Nellie's
escort, as if you had been but an apprentice."

Cyril laughed.

"I said that my father was Sir Aubrey Shenstone, though I own that I
did not say so until I had been here some time; but the fact that he
was a Baronet and not a Knight made little difference. It was a
friendless lad whom you took in and gave shelter to, Captain Dave,
and--it mattered not whether he was plain Cyril or Sir Cyril. I had
certainly no thought of taking my title again until I entered a
foreign army, and indeed it would have been a disservice to me here
in London. I should have cut but a poor figure asking for work and
calling myself Sir Cyril Shenstone. I should have had to enter into
all sorts of explanations before anyone would have believed me, and I
don't think that, even with you, I should have been so comfortable as
I have been."

"Well, at any rate, no harm has been done," Captain Dave said; "but I
think you might have told me."

"If I had, Captain Dave, you would assuredly have told your wife and
Mistress Nellie; and it was much more pleasant for me that things
should be as they were."

"Well, perhaps you were right, lad. And I own that I might not have
let you work at my books, and worry over that robbery, had I known
that you were of a station above me."

"That you could never have known," Cyril said warmly. "We have been
poor ever since I can remember. I owed my education to the kindness
of friends of my mother, and in no way has my station been equal to
that of a London trader like yourself. As to the title, it was but a
matter of birth, and went but ill with an empty purse and a shabby
doublet. In the future it may be useful, but until now, it has been
naught, and indeed worse than naught, to me."

The next morning when Cyril went into the parlour he found that
Nellie was busy assisting the maid to lay the table. When the latter
had left the room, the girl went up to Cyril and took his hand.

"I have never thanked you yet," she said. "I could not bring myself
to speak of it, but now that I have told them I can do so. Ever since
that dreadful night I have prayed for you, morning and evening, and
thanked God for sending you to my rescue. What a wicked girl you must
have thought me--and with reason! But you could not think of me worse
than I thought of myself. Now that my father and mother have forgiven
me I shall be different altogether. I had before made up my mind to
tell them. Still, it did not seem to me that I should ever be happy
again. But now that I have had the courage to speak out, and they
have been so good to me, a great weight is lifted off my mind, and I
mean to learn to be a good housewife like my mother, and to try to be
worthy, some day, of an honest man's love."

"I am sure you will be," Cyril said warmly. "And so, Mistress Nellie,
it has all turned out for the best, though it did not seem so at one
time."

At this moment Captain Dave came in. "I am glad to see you two
talking together as of old," he said. "We had thought that there must
be some quarrel between you, for you had given up rating him, Nellie.
Give her a kiss, Cyril; she is a good lass, though she has been a
foolish one. Nay, Nellie, do not offer him your cheek--it is the
fashion to do that to every idle acquaintance. Kiss him heartily, as
if you loved him. That is right, lass. Now let us to breakfast. Where
is your mother? She is late."

"I told her that I would see after the breakfast in future, father,
and I have begun this morning--partly because it is my duty to take
the work off her hands, and partly because I wanted a private talk
with Sir Cyril."

"I won't be called Sir Cyril under this roof," the lad said,
laughing. "And I warn you that if anyone calls me so I will not
answer. I have always been Cyril with you all, and I intend to remain
so to the end, and you must remember that it is but a few months that
I have had the right to the title, and was never addressed by it
until by Prince Rupert. I was for the moment well nigh as much
surprised as you were last night."

An hour later Cyril again donned his best suit, and started to pay
his visit to the Earl. Had he not seen him over-night, he would have
felt very uncomfortable at the thought of the visit; but he had found
him so pleasant and friendly, and so entirely free from any air of
pride or condescension, that it seemed as if he were going to meet a
friend. He was particularly struck with the manner in which he had
placed Captain Dave and his family at their ease, and got them to
talk as freely and naturally with him as if he had been an
acquaintance of long standing. It seemed strange to him to give his
name as Sir Cyril Shenstone to the lackeys at the door, and he almost
expected to see an expression of amusement on their faces. They had,
however, evidently received instructions respecting him, for he was
without question at once ushered into the room in which the Earl of
Wisbech and his daughters were sitting.

The Earl shook him warmly by the hand, and then, turning to his
daughters, said,--

"This is the gentleman to whom you owe your lives, girls. Sir Cyril,
these are my daughters--Lady Dorothy, Lady Bertha, and Lady Beatrice.
It seems somewhat strange to have to introduce you, who have saved
their lives, to them; but you have the advantage of them, for you
have seen them before, but they have not until now seen your face."

Each of the girls as she was named made a deep curtsey, and then
presented her cheek to be kissed, as was the custom of the times.

"They are somewhat tongue-tied," the Earl said, smiling, as the
eldest of the three cast an appealing glance to him, "and have begged
me to thank you in their names, which I do with all my heart, and beg
you to believe that their gratitude is none the less deep because
they have no words to express it. They generally have plenty to say,
I can assure you, and will find their tongues when you are a little
better acquainted."

"I am most happy to have been of service to you, ladies," Cyril said,
bowing deeply to them. "I can hardly say that I have the advantage
your father speaks of, for in truth the smoke was so thick, and my
eyes smarted so with it, that I could scarce see your faces."

"Their attire, too, in no way helped you," the Earl said, with a
laugh, "for, as I hear, their costume was of the slightest. I believe
that Dorothy's chief concern is that she did not have time to attire
herself in a more becoming toilette before the smoke overpowered
her."

"Now, father," the girl protested, with a pretty colour in her
cheeks, "you know I have never said anything of the sort, though I
did say that I wished I had thrown a cloak round me. It is not
pleasant, whatever you may think, to know that one was handed down a
ladder in one's nightdress."

"I don't care about that a bit," Beatrice said; "but you did not say,
father, that it was a young gentleman, no older than Sydney, who
found us and carried us out. I had expected to see a great big man."

"I don't think I said anything about his age, Beatrice, but simply
told you that I had found out that it was Sir Cyril Shenstone that
had saved you."

"Is the nurse recovering, my Lord?"

"She is still in bed, and the doctor says she will be some time
before she quite recovers from the fright and shock. They were all
sleeping in the storey above. It was Dorothy who first woke, and,
after waking her sisters, ran into the nurse's room, which was next
