search of the steamer, and Maury was requested to "furnish them with
instructions."

It will be observed here that the gentleman thus appealed to was at the
time engaged in his study at Washington, utterly ignorant of all that
had occurred within the previous few weeks on the stormy Atlantic,
except through the reports brought thence by ships.  These reports
furnished him with meagre data to proceed upon--simply that a crippled
steamer had been seen in a certain latitude and longitude on a
particular day.

But this information was sufficient for the practical man of science.
Proceeding upon the supposition that the steamer had been completely
disabled, he drew two lines on the chart to define the limits of her
drift.  This his previous knowledge of the flow of the Gulf Stream at
all seasons of the year enabled him to do.  Between these two lines, he
said, the steamer, if she could neither steam nor sail after the gale,
had drifted.  And that she could neither steam nor sail he had good
reason to suppose from the account of her brought in by the vessels
above mentioned.  A certain point was marked on the chart as being the
spot where the searching vessels might expect to fall in with the wreck.

While these preparations were being made, two ships fell in with the
wreck and relieved the crew.  This, however, was not known at the time
by the anxious friends on shore.  The cutters sailed on their mission,
and reached the indicated spot in the sea, where, of course, their
assistance was now unnecessary.  But when the vessels that had relieved
the crew of the wreck arrived in harbour and reported where the wreck
had been last seen, it was found to be within a few miles of the spot
indicated by Maury!

Thus, upon very slight data, a man of science and observation was
enabled, while seated in his study, to follow the drift of a wrecked
vessel over the pathless deep, and to indicate to a rescue party, not
only the exact course they ought to steer, but the precise spot where
the wreck should be found.

The waves of the ocean are by no means so high as people imagine.  Their
appearance in the Atlantic or Pacific, when raised by a violent storm,
is indeed very awful, and men have come to speak of them as being
"mountains of water."  But their sublime aspect and their tumultuous
state of agitation have contributed much to deceive superficial
observers as to their real height.  Scientific men have measured the
height of the waves.

Not many years ago a vessel, while crossing the Atlantic, was overtaken
by a violent storm.  The sea rose in its might; the good ship reeled
under the combined influence of wind and waves.  While the majority of
the passengers sought refuge from the driving spray in the cabin, one
eccentric old gentleman was seen skipping about the deck with unwonted
activity--now on the bulwarks, now on the quarter-deck, and anon in the
rigging; utterly regardless of the drenching sea and the howling wind,
and seeming as though he were a species of human stormy petrel.  This
was the celebrated Dr Scoresby; a man who had spent his youth and
manhood in the whale-fishing; who, late in life, entered the Church,
and, until the day of his death, took a special delight in directing the
attention of sailors to Him whose word stilled the tempest and bade the
angry waves be calm.  Being an enthusiast in scientific research, Dr
Scoresby was availing himself of the opportunity afforded by this storm
to _measure the waves_!  Others have made similar measurements, and the
result goes to prove that waves seldom or never rise much more than ten
feet above the sea-level.  The corresponding depression sinks to the
same depth, thus giving the entire height of the largest waves an
elevation of somewhere between twenty and thirty feet.  When it is
considered that sometimes the waves of the sea (especially those off the
Cape of Good Hope) are so broad that only a few of them occupy the space
of a mile, and that they travel at the rate of about forty miles an
hour, we may have some slight idea of the grandeur as well as the power
of the ocean billows.  The forms represented in our illustration are
only wavelets on the backs of these monster waves.

Waves travel at a rate which increases in proportion to their size and
the depth of water in which they are formed.  Every one knows that on
most lakes they are comparatively small and harmless.  In some lakes,
however, such as Lake Superior in North America, which is upwards of
three hundred miles long, the waves are so formidable as to resemble
those of the ocean, and they are capable of producing tremendous
effects.  But the waves of the sea, when roused to their greatest
height, and travelling at their greatest speed, are terrible to behold.
Their force is absolutely irresistible.  Sometimes waves of more than
usually gigantic proportions arise, and, after careering over the broad
sea in unimpeded majesty, fall with crushing violence on some doomed
shore.  They rush onward, pass the usual barriers of the sea-beach, and
do not retire until horrible devastation has been carried far into the
land.

Maury gives the following anecdote from the notes of a Russian officer,
which shows the awful power of such waves.

"On the 23rd of December 1854, at 9:45 a.m., the shocks of an earthquake
were felt on board the Russian frigate _Diana_, as she lay at anchor in
the harbour of Simoda, not far from Jeddo in Japan.  In fifteen minutes
afterwards (10 o'clock) a large wave was observed rolling into the
harbour, and the water on the beach to be rapidly rising.  The town, as
seen from the frigate, appeared to be sinking.  This wave was followed
by another; and when the two receded, which was at fifteen minutes past
ten, there was not a house, save an unfinished temple, left standing.
These waves continued to come and go until half-past two p.m., during
which time the frigate was thrown on her beam-ends five times; a piece
of her keel, eighty-one feet long, was torn off; holes were knocked in
her by striking on the bottom, and she was reduced to a wreck.  In the
course of five minutes the water in the harbour fell, it is said, from
twenty-three to three feet, and the anchors of the ship were laid bare.
There was a great loss of life; many houses were washed into the sea,
and many junks carried up--one two miles inland--and dashed to pieces on
the shore.  The day was beautifully fine, and no warning was given of
the approaching convulsion: the sea was perfectly smooth when its
surface was broken by the first wave."

Monster waves of this kind occur at regular intervals, among the islands
of the Pacific, once and sometimes twice in the year; and this without
any additional influence of an earthquake, at least in the immediate
neighbourhood of the islands, though it is quite possible that
earthquakes in some remote part of the world may have something to do
with these waves.

One such wave is described as breaking on one of these islands with
tremendous violence.  It appeared at first like a dark line, or low
cloud, or fog-bank, on the sea-ward horizon.  The day was fine though
cloudy, and a gentle breeze was blowing; but the sea was not rougher, or
the breaker on the coral reef that encircled the island higher, than
usual.  It was supposed to be an approaching thunder-storm; but the line
gradually drew nearer without spreading upon the sky, as would have been
the case had it been a thunder-cloud.  Still nearer it came, and soon
those on shore observed that it was moving swiftly towards the island;
but there was no sound until it reached the smaller islands out at sea.
As it passed these, a cloud of white foam encircled each and burst high
into the air.  This appearance was soon followed by a loud roar, and it
became evident that the object was an enormous wave.  When it approached
the outer reef, its awful magnitude became more evident.  It burst
completely over the reef at all points, with a deep, continuous roar;
yet, although part of its force was thus broken, on it came, as if with
renewed might, and finally fell upon the beach with a crash that seemed
to shake the solid earth; then, rushing impetuously up into the woods,
it levelled the smaller trees and bushes in its headlong course; and, on
retiring, left a scene of wreck and desolation that is quite
indescribable.

"Storm-waves," as those unusually gigantic billows are called, are said
to be the result of the removal of atmospheric pressure in certain parts
of the ocean over which a storm is raging.  This removal of pressure
allows the portion thus relieved to be forced up high above the ordinary
sea-level by those other parts that are not so relieved.

The devastating effects of these storm-waves is still further
illustrated by the total destruction of Coringa, on the Coromandel
Coast, in 1789.  During a hurricane, in December of that year, at the
moment when a high tide was at its highest point, and the north-west
wind was blowing with fury, accumulating the waters at the head of the
bay, three monstrous waves came rolling in from the sea upon the devoted
town, following each other at a short distance.  The horror-stricken
inhabitants had scarcely time to note the fact of their approach, when
the first wave, sweeping everything in its passage, carried several feet
of water into the town.  The second swept still further in its
destructive course, inundating all the low country.  The third, rushing
onward in irresistible fury, overwhelmed everything, submerging the town
and twenty thousand of its inhabitants.  Vessels at anchor at the mouth
of the river were carried inland; and the sea on retiring left heaps of
sand and mud, which rendered it a hopeless task either to search for the
dead or for buried property.

We have spoken of waves "travelling" at such and such a rate, but they
do not in reality travel at all.  It is the undulation, or, so to speak,
the _motion_ of a wave, that travels; in the same manner that a wave
passes from one end of a carpet to the other end when it is shaken.  The
water remains stationary, excepting the spray and foam on the surface,
and is only possessed of a rising and sinking motion.  This undulatory
motion, or impulse, is transmitted from each particle of water to its
neighbouring particle, until it reaches the last drop of water on the
shore.  But when a wave reaches shallow water it has no longer room to
sink to its proper depth; hence the water composing it acquires _actual_
motion, and rushes to the land with more or less of the tremendous
violence that has been already described.

Waves are caused by wind, which first ruffles the surface of the sea
into ripples, and then, acting with ever-increasing power on the little
surfaces thus raised, blows _them_ up into waves, and finally into great
billows.  Sometimes, however, winds burst upon the calm ocean with such
sudden violence that for a time the waves cannot lift their heads.  The
instant they do so, they are cast down and scattered in foam, and the
ocean in a few minutes presents the appearance of a cauldron of boiling
milk!  Such squalls are extremely dangerous to mariners, and vessels
exposed to them are often thrown on their beam-ends, even though all
sail has been previously taken in.  Generally speaking, however, the
immediate effect of wind passing either lightly or furiously over the
sea is to raise its surface into waves.  But these waves, however large
they may be, do not affect the waters of the ocean more than a few yards
below its surface.  The water below their influence is comparatively
calm, being affected only by ocean currents.

The tides of the sea--as the two great flowings and ebbings of the water
every twenty-four hours are called--are caused principally by the
attractive influence of the moon, which, to a small extent, lifts the
waters of the ocean towards it, as it passes over them, and thus causes
a high wave.  This wave, or current, when it swells up on the land,
forms high tide.  When the moon's influence has completely passed away,
it is low tide.  The moon raises this wave wherever it passes; not only
in the ocean directly under it, but, strange to say, it causes a similar
wave on the opposite side of the globe.  Thus there are two waves always
following the moon, and hence the two high tides in the twenty-four
hours.  This second wave has been accounted for in the following way:
The cohesion of particles of water is easily overcome.  The moon, in
passing over the sea, separates the particles by her attractive power,
and draws the surface of the sea away from the solid globe.  But the
moon also attracts the earth itself, and draws it away from the water on
its opposite side thus causing the high wave there, as represented in
the diagram, _figure 1_.

The sun has also a slight influence on the tides, but not to such an
extent as the moon.  When the two luminaries exert their combined
influence in the same direction, they produce the phenomenon of a very
high or spring-tide, as in _figure 2_, where the tide at _a_ and _b_ has
risen extremely high, while at _c_ and _d_ it has fallen correspondingly
low.  When they act in opposition to each other, as at the moon's
quarter, there occurs a very low or neap-tide.  In _figure 3_ the moon
has raised high tide at _a_ and _b_, but the sun has counteracted its
influence to some extent at _c_ and _d_, thus producing neap-tides,
which neither rise so high nor fall so low as do other tides.  Tides
attain various elevations in different parts of the world, partly owing
to local influences.  In the Bristol Channel the tide rises to nearly
sixty feet, while in the Mediterranean it is extremely small, owing to
the landlocked nature of that sea preventing the tidal wave from having
its full effect.  Up some gulfs and estuaries the tides sweep with the
violence of a torrent, and any one caught by them on the shore would be
overtaken and drowned before he could gain the dry land.  In the open
sea they rise and fall to an elevation of little more than three or four
feet.

The value of the tides is unspeakable.  They sweep from our shores
pollution of every kind, purify our rivers and estuaries, and are
productive of freshness and health all round the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The gentlemen here referred to are agreed as to the fact of systematic
arrangement of currents, though they differ in regard to some of the
causes thereof and other matters.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE GULF STREAM--ITS NATURE--CAUSE--ILLUSTRATION--EFFECT OF SMALL POWERS
UNITED--ADVENTURES OF A PARTICLE OF WATER--EFFECT OF GULF STREAM ON
CLIMATE--ITS COURSE--INFLUENCE ON NAVIGATION--SARGASSO SEA--SCIENTIFIC
EFFORTS OF PRESENT DAY--WIND AND CURRENT CHARTS--EFFECTS ON COMMERCE--
CAUSE OF STORMS--INFLUENCE OF GULF STREAM ON MARINE ANIMALS.

Of the varied motions of the sea, the most important, perhaps, as well
as the most wonderful, is the Gulf Stream.  This mighty current has been
likened by Maury to a "river in the ocean.  In the severest droughts it
never fails, and in the mightiest floods it never overflows.  Its banks
and its bottom are of cold water, while its current is of warm.  It
takes its rise in the Gulf of Mexico (hence its name), and empties into
the arctic seas.  Its current is more rapid than the Mississippi or the
Amazon, and its volume more than a thousand times greater."

This great current is of the most beautiful indigo-blue colour as far
out as the Carolina coasts; and its waters are so distinctly separated
from those of the sea, that the line of demarcation may be traced by the
eye.  Its influences on the currents of the sea, and on the climates and
the navigation of the world, are so great and important, that we think a
somewhat particular account of it cannot fail to interest the reader.

The waters of the Gulf Stream are salter than those of the sea; which
fact accounts for its deeper blue colour, it being well known that salt
has the effect of intensifying the blue of deep water.

The cause of the Gulf Stream has long been a subject of conjecture and
dispute among philosophers.  Some have maintained that the Mississippi
river caused it; but this theory is upset by the fact that the stream is
salt--salter even than the sea--while the river is fresh.  Besides, the
volume of water emptied into the Gulf of Mexico by that river is not
equal to the _three thousandth part_ of that which issues from it in the
form of the Gulf Stream.

Scientific men are still disagreed on this point.  They all, indeed,
seem to hold the opinion that _difference of temperature_ has to do with
the origination of the stream; but while some, such as Captain Maury,
hold that this is the _chief_ cause, others, such as Professor Thompson,
believe the trade-winds to be the most important agent in the matter.
We venture to incline to the opinion that not only the Gulf Stream, but
_all_ the constant currents of the sea are due chiefly to _difference of
temperature and saltness_.  These conditions alter the specific gravity
of the waters of the ocean in some places more than in others; hence the
equilibrium is destroyed, and currents commence to flow as a natural
result, seeking to restore that equilibrium.  But as the disturbing
agents are always at work, so the currents are of necessity constant.
Other currents there are in the sea, but they are the result of winds
and various local causes; they are therefore temporary and partial,
while the _great_ currents of the ocean are permanent, and are,
comparatively, little affected by the winds.  Every one knows that when
a pot is put on the fire to boil, the water contained in it, as soon as
it begins to get heated, commences to circulate.  The heated water rises
to the top, the cold descends.  When heated more than that which has
ascended, it in turn rises to the surface; and so there is a regular
current established in the pot, which continues to flow as long as the
heating process goes on.  This same principle of temperature, then, is
one of the causes of the Gulf Stream.  The torrid zone is the furnace
where the waters of the ocean are heated.  But in this process of
heating, evaporation goes on to a large extent; hence the waters become
salter than those elsewhere.  Here is another agent called into action.
The hot salt waters of the torrid zone at once rush off to distribute
their superabundant caloric and salt to the seas of the frigid zones;
where the ice around the poles has kept the waters cold, and the absence
of great heat, and, to a large extent, of evaporation, has kept them
comparatively fresh.  In fact, the waters of the sea require to be
stirred, because numerous agents are at work day and night, from pole to
pole, altering their specific gravity and deranging, so to speak, the
mixture.  This stirring is secured by the unalterable laws which the
Creator has fixed for the carrying on of the processes of nature.  The
currents of the sea may be said to be the result of this process of
stirring its waters.

It is curious and interesting to note the apparently insignificant
instruments which God has seen fit to use in the carrying out of his
plans.  The smallest coral insect that builds its little cell in the
southern seas exercises an influence in the production of the Gulf
Stream.  It has been said, with some degree of truth, that one such
insect is capable of setting in motion the entire ocean!  The coral
insect has, in common with many other marine creatures, been gifted with
the power of extracting from sea water the lime which it contains, in
order to build its cell.  The lime thus extracted leaves a minute
particle of water necessarily destitute of that substance.  Before that
particle can be restored to its original condition of equality, every
other particle of water in the ocean must part with a share of its
superabundant lime!  The thing _must_ be done.  That bereaved particle
cannot rest without its lime.  It forthwith commences to travel for the
purpose of laying its brother-particles under contribution; and it
travels far and wide--round and round the world.  Myriads upon myriads
of coral insects are perpetually engaged in thus robbing the sea water
of its lime; shells are formed in a similar manner: so that our particle
soon finds itself in company with innumerable other particles of water
in a like destitute condition.  It rises to the surface.  Here the sun,
as if to compensate it for the loss of its lime, bestows upon it an
unusual amount of heat; and the surrounding particles, not to be
outdone, make it almost unlimited presents of salt.  Full to overflow
with the gifts of its new companions, it hastens to bestow of its
superabundance on less favoured particles; joins the great army of the
ocean's currents; enters, perchance, the Gulf of Mexico, where it is
turned back, and hastens along with the Gulf Stream, with all its
natural warmth of character, to ameliorate the climate of Great Britain
and the western shores of Europe.  Having accomplished this benevolent
work, it passes on, with some of its heat and vigour still remaining, to
the arctic seas--where it is finally robbed of all its heat and nearly
all its salt, and frozen into an icicle--there for many a long day to
exert a chilling influence on the waters and the atmosphere around it.
Being melted at last by the hot sun of the short arctic summer, it
hurries back with the cold currents of the north to the genial regions
of the equator, in search of its lost caloric and salt, taking in a full
cargo of lime, etcetera, as it passes the mouths of rivers.  Arrived at
its old starting-point, our wanderer receives once more heat and salt to
the full, parts with its lime, and at once hastens off on a new voyage
of usefulness--to give out of its superabundance in exchange for the
superabundance of others: thus quietly teaching man the lesson that the
true principles of commerce were carried out in the depths of the sea
ages before he discovered them and carried them into practice on its
surface.

Perchance another fate awaits this adventurous particle of water.
Mayhap, before it reaches the cold regions of the north, it is
evaporated into the clouds, and descends upon the earth in fresh and
refreshing rain or dew.  Having fertilised the fields, it flows back to
its parent ocean, laden with a superabundant cargo of earthy substances,
which it soon parts with in exchange for salt.  And thus on it goes,
round and round the world; down in the ocean's depths, up in the cloudy
sky, deep in the springs of earth; ever moving, ever active, never lost,
and always fulfilling the end for which it was created.

All ocean currents are composed of water in one or other of the
conditions just described;--the hot and salt waters of the equator,
flowing north to be cooled and freshened; the cold and fresh waters of
the north, flowing south to be heated and salted.  The Gulf Stream is
simply the stream of equatorial hot water that flows towards the pole
through the Atlantic.  Its fountain-head is the region of the equator,
_not_ the Gulf of Mexico; but it is carried, by the conformation of the
land, into that gulf and deflected by it, and from it out into the ocean
in the direction of Europe.  This stream in the Atlantic is well
defined, owing to the comparative narrowness of that sea.

The Gulf Stream, then, is like a river of oil in the ocean,--it
preserves its distinctive character for more than three thousand miles.
It flows towards the polar regions, and the waters of those regions flow
in counter-currents towards the equator, because of the fixed law that
water must seek its equilibrium as well as its level, thus keeping up a
continuous circulation of the hot waters towards the north and the cold
towards the south.  There are similar currents in the Pacific, but they
are neither so large nor so regular as those of the Atlantic, owing to
the wide formation of the basin of the former sea.

The effect of the Gulf Stream on climate is very great.  The dreary
fur-trading establishment of York Factory, on the shores of Hudson's
Bay, is surrounded by a climate of the most rigorous character--the
thermometer seldom rising up so high as zero during many months, and
often ranging down so low as 50 degrees below zero, sometimes even
lower, while the winter is seven or eight months long: the lakes and
rivers are covered with ice upwards of six feet thick, and the salt sea
itself is frozen.  Yet this region lies in the same latitude with
Scotland, York Factory being on the parallel of 57 degrees north, which
passes close to Aberdeen!  The difference in temperature between the two
places is owing very much, if not entirely, to the influence of the Gulf
Stream.

Starting from its caldron in the Gulf of Mexico, it carries a freight of
caloric towards the North Atlantic.  Owing partly to the diurnal motion
of the Earth on its axis, its flow trends towards the east; hence its
warm waters embrace our favoured coasts, and ameliorate our climate,
while the eastern sea-board of North America is left, in winter, to the
rigour of unmitigated frost.

But besides the powerful influence of this current on climate, it exerts
a very considerable influence on navigation.  In former times, when men
regarded the ocean as a great watery waste--utterly ignorant of the
exquisite order and harmonious action of all the varied substances and
conditions which prevail in the sea, just as much as on the land--they
committed themselves to the deep as to a blind chance, and took the
storms and calms they encountered as their inevitable fate, which they
had no means of evading.  Ascertaining, as well as they could from the
imperfect charts of those days, the position of their desired haven,
they steered straight for it through fair weather and foul, regarding
interruptions and delays as mere unavoidable matters of course.

But when men began to study the causes and effects of the operation of
those elements in the midst of which they dwelt, they soon perceived
that order reigned where before they had imagined that confusion
revelled; and that, by adapting their operations to the ascertained laws
of Providence, they could, even upon the seemingly unstable sea, avoid
dangers and delays of many kinds, and oftentimes place themselves in
highly favourable circumstances.  Navigators no longer dash recklessly
into the Gulf Stream, and try to stem its tide, as they did of yore;
but, as circumstances require, they either take advantage of the
counter-currents which skirt along it, or avail themselves of the warm
climate which it creates even in the midst of winter.  There is a
certain spot in the Atlantic known by the name of the Sargasso Sea,
which is neither more nor less than a huge ocean-eddy, in which immense
quantities of sea-weed collect.  The weed floats so thickly on the
surface as to give to the sea the appearance of solid land; and ships
find extreme difficulty in getting through this region, which is
rendered still further unnavigable by the prevalence of long-continued
calms.  This Sargasso Sea is of considerable extent, and lies off the
west coast of Africa, a little to the north of the Cape Verd Islands.

In former years, ships used to get entangled in this weedy region for
weeks together, unable to proceed on their voyage.  The great Columbus
fell in with it on his voyage to America, and his followers, thinking
they had reached the end of the world, were filled with consternation.
This Sargasso Sea lies in the same spot at the present day, but men now
know its extent and position.  Instead of steering straight for port,
they proceed a considerable distance out of their way, and, by avoiding
this calm region, accomplish their voyages with much greater speed.

The ocean currents have been, by repeated and long-continued
investigation, ascertained and mapped out; so also have the currents of
the atmosphere, so that, now-a-days, by taking advantage of some of
these currents and avoiding others, voyages are performed, not only in
much shorter time, but with much greater precision and certainty.  As it
was with ocean currents long ago, so was it with atmospheric.
Navigators merely put to sea, steered as near as possible on their
direct course, and took advantage of such winds as chanced to blow.  Now
they know whither to steer in order to meet with such winds and currents
as will convey them in the shortest space of time to the end of their
voyage.  The knowledge necessary to this has not been gained by the
gigantic effort of one mind, nor by the accidental collocation of the
results of the investigations of many ordinary minds.  But a few
master-minds have succeeded in gathering within their own grasp the
myriad facts collected by thousands of naval men, of all countries, in
their various voyages; and, by a careful comparison and philosophical
investigation of these facts, they have ascertained and systematised
truths which were before unknown, and have constructed wind and current
charts, by the use of which voyages are wonderfully shortened,
