thanks to Du Guesclin and the Prince himself, is already made, and
though clouded for a time, with the grace of our Lady and of St.
Eustace, I will yet clear it; so, Arthur, be not downcast for me, but
think what Father Cyril hath taught concerning evil report and good
report.  But tell me, how came you hither?"

"She--that is, the person that warned me--let me down from the window
upon the head of the great gurgoyle, and from thence I scrambled down
by the vines on the wall, ran through the court without being seen by
the Squires and grooms, and found my way to the bridge, where happily I
met John Ingram, who brought me hither."

"She?" repeated Gaston, with a sly look in his black eyes.

"I have said too much," said Arthur, colouring deeply; "I pray you to
forget."

"Forget!" proceeded the Squire, "that is sooner said than done.  We
shall rack our brains to guess what lady can--"

"Hush, Gaston," said Eustace, as his nephew looked at him imploringly,
"tempt not the boy.  And you, Arthur, must return to the palace
immediately."

"Oh, uncle!" said the boy, "may I not stay with you this one night? It
is eight weary months since I have ever seen you, save by peering down
through the tall balusters of the Princess's balcony, when the Knights
were going to dinner in the hall, and I hoped you would keep me with
you at least one night.  See how late and dark it is--the Castle gates
will be closed by this time."

"It does indeed rejoice my heart to have you beside me, fair nephew,"
said Eustace, "and yet I know not how to favour such an escape as this,
even for such a cause."

"I never broke out of bounds before," said Arthur, "and never will,
though Lord Harry and Lord Thomas Holland have more than once asked me
to join them."

"Then," said the Knight, "since it is, as you say, too late to rouse
the palace, I will take you back in my hand to-morrow morn, see the
master of the Damoiseaux, and pray him to excuse you for coming to see
me ere my departure."

"Yes, that will be all well," said Arthur; "I could, to be sure, find
the corner where Lord Harry has loosened the stones, and get in by the
pages' window, ere old Master Michael is awake in the morn; but I think
such doings are more like those of a fox than of a brave boy, and
though I should be well punished, I will walk in at the door, and hold
up my head boldly."

"Shall you be punished then?" said Gaston.  "Is your old master of the
Damoiseaux very severe?"

"He has not been so hitherto with me," said Arthur: "he scolds me for
little, save what you too are displeased with, Master d'Aubricour,
because I cannot bring my mouth to speak your language in your own
fashion.  It is Lord Harry that chiefly falls under his displeasure.
But punished now I shall assuredly be, unless Uncle Eustace can work
wonders."

"I will see what may be done, Arthur," said Eustace.  "And now, have
you supped?"

The evening passed off very happily to the little page, who, quite
reassured by his uncle's consolations, only thought of the delight of
being with one who seemed to supply to him the place at once of an
elder brother and of a father.

Early the next morning, Eustace walked with him to the palace.  Just
before he reached it, he made this inquiry, "Arthur, do you often see
the Lady Agnes de Clarenham?"

"Oh, yes, I am with her almost every afternoon.  She hears me read, she
helps me with my French words, and teaches me courtly manners. I am her
own page and servant--but, here we are.  This is the door that leads to
the room of Master Michael de Sancy, the master of the Damoiseaux."




CHAPTER XII


The next few days were spent in taking precautions against the danger
intimated by the mysterious message.  Gaston gathered together a few of
the ancient Lances of Lynwood, who were glad to enlist under the blue
crosslet, and these, with some men-at-arms, who had recently come to
Bordeaux to seek employment, formed a body with whom Eustace trusted to
be able to keep the disaffected in check.  Through vineyards and over
gently swelling hills did their course lead them, till, on the evening
of the second day's journey, the view to the south was shut in by more
lofty and bolder peaks, rising gradually towards the Pyrenees, and on
the summit of a rock overhanging a small rapid stream appeared the tall
and massive towers of a Castle, surmounted by the broad red cross of
St. George, and which their guide pronounced to be the Chateau Norbelle.

"A noble eyrie!" said Eustace, looking up and measuring it with his
eye.  "Too noble to be sacrificed to the snaring of one poor Knight."

"Shame that such a knightly building should serve for such a nest of
traitors!" said Gaston.  "Saving treachery, a dozen boys could keep it
against a royal host, provided they had half the spirit of your little
nephew."

"Let us summon the said traitors," said Eustace, blowing a blast on his
bugle.  The gates were thrown wide open, the drawbridge lowered, and
beneath the portcullis stood the Seneschal, his bunch of keys at his
girdle.  Both Eustace and Gaston cast searching glances upon him, and
his aspect made them for a moment doubt the truth of the warning. A
patch covered the lost eye, his moustache was shaved, his hair appeared
many shades lighter, as well as his beard, which had been carefully
trimmed, and altogether the obsequious Seneschal presented a strong
contrast to the dissolute reckless man-at-arms.  The Knight debated
with himself, whether to let him perceive that he was recognized; and
deciding to watch his conduct, he asked by what name to address him.

"Thibault Sanchez," replied Le Borgne Basque, giving his real name,
which he might safely do, as it was not known to above two men in the
whole Duchy of Aquitaine.  "Thibault Sanchez, so please you, noble Sir,
a poor Squire from the mountains, who hath seen some few battles and
combats in his day, but never one equal to the fight of Najara, where
your deeds of prowess--"

"My deeds of prowess, Sir Seneschal, had better rest in silence until
our horses have been disposed of, and I have made the rounds of the
Castle before the light fails us."

"So late, Sir Knight! and after a long and weary journey?  Surely you
will drink a cup of wine, and take a night's rest first, relying on me,
who, though I be a plain man, trust I understand somewhat of the duties
of mine office."

"I sleep not until I have learnt what is committed to my charge,"
replied the Knight.  "Lead the way, Master Sanchez."

"Ah! there is what it is to have a Knight of fame," cried Le Borgne
Basque.  "What vigilance! what earnestness!  Ah, this will be, as I
told my comrades even now, the very school of chivalry, the pride of
the country."

They had by this time crossed the narrow court, and passing beneath a
second portcullised door defended on either side by high battlement
walls, nearly double as thick as the steps themselves were wide.  At
the head was an arched door, heavily studded with nails, and opening
into the Castle hall, a gloomy, vaulted room, its loop-hole windows, in
their mighty depth of wall, affording little light.  A large wood fire
was burning in the hearth, and its flame cast a bright red light on
some suits of armour that were hung at one end of the hall, as well as
on some benches, and a long table in the midst, where were placed some
trenchers, drinking horns, and a flask or two of wine.

"A drop of wine, noble Knight," said the Seneschal.  "Take a cup to
recruit you after your journey, and wash the dust from your throat."

A long ride in full armour beneath the sun of Gascony made this no
unacceptable proposal, but the probability that the wine might be
drugged had been contemplated by Eustace, who had not only resolved to
abstain himself, but had exacted the same promise from d'Aubricour,
sorely against his will.

"We will spare your flasks till a time of need," said Eustace, only
accepting the basin of fair water presented to him to lave his hands.
"And now to the walls," he added, after he had filled a cup with water
from the pitcher and refreshed himself with it.  Gaston followed his
example, not without a wistful look at the wine, and Sanchez was
obliged to lead the way up a long flight of spiral steps to two other
vaulted apartments, one over the other--the lower destined for the
sleeping chamber of the Knight and his Squire, the higher for such of
the men-at-arms as could not find accommodation in the hall, or in the
offices below.  Above this they came out on the lead-covered roof,
surrounded with a high crenellated stone parapet, where two or three
warders were stationed.  Still higher rose one small octagonal
watch-tower, on the summit of which was planted a spear bearing St.
George's pennon, and by its side Sir Eustace now placed his own.

This done, Eustace could not help standing for a few moments to look
forth upon the glorious expanse of country beneath him--the rich fields
and fair vineyards spreading far away to the west and north, with towns
and villages here and there rising among them; while far away to the
east, among higher hills, lay the French town of Carcassonne, a white
mass, just discernible by the light of the setting sun; and the south
was bounded by the peaks of the Pyrenees, amongst which lay all
Eustace's brightest recollections of novelty, adventure, and hopes of
glory.

Descending the stairs once more, after traversing the hall, they found
themselves in the kitchen, where a large supper was preparing. Here,
too, was the buttery, some other small chambers fit for storehouses,
and some stalls for horses, all protected by the great bartizan at the
foot of the stairs, which was capable of being defended even after the
outer court was won.  By the time the new-comers had made themselves
acquainted with these localities, the evening was fast closing in, and
Sanchez pronounced that the Knight's survey was concluded in good time
for supper.

"I have not yet seen the vaults," said Eustace.

"The vaults, Sir Knight! what would you see there, save a few rusted
chains, and some whitened bones, that have been there ever since the
days of the Count de Montfort and the heretic Albigenses!  They say
that their accursed spirits haunt the place."

"I have heard," returned Sir Eustace, "that these Castles of Gascony
are said to have secret passages communicating with their vaults, and I
would willingly satisfy my own eyes that we are exposed to no such
peril here."

"Nay, not a man in the Castle will enter those vaults after sunset, Sir
Knight.  The Albigenses, Sir Eustace!"

"I will take the risk alone," said Eustace.  "Hand me a torch there!"

Gaston took another, and Thibault Sanchez, seeing them so resolute,
chose to be of the party.  The torches shed their red glare over the
stone arches on which the Castle rested, and there was a chill damp air
and earthy smell, which made both Knight and Squire shudder and start.
No sooner had they entered than Thibault, trembling exclaimed, in a
tone of horror, "There! there!  O blessed Lady, protect us!"

"Where?" asked Eustace, scarce able to defend himself from an
impression of terror.

"'Tis gone--yet methought I saw it again.--There! look yonder, Sir
Knight--something white fluttering behind that column!"

Gaston crossed himself, and turned pale; but Eustace had settled his
nerves.  "A truce with these vain follies, Master Seneschal," said he,
sternly.  "Those who know Le Borgne Basque cannot believe his fears,
either of saints or demons, to be other than assumed."

No ghost could have startled the Seneschal of the Chateau Norbelle as
much as this sobriquet.  He fell back, and subsided into complete
silence, as he meditated whether it were best to confess the plot, and
throw himself upon Sir Eustace's mercy, or whether he could hope that
this was merely a chance recognition.  He inclined to the latter belief
when he observed that the Knight was at fault respecting the secret
passage, searching in vain through every part of the vault, and twice
passing over the very spot.  The third time, however, it so chanced
that his spur rung against something of metal, and he called for Gaston
to hold his torch lower.  The light fell not only upon an iron ring,
but upon a guard which evidently covered a key-hole.

Sanchez, after in vain professing great amazement, and perfect
ignorance of any such entrance, gave up his bunch of keys, protesting
that there was nothing there which could unlock the mysterious door:
but the Knight had another method.  "Look you, Master Sanchez," said
he, "it may be, as you say, that this door hath not been unclosed for
hundreds of years, notwithstanding I see traces in the dust as if it
had been raised of late.  I shall, however, sleep more securely if
convinced that it is an impossibility to lift it.  Go, therefore,
Gaston, and call half a dozen of the men, to bring each of them the
heaviest stone they can find from that heap I saw prepared for a
mangonel in the court-yard."

"Oh, excellent!" exclaimed Gaston, "and yet, Sir Eustace--"

There he stopped, but it was evident that he was reluctant to leave his
master alone with this villain.  Eustace replied by drawing his good
sword, and giving him a fearless smile, as he planted his foot upon the
trap-door; and fixing his gaze upon Le Borgne Basque, made him feel
that this was no moment for treachery.

Gaston sped fast out of the dungeon, and, in brief space, made his
appearance at the head of the men-at-arms, some bearing torches, others
labouring under the weight of the huge stones, which, as he rightly
thought, they were far more inclined to heave at Sir Eustace's head
than to place in the spot he pointed out.  They were, however,
compelled to obey, and, with unwilling hands, built up such a pile upon
the secret door, that it could not be lifted from beneath without
gigantic strength, and a noise which would re-echo through the Castle.
This done, Sir Eustace watched them all out of the vault himself,
closed the door, locked it, and announced to the Seneschal his
intention of relieving him for the future from the care of the keys.
Still watching him closely, he ascended to the hall, and gave the
signal for the supper, which shortly made its appearance.

Thibault Sanchez, who laid claim to some share of gentle blood, was
permitted to enjoy the place of honour together with Sir Eustace and
d'Aubricour--the rather that it gave them a better opportunity of
keeping their eye upon him.

There was an evident attempt, on the part of the garrison, to engage
their new comrades in a carouse in honour of their arrival, but this
was brought to an abrupt conclusion by Sir Eustace, who, in a tone
which admitted no reply, ordered the wine flasks to the buttery, and
the men, some to their posts and others to their beds.  Ingram walked
off, muttering his discontent; and great was the ill-will excited
amongst, not only the original garrison, but the new-comers from
Bordeaux, who, from their lairs of straw, lamented the day when they
took service with so severe and rigid a Knight, and compared his
discipline with that of his brother, Sir Reginald, who, strict as he
might be, never grudged a poor man-at-arms a little merriment. "But as
to this Knight, one might as well serve a Cistercian monk!"

As to Le Borgne Basque, he betook himself to the buttery; and there, in
an undertone of great terror, began to mutter to his friend and ally,
Tristan de la Fleche, "It is all over with us!  He is a wizard! Sir
Leonard Ashton was right--oaf as he was; I never believed him before;
but what, save enchantment, could have enabled him to recognize me
under this disguise, or how could he have gone straight to yonder door?"

"Think you not that he had some warning?" asked Tristan.

"Impossible, save from Clarenham, or from Ashton himself; and, dolt as
he is, I trow he has sense enough to keep his own counsel.  He has not
forgotten the day when he saw this dainty young sprig rise up in his
golden spurs before his eyes.  I know how it is!  It is with him as it
was with the Lord of Corasse!"

"How was that, Thibault?"

"Why, you must know that Raymond de Corasse had helped himself to the
tithes of a certain Church in Catalonia, whereby the Priest who claimed
them said to him, 'Know that I will send thee a champion that thou wilt
be more afraid of than thou hast hitherto been of me.'  Three months
after, each night, in the Castle of Corasse, began such turmoil as
never was known; raps at every door, and especially that of the
Knight--as if all the goblins in fairy-land had been let loose.  The
Knight lay silent all one night; but the next, when the rioting was
renewed as loud as ever, he leapt out of his bed, and bawled out, 'Who
is it at this hour thus knocks at my chamber door?'  He was answered,
'It is I.'  'And who sends thee hither?' asked the Knight.  'The Clerk
of Catalonia, whom thou hast much wronged.  I will never leave thee
quiet until thou hast rendered him a just account.'  'What art thou
called,' said the Knight, 'who art so good a messenger?'  'Orthon is my
name.'  But it fell out otherwise from the Clerk's intentions, for
Orthon had taken a liking to the Knight, and promised to serve him
rather than the Clerk--engaging never to disturb the Castle--for,
indeed, he had no power to do ill to any.  Often did he come to the
Knight's bed by night, and pull the pillow from under his head--"

"What was he like?" asked Tristan.
