
"Why? because they've beaten us now three times running; and the last
time when our chaps went over to Wraxby and got licked at footer their
captain asked Ally if in future we should like to play a master!
Such rot!" continued the youthful "Rats," boiling with wrath; "as if we
couldn't smash them without!  Look here, I'd give--I'd give sixpence if
we could win!" and with this burst of patriotic enthusiasm the speaker
hurried away to join Maxton, who, with an old sprung racquet in one hand
and the inside of an exploded cricket-ball in the other, was calling to
him from the adjoining playing field to "Come and play tip and run, and
bring something that'll do for a wicket."

The feelings expressed by "Rats" as regards the result of the match were
shared by the whole school, and by none more so than the members of the
Third Form.

"The Happy Family" turned up to a man, and encamped _en masse_ upon the
turf within twenty yards of the pavilion.  Bibbs was the last to arrive
on the scene of action, and did so with a bag of sweets in one hand, a
book in the other, and a piece of paper, pinned by some joker to the
tail of his coat, bearing the legend, "Please to kick me"--a request
which was immediately responded to in a most hearty and generous fashion
by all present.

Kicking the unfortunate Bibbs afforded every one such exquisite
enjoyment that an effort was made to prolong the pastime by forcible
attempts to fasten the placard on to other members of the company, and
a general _melee_, would have followed if the attention of the
combatants had not been attracted in another direction.  Ronleigh having
won the toss and elected to go in first, the Wraxby men strolled out of
the pavilion to take the field.

They were a likely-looking lot of fellows--the faded flannel caps and
careless way in which they sauntered towards the pitch proclaiming the
fact that each one was a veteran player.

"That chap with the wicket-keeping gloves in his hand is Partridge,
their captain," said Carton; "and that fellow who's putting out the
single stump to bowl at is Austin.  He does put them in to some
tune; you can hardly see the ball, it's so swift."

There was a faint _clang_ from the pitch.

"See that!" cried Fletcher junior: "that chap Austin's knocked that
single stump out of the ground first ball.  My eye, he'll make our
fellows sit up, I'll bet."

"No, he won't," cried "Rats" excitedly.  "Old Ally'll knock him into a
cocked hat.  He'll soon break his back," added the speaker
complaisantly.  "Hullo! men in--Parkes and Rowland."

There is something in the short space of time preceding the first
_clack_ of the bat at a cricket match which rivals in interest even that
exciting moment at football when the centre forward stands hovering over
the ball waiting for the whistle to give the signal for the contest to
commence.

The noisy clatter of "The Happy Family" ceases as the crowd of boys,
ranged all down the sides of the field, turn to watch the opening of the
game.

It is an ideal day for cricket, with a fresh breeze blowing, just
sufficient to temper the hot afternoon sunshine and cause a flutter of
cricket-shirts and boundary flags.  Rowland takes centre, twists the
handle of his bat round and round in his hands, and is heard amid the
general hush to say, "No, no trial."  Austin glances round at the
motionless figures of his comrades, signals to _long-on_ to stand a
little deeper,  and then delivers the ball.  With an easy and graceful
forward stroke, the batsman returns it sharply in the direction of the
opposite wicket, and an almost imperceptible movement, like the
releasing of a spring, takes place among the fielders.  So begins
the battle.

"Twenty up!" had just been called from the pavilion when a sharp catch
in the slips disposed of Parkes.

"Never mind!" cried "Rats."  "Here comes old Ally; he'll make them trot
round a bit!"

The captain commenced his innings with a heart-warming leg hit, which
sent the ball to the boundary, a wave of legs and arms marking its track
as the spectators, with a joyous yell, rolled over one another to escape
being hit.

For some time cheer followed cheer, and "The Happy Family" clapped until
their hands smarted; then suddenly there arose a prolonged "_Oh, oh!_"
from all the field.

"Hullo! what's the matter?" asked Bibbs, looking up from the book he was
reading.

"What's the matter?" shouted Maxton wrathfully, snatching away the
volume and banging Bibbs on the head with it.  "Why don't you watch the
game?  Old Ally's bowled off his pads!"

It was only too true: the captain's wicket was down, and "The Happy
Family," after a simultaneous ejaculation of "_Blow it!_" tore up stalks
of grass, and began to chew them with a stern expression on their faces.

This disaster seemed but the forerunner of others.  Redfern, the next
man, had hardly taken his place at the wicket when a sharp _click_, the
glitter of bails twirling in the air, and a Wraxby shout of "Well
bowled!" announced his fate; while ten minutes later Rowland, one of the
mainstays of the home team, was caught in a most provoking manner at
_cover-point_.

"Oh, bother it all!" sighed "Rats; this is nothing but a procession."

"Now, Oaks, old chap, do your best for us!" cried Allingford.

"All right," returned the other, laughing, as he paused for a moment
outside the pavilion to fasten the strap of his batting-glove; "I'm
going to make runs this journey, or die in the attempt."

Oaks was undoubtedly a regular Briton, just the sort of fellow to turn
the fortunes of a losing game.  He walked up to the wicket as coolly as
though it were enclosed within a practice net, patted down the ground
with the flat of his bat in a manner which seemed to imply that he had
"come to stay," and then proceeded to hit three twos in his first
"over."

This dashing commencement was but the prelude to a brilliant bit of
rapid scoring: twos and threes followed each other in quick succession.
Allingford shouted, the crowd roared, while "The Happy Family"
gambolled about on one another's chests and stomachs, and squealed with
delight.  Like the poet's brook, Oaks might have exclaimed, "Men may
come, and men may go, but I go on for ever." When Wraxby changed the
bowling, he welcomed the new-comer by sending the first ball into the
next field, and continued to cut and drive in such a gallant manner that
even Bibbs, standing up to get the full use of his lungs, shouted, "Go
'long!" and "Well hit!" until his face was the colour of a poppy.

"I say!" exclaimed Carton, as the eighth wicket fell, "I wish one of
these next two chaps would hang on a bit, and give Oaks a chance of
getting a few more; it must be nearly eighty up."

"Thurston, you're in!" came from the scorer.

The boy named was sitting by himself, on the end of a form close to the
telegraph, moodily scraping up the ground with the spikes of his
cricket-shoes.  He knew that most of his comrades in the eleven would
give him the cold shoulder, and so did not mingle with them inside the
pavilion.  He rose, and prepared to obey the summons.

"Let's give him a cheer," said Rats; "he may do something.--Go it,
Thurston!  Sit tight, and keep the pot boiling!"

The big fellow turned his head in the direction of "The Happy Family,"
and with something of the old good-humoured smile, which had seldom of
late been seen upon his face, answered: "All right, my boy, you see if I
don't."

"Jolly fellow old Thirsty," remarked "Rats," swelling with pride at this
friendly recognition.  "He can play when he likes, but he hasn't
troubled to practise much of late.  He used always--Phew! my eye, what
an awful crack!"

A terrifically swift ball from Austin had risen suddenly from the hard
ground.  Thurston had no time to avoid it, but turning away his face,
received the blow on the back of his head.  He dropped his bat,
staggered away from the wicket, and fell forward on his knees.

To suffer for the cause of the school in a cricket or football match was
a thing which, like charity, "covered a multitude of sins." Allingford
hurried out of the pavilion and ran towards the pitch, while Partridge
and a few more of the "Wraxby men gathered round their wounded opponent
and helped him to his feet.

"You'd better come out, Thurston," said the Ronleigh captain; "I'll send
the next man in."

"No, I'll go on," replied the other, in rather a shaky voice; "I shall
be all right in a minute."

It requires something more than ordinary pluck for a batsman to stand up
to fast bowling and show good form after having been badly hit.  For a
time a great deal of determination, and the exercise of a considerable
amount of will power, are necessary to conquer the natural inclination
to shrink from a possible repetition of the injury; and those who
watched the dogged manner in which Thurston continued to defend his
wicket, being themselves practical cricketers, rewarded him with loud
shouts of encouragement and praise.

Oaks piled on the score with unflagging energy, while the careful play
of his companion defied all attempts of the Wraxby bowlers to dissolve
the partnership.

"Bravo, 'Thirsty!'" shouted the spectators.  "Go 'long'--and another!"

At length, just as the telegraph operator had received the welcome
order, "A hundred up!" the ball shot, and crashed into Thurston's
wicket.  He came slowly back from the pitch, still holding his hand to
the back of his head; and though his individual score had barely run
into double figures, he was greeted on all sides with hearty cheers.

Payne, the last man, just succeeded in cracking his _duck's-egg_, and
the innings closed for 104.

As the fielders came trooping in, a small boy ran past the Third Form
encampment exclaiming, "I say, you chaps, old Punch is in the lower
road, over by that tree!"  Which announcement had no sooner been made
than the greater part of "The Happy Family" sprang to their feet, and
went scampering across the field in the direction of the opposite hedge.

The cause of this stampede, it must be explained, was the arrival of an
itinerant vendor of ice-cream, whose real name, Samuel Jones, had been
changed to Punch on account of the prominence of his nasal organ.
His presence within the grounds of Ronleigh College was not approved of
by the authorities, and his trade with the small boys, who were his
particular patrons, was carried on through a gap in the hedge.
Punch's establishment ran on four wheels, and was ornamented with a
number of daubs representing Union Jacks and Royal Standards, which
formed the framework of an alarming portrait of the Prince of Wales,
from which adornment one might be led to suppose that on some previous
occasion His Royal Highness had patronized the stall.  The ice-cream
was shovelled out of a tin receptacle, and pasted in lumps on to the top
of very shallow glasses, the standard price for which was one penny; and
there being a scarcity of spoons, the customers usually devoured the
delicacy in the same manner as a dog does a saucer of milk.  Cynical
members of the upper classes at Ronleigh, who had ceased to patronize
the stall, charged Punch with not being over-particular in washing the
glasses, and of making the "stuff," as they called it, with cornflour
instead of cream.  But the small boys were not fastidious; and as each
one had two helpings, which they ate as slowly as possible to prolong
the enjoyment, they were still refreshing themselves when the home team
moved out to field.

"Look sharp!" cried "Rats," giving Bibbs's elbow a sudden jerk which
caused that worthy to plaster the end of his nose with the remains of
his third ice.  "Come on! let's see the beginning."

The second half of the game proved, if anything, more exciting than the
first.  Two wickets fell before 10 appeared on the telegraph.

"Oh, we shall lick them easily!" cried "Rats" jubilantly; while Fletcher
junior gave vent to his feelings by handing Bibbs's bag of sweets round
to the company.

But there were still some hard nuts to be cracked in the Wraxby team,
and one soon appeared in Partridge, the captain.  Over after over went
by, and the score rapidly increased: "Thirty up!"--"Forty up!"--"Fifty
up!"  Two more wickets were taken; but Partridge seemed to have fairly
got his eye in, and gave the home team as much leather-hunting as Oaks
had provided for the visitors.  To make matters worse, Austin, arriving
on the scene sixth man in, appeared to be also possessed with a
determination to carry his bat; and though he was eventually run out
by a sharp throw-in from square-leg, it was not until eighty runs had
been registered for the Grammar School.

The closing scene of the game caused an amount of excitement
unparalleled in the history of Ronleigh cricket.

As the last man of the Wraxby team went in to bat, the telegraph was
changed from 90 to 100.  "Over" had just been called, and the invincible
Partridge stepped forward to play, evidently making up his mind for
another boundary hit.  Thurston had been put on to bowl at the top end,
and stood ready to recommence the attack.

"Four to equal, five to beat," sighed "Rats."  "Bother it all, they're
sure to win."

A cricket match needs to be very narrowly watched, or the spectator
whose eye has strayed for a moment from the game misses some fine piece
of play.  The incident which finished the contest between Ronleigh
College and Wraxby Grammar School occupied barely three seconds of time;
yet it was remembered and spoken about many years after those concerned
in it had passed on to swell the ranks of the "old boys."

Partridge commenced the over with a hard, straight drive, and at the
same instant Thurston gave a little jump into the air with his right arm
stretched above his head.  The ball had passed like lightning between
the wickets, and the spectators looked for a moment to see where it had
gone; then a wild shriek of joy from "The Happy Family" rent the air,--

"_Caught!_"

It was true enough.  With a splendid one-handed catch Thurston had
brought the well-fought contest to a close, and secured a victory for
Ronleigh College.

This brilliant feat, coupled with the gallant manner in which he had
continued his innings when hurt, and so enabled Oaks to run up the
score, caused the black sheep of the Sixth Form to be regarded as the
hero of the day.  Allingford shook him by the hand, and a noisy crowd
hoisted him shoulder high and carried him three times round the
quadrangle.

Thurston certainly had good reason to feel proud of the part he had
played in the chief match of the season, and might in years to come have
always looked back with pleasure on this twenty-fourth of July.
Unfortunately another event of a sadly different character was destined
to make it a red-letter day in his career at Ronleigh.  The feeling of
respect and good-will which his prowess in the field had awakened in the
minds of his former friends afforded him a splendid opportunity for
reassociating himself with all that was worthy and honourable in school
life.  The chance no sooner presented itself, however, than it was flung
away, and was lost for ever.

Evening preparation was over, and supper, an informal meal, attendance
at which was not compulsory, was in progress.  The door of Thurston's
study was once more locked on the inside, as it had been when Diggory
went to return the match-box to its rightful owner.
