or desire it not, fortune has given you to me. Have you no word for me
before I go?"

Now during all this long, half-insane harangue, Suzanne had sat quite
silent, making no reply at all, not even seeming to hear the demon, for
such he was, whose wicked talk defiled her ears. But when he asked her
whether she had nothing to say to him before he went, still looking not
at him, but beyond him, she gave him his answer in one word, the same
that she had used when she awoke from her swoon:

"_Murderer_."

Something in the tone in which she spoke, or perhaps in the substance
of that short speech, seemed to cow him; at the least he turned and left
the hut, and presently Sihamba heard him talking to the sentry without,
bidding him to keep close watch till he came back within an hour.

When Piet went out he left the door-board of the hut open, so that
Sihamba dared neither act nor speak, fearing lest the guard should hear
or see her through it. Therefore she still lay upon the top of the hut,
and watched through the smoke-hole. For a while Suzanne sat quiet upon
the bed, then of a sudden she rose from it, and shuffling across the hut
as well as her bound feet would allow her, she closed the opening with
the door-board, and secured it by its wooden bar. Next she returned
to the bed and, seating upon it, clasped her hands and began to pray,
muttering aloud and mixing with her prayer the name of her husband
Ralph. Ceasing presently, she thrust her hand into her bosom and drew
from it a knife, not large, but strong and very sharp. Opening this
knife she cut the thong that bound her ankles, and made it into a noose.
Then she looked earnestly first at the noose, next at the knife, and
thirdly at the candles, and Sihamba understood that she meant to do
herself to death, and was choosing between steel and rope and fire.

Now all this while, although she dared not so much as whisper, Sihamba
had not been idle, for with the blade of the assegai she was working
gently at the thatch of the smoke-hole, and cutting the rimpis that
bound it, till at last, and not too soon, she thought that it was wide
enough to allow of the passage of her small body. Then watching until
the guard leaned against the hut, so that the bulge of it would cut
her off from his sight, during the instant that her figure was outlined
against the sky, she stood up, and thrusting her feet through the hole,
forced her body to follow them, and then dropped lightly as a cat to the
floor beneath. But now there was another danger to be faced, and a great
one, namely, that Suzanne might cry out in fear, which doubtless she
would have done, had not the sudden sight of some living creature in the
hut where she thought herself alone, so startled her that for a
moment she lost her breath. Before she could find it again Sihamba was
whispering in her ear, saying:

"Keep silence for your life's sake, Swallow. It is I, Sihamba, who am
come to save you."

Suzanne stared at her, and light came back into the empty eyes, then
they grew dark again, as she answered below her breath:

"Of what use is my life? Ralph is dead, and I was about to take it that
I may save myself from shame and go to seek him, for surely God will
forgive the sin."

Sihamba looked at her and said:

"Swallow, prepare yourself for great joy, and, above all, do not cry
out. Your husband is not dead, he was but wounded, and I drew him living
from the sea. He lies safe at the stead in your mother's care."

Suzanne heard her, and, notwithstanding the caution, still she would
have cried aloud in the madness of her joy, had not Sihamba, seeing her
lips opened, thrust her hands upon her mouth and held them there till
the danger was past.

"You do not lie to me?" she gasped at length.

"Nay, I speak truth, I swear it. But this is no time to talk. Yonder
stand food and milk; eat while I think."

As Sihamba guessed, nothing but a little water had passed Suzanne's
lips since that meal which she and her husband took together beside the
waggon, nor one minute before she could have swallowed anything had her
life been the price of it. But now it was different, for despair had
left her, and hope shone in her heart again, and behold! of a sudden she
was hungry, and ate and drank with gladness, while Sihamba thought.

Presently the little woman looked up and whispered:

"A plan comes into my head; it is a strange one, but I can find no
other, and it may serve our turn, for I think that good luck goes with
us. Swallow, give me the noose of hide which you made from the riem that
bound your feet."

Suzanne obeyed her wondering, whereon Sihamba placed the noose about her
own neck, then bade Suzanne stand upon the bed and thrust the end of the
riem loosely into the thatch of the hut as high up as she could reach,
so that it looked as though it were made fast there. Next, Sihamba
slipped off her fur cloak, leaving herself naked except for the moocha
round her middle, and, clasping her hands behind her back with the
assegai between them, she drew the riem taut, and leaned against the
wall of the hut after the fashion of one who is about to be pulled from
the ground and strangled.

"Now, mistress, listen to me," she said earnestly. "You have seen me
like this before, have you not, when I was about to be hanged, and you
bought my life at a price? Well, as it chances, that man who guards the
hut is he who took me at Bull-Head's bidding and set the rope round my
neck, whereon I said some words to him which made him afraid. Now if
he sees me again thus in a hut where he knows you to be alone, he will
think that I am a ghost and his heart will turn to ice and the strength
of his hands to water, and then before he can find his strength again
I shall make an end of him with the spear, as I know well how to do
although I am so small, and we will fly."

"Is there no other way?" murmured Suzanne aghast.

"None, Swallow. For you the choice lies between witnessing this deed
and--Swart Piet or--Death. Nay, you need not witness it even, if you
will do as I tell you. Presently, when I give the word, loosen the bar
of the door-board, then crouch by the hole and utter a low cry of fear,
calling to the man on guard for help. He will enter and see me, whereon
you can creep through the door-hole and wait without, leaving me to deal
with him. If I succeed I will be with you at once; if I fail, run to the
stream and hoot like an owl, when Zinti, who is hidden there, will join
you. Then you must get out of the krantz as best you can. Only one man
watches the entrance, and if needful Zinti can shoot him. The _schimmel_
and other horses are hidden in the wood, and he will lead you to them.
Mount and ride for home, or anywhere away from this accursed place, and
at times when you talk of the matter of your escape with your husband,
think kindly of Sihamba Ngenyanga. Nay, do not answer, for there is
little time to lose. Quick, now, to the door-hole, and do as I bade
you."

So, like one in a dream, Suzanne loosened the bar, and, crouching by
the entrance to the hut, uttered a low wail of terror, saying, "Help me,
soldier, help me swiftly," in the Kaffir tongue. The man without heard,
and, pushing down the board, crept in at once, saying, "Who harms you,
lady?" as he rose to his feet. Then suddenly, in this hut, where there
was but one woman, a white woman, whom he himself had carried into it,
he beheld another woman--Sihamba; and his hair stood up upon his head
and his eyes grew round with terror. Yes, it was Sihamba herself, for
the light of the candles shone full upon her, or, rather, her ghost,
and she was hanging to the roof, the tips of her toes just touching the
ground, as once he had seen her hang before.

For some seconds the man stared in his terror, and while he stared
Suzanne slipped from the hut. Then muttering, "It is the spirit of the
witch, Sihamba, who prophesied my death--her spirit that haunts me," he
dropped to his knees, and, trembling like a leaf, turned to creep from
the hut. Next second he was _dead_, dead without a sound, for Sihamba
was a doctoress, and knew well where to thrust with the spear.

Of all this Suzanne heard nothing and saw nothing, till presently
Sihamba stood by her side holding the skin cape in one hand and the
spear in the other.

"Now one danger is done with," she said quietly, as she put on the cape,
"but many still remain. Follow me, Swallow," and, going to the edge
of the stream, she hooted like an owl, whereupon Zinti came out of the
reeds, looking very cold and frightened.

"Be swift," whispered Sihamba, and they started along the krantz at a
run. Before they were half way across it, the storm-clouds, which had
been thinning gradually, broke up altogether, and the moon shone out
with a bright light, showing them as plainly as though it were day; but
as it chanced they met nobody and were seen of none.

At length they reached the cleft in the rock that led to the plain
below. "Stay here," said Sihamba, "while I look," and she crept to the
entrance. Presently she returned and said:

"A man watches there, and it is not possible to slip past him because
of the moonlight. Now, I know of only one thing that we can do; and you,
Zinti, must do it. Slip down the rock and cover the man with your gun,
saying to him that if he stirs a hand or speaks a word you will shoot
him dead. Hold him thus till we are past you on our way to the wood,
then follow us as best you can, but do not fire except to save your life
or ours."

Now the gifts of Zinti lay rather in tracking and remembering paths and
directions than in fighting men, so that when he heard this order he was
afraid and hesitated. But when she saw it, Sihamba turned upon him so
fiercely that he feared her more than the watchman, and went at once,
so that this man who was half asleep suddenly saw the muzzle of a _roer_
within three paces of his head and heard a voice command him to stand
still and silent or die. Thus he stood indeed until he perceived that
the new wife of his chief was escaping. Then remembering what would be
his fate at the hands of Bull-Head he determined to take his chance of
being shot, and, turning suddenly, sped towards the kraal shouting as he
ran, whereon Zinti fired at him, but the ball went wide. A cannon could
scarcely have made more noise than did the great _roer_ in the silence
of the night as the report of it echoed to and fro among the hills.

"Oh! fool to fire, and yet greater fool to miss," said Sihamba. "To the
horses! Swift! swift!"

They ran as the wind runs, and now they were in the wood, and now they
had found the beasts.

"Praise to the Snake of my house!" said Sihamba, "they are safe, all
four of them," and very quickly they untied the riems by which they had
fastened the horses to the trees.

"Mount, Swallow," said Sihamba, seizing the head of the great
_schimmel_.

Suzanne set her foot upon the shoulder of Zinti, who knelt to receive
it, and sprang into the saddle. Then having lifted Sihamba on the
grey mare Zinti mounted the other horse himself, holding the mule by a
leading riem.

"Which way, mistress?" he asked.

"Homewards," she answered, and they cantered forward through the wood.

On the further side of this wood was a little sloping plain not more
than three hundred paces wide, and beyond it lay the seaward Nek through
which they must pass on their journey to the stead. Already they were
out of the wood and upon the plain, when from their right a body of
horsemen swooped towards them, seven in all, of whom one, the leader,
was Swart Piet himself, cutting them off from the Nek. They halted their
horses as though to a word of command, and speaking rapidly, Sihamba
asked of Zinti: "Is there any other pass through yonder range, for this
one is barred to us?"

"None that I know of," he answered; "but I have seen that the ground
behind us is flat and open as far as the great peak which you saw rising
on the plain away beyond the sky-line."

"Good," said Sihamba. "Let us head for the peak, since we have nowhere
else to go, and if we are separated, let us agree to meet upon its
southern slope. Now, Zinti, loose the mule, for we have our lives to
save, and ride on, remembering that Death is behind you."



CHAPTER XIX

HOW THE SCHIMMEL CROSSED THE RED WATER

When they turned their horses' heads, Swart Piet and his men were not
much more than a hundred paces from them, but in the wood they gained
much ground, for he did not think that they would dare to leave it, and
hunted for them there while they were racing over the open plain more
than a mile away. At last he caught sight of them crossing a distant
ridge, and the long chase began. For hour after hour they galloped on
through the moonlight across the wide and rolling veldt until the moon
sank, and they must pick their way as best they could in the darkness.
Then came the dawn, and still they rode forward, though now the horses
were beginning to grow weary, except the _schimmel_, who pulled upon
his bit as though he were fresh from the stable. In front of them, some
twenty miles away, rose the lofty peak for which they were heading, and
behind lay the great expanse of plain which they had passed. Suzanne
looked back over her shoulder, but there was no one in sight.

"Let us halt," she said, "and rest ourselves and the horses." So they
pulled up by a stream and suffered the beasts to drink some water,
though not much, while they themselves devoured biltong, of which they
had a little in the saddle-bags.

"Why do we ride for the peak?" asked Suzanne.

"Because there are places where we may lie hid," Sihamba answered, "and
thence we can make our way down to the seashore and so back homewards,
whereas here upon the plain we can be seen from miles away."

"Do any people live on the peak?"

"Yes, Swallow; it is the home of the great chief Sigwe, the
chief-paramount of the Red Kaffirs, who counts his spears by thousands,
but I have heard that he is away to the north upon a war which he makes
against some of the Swazi tribes with whom he has a quarrel."

"Will the people of Sigwe protect us, Sihamba?"

"Perhaps. We shall see. At least, you are safer with them than in the
hands of Swart Piet."

At this moment, Zinti, who was watching the plain over which they had
travelled, uttered a cry of warning. Looking back, they saw the reason
of it, for there, crossing the crest of a wave of ground, not more than
a mile away, were five horsemen riding hard upon their spoor.

"Swart Piet and four of his men," said Sihamba, "and by my Spirit,
they have fresh horses; they must have taken them from the kraal of the
half-breed which we passed at daybreak, and that is why we lost sight of
them for a while."

Now even as Zinti helped her to mount the _schimmel_ Suzanne turned so
faint with terror that she almost fell to the ground again.

"Have no fear, Swallow," said Sihamba, "he has not caught us yet, and a
voice in me says that we shall escape him."

But though she spoke thus bravely, in her heart Sihamba was much afraid,
for except the _schimmel_ their horses were almost spent, whereas Van
Vooren was fresh mounted, and not a mile behind. Still they galloped
forward till they reached a more broken stretch of veldt, where trees
grew singly, and here and there were kloofs with bush in them.

"Mistress," cried Zinti, "my horse can go no more, and Bull-Head is hard
upon us. Of your wisdom tell me what I should do or presently I must be
killed."

"Ride into that kloof and hide yourself," answered Sihamba, "for
Bull-Head will never seek you there; he hunts the white Swallow, not the
black finch. Afterwards you can follow on our spoor, and if you cannot
find us, make your way back to the Baas Botmar and tell him all you
know. Quick, into the kloof, for here they cannot see you."

"I hear you, lady," said Zinti, and the next minute they saw him leading
his weary horse into the shelter of the thick bush, for the poor beast
could carry him no more.

For the next three miles the ground trended downwards to the banks of a
great river, beyond which were the gentle rising slopes that surrounded
the foot of the high peak. On they galloped, the _schimmel_ never
faltering in his swinging stride, although his flanks grew thin and his
eyes large. But with the grey mare it was otherwise, for though she was
a gallant nag her strength was gone. Indeed, with any heavier rider
upon her back, ere this she would have fallen. But still she answered to
Sihamba's voice and plunged on, rolling and stumbling in her gait.

"She will last till the river," she said, seeing Suzanne look at the
mare.

"And then----?" gasped Suzanne, glancing behind her to where, not five
hundred yards away, Swart Piet and his Kaffirs hunted them sullenly and
in silence, as strong dogs hunt down a wounded buck.

"And then--who knows?" answered Sihamba, and they went on without more
words, for they had no breath to spare.

Now, not half a mile away, they came in sight of the river, which had
been hidden from them before by the lie of the ground, and a groan of
despair broke from their lips, for it was in flood. Yes, the storms in
the mountains had swollen it, and it rolled towards the sea a red flood
of foam-flecked water, well-nigh two hundred yards from bank to bank.
Still they rode on, for they dared not stop, and presently behind them
they heard a shout of triumph, and knew that their pursuers had also
seen the Red Water, and rejoiced because now they had them in a trap.

Within ten yards of the lip of the river, the grey mare stopped
suddenly, shivered like a leaf in the wind and sank to the ground.

"Now, Swallow," said Sihamba as she slipped from the saddle, "you must
choose between that raging torrent and Swart Piet. If you choose the
torrent the great horse is still strong and he may swim through; I can
say no more."

"And you?" asked Suzanne.

"I? I bide here, and oh! I would that Zinti had left the gun with me."

"Never," cried Suzanne. "Together we will live or die. Mount, I
say--mount. Nay, if you refuse I will throw myself into the water before
your eyes."

Then seeing that she would indeed do no less, Sihamba took her
outstretched hand, and placing her foot upon the foot of Suzanne,
scrambled up upon the pad in front of her, whereat the pursuers, who
now were little over two hundred yards away, laughed out loud, and
Swart Piet shouted to Suzanne to yield. But they did not laugh long,
for Sihamba, having first bent her head and kissed Suzanne on the hand,
leaned forward and began to stroke the _schimmel's_ neck and to whisper
into his ear, till indeed it seemed as though the great brute that loved
her understood. At the least he pricked his ears and tossed his head,
then looked, first round at the horses that drew near, and next at the
foaming flood in front.

"Sit fast, Swallow," said Sihamba, and then she cried a word aloud to
the horse, and struck it lightly with her hand. At the sound of that
word the stallion drew himself together, sprang forward with two bounds
over the ten paces of level bank and leapt far out into the flood that
