my enemy be confounded.  Recall my senses unto Thyself, cause me
to forget all worldly things; grant me quickly to cast away and
despise the imaginations of sin.  Succour me, O Eternal Truth,
that no vanity may move me.  Come unto me, O Heavenly Sweetness,
and let all impurity flee from before Thy face.  Pardon me also,
and of Thy mercy deal gently with me, whensoever in prayer I
think on anything besides Thee; for truly I confess that I am
wont to be continually distracted.  For often and often, where in
the body I stand or sit, there I myself am not; but rather am I
there, whither I am borne by my thoughts.  Where my thought is,
there am I; and there commonly is my thought where that which I
love is.  That readily occurreth to me, which naturally
delighteth, or pleaseth through custom.

6. Wherefore Thou, who art the Truth, hast plainly said, Where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also.(2)  If I love
heaven, I gladly meditate on heavenly things.  If I love the
world, I rejoice in the delights of the world, and am made sorry
by its adversities.  If I love the flesh, I am continually
imagining the things which belong to the flesh; if I love the
spirit, I am delighted by meditating on spiritual things.  For
whatsoever things I love, on these I readily converse and listen,
and carry home with me the images of them.  But blessed is that
man who for Thy sake, O Lord, is willing to part from all
creatures; who doth violence to his fleshly nature and crucifieth
the lusts of the flesh by the fervour of his spirit, so that with
serene conscience he may offer unto Thee a pure prayer, and be
made worthy to enter into the angelic choirs, having shut out
from himself, both outwardly and inwardly, all worldly things.

(1) Psalm lxxi. 12.   (2) Matthew vi. 21.


CHAPTER XLIX

Of the desire after eternal life, and how great blessings are
promised to those who strive

"My Son, when thou feelest the desire of eternal happiness to be
poured into thee from above, and longest to depart from the
tabernacle of this body, that thou mayest contemplate My glory
without shadow of turning, enlarge thine heart, and take in this
holy inspiration with all thy desire.  Give most hearty thanks to
the Supreme Goodness, who dealeth with thee so graciously,
visiteth thee so lovingly, stirreth thee up so fervently, raiseth
thee so powerfully, lest thou sink down through thine own weight,
to earthly things.  For not by thine own meditating or striving
dost thou receive this gift, but by the sole gracious
condescension of Supreme Grace and Divine regard; to the end that
thou mayest make progress in virtue and in more humility, and
prepare thyself for future conflicts, and cleave unto Me with all
the affection of thy heart, and strive to serve Me with fervent
will.

2. "My Son, often the fire burneth, but the flame ascendeth not
without smoke.  So also the desires of some men burn towards
heavenly things, and yet they are not free from the temptation of
carnal affection.  Thus therefore they are not acting with an
altogether simple desire for God's glory when they pray to Him so
earnestly.  Such, too, is oftentimes thy desire, when thou hast
imagined it to be so earnest.  For that is not pure and perfect
which is tainted with thine own self-seeking.

3. "Seek thou not what is pleasant and advantageous to thyself,
but what is acceptable and honourable unto Me; for if thou
judgest rightly, thou must choose and follow after My appointment
rather than thine own desire; yea, rather than anything that can
be desired.  I know thy desire, and I have heard thy many
groanings.  Already thou longest to be in the glorious liberty of
the children of God; already the eternal home delighteth thee,
and the heavenly country full of joy; but the hour is not yet
come; there remaineth still another season, even a season of
warfare, a season of labour and probation.  Thou desirest to be
filled with the Chief Good, but thou canst not attain it
immediately.  I AM that Good; wait for Me, until the Kingdom of
God shall come.

4. "Thou must still be tried upon earth, and be exercised in many
things.  Consolation shall from time to time be given thee, but
abundant satisfying shall not be granted.  Be strong therefore,
and be thou brave both in working and in suffering things which
are against thy nature.  Thou must put on the new man, and be
changed into another man.  Thou must often do what thou wouldst
not; and thou must leave undone what thou wouldst do.  What
pleaseth others shall have good success, what pleaseth thee shall
have no prosperity.  What others say shall be listened to; what
thou sayest shall receive no heed.  Others shall ask and receive;
thou shalt ask and not obtain.  Others shall be great in the
report of men, but about thee shall nothing be spoken.  To others
this or that shall be entrusted; thou shalt be judged useful for
nought.

5. "For this cause nature shall sometimes be filled with sadness;
and it is a great thing if thou bear it silently.  In this and
many like things the faithful servant of the Lord is wont to be
tried, how far he is able to deny himself and bring himself into
subjection in all things.  Scarcely is there anything in which
thou hast need to mortify thyself so much as in seeing things
which are adverse to thy will; especially when things are
commanded thee to be done which seem to thee inexpedient or of
little use to thee.  And because thou darest not resist a higher
power, being under authority, therefore it seemeth hard for thee
to shape thy course according to the nod of another, and to
forego thine own opinion.

6. "But consider, My Son, the fruit of these labours, the swift
end, and the reward exceeding great; and thou shalt find it no
pain to bear them then, but rather the strongest solace of thy
patience.  For even in exchange for this trifling desire which
thou hast readily forsaken, thou shalt always have thy will in
Heaven.  There verily thou shalt find all that thou wouldst, all
that thou canst long for.  There thou shalt have all good within
thy power without the fear of losing it.  There thy will, ever at
one with Mine, shall desire nothing outward, nothing for itself.
There no man shall withstand thee, none shall complain of thee,
none shall hinder, nothing shall stand in thy path; but all
things desired by thee shall be present together, and shall
refresh thy whole affection, and fill it up even to the brim.
There I will glory for the scorn suffered here, the garment of
praise for sorrow, and for the lowest place a throne in the
Kingdom, for ever.  There shall appear the fruit of obedience,
the labour of repentance shall rejoice, and humble subjection
shall be crowned gloriously.

7. "Now therefore bow thyself humbly under the hands of all men;
nor let it trouble thee who said this or who ordered that; but
take special heed that whether thy superior, thy inferior, or thy
equal, require anything from thee, or even show a desire for it;
take it all in good part, and study with a good will to fulfil
the desire.  Let one seek this, another that; let this man glory
in this, and that man in that, and be praised a thousand thousand
times, but rejoice thou only in the contempt of thyself, and in
Mine own good pleasure and glory.  This is what thou art to long
for, even that whether by life or by death God may be ever
magnified in thee."(1)

(1) Philippians i. 20.


CHAPTER L

How a desolate man ought to commit himself into the hands of God

O Lord, Holy Father, be Thou blessed now and evermore; because as
Thou wilt so it is done, and what Thou doest is good.  Let Thy
servant rejoice in Thee, not in himself, nor in any other;
because Thou alone art the true joy, Thou art my hope and my
crown, Thou art my joy and my honour, O Lord.  What hath Thy
servant, which he received not from Thee, even without merit of
his own?  Thine are all things which Thou hast given, and which
Thou hast made.  I am poor and in misery even from my youth
up,(1) and my soul is sorrowful unto tears, sometimes also it is
disquieted within itself, because of the sufferings which are
coming upon it.

2. I long after the joy of peace; for the peace of Thy children
do I beseech, for in the light of Thy comfort they are fed by
Thee.  If Thou give peace, if Thou pour into me holy joy, the
soul of Thy servant shall be full of melody, and devout in Thy
praise.  But if Thou withdraw Thyself as too often Thou art wont,
he will not be able to run in the way of Thy commandments, but
rather he will smite his breast and will bow his knees; because
it is not with him as yesterday and the day before, when Thy
candle shined upon his head,(2) and he walked under the shadow of
Thy wings,(3) from the temptations which beset him.

3. O Father, righteous and ever to be praised, the hour cometh
when Thy servant is to be proved.  O beloved Father, it is well
that in this hour Thy servant suffer somewhat for Thy sake.  O
Father, evermore to be adored, as the hour cometh which Thou
foreknewest from everlasting, when for a little while Thy servant
should outwardly bow down, but always live inwardly with Thee;
when for a little while he should be little regarded, humbled,
and fail in the eyes of men; should be wasted with sufferings and
weaknesses, to rise again with Thee in the dawn of the new light,
and be glorified in the heavenly places.  O Holy Father, thou
hast ordained it so, and so hast willed it; and that is done
which Thou Thyself hast commanded.

4. For this is Thy favour to Thy friend, that he should suffer
and be troubled in the world for Thy love's sake, how often
soever, and by whomsoever and whosoever Thou hast suffered it to
be done.  Without Thy counsel and providence, and without cause,
nothing cometh to pass on the earth.  It is good for me, Lord,
that I had been in trouble, that I may learn Thy statutes,(4)
and may cast away all pride of heart and presumption.  It is
profitable for me that confusion hath covered my face, that I may
seek to Thee for consolation rather than unto men.  By this also
I have learned to dread Thine unsearchable judgment, who
afflictest the just with the wicked, but not without equity and
justice.

5. Thanks be unto Thee, because Thou hast not spared my sins, but
hast beaten me with stripes of love, inflicting pains, and
sending troubles upon me without and within.  There is none who
can console me, of all things which are under heaven, but Thou
only, O Lord my God, Thou heavenly Physician of souls, who dost
scourge and hast mercy, who leadest down to hell and bringest up
again.(5)  Thy discipline over me, and Thy rod itself shall teach
me.

6. Behold, O beloved Father, I am in Thy hands, I bow myself
under the rod of Thy correction.  Smite my back and my neck that
I may bend my crookedness to Thy will.  Make me a pious and lowly
disciple, as Thou wert wont to be kind, that I may walk according
to every nod of Thine.  To Thee I commend myself and all that I
have for correction; better is it to be punished here than
hereafter.  Thou knowest all things and each of them; and nothing
remaineth hid from Thee in man's conscience.  Before they are,
thou knowest that they will be, and Thou needest not that any man
teach Thee or admonish Thee concerning the things which are done
upon the earth.  Thou knowest what is expedient for my profit,
and how greatly trouble serveth unto the scrubbing off the rust
of sin.  Do with me according to Thy desired good pleasure, and
despise not my life which is full of sin, known to none so
entirely and fully as to Thee alone.

7. Grant me, O Lord, to know that which ought to be known; to
love that which ought to be loved; to praise that which pleaseth
Thee most, to esteem that which is precious in Thy sight, to
blame that which is vile in Thine eyes.  Suffer me not to judge
according to the sight of bodily eyes, nor to give sentence
according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant men; but to
discern in true judgment between visible and spiritual things,
and above all things to be ever seeking after the will of Thy
good pleasure.

8. Oftentimes the senses of men are deceived in judging; the
lovers of the world also are deceived in that they love only
visible things.  What is a man better because by man he is
reckoned very great?  The deceiver deceiveth the deceiver, the
vain man the vain, the blind man the blind, the weak man the
weak, when they exalt one another; and in truth they rather put
to shame, while they foolishly praise.  For as humble St. Francis
saith, "What each one is in Thine eyes, so much he is, and no
more."

(1) Psalm lxxxviii. 15.   (2) Job xxix. 3.   (3) Psalm xvii. 8.
(4) Psalm cxix. 71.   (5) Job xiii. 2.


CHAPTER LI

That we must give ourselves to humble works when we are unequal
to those that are lofty

"My Son, thou art not always able to continue in very fervent
desire after virtues, nor to stand fast in the loftier region of
contemplation; but thou must of necessity sometimes descend to
lower things because of thine original corruption, and bear about
the burden of corruptible life, though unwillingly and with
weariness.  So long as thou wearest a mortal body, thou shalt
feel weariness and heaviness of heart.  Therefore thou oughtest
to groan often in the flesh because of the burden of the flesh,
inasmuch as thou canst not give thyself to spiritual studies and
divine contemplation unceasingly.

2. "At such a time it is expedient for thee to flee to humble and
external works, and to renew thyself with good actions; to wait
for My coming and heavenly visitation with sure confidence; to
bear thy exile and drought of mind with patience, until thou be
visited by Me again, and be freed from all anxieties.  For I will
cause thee to forget thy labours, and altogether to enjoy eternal
peace. I will spread open before thee the pleasant pastures of the
Scriptures, that with enlarged heart thou mayest begin to run in
the way of My commandments.  And thou shalt say, 'The sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us.'"(1)

(1) Romans viii. 18.


CHAPTER LII

That a man ought not to reckon himself worthy of consolation, but
more worthy of chastisement

O Lord, I am not worthy of Thy consolation, nor of any spiritual
visitation; and therefore Thou dealest justly with me, when Thou
leavest me poor and desolate.  For if I were able to pour forth
tears like the sea, still should I not be worthy of Thy
consolation.  Therefore am I nothing worthy save to be scourged
and punished, because I have grievously and many a time offended
Thee, and in many things have greatly sinned.  Therefore, true
account being taken, I am not worthy even of the least of Thy
consolations.  But Thou, gracious and merciful God, who willest
not that Thy works should perish, to show forth the riches of Thy
mercy upon the vessels of mercy,(1) vouchsafest even beyond all
his own deserving, to comfort Thy servant above the measure of
mankind.  For Thy consolations are not like unto the discoursings
of men.

2. What have I done, O Lord, that Thou shouldst bestow any
heavenly comfort upon me?  I remember not that I have done any
good, but have been ever prone to sin and slow to amendment.  It
is true and I cannot deny it.  If I should say otherwise, Thou
wouldst rise up against me, and there would be none to defend
me.  What have I deserved for my sins but hell and everlasting
fire?  In very truth I confess that I am worthy of all scorn and
contempt, nor is it fit that I should be remembered among Thy
faithful servants.  And although I be unwilling to hear this,
nevertheless I will for the Truth's sake, accuse myself of my
sins, that the more readily I may prevail to be accounted worthy
of Thy mercy.

3. What shall I say, guilty that I am and filled with confusion?
I have no mouth to utter, unless it be this word alone, "I have
sinned, Lord, I have sinned; have mercy upon me, forgive me."
Let me alone, that I may take comfort a little before I go whence
I shall not return even to the land of darkness and the shadow of
death.(2)  What dost Thou so much require of a guilty and
miserable sinner, as that he be contrite, and humble himself for
his sins?  In true contrition and humiliation of heart is
begotten the hope of pardon, the troubled conscience is
reconciled, lost grace is recovered, a man is preserved from the
wrath to come, and God and the penitent soul hasten to meet each
other with a holy kiss.(3)

4. The humble contrition of sinners is an acceptable sacrifice
unto Thee, O Lord, sending forth a smell sweeter far in Thy sight
than the incense.  This also is that pleasant ointment which Thou
wouldst have poured upon Thy sacred feet, for a broken and
contrite heart Thou hast never despised.(4)  There is the place
of refuge from the wrathful countenance of the enemy.  There is
amended and washed away whatsoever evil hath elsewhere been
contracted.

(1) Romans ix. 23.   (2) Job x. 20, 21.   (3) Luke xv. 20.
(4) Psalm li. 17.


CHAPTER LIII

That the Grace of God doth not join itself to those who mind
earthly things

"My Son, precious is My grace, it suffereth not itself to be
joined with outward things, nor with earthly consolations.
Therefore thou oughtest to cast away all things which hinder
grace, if thou longest to receive the inpouring thereof.  Seek a
secret place for thyself, love to dwell alone with thyself,
desire the conversation of no one; but rather pour out thy devout
prayer to God, that thou mayest possess a contrite mind and a
pure conscience.  Count the whole world as nought; seek to be
alone with God before all outward things.  For thou canst not be
alone with Me, and at the same time be delighted with transitory
things.  Thou oughtest to be separated from thy acquaintances and
dear friends, and keep thy mind free from all worldly comfort.
So the blessed Apostle Peter beseecheth, that Christ's faithful
ones bear themselves in this world as strangers and pilgrims.(1)

2. "Oh how great a confidence shall there be to the dying man
whom no affection to anything detaineth in the world?  But to
have a heart so separated from all things, a sickly soul doth not
yet comprehend, nor doth the carnal man know the liberty of the
spiritual man.  But if indeed he desire to be spiritually minded,
