any court composed of rational men. Even if there were no other crimes
at his door, two of his actions are sufficient to slay him; for he
betrayed to Philip not only the Phocians but also Thrace. {180} Two
places in the whole world of greater value to Athens than Thermopylae
on land, and the Hellespont over sea, could not possibly be found; and
both these places these men have shamefully sold, and placed in
Philip's hands to be used against you. The enormity of this crime
alone--the sacrifice of Thrace and the Walls--apart from all the rest,
might be proved in countless ways,[n] and it is easy to point out how
many men have been executed or fined vast sums of money by you for such
offences--Ergophilus,[n] Cephisodotus,[n] Timomachus,[n] Ergocles[n]
long ago, Dionysius, and others; all of whom together, I may almost
say, have done the city less harm than the defendant. {181} But in
those days, men of Athens, you still guarded against danger by
calculation and forethought; whereas now you overlook any danger which
does not annoy you from day to day, or cause you pain by its immediate
presence, and then pass such resolutions here as 'that Philip shall
take the oath in favour of Cersobleptes also,' 'that we will not take
part in the proceedings of the Amphictyons,' 'that we must amend the
Peace.' But none of these resolutions would have been required, had
Aeschines then been ready to sail and to do what was required. As it
is, by urging us to go by land, he has lost all that we could have
saved by sailing; and by lying, all that could have been saved by
speaking the truth.

{182} He intends, I am told, to express immediately his indignation
that he alone of all the speakers in the Assembly should have to render
an account of his words. I will not urge that all speakers would
reasonably be called upon to render such an account, if any of their
words were spoken for money; I only say this. If Aeschines in his
private capacity has spoken wildly on some occasion or committed some
blunder, do not be over-strict with him, but let it pass and grant him
pardon: but if as your ambassador he has deliberately deceived you for
money, then do not let him go, or tolerate the plea that he ought not
to be called to account for what he _said_. {183} Why, for what, if not
for his words, is an ambassador to be brought to justice? Ambassadors
have no control over ships or places or soldiers or citadels--no one
puts such things in their hands--but over words and times. As regards
times, if he did not cause the times of the city's opportunities to be
lost, he is not guilty; but if he did so, he has committed crime. And
as to his words, if the words of his report were true or expedient, let
him escape; but if they were at once false, venal, and disastrous, let
him be convicted. {184} No greater wrong can a man do you, than is done
by lying speeches. For where government is based upon speeches, how can
it be carried on in security, if the speeches are not true? and if, in
particular, a speaker takes bribes and speaks to further the interests
of the enemy, how can you escape real danger? For to rob you of your
opportunities is not the same thing as to rob an oligarchy or a tyrant.
Far from it. {185} Under such governments, I imagine, everything is
done promptly at a word of command. But with you the Council must first
hear about everything, and pass its preliminary resolution--and even
that not at any time, but only when notice has been given of the
reception of heralds and embassies: then you must convoke an Assembly,
and that only when the time comes for one, as ordained by law: then
those who speak for your true good have to master and overcome those
who, through ignorance or wickedness, oppose them. {186} Besides all
this, even when a measure is resolved upon, and its advantages are
already plain, time must be granted to the impecuniosity of the
majority, in which they may procure whatever means they require in
order to be able to carry out what has been resolved. And so he who
causes times so critical to be lost, in a state constituted as ours is,
has not caused you to lose times, but has robbed you absolutely of the
realization of your aims.

{187} Now all those who are anxious to deceive you are very ready with
such expressions as 'disturbers of the city,' 'men who prevent Philip
from conferring benefits on the city.' In reply to these, I will use no
argument, but will read you Philip's letters, and will remind you of
the occasion on which each piece of deception took place, that you may
know that Philip has got beyond this exaggerated title of
'benefactor',[n] of which we are so sickened, in his attempts to take
you in by it.

[_Philip's letters are read._]

{188} Now although his work as ambassador has been so shameful, so
detrimental to you in many--nay, in all points, he goes about asking
people what they think of Demosthenes, who prosecutes his own
colleagues. I prosecute you indeed, whether I would or no, because
throughout our entire absence from home you plotted against me as I
have said, and because now I have the choice of only two alternatives:
either I must appear to share with you the responsibility for such work
as yours, or I must prosecute you. {189} Nay, I deny that I was ever
your colleague in the Embassy. I say that your work as ambassador was
an atrocious work, while my own was for the true good of those present
here. It is Philocrates that has been your colleague, as you have been
his, and Phrynon. For your policy was the same as theirs, and you all
approved of the same objects. But 'where are the salt, the table, the
libations that we shared?' So he asks everywhere in his theatrical
style--as though it were not the criminals, but the upright, that were
false to such pledges! {190} I am certain that though all the Prytanes
offer their common sacrifice on each occasion, and join one with
another in their meal and their libation, the good do not on this
account copy the bad; but if they detect one of their own number in
crime they report the fact to the Council and the people. In the very
same way the Council offers its inaugural sacrifice and feasts
together, and joins in libations and sacred rites. So do the generals,
and, one may practically say, every body of magistrates. Does that mean
that they grant an indemnity to any of their number who is guilty of
crime? Very far from it. {191} Leon accuses Timagoras,[n] after being
his fellow ambassador for four years: Eubulus accuses Tharrex and
Smicythus, after sharing the banquet with them: the great Conon, the
elder, prosecuted Adeimantus,[n] though they were generals together.
Which sinned against the salt and the libation, Aeschines--the traitors
and the faithless ambassadors and the hirelings, or their accusers?
Plainly those who violated, as you have done, the sanctity, not of
private libations, but of libations poured in the name of the whole
country.

{192} That you may realize that these men have been the most worthless
and wicked not only of all who have ever gone to Philip in a public
capacity, but even of those who have gone as private persons, and
indeed of all mankind, I ask you to listen to me while I describe
briefly an incident which falls outside the story of this Embassy. When
Philip took Olynthus he celebrated Olympian games, and gathered
together all the artists to the sacrifice and the festal gathering.
{193} And while he was entertaining them at a banquet, and crowning the
victors, he asked Satyrus, the well-known comic actor, why he alone
requested no favour of him. Did he see any meanness in him, or any
dislike towards himself? Satyrus answered (so the story goes) that he
happened to stand in no need of the things for which the rest were
asking, but that the boon which he would like to ask was a favour which
it would be very easy indeed for Philip to bestow; only he was afraid
that he might fail to obtain it. {194} Philip bade him name his
request, declaring with some spirit that there was nothing that he
would not do for him. Satyrus is then said to have stated that
Apollophanes of Pydna was formerly his friend and guest-friend,[n] and
that when he had perished by a treacherous assassination, his kinsman
had, in alarm, conveyed his daughters, then little children, to
Olynthus secretly. 'These girls,' said Satyrus, 'have been taken
prisoners at the capture of the city; they are with you, and they are
now of marriageable age. {195} It is these girls that I beg and entreat
you to give to me. But I should like you to hear and understand what
sort of present you will be giving me, if you really give it. I shall
gain nothing by receiving it: I shall give them in marriage, and a
dowry with them, and shall not allow them to suffer anything unworthy
of us or of their father.' When those who were present at the feast
heard this, there was such applause and cheering and approbation on all
hands, that Philip was moved and granted the request, although the
Apollophanes who was spoken of was one of the murderers of Alexander,
Philip's brother. {196} Now let us examine side by side with this
banquet of Satyrus, that in which these men took part in Macedonia.
Observe what likeness and resemblance there is between the two! For
these men were invited to the house of Xenophron, the son of Phaedimus,
who was one of the Thirty,[n] and went. I did not go. But when it came
to the time for wine, he brought in an Olynthian woman--good-looking,
but well-bred and modest, as the event proved. {197} At first, I
believe (according to the account which Iatrocles gave me the next
day), they only forced her to drink a little wine quietly and to eat
some dessert; but as the feast proceeded and they waxed warm, they bade
her recline and even sing a song. And when the poor creature, who was
in great distress, neither would nor could do as they bade her,
Aeschines and Phrynon declared that it was an insult and quite
intolerable, that a captive woman--one of those god-forsaken devils the
Olynthians--should give herself airs. 'Call a slave,' they cried, 'and
let some one bring a strap.' A servant came with a lash; they had been
drinking, I imagine, and were easily annoyed; and as soon as she said
something and burst into tears, the servant tore open her dress and
gave her a number of cuts across the back. {198} Beside herself with
the pain and the sense of her position, the woman leaped up and fell
before the knees of Iatrocles, overturning the table as she did so. And
had he not rescued her, she would have perished as the victim of a
drunken debauch; for the drunkenness of this abominable creature is
something horrible.[n] The case of this woman was also mentioned in
Arcadia before the Ten Thousand, and Diophantus reported to you what I
shall now force him to testify; for the matter was much talked of in
Thessaly and everywhere.

{199} Yet with all this on his conscience this unclean creature will
dare to look you in the face, and will very soon be speaking to you of
the life he has lived, in that magnificent voice of his. It chokes me
to hear him! Does not the jury know how at first you used to read over
the books to your mother at her initiations,[n] and wallow amid bands
of drunken men at their orgies, while still a boy? {200} and how you
were afterwards under-clerk to the magistrates, and played the rogue
for two or three drachmae?[n] and how at last, in recent days, you
thought yourself lucky to get a parasitic living in the training-rooms
of others, as a third-rate actor? What then is the life of which you
propose to speak? Where have you lived it? For the life which you have
really lived has been what I have described. And how much does he take
upon himself! He brought another man to trial here for unnatural
offences! But I leave this point for the moment. (_To the clerk._)
First, read me these depositions.

[_The depositions are read._]

{201} So many, then, and so gross, gentlemen of the jury, being the
crimes against you of which he stands convicted--and what wickedness do
they not include? he is corrupt, he is a minion, he is under the curse,
a liar, a betrayer of his own people; all the most heinous offences are
there--he will not defend himself against a single one of these
charges, and will have no defence to offer that is either just or
straightforward. But the statement which, I am told, he intends to
make, borders on madness; though perhaps a man who has no other plea to
offer must contrive anything that he can. {202} For I hear that he is
to say that I, forsooth, have been a partner in everything of which I
accuse him; that at first I used to approve of his policy and to act
with him; and that I have suddenly changed my mind and become his
accuser. As a defence of his conduct such assertions are, of course,
neither legitimate nor to the point, though they do imply some kind of
charge against myself; for, of course, if I have acted thus, I am a
worthless person. But the conduct itself is no better for that. Far
from it! {203} At the same time, I think it is proper for me to prove
to you both the points in question--first, that if he makes such an
assertion he will be lying; and secondly, what is the just line of
defence. Now a just and straightforward defence must show either that
the acts charged against him were not committed, or that having been
committed, they are to the advantage of the city. {204} But Aeschines
cannot do either of these things. For I presume that it is not possible
for him to say that it is to the advantage of the city that the
Phocians have been ruined, that Thermopylae is in Philip's hands, that
Thebes is powerful, that there are soldiers in Euboea and plotting
against Megara, and that the Peace should not have been sworn to,[n]
when on the former occasion he announced the very contrary of all these
things to you in the guise of advantages, and advantages about to be
realized? Nor will he be able to persuade you that these things have
not been done, when you yourselves have seen them and know the facts
well. {205} It remains for me, therefore, to show you that I have had
no share in any of their proceedings. Shall I then dismiss everything
else from consideration--all that I have said against them in your
presence, all my collisions with them during our absence, all my
antagonism to them from first to last--and produce my opponents
themselves as witnesses to the fact that my conduct and theirs have
been absolutely contrary the one to the other--that they have taken
money to your detriment, and that I refused to receive it? Then mark
what I say.

{206} Who, would you say, was of all men in Athens the most offensive,
most overflowing with effrontery and contemptuousness? I am sure that
none of you, even by mistake, would name any other than Philocrates.
And who, would you say, possessed the loudest voice and could enunciate
whatever he pleased most clearly? Aeschines the defendant, I am sure.
Who is it then that these men describe as cowardly and timid before a
crowd, while I call him cautious? It is myself; for I have never
annoyed you or forced myself upon you against your will. {207} Now at
every meeting of the Assembly, as often as a discussion has arisen upon
these subjects, you hear me accusing and convicting these men,
declaring explicitly that they have taken money and have sold all the
interests of the city. And not one of them has ever to this day
contradicted the statement, when he heard it, or opened his mouth, or
shown himself. {208} What then is the reason, why the most offensive
men in the city, the men with the loudest voices, are so cowed before
me, the timidest of men, whose voice is no louder than any other? It is
because Truth is strong; while to them, on the other hand, the
consciousness of having sold public interests is a source of weakness.
It is this that steals away the boldness of these men, this that binds
down their tongues and stops their mouths--chokes them, and makes them
silent. {209} You remember, of course, how at the recent meeting in the
Peiraeus, when you would not have him for your representative,[n] he
was shouting that he would impeach me and indict me, and crying, 'Oh!
Oh!' But such steps are the beginning of long and numerous trials and
speeches; whereas the alternative was but to utter perhaps two or three
words, which even a slave purchased yesterday could have
pronounced--'Men of Athens, this is utterly atrocious. Demosthenes is
accusing me here of crimes in which he himself was a partner; he says
that I have taken money, when he has taken money, or shared it,
himself.' {210} But no such words, no such sound, did he utter, nor did
one of you hear him do so; he only uttered threats to a different
effect. And why? Because he knew that he had done what he was charged
with doing; he was abjectly afraid to use any such expressions; his
resolution could not rise to them, but shrank back; for it was in the
grip of his conscience; whereas there was nothing to hinder him from
uttering irrelevant abuse and slander. {211} But here is the strongest
proof of all, and it consists not in words, but in fact. For when I was
anxious to do what it was right to do, namely, to make a second report
to you, after serving a second time as ambassador, Aeschines came
before the Board of Auditors with a number of witnesses, and forbade
them to call me before the court, since I had rendered my account
already, and was no longer liable to give it. The incident was
extremely ridiculous. And what was the meaning of it? He had made his
report with reference to the First Embassy, against which no one
brought any charge, and did not wish to go before the court again with
regard to the Second Embassy, with reference to which he now appears
before you, and within which all his crimes fell. {212} But if I came
before you twice, it became necessary for him also to appear again; and
so he tried to prevent them from summoning me. But this action of his,
men of Athens, plainly proves to you two things--first, that he had so
condemned himself that none of you can now acquit him without impiety;
and secondly, that he will not speak a word of truth about me. Had he
anything true to assert, he would have been found asserting it and
accusing me then; he would certainly not have tried to prevent my being
summoned. {213} To prove the truth of what I say, (_to the clerk_) call
me the witnesses to the facts.

But further, if he makes slanderous statements against me which have
nothing to do with the Embassy, there are many good reasons for your
refusing to listen to him. For I am not on my trial to-day, and when I
have finished my speech I have no further time allotted to me.[n] What
can such statements mean, except that he is bankrupt of legitimate
arguments? For who that was on his trial and had any defence to make,
would prefer to accuse another? {214} And consider also this further
point, gentlemen of the jury. If I were on my trial, with the defendant
Aeschines for accuser and Philip for judge; and if, being unable to
disprove my guilt, I abused Aeschines and tried to sully his character,
do you not think that Philip would be indignant at the very fact of a
man abusing _his_ benefactors in his own presence? Do not _you_ then
prove worse than Philip; but force Aeschines to defend himself against
the charges which are the subject of the trial. (_To the clerk._) Read
the deposition.

[_The deposition is read._]

{215} So for my part, because I had nothing on my conscience, I felt it
my duty to render an account and submit all the information that the
laws required, while the defendant took the opposite view. How then can
his conduct and mine have been the same? or how can he possibly assert
against me now things of which he has never even accused me before? It
is surely impossible. And yet he will assert these things, and, Heaven
knows, it is natural enough. For you doubtless know well that ever
since the human race began and trials were instituted, no one was ever
convicted admitting his crime: they brazen it out, they deny it, they
lie, they make up excuses, they take every means to escape paying the
penalty. {216} _You_ must not let any of these devices mislead you
to-day; your judgement must be given upon the facts, in the light of
your own knowledge; you must not attend to words, whether mine or his,
still less to the witnesses whom he will have ready to testify
anything, since he has Philip to pay his expenses--you will see how
glibly they will give evidence for him; nor must you care whether his
voice is fine and loud, or whether mine is poor. {217} For it is no
trial of orators or of speeches that you have to hold to-day, if you
are wise men. You have rather, in the name of a cause shamefully and
terribly ruined, to thrust off the present disgrace on to the shoulders
of the guilty, after a scrutiny of those results which are known to you
all. {218} And these results, which you know and do not require us to
tell you of--what are they? If the consequences of the Peace have been
all that they promised you; if you admit that you were so filled with
an unmanly cowardice, that, though the enemy was not in your land,
though you were not blockaded by sea, though your city was menaced by
no other danger whatever, though, on the contrary, the price of corn
was low and you were in other respects as well off as you are to-day,
{219} though you knew beforehand on the information of these men that
your allies were about to be ruined and Thebes to become powerful, that
Philip was about to occupy the Thracian strongholds and to establish a
basis of operations against you in Euboea, and that all that has now
happened was about to come to pass, you nevertheless made peace
cheerfully;--if that is so, then acquit Aeschines, and do not add
perjury to all your disgrace. For in that case he is guilty of no crime
against you; it is I that am mad and brainsick to accuse him now. {220}
But if what they told you was altogether the reverse of this, if it was
a tale of great generosity--of Philip's love for Athens, of his
intention to save the Phocians, to check the insolence of the Thebans,
and beside all this (if he obtained the Peace) to confer on you
benefits that would more than compensate for Amphipolis, and to restore
to you Euboea and Oropus; if, I say, they stated and promised all this,
and have now totally deceived and cheated you, and have all but robbed
you of Attica itself, then condemn him, and do not, in addition to all
the outrages--I know not what other word to use--that you have
suffered, carry with you to your homes, through upholding their
corruption, the curse and the guilt of perjury.

{221} Again, gentlemen of the jury, ask yourselves what reason I could
have had for choosing to accuse these men, if they had done no wrong?
You will find none. Is it pleasant to have many enemies? Pleasant? It
is not even safe. Was there any quarrel between me and Aeschines? None.
What then? 'You were afraid for yourself, and in your cowardice thought
to save yourself this way:' for that, I have heard, is what he says.
What? I was afraid, when, according to your own statement, there was
nothing to be afraid of, and no crime had been committed? If he repeats
such an assertion, men of Athens, consider[n] what these men
themselves, the actual criminals, ought to suffer for their offences,
if I, who am absolutely guiltless, was afraid of being ruined owing to
them. {222} But what is my motive for accusing you? I am an informer,
of course, and want to get money out of you![n] And which was the
easier course for me--to get money out of Philip, who offered a large
sum--to get as much as any of these men, and to have not only Philip
for my friend, but also my opponents (for they would assuredly have
been friends, had I been partner with them, since even now they have no
inherited quarrel against me, but only the fact that I refused to join
in their actions); or to beg them for a share of their gains, and be
regarded with hostility both by Philip and by them? Is it likely that
when I was ransoming the prisoners at such cost to myself, I should ask
to receive a paltry sum from these men, in a disgraceful manner and
with their enmity accompanying it? {223} Impossible! My report was
true. I abstained from taking money for the sake of justice and truth
and my own future. For I thought, as others among you have thought,
that my own uprightness would receive its reward, and that I must not
barter my ambition to stand well with you for gain of any kind. And I
abhor these men, because I saw that they were vile and impious in the
conduct of their mission, and because I have been robbed of the objects
of my own ambition, owing to their corruption, now that you have come
to be vexed with the Embassy as a whole. And it is because I foresee
what must happen that I now accuse him, and appear to challenge his
report; for I would have it decided here, in a trial before a jury,
that my conduct has been the opposite of his. {224} And I am
afraid--afraid, I say, for I will speak all my mind to you--that though
when the time comes you may drag me in spite of my entire innocence to
the same ruin with them, you are now utterly supine. For, men of
Athens, you appear to me to be altogether unstrung, waiting to suffer
