courageous spirit flashed from her clear young eyes and emanated from
her taut young body, erect in defiance. "You may think that you can do
anything with me that you please, but you can't!"

"Peculiar--highly perplexing--why should that one stimulus, in the case
of young females, produce such an entirely disproportionate reaction?"
Roger's eyes bored into Clio's; the girl shivered and looked away. "But
sex itself, primal and basic, the most widespread concomitant of life in
this continuum, is completely illogical and paradoxical. Most
baffling--decidedly, this research on sex must go on."

Roger pressed a button and a tall, comely woman appeared--a woman of
indefinite age and of uncertain nationality.

"Show Miss Marsden to her apartment," he directed, and as the two women
went out a man came in.

"The cargo is unloaded, sir," the newcomer reported. "The two men and
the five women indicated have been taken to the hospital."

"Very well, dispose of the others in the usual fashion." The minion went
out, and Roger continued, emotionlessly:

"Collectively, the other passengers may be worth a million or so, but it
would not be worthwhile to waste time upon them."

"What are you, anyway?" blazed Costigan, helpless but enraged beyond
caution. "I have heard of mad scientists who tried to destroy the Earth,
and of equally mad geniuses who thought themselves Napoleons capable of
conquering even the Solar System. Whichever you are, you should know
that you can't get away with it."

"I am neither. I am, however, a scientist, and I direct many other
scientists. I am not mad. You have undoubtedly noticed several peculiar
features of this place?"

"Yes, particularly the artificial gravity and those screens. An ordinary
ether-wall is opaque in one direction, and doesn't bar matter--yours are
transparent both ways and something more than impenetrable to matter.
How do you do it?"

"You could not understand them if I explained them to you, and they are
merely two of our smaller developments. I do not intend to destroy your
planet Earth; I have no desire to rule over masses of futile and
brainless men. I have, however, certain ends of my own in view. To
accomplish my plans I require hundreds of millions in gold and other
hundreds of millions in uranium, thorium, and radium; all of which I
shall take from the planets of this Solar System before I leave it. I
shall take them in spite of the puerile efforts of the fleets of your
Triplanetary League.

"This structure was designed by me and built under my direction. It is
protected from meteorites by forces of my devising. It is indetectable
and invisible--ether waves are bent around it without loss or
distortion. I am discussing these points at such length so that you may
realize exactly your position. As I have intimated, you can be of
assistance to me if you will."

"Now just what could you offer any _man_ to make him join your outfit?"
demanded Costigan, venomously.

"Many things," Roger's cold tone betrayed no emotion, no recognition of
Costigan's open and bitter contempt. "I have under me many men, bound to
me by many ties. Needs, wants, longings, and desires differ from man to
man, and I can satisfy practically any of them. Many men take delight in
the society of young and beautiful women, but there are other urges
which I have found quite efficient. Greed, thirst for fame, longing for
power, and so on, including many qualities usually regarded as 'noble.'
And what I promise, I deliver. I demand only loyalty to me, and that
only in certain things and for a relatively short period. In all else,
my men do as they please. In conclusion, I can use you two conveniently,
but I do not need you. Therefore you may choose now between my service
and--the alternative."

"Exactly what is the alternative?"

"We will not go into that. Suffice it to say that it has to do with a
minor research, which is not progressing satisfactorily. It will result
in your extinction, and perhaps I should mention that that extinction
will not be particularly pleasant."

"I say NO, you...." Bradley roared. He intended to give an unexpurgated
classification, but was rudely interrupted.

"Hold on a minute!" snapped Costigan. "How about Miss Marsden?"

"She has nothing to do with this discussion," returned Roger, icily. "I
do not bargain--in fact, I believe that I shall keep her for a time. She
has it in mind to destroy herself if I do not allow her to be ransomed,
but she will find that door closed to her until I permit it to open."

"In that case, I string along with the Chief--take what he started to
say about you and run it clear across the board for me!" barked
Costigan.

"Very well. That decision was to be expected from men of your type." The
gray man touched two buttons and two of his creatures entered the room.
"Put these men into two separate cells on the second level," he ordered.
"Search them; all their weapons may not have been in their armor. Seal
the doors and mount special guards, tuned to me here."

Imprisoned they were, and carefully searched; but they bore no arms, and
nothing had been said concerning communicators. Even if such instruments
could be concealed, Roger would detect their use instantly. At least, so
ran his thought. But Roger's men had no inkling of the possibility of
Costigan's "Service Special" phones, detectors, and spy-ray--instruments
of minute size and of infinitesimal power, but yet instruments which,
working as they were below the level of the ether, were effective at
great distances and caused no vibrations in the ether by which their use
could be detected. And what could be more innocent than the regulation
personal equipment of every officer of space? The heavy goggles, the
wrist-watch and its supplementary pocket chronometer, the flash-lamp,
the automatic lighter, the sender, the money-belt?

All these items of equipment were examined with due care; but the
cleverest minds of the Triplanetary Service had designed those
communicators to pass any ordinary search, however careful, and when
Costigan and Bradley were finally locked into the designated cells they
still possessed their ultra-instruments.




CHAPTER 8

IN ROGER'S PLANETOID


In the hall Clio glanced around her wildly, seeking even the narrowest
avenue of escape. Before she could act, however, her body was clamped as
though in a vise, and she struggled, motionless.

"It is useless to attempt to escape, or to do anything except what
Roger wishes," the guide informed her somberly, snapping off the
instrument in her hand and thus restoring to the thoroughly cowed girl
her freedom of motion.

"His lightest wish is law," she continued as they walked down a long
corridor. "The sooner you realize that you must do exactly as he
pleases, in all things, the easier your life will be."

"But I wouldn't _want_ to keep on living!" Clio declared, with a flash
of spirit. "And I can _always_ die, you know."

"You will find that you cannot," the passionless creature returned,
monotonously. "If you do not yield, you will long and pray for death,
but you will not die unless Roger wills it. Look at me: I cannot die.
Here is your apartment. You will stay here until Roger gives further
orders concerning you."

The living automaton opened a door and stood silent and impassive while
Clio, staring at her in horror, shrank past her and into the sumptuously
furnished suite. The door closed soundlessly and utter silence descended
as a pall. Not an ordinary silence, but the indescribable perfection of
the absolute silence, complete absence of all sound. In that silence
Clio stood motionless. Tense and rigid, hopeless, despairing, she stood
there in that magnificent room, fighting an almost overwhelming impulse
to scream. Suddenly she heard the cold voice of Roger, speaking from the
empty air.

"You are over-wrought, Miss Marsden. You can be of no use to yourself or
to me in that condition. I command you to rest; and, to insure that
rest, you may pull that cord, which will establish about this room an
ether wall: a wall to cut off even this my voice...."

The voice ceased as she pulled the cord savagely and threw herself upon
a divan in a torrent of gasping, strangling, but rebellious sobs. Then
again came a voice, but not to her ears. Deep within her, pervading
every bone and muscle, it made itself felt rather than heard.

"Clio?" it asked. "Don't talk yet...."

"Conway!" she gasped in relief, every fiber of her being thrilled into
new hope at the deep, well-remembered voice of Conway Costigan.

"Keep still!" he snapped. "Don't act so happy! He may have a spy-ray on
you. He can't hear me, but he may be able to hear you. When he was
talking to you you must have noticed a sort of rough, sandpapery feeling
under that necklace I gave you? Since he's got an ether-wall around you
the beads are dead now. If you feel anything like that under the
wrist-watch, breathe deeply, twice. If you don't feel anything there,
it's safe for you to talk, as loud as you please."

"I don't feel anything, Conway!" she rejoiced. Tears forgotten, she was
her old, buoyant self again. "So that wall _is_ real, after all? I only
about half believed it."

"Don't trust it too much, because he can cut it off from the outside any
time he wants to. Remember what I told you: that necklace will warn you
of any spy-ray in the ether, and the watch will detect anything below
the level of the ether. It's dead now, of course, since our three phones
are direct-connected; I'm in touch with Bradley, too. Don't be too
scared; we've got a lot better chance than I thought we had."

"What? You don't mean it!"

"Absolutely. I'm beginning to think that maybe we've got something he
doesn't know exists--our ultra-wave. Of course I wasn't surprised when
his searchers failed to find our instruments, but it never occurred to
me that I might have a clear field to use them in! I can't quite believe
it yet, but I haven't been able to find any indication that he can even
detect the bands we are using. I'm going to look around over there with
my spy-ray ... I'm looking at you now--feel it?"

"Yes, the watch feels that way, now."

"Fine! Not a sign of interference over here, either. I can't find a
trace of ultra-wave--anything below ether-level, you know--anywhere in
the whole place. He's got so much stuff that we've never heard of that I
supposed of course he'd have ultra-wave, too; but if he hasn't, that
gives us the edge. Well, Bradley and I've got a lot of work to do....
Wait a minute, I just had a thought. I'll be back in about a second."

There was a brief pause, then the soundless, but clear voice went on:

"Good hunting! That woman that gave you the blue willies isn't
alive--she's full of the prettiest machinery and circuits you ever saw!"

"Oh, Conway!" and the girl's voice broke in an engulfing wave of
thanksgiving and relief. "It was so unutterably horrible, thinking of
what must have happened to her and to others like her!"

"He's running a colossal bluff, I think. He's good, all right, but he
lacks quite a lot of being omnipotent. But don't get too cocky, either.
Plenty has happened to plenty of women here, and men too--and plenty may
happen to us unless we put out a few jets. Keep a stiff upper lip, and
if you want us, yell. 'Bye!"

The silent voice ceased, the watch upon Clio's wrist again became an
unobtrusive timepiece, and Costigan, in his solitary cell far below her
tower room, turned his peculiarly goggled eyes toward other scenes. His
hands, apparently idle in his pockets, manipulated tiny controls; his
keen, highly-trained eyes studied every concealed detail of mechanism of
the great globe. Finally, he took off the goggles and spoke in a low
voice to Bradley, confined in another windowless room across the hall.

"I think I've got dope enough, Captain. I've found out where he put our
armor and guns, and I've located all the main leads, controls, and
generators. There are no ether-walls around us here, but every door is
shielded, and there are guards outside our doors--one to each of us.
They're robots, not men. That makes it harder, since they're undoubtedly
connected direct to Roger's desk and will give an alarm at the first
hint of abnormal performance. We can't do a thing until he leaves his
desk. See that black panel, a little below the cord-switch to the right
of your door? That's the conduit cover. When I give you the word, tear
that off and you'll see one red wire in the cable. It feeds the
shield-generator of your door. Break that wire and join me out in the
hall. Sorry I had only one of these ultra-wave spies, but once we're
together it won't be so bad. Here's what I thought we could do," and he
went over in detail the only course of action which his survey had shown
to be possible.

"There, he's left his desk!" Costigan exclaimed after the conversation
had continued for almost an hour. "Now as soon as we find out where he's
going, we'll start something ... he's going to see Clio, the swine! This
changes things, Bradley!" His hard voice was a curse.

"Somewhat!" blazed the captain. "I know how you two have been getting on
all during the cruise. I'm with you, but what can we do?"

"We'll do something," Costigan declared grimly. "If he makes a pass at
her I'll get him if I have to blow this whole sphere out of space, with
us in it!"

"Don't do that, Conway," Clio's low voice, trembling but determined, was
felt by both men. "If there's a chance for you to get away and do
anything about fighting him, don't mind me. Maybe he only wants to talk
about the ransom, anyway."

"He wouldn't talk ransom to _you_--he's going to talk something else
entirely," Costigan gritted, then his voice changed suddenly. "But say,
maybe it's just as well this way. They didn't find our specials when
they searched us, you know, and we're going to do plenty of damage right
soon now. Roger probably isn't a fast worker--more the cat-and-mouse
type, I'd say--and after we get started he'll have something on his mind
besides you. Think you can stall him off and keep him interested for
about fifteen minutes?"

"I'm sure I can--I'll do _anything_ to help us, or you, get away from
this horrible...." Her voice ceased as Roger broke the ether-wall of her
apartment and walked toward the divan, upon which she crouched in
wide-eyed, helpless, trembling terror.

"Get ready, Bradley!" Costigan directed tersely. "He left Clio's
ether-wall off, so that any abnormal signals would be relayed to him
from his desk--he knows that there's no chance of anyone disturbing him
in that room. But I'm holding a beam on that switch, so that the wall is
on, full strength. No matter what we do now, he can't get a warning.
I'll have to hold the beam exactly in place, though, so you'll have to
do the dirty work. Tear out that red wire and kill those two guards. You
know how to kill a robot, don't you?"

"Yes--break his eye-lenses and his ear-drums and he'll stop whatever
he's doing and send out distress calls.... Got 'em both. Now what?"

"Open my door--the shield switch is to the right."

Costigan's door flew open and the Triplanetary captain leaped into the
room.

"Now for our armor!" he cried.

"Not yet!" snapped Costigan. He was standing rigid, goggled eyes staring
immovably at a spot on the ceiling. "I can't move a millimeter until
you've closed Clio's ether-wall switch. If I take this ray off it for a
second we're sunk. Five floors up, straight ahead down a
corridor--fourth door on right. When you're at the switch you'll feel my
ray on your watch. Snap it up!"

"Right," and the captain leaped away at a pace to be equalled by few men
of half his years.

Soon he was back, and after Costigan had tested the ether-wall of the
"bridal suite" to make sure that no warning signal from his desk or his
servants could reach Roger within it, the two officers hurried away
toward the room in which their space-armor was.

"Too bad they don't wear uniforms," panted Bradley, short of breath
from the many flights of stairs. "Might have helped some as disguise."

"I doubt it--with so many robots around, they've probably got signals
that we couldn't understand anyway. If we meet anybody it'll mean a
battle. Hold it!" Peering through walls with his spy-ray, Costigan had
seen two men approaching, blocking an intersecting corridor into which
they must turn. "Two of 'em, a man and a robot--the robot's on your
side. We'll wait here, right at the corner--when they round it take
'em!" and Costigan put away his goggles in readiness for strife.

All unsuspecting, the two pirates came into view, and as they appeared
the two officers struck. Costigan, on the inside, drove a short, hard
right low into the human pirate's abdomen. The fiercely-driven fist sank
to the wrist into the soft tissues and the stricken man collapsed. But
even as the blow landed Costigan had seen that there was a third enemy,
following close behind the two he had been watching, a pirate who was
even then training a ray projector upon him. Reacting automatically,
Costigan swung his unconscious opponent around in front of him, so that
it was into an enemy's body that the vicious ray tore, and not into his
own. Crouching down into the smallest possible compass, he straightened
out with the lashing force of a mighty steel spring, hurling the corpse
straight at the flaming mouth of the projector. The weapon crashed to
the floor and dead pirate and living went down in a heap. Upon that heap
Costigan hurled himself, feeling for the pirate's throat. But the fellow
had wriggled clear, and countered with a gouging thrust that would have
torn out the eyes of a slower man, following it up instantly with a
savage kick for the groin. No automaton this, geared and set to perform
certain fixed duties with mechanical precision, but a lithe, strong man
in hard training, fighting with every foul trick known to his murderous
ilk.

But Costigan was no tyro in the art of dirty fighting. Few indeed were
the maiming tricks of foul combat unknown to even the rank and file of
the highly efficient under-cover branch of the Triplanetary Service; and
Costigan, a Sector Chief, knew them all. Not for pleasure,
sportsmanship, nor million-dollar purses did those secret agents use
Nature's weapons. They came to grips only when it could not possibly be
avoided, but when they were forced to fight in that fashion they went in
with but one grim purpose--to kill, and to kill in the shortest possible
space of time. Thus it was that Costigan's opening soon came. The
pirate launched a vicious _coup de sabot_, which Costigan avoided by a
lightning shift. It was a slight shift, barely enough to make the kicker
miss, and two powerful hands closed upon that flying foot in midair like
the sprung jaws of a bear-trap. Closed and twisted viciously, in the
