never brought out except when he was alone, and waited for Captain
Baird to ask his question. Captain Baird turned at last.

"They are our markings?" Captain Baird asked. It was not the
question. Captain Baird knew the markings of the Rocket Testing
Station as well as the doctor did.

"Yes," the doctor said, "they are our markings. Identical. But not
our paint."

Captain Baird turned back to the window. Six months ago it had
happened. Ten minutes after launching, the giant test rocket had
been only a speck on the observation screen. Captain Baird had
turned away in disgust.

"A mouse!" the captain had said, "unfortunate a mouse can't
observe, build, report. My men are getting restless, Johannsen."

"When we are ready, Captain," the doctor had said.

It was twelve hours before the urgent call from Central Control
brought the captain running back to the laboratory. The doctor was
there before him. Professor Schultz wasted no time, he pointed to
the instrument panel. "A sudden shift, see for yourself. We'll
miss Mars by a million and a quarter at least."

Two hours later the shift in course of the test rocket was
apparent to all of them and so was their disappointment.

       *     *     *     *     *

"According to the instruments the steering shifted a quarter of an
inch. No reason shows up," Professor Schultz said.

"Flaw in the metal?" Doctor Johannsen said.

"How far can it go?" Captain Baird asked.

Professor Schultz shrugged. "Until the fuel runs out, which is
probably as good as never, or until the landing mechanism is
activated by a planet-sized body."

"Course? Did you plot it?" The doctor asked.

"Of course I did," Professor Schultz said, "as close as I can
calculate it is headed for Alpha Centauri."

Captain Baird turned away. The doctor watched him.

"Perhaps you will not be quite so hasty with your men's lives in
the future, Captain?" the doctor said.

Professor Schultz was spinning dials. "No contact," the professor
said, "No contact at all."

That had been six months ago. Three more test rockets had been
fired successfully before the urgent report came through from
