distance our guards allow, I happened to recognize your figure lying
here. I was sorry and yet glad to see you, sorry that you were a
prisoner, and glad to find at least one whom I knew, a friend."

John gave Weber's hand a strong grasp.

"I can say the same about you," he said warmly. "We're both prisoners,
but yesterday was a magnificent day for France and democracy."

"It was, and now it's to be seen what today will be."

"I hope and believe it will be no less magnificent."

"I learned that you were taken just after you alighted from an
aeroplane, and that a man with you escaped in the plane. At least, I
presume it was you, as I heard the Germans talking of such a person and
I knew of your great friendship for Philip Lannes. Lannes, of course was
the one who escaped."

"A good surmise, Fernand. It was no less a man than he."

Weber's eyes sparkled.

"I was sure of it," he said. "A wonderful fellow, that Lannes, perhaps
the most skillful and important bearer of dispatches that France has.
But he will not forget you, Mr. Scott. He knows, of course, where you
were taken, and doubtless from points high in the air he has traced the
course of this German army. He will find time to come for you. He will
surely do so. He has a feeling for you like that of a brother, and his
skill in the air gives him a wonderful advantage. In all the history of
the world there have never before been any scouts like the aeroplanes."

"That's true, and that, I think, is their chief use."

Impulse made John look up. The skies were fast beginning to brighten
with the first light in the east, and large objects would be visible
there. But he saw nothing against the blue save two or three captive
balloons which floated not far above the trees inside the German lines.
He longed for a sight of the _Arrow_. He believed that he would know its
shape even high in the heavens, but they were speckless.

The Alsatian, whose eyes followed his, shook his head.

"He is not there, Mr. Scott," he said, "and you will not see him today,
but I have a conviction that he will come, by night doubtless."

John lowered his eyes and his feeling of disappointment passed. It had
been foolish of him to hope so soon, but it was only a momentary
impulse, Lannes could not seek him now, and even if he were to come
there would be no chance of rescue until circumstances changed.

"Doubtless you and he were embarked on a long errand when you were
taken," said Weber.

"We were carrying a message to the commander of one of the French
armies, but I don't know the name of the commander, I don't know which
army it is, and I don't know where it is."

Weber laughed.

"But Lannes knew all of those things," he said. "Oh, he's a close one!
He wouldn't trust such secrets not even to his brother-in-arms."

"Nor should he do so. I'd rather he'd never tell them to me unless he
thought it necessary."

"I agree with you exactly, Mr. Scott. Hark! Did you hear it? The battle
swells afresh, and it's not yet full day!"

The roaring had not ceased, but out of the west rose a sound, louder
yet, deep, rolling and heavy with menace. It was the discharge of a
great gun and it came from a point several miles away.

"We don't know who fired that," said Weber, "It may be French, English
or German, but it's my opinion that we'll hear its like in our forest
all day long, just as we did yesterday. However, it shall not keep me
from bathing my face in this brook."

"Nor me either," said John.

The cold water refreshed and invigorated him, and as he stooped over the
brook, he heard other cannon. They seemed to him fairly to spring into
action, and, in a few moments, the whole earth was roaring again with
the huge volume of their fire.

Other prisoners, wounded and unwounded, awakened by the cannon, strolled
down to the brook and dipped into its waters.

"I'd better slip back to my place beyond the hillock," said Weber.
"We're in two lots, we prisoners, and I belong in the other lot. I don't
think our guards have noticed our presence here, and it will be safer
for me to return. But it's likely that we'll all be gathered into one
body soon, and I'll help you watch for Lannes."

"I'll be glad of your help," said John sincerely. "We must escape. In
all the confusion of so huge a battle there ought to be a chance."

Weber slipped away in the crowd now hurrying down to the stream, and in
a few moments John was joined by Fleury, whose attention was centered on
the sounds of the distant battle. He deemed it best to say nothing to
him of Weber, who did not wish to be known as an Alsatian. Fleury's
heavy sleep had made him strong and fresh again, but he was in a fury at
his helplessness.

"To think of our being tied here at such a time," he said. "France and
England are pushing the battle again! I know it, and we're helpless,
mere prisoners!"

"Still," said John, "while we can't fight we may see things worth
seeing. Perhaps it's not altogether our loss to be inside the German
army on such a day."

Fleury could not reconcile himself to such a view, but he sought to make
the best of it, and he was cheered, too, by the vast increase in the
volume of the cannon fire. Before the full day had crossed from east to
west the great guns were thundering again along the long battle line.
But in their immediate vicinity there was no action. All the German
troops here seemed to be resting on their arms. No Uhlans were visible
and John judged that the detachment under von Boehlen, having gone forth
chiefly for scouting purposes, had not yet returned.

They received bread, sausage and coffee for breakfast from one of the
huge kitchen automobiles, and nearly all ate with a good appetite. Their
German captors did not treat them badly, but John, watching both
officers and men, did not see any elation. He had no doubt that the
officers were stunned by the terrible surprise of the day before, and as
for the men, they would know nothing. He had seen early that the Germans
were splendid troops, disciplined, brave and ingenious, but the habit of
blind obedience would blind them also to the fact that fortune had
turned her face away from them.

He wished that his friend von Arnheim--friend he regarded him--would
appear and tell him something about the battle, but his wish did not
come true for an hour and meanwhile the whole heavens resounded with the
roar of the battle, while distant flashes from the guns could be seen on
either flank.

The young German, glasses in hand, evidently seeking a good view, walked
to the crest of the hillock behind which Weber had disappeared. John
presumed enough on their brief friendship to call to him.

"Do you see anything of interest?" he asked.

Von Arnheim nodded quickly.

"I see the distant fringe of a battle," he replied amiably, "but it's
too early in the morning for me to pass my judgment upon it."

"Nevertheless you can look for a day of most desperate struggle!"

Von Arnheim nodded very gravely.

"Men by tens of thousands will fall before night," he said.

As if to confirm his words, the roar of the battle took a sudden and
mighty increase, like a convulsion.




CHAPTER VII

THE TWO PRINCES


John sat with the other prisoners for more than two hours listening to
the thunder of the great battle or rather series of battles which were
afterwards classified under the general head the Battle of the Marne. He
was not a soldier, merely a civilian serving as a soldier, but he had
learned already to interpret many of the signs of combat. There was an
atmospheric feeling that registered on a sensitive mind the difference
between victory and defeat, and he was firm in the belief that as
yesterday had gone today was going. Certainly this great German army
which he believed to be in the center was not advancing, and something
of a character most menacing was happening to the wings of the German
force. He read it in the serious, preoccupied faces of the officers who
passed near. There was not a smile on the face of the youngest of them
all, but deepest anxiety was written alike on young and old.

John and Fleury sat together at the edge of the brook, and for a while
forgot their chagrin at not being on the battle line. The battle itself
which they could not see, but which they could hear, absorbed them so
thoroughly that they had no time to think of regrets.

John had thought that man's violence, his energy in destruction on the
first day could not be equalled, but it seemed to him now that the
second day surpassed the first. The cannon fire was distant, yet the
waves of air beat heavily upon them, and the earth shook without
ceasing. Wisps of smoke floated toward them and the air was tainted
again with the acrid smell of burned gunpowder.

"You're a mountaineer, Fleury, you told me," said Scott, "and you should
be able to judge how sound travels through gorges. I suppose you yodel,
of course?"

"Yodel, what's that?"

"To make a long singing cry on a peak which is supposed to reach to
somebody on another peak who sends back the same kind of a singing cry.
We have a general impression in America that European mountaineers don't
do much but stand in fancy costumes on crests and ridges and yodel to
one another."

"It may have been so once," said the young Savoyard, "but this is a bad
year for yodeling. The voice of the cannon carries so far that the voice
of man doesn't amount to much. But what sound did you want me to
interpret?"

"That of the cannon. Does its volume move eastward or westward? I should
think it's much like your mountain storms and you know how they travel
among the ridges."

"The comparison is just, but I can't yet tell any shifting of the
artillery fire. The wind brings the sound toward us, and if there's any
great advance or retreat I should be able to detect it. I should say
that as far as the second day is concerned nothing decisive has happened
yet."

"Do you know this country?"

"A little. My regiment marched through here about three weeks ago and we
made two camps not far from this spot. This is the wood of Senouart, and
the brook here runs down to the river Marne."

"And we're not far from that river. Then we've pressed back the Germans
farther than I thought. It's strange that the German army here does not
move."

"It's waiting, and I fancy it doesn't know what to do. I've an idea that
our victory yesterday was greater than the French and British have
realized, but which the Germans, of course, understand. Why do they
leave us here, almost neglected, and why do their officers walk about,
looking so doubtful and anxious? I've heard that the Germans were
approaching Paris with five armies. It may be that we've cut off at
least one of those armies and that it's in mortal danger."

"It may be so. But have you thought, Fleury, of the extraordinary
difference between this morning and yesterday morning?"

"I have. In conditions they're worlds apart. Hark! Listen now, Scott, my
friend!"

He lay on the grass and put his ear to the ground, just as John had
often done. Listening intently for at least two minutes, he announced
with conviction that the cannonade was moving eastward.

"Which means that the Germans are withdrawing again?" said John.

"Undoubtedly," said Fleury, his face glowing.

They listened a quarter of an hour longer, and John himself was then
able to tell that the battle line was shifting. The Germans elsewhere
must have fallen back several miles, but the army about him did not yet
move. He caught a glimpse of the burly general walking back and forth in
the forest, his hands clasped behind him, and a frown on his broad,
fighting face. He would walk occasionally to a little telephone station,
improvised under the trees--John could see the wires stretching away
through the forest--and listen long and attentively. But when he put
down the receiver the same moody look was invariably on his face, and
John was convinced as much by his expression as by the sound of the guns
that affairs were not going well with the Germans.

Another long hour passed and the sun moved on toward noon, but a German
army of perhaps a quarter of a million men lay idle in the forest of
Senouart, as John now called the whole region.

Presently the general walked down the line and John lost sight of him.
But Weber reappeared, coming from the other side of the hillock, and
John was glad to see him, since Fleury had gone back to attend to a
wounded friend.

"There doesn't seem to be as much action here as I expected," said
Weber, cheerfully, sitting down on the grass beside young Scott.

"But they're shaking the world there! and there!" said John, nodding to
right and to left.

"So they are. This is a most extraordinary reversal, Mr. Scott, and I
can't conceive how it was brought about. Some mysterious mind has made
and carried through a plan that was superbly Napoleonic. I'd give much
to know how it was done."

John shook his head.

"I know nothing of it," he said.

"But doubtless your friend Lannes does. What a wonderful thing it is to
carry through the heavens the dispatches which may move forward a
million armed men."

"I don't know anything about Lannes' dispatches."

"Nor do I, but I can make a close guess, just as you can. He's surely
hovering over the battle field today, and as I said last night he
certainly has some idea where you are, and sooner or later will come for
you."

John looked up, but again the heavens were bare and clear. Then he
looked down and saw walking near them a heavy, middle-aged, bearded man
to whom all the German officers paid great deference. The man's manner
was haughty and overbearing, and John understood at once that in the
monarchical sense he was a personage.

"Do you know the big fellow there?" he said to Weber. "Have you heard
anyone speak of him?"

"I saw him this morning, and one of the guards told us who he is. That
is Prince Karl of Auersperg. The house of Auersperg is one of the
oldest in Germany, much older than the Emperor's family, the
Hohenzollerns. I don't suppose the world contains any royal blood more
ancient than that of Prince Karl."

"Evidently he feels that it's so. I'm getting used to princes, but our
heavy friend there must be something of a specialist in the princely
line. I should judge from his manner that he is not only the oldest man
on earth, speaking in terms of blood, but the owner of the earth as
well."

"The Auerspergs have an immense pride."

"I can see it, but a lot of pride fell before Paris yesterday, and a lot
more is falling among these hills and forests today. There seems to be a
lot of difference between princes, the Arnheims and the Auerspergs, for
instance."

Then a sudden thought struck John. It had the vaguest sort of basis, but
it came home to him with all the power of conviction.

"I wonder if Prince Karl of Auersperg once owned a magnificent armored
automobile," he said.

