her wrist; if she stumbled, he jerked her roughly to her feet. She set
her teeth and kept pace with him. Only once did she speak. They had come
to a depression in the road where the melted snow had made a wide pool.
Wogan leaped across it and said,--

"Give me your hand! There's a white stone midway where you can set your
foot."

The Princess stepped as he bade her. The stone yielded beneath her tread
and she stood ankle-deep in the water. Wogan sprang to her side and
lifted her out. She had uttered no cry, and now she only laughed as she
stood shivering on the further edge. It was that low musical,
good-humoured laugh to which Wogan had never listened without a thrill
of gladness, but it waked no response in him now.

"You told me of a white stone on which I might safely set my foot," she
said. "Well, sir, your white stone was straw."

They were both to remember these words afterwards and to make of them a
parable, but it seemed that Wogan barely heard them now. "Come!" he
said, and taking her arm he set off running again.

Clementina understood that something inopportune, something terrible,
had happened since she had left the villa. She asked no questions; she
trusted herself without reserve to these true friends who had striven at
such risks for her, she desired to prove to them that she was what they
would have her be,--a girl who did not pester them with inconvenient
chatter, but who could keep silence when silence was helpful, and face
hardships with a buoyant heart.

They crossed the bridge and stopped before a pair of high folding doors.
They were the doors of the tavern. Wogan drew a breath of relief, pulled
the bobbin, and pushed the doors open. Clementina slipped through, and
in darkness she took a step forward and bruised herself against the
wheels of a carriage. Wogan closed the door and ran to her side.

"This way," said he, and held out his hand. He guided Clementina round
the carriage to a steep narrow stairway--it was more a ladder than a
stair--fixed against the inner wall. At the top of this stairway shone a
horizontal line of yellow light. Wogan led the Princess up the stairs.
The line of light shone out beneath a door. Wogan opened the door and
stood aside. Clementina passed into a small bare room lighted by a
single candle, where Mrs. Misset, Gaydon, and O'Toole waited for her
coming. Not a word was said; but their eyes spoke their admiration of
the woman, their knees expressed their homage to the Queen. There was a
fire blazing on the hearth, Mrs. Misset had a dry change of clothes
ready and warm. Wogan laid the Princess's bundle on a chair, and with
Gaydon and O'Toole went down the stairs.

"The horses?" he asked.

"I have ordered them," said Gaydon, "at the post-house. I will fetch
them;" and he hurried off upon his errand.

Wogan turned to O'Toole.

"And the bill?"

"I have paid it."

"There is no one awake in the house?"

"No one but the landlady."

"Good! Can you keep her engaged until we are ready?"

"To be sure I can. She shall never give a thought to any man of you but
myself."

O'Toole passed through a door at the bottom of the staircase into the
common-room of the inn. Wogan gently opened the big doors and dragged
the carriage out into the road. Gaydon with the horses galloped
silently up through the snow, and together the two men feverishly
harnessed them to the carriage. There were six for the carriage, and a
seventh for O'Toole to ride. The expedition which Wogan and Gaydon
showed was matched by the Princess. For while they were fastening the
last buckles, the door at the top of the stairs opened, and again that
night Clementina whispered,--

"I am ready."

"Come!" replied Wogan. She wore a scarlet cloak upon her shoulders, and
muffling it about her head she ran down with Mrs. Misset. Wogan opened
the lower door of the inn and called for O'Toole. O'Toole came running
out before Wogan had ended his words, and sprang into his saddle. Gaydon
was already on the box with the reins gathered in his hand. Wogan had
the carriage door open before Clementina had reached the foot of the
stairs; it was shut upon her and her companion almost before they were
aware they were within it; the carriage started almost before the door
was shut. Yet when it did start, Wogan was beside Gaydon upon the box.
Their movements, indeed, occurred with so exact a rapidity, that though
the hostess at once followed O'Toole to bid her guests farewell, when
she reached the big doors she saw only the back of the carriage lurching
through the ruts of snow.

"Quick!" cried Wogan; "we have lost too much time."

"A bare twenty minutes," said Gaydon.

"A good twelve hours," said Wogan.

Gaydon lashed the horses into a gallop, the horses strained at their
collars, the carriage raced out of the town and up the slopes of the
Brenner. The princess Clementina had been rescued from her prison.

"But we must keep her free!" cried Wogan, as he blew through his gloves
upon his frozen fingers. "Faster! Faster!"

The incline was steep, the snow clogged the wheels, the horses sank deep
in it. Gaydon might ply his whip as he would, the carriage might lurch
and leap from side to side; the pace was all too slow for Wogan.

"We have lost twelve hours," he cried. "Oh, would to God we were come to
Italy!" And turning backwards he strained his eyes down through the
darkness and snow to the hidden roofs of Innspruck, almost fearing to
see the windows from one end of the town to the other leap to a blaze of
light, and to hear a roar of many voices warn him that the escape was
discovered. But the only cry that he heard came from the lips of Mrs.
Misset, who put her head from the carriage and bade him stop.

Gaydon brought the horses to a standstill three miles out of Innspruck.




CHAPTER XV


Wogan jumped down from his box and ran to the carriage-door.

"Her Highness is ill?" he cried in suspense.

"Not the least bit in the world," returned Clementina, whose voice for
once in a way jarred upon Wogan's ears. Nothing short of a positive
sickness could justify the delay.

"What is it, then?" he asked curtly, almost roughly, of Mrs. Misset.

"You carried a packet for her Highness. It is left behind at the
tavern."

Wogan stamped impatiently on the ground.

"And for this, for a petticoat or two, you hinder us," he cried in a
heat. "There's no petticoat in the world, though it were so stiff with
gold that it stood on end of itself, that's worth a single second of the
next forty-eight hours."

"But it contains her Highness's jewels."

Wogan's impatience became an exasperation. Were all women at heart,
then, no better than Indian squaws? A string of beads outweighed the
sacrifices of friends and the chance of a crown! There was a blemish in
his idol, since at all costs she must glitter. Wogan, however, was the
master here.

"Her Highness must lose her jewels," he said roughly, and was turning
away when her Highness herself spoke.

"You are unjust, my friend," she said. "I would lose them very
willingly, were there a chance no one else would discover them. But
there's no chance. The woman of the tavern will find the bundle, will
open it; very likely she has done so already. We shall have all
Innspruck on our heels in half an hour;" and for the first time that
night Wogan heard her voice break, and grieved to know that the tears
were running down her cheeks. He called to O'Toole,--

"Ride back to the tavern! Bring the packet without fail!"

O'Toole galloped off, and Gaydon drove the carriage to the side of the
road. There was nothing to do but to wait, and they waited in silence,
counting up the chances. There could be no doubt that the landlady, if
once she discovered the jewels hidden away in a common packet of
clothing, must suspect the travellers who had left them behind. She
would be terrified by their value; she would be afraid to retain them
lest harm should come to her; and all Innspruck would be upon the
fugitives' heels. They waited for half an hour,--thirty minutes of gloom
and despair. Clementina wept over this new danger which her comrades
ran; Mrs. Misset wept for that her negligence was to blame; Gaydon sat
on the box in the falling snow with his arms crossed upon his breast,
and felt his head already loose upon his shoulders. The only one of the
party who had any comfort of that half-hour was Wogan. For he had been
wrong,--the chosen woman had no wish to glitter at all costs, though, to
be sure, she could not help glittering with the refulgence of her great
merits. His idol had no blemish. Wogan paced up and down the road, while
he listened for O'Toole's return, and that thought cheated the time for
him. At last he heard very faintly the sound of galloping hoofs below
him on the road. He ran back to Gaydon.

"It might be a courier to arrest us. If I shout, drive fast as you can
to Nazareth, and from Nazareth to Italy."

He hurried down the road and was hailed by O'Toole.

"I have it," said he. Wogan turned and ran by O'Toole's stirrup to the
carriage.

"The landlady has a good conscience and sleeps well," said O'Toole. "I
found the house dark and the doors shut. They were only secured,
however, by a wooden beam dropped into a couple of sockets on the
inside."

"But how did you open them?" asked Clementina.

"Your Highness, I have, after all, a pair of arms," said O'Toole. "I
just pressed on the doors till--"

"Till the sockets gave?"

"No, till the beam broke," said he, and Clementina laughed.

"That's my six foot four!" said she. O'Toole did not understand. But he
smiled with great condescension and dignity, and continued his story.

"I groped my way up the stairs into the room and found the bundle
untouched in the corner."

He handed it to the Princess; Wogan sprang again onto the box, and
Gaydon whipped up the horses. They reached the first posting stage at
two, the second at four, the third at six, and at each they wasted no
time. All that night their horses strained up the mountain road amid the
whirling sleet. At times the wind roaring down a gorge would set the
carriage rocking; at times they stuck fast in drifts; and Wogan and
Gaydon must leap from the box and plunging waist-deep in the snow, must
drag at the horses and push at the wheels. The pace was too slow; Wogan
seemed to hear on every gust of wind the sound of a galloping company.

"We have lost twelve hours, more than twelve hours now," he repeated and
repeated to Gaydon. All the way to Ala they would still be in the
Emperor's territory. It needed only a single courier to gallop past
them, and at either Roveredo or Trent they would infallibly be taken.
Wogan fingered his pistols, straining his eyes backwards down the road.

At daybreak the snow stopped; the carriage rolled on high among the
mountains under a grey sky; and here and there, at a wind of the road,
Wogan caught a glimpse of the towers and chimney-tops of Innspruck, or
had within his view a stretch of the slope they had climbed. But there
was never a black speck visible upon the white of the snow; as yet no
courier was overtaking them, as yet Innspruck did not know its captive
had escaped. At eight o'clock in the morning they came to Nazareth, and
found their own berlin ready harnessed at the post-house door, the
postillion already in his saddle, and Misset waiting with an uncovered
head.

"Her Highness will breakfast here, no doubt?" said Gaydon.

"Misset will have seen to it," cried Wogan, "that the berlin is
furnished. We can breakfast as we go."

They waited no more than ten minutes at Nazareth. The order of
travelling was now changed. Wogan and Gaydon now travelled in the berlin
with Mrs. Misset and Clementina. Gaydon, being the oldest of the party,
figured as the Count of Cernes, Mrs. Misset as his wife, Clementina as
his niece, and Wogan as a friend of the family. O'Toole and Misset rode
beside the carriage in the guise of servants. Thus they started from
Nazareth, and had journeyed perhaps a mile when without so much as a
moan Clementina swooned and fell forward into Wogan's arms. Mrs. Misset
uttered a cry; Wogan clasped the Princess to his breast. Her head fell
back across his arm, pale as death; her eyes were closed; her bosom,
strained against his, neither rose nor fell.

"She has fasted all Lent," he said in a broken voice. "She has eaten
nothing since we left Innspruck."

Mrs. Misset burst into tears; she caught Clementina's hand and clasped
it; she had no eyes but for her. With Gaydon it was different. Wogan was
holding the Princess in a clasp too loverlike, though, to be sure, it
was none of his business.

"We must stop the carriage," he said.

"No," cried Wogan, desperately; "that we must not do;" and he caught her
still closer to him. He had a fear that she was dying. Even so, she
should not be recaptured. Though she were dead, he would still carry her
dead body into Bologna and lay it white and still before his King.
Europe from London to the Bosphorus should know the truth of her and
ring with the wonder of her, though she were dead. O'Toole, attracted by
the noise of Mrs. Misset's lamentations, bent down over his horse's neck
and looked into the carriage.

"Her Highness is dead!" he cried.

"Drive on," replied Wogan, through his clenched teeth.

Upon the other side of the carriage, Misset shouted through the window,
"There is a spring by the roadside."

"Drive on," said Wogan.

Gaydon touched him on the arm.

"You will stifle her, man."

Wogan woke to a comprehension of his attitude, and placed Clementina
back on her seat. Mrs. Misset by good fortune had a small bottle of
Carmelite water in her pocket; she held it to the Princess's nostrils,
who in a little opened her eyes and saw her companions in tears about
her, imploring her to wake.

"It is nothing," she said. "Take courage, my poor marmosets;" and with a
smile she added, "There's my six feet four with the tears in his eyes.
Did ever a woman have such friends?"

The sun came out in the sky as she spoke. They had topped the pass and
were now driving down towards Italy. There was snow about them still on
the mountain-sides and deep in drifts upon the roads. The air was
musical with the sound of innumerable freshets: they could be seen
leaping and sparkling in the sunlight; the valleys below were green with
the young green of spring, and the winds were tempered with the warmth
of Italy. A like change came upon the fugitives. They laughed, where
before they had wept; from under the seat they pulled out chickens which
Misset had cooked with his own hands at Nazareth, bottles of the wine of
St. Laurent, and bread; and Wogan allowed a halt long enough to get
water from a spring by the roadside.

"There is no salt," said Gaydon.

"Indeed there is," replied Misset, indignant at the aspersion on his
catering. "I have it in my tobacco-box." He took his tobacco-box from
his pocket and passed it into the carriage. Clementina made sandwiches
and passed them out to the horsemen. The chickens turned out to be old
cocks, impervious to the soundest tooth. No one minded except Misset,
who had brought them. The jolts of the carriage became matter for a
jest. They picnicked with the merriment of children, and finally
O'Toole, to show his contempt for the Emperor, fired off both his loaded
pistols in the air.

At that Wogan's anxiety returned. He blazed up into anger. He thrust his
head from the window.

"Is this your respect for her Highness?" he cried. "Is this your
consideration?"

"Nay," interposed Clementina, "you shall not chide my six feet four."

"But he is mad, your Highness. I don't say but what a trifle of madness
is salt to a man; but O'Toole's clean daft to be firing his pistols off
to let the whole world know who we are. Here are we not six stages from
Innspruck, and already we have lost twelve hours."

"When?"

"Last night, before we left Innspruck, between the time when you escaped
from the villa and when I joined you in the avenue. I climbed out of the
window to descend as I had entered, but the sentinel had returned. I
waited on the window-ledge crouched against the wall until he should
show me his back. After five minutes or so he did. He stamped on the
snow and marched up the lane. I let myself down and hung by my hands,
but he turned on his beat before I could drop. He marched back; I clung
