[7] Luke i. 48.

[8] Matt. v. 11.

[9] Luke xxii. 28-30.

[10] Ps. xxv. 14.




SERMON XIII.

Truth hidden when not sought after.

"_They shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables._"--2 Tim. iv. 4.


From these words of the blessed Apostle, written shortly before he
suffered martyrdom, we learn, that there is such a thing as religious
truth, and therefore there is such a thing as religious error.  We
learn that religious truth is _one_--and therefore that all views of
religion _but_ one are wrong.  And we learn, moreover, that so it was
to be (for his words are a prophecy) that professed Christians,
forgetting this, should turn away their ears from the one Truth, and
should be turned, not to one, but to many fables.  All this is
fulfilled before our eyes; our religious creeds and professions at this
day are many; but Truth is one: therefore they cannot all be right, or
rather almost all of them must be wrong.  That is, the multitude of men
are wrong, so far as they differ, and as they differ, not about trivial
points, but about great matters, it follows that the multitude of men,
whether by their own fault or not, are wrong even in the greater
matters of religion.

This is a most solemn thought, and a perplexing one.  However, there is
another which, though it ought not to be perplexing, is perplexing
still, and perhaps has greater need to be considered and explained; I
mean that men of learning and ability are so often wrong in religious
matters also.  It is a stumbling-block to many, when they find that
those who seem the legitimate guides furnished by God's providence, who
are in some sense the natural prophets and expounders of the truth,
that these too are on many sides, and therefore many of them on the
side of error also.  There are persons who can despise the opinions of
the _many_, and feel that _they_ are not right, but that truth, if it
be to be found, lies with the _few_; and since men of ability _are_
among the few, they think that truth lies with men of ability, and when
after all they are told that able men are ranged on contrary sides in
religious questions, they either hastily deny the fact, or they are
startled, and stagger in their faith.

But on the contrary, let us honestly confess what is certain, that not
the ignorant, or weakminded, or dull, or enthusiastic, or extravagant
only turn their ears from the Truth and are turned unto fables, but
also men of powerful minds, keen perceptions, extended views, ample and
various knowledge.  Let us, I say, confess it; yet let us not believe
in the Truth the less on account of it.

I say that in the number of the adversaries of the Truth, there are
many men of highly endowed and highly cultivated minds.  Why should we
deny this?  It is unfair to do so; and not only unfair, but very
unnecessary.  What is called ability and talent does not make a man a
Christian; nay, often, as may be shown without difficulty, it is the
occasion of his rejecting Christianity, or this or that part of it.
Not only in the higher ranks of society do we see this; even in the
humble and secluded village, it will commonly be found, that those who
have greater gifts of mind than others around them, who have more
natural quickness, shrewdness, and wit, are the very persons who are
the most likely to turn out ill--who are least under the influence of
religious principles--and neither obey nor even revere the Gospel of
salvation which Christ has brought us.

Now if we consult St. Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians, we shall find
the same state of things existing even in the first age of
Christianity.  Even the Apostle speaks of those who were blind, or to
whom his Gospel was hid; and he elsewhere describes them, not as the
uneducated and dull of understanding, but as the wise of this world,
the scribe and the disputer.  Even then, before the Apostle's prophecy
in the text was fulfilled, there were many who erred from the truth
even in the midst of light, and in spite of superior intellectual
endowments and acquirements.

Does not our Saviour Himself say the same thing, when He thanks His
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that He hath hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes?

Now it should not surprise us when men of acute and powerful
understandings more or less reject the Gospel, for this reason, that
the Christian revelation addresses itself to our hearts, to our love of
truth and goodness, our fear of sinning, and our desire to gain God's
favour, and quickness, sagacity, depth of thought, strength of mind,
power of comprehension, perception of the beautiful, power of language,
and the like, though they are excellent gifts, are clearly quite of a
different kind from these spiritual excellences--a man may have the one
without having the other.  _This_, then, is the plain reason why able,
or again why learned men are so often defective Christians, because
there is no necessary connexion between faith and ability, because
faith is one thing and ability is another; because ability of mind is a
_gift_, and faith is a _grace_.  Who would ever argue that a man could,
like Samson, conquer lions or throw down the gates of a city, because
he was able, or accomplished, or experienced in the business of life?
Who would ever argue that a man could see because he could hear, or run
with the swift because he had "the tongue of the learned[1]"?  These
gifts are different in kind.  In like manner, powers of mind and
religious principles and feelings are distinct gifts; and as all the
highest spiritual excellence, humility, firmness, patience, would never
enable a man to read an unknown tongue, or to enter into the depths of
science, so all the most brilliant mental endowments, wit, or
imagination, or penetration, or depth, will never of themselves make us
wise in religion.  And as we should fairly and justly deride the savage
who wished to decide questions of science or literature by the sword,
so may we justly look with amazement on the error of those who think
that they can master the high mysteries of spiritual truth, and find
their way to God, by what is commonly called reason, i. e. by the
random and blind efforts of mere mental acuteness, and mere experience
of the world.

That Truth, which St. Paul preached, addresses itself to our spiritual
nature: it will be rightly understood, valued, accepted, by none but
lovers of truth, virtue, purity, humility, and peace.  Wisdom will be
justified of her children.  Those, indeed, who are thus endowed may and
will go on to use their powers of mind, whatever they are, in the
service of religion; none but they can use them aright.  Those who
reject revealed truth wilfully, are such as do not love moral and
religious truth.  It is bad men, proud men, men of hard hearts, and
unhumbled tempers, and immoral lives, these are they who reject the
Gospel.  These are they of whom St. Paul speaks in another Epistle--"If
our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of
this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not."  With
this agree the instances of turning the ears from the truth which the
New Testament affords us.  Who were they who were the enemies of Christ
and His Apostles?  The infidel Sadducees, the immoral, hard-hearted,
yet hypocritical Pharisees, Herod, who married his brother Philip's
wife[2], and Felix, who trembled when St. Paul reasoned of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come[3].  On the other hand,
men of holy and consistent lives, as Cornelius the Centurion, and those
who were frequenters of religious ordinances, as Simeon and Anna, these
became Christians.  So it is now.  If men turn unto fables of their own
will, they do it on account of their pride, or their love of indolence
and self-indulgence.

This should be kept in mind when Christians are alarmed, as they
sometimes are, on hearing instances of infidelity or heresy among those
who read, reflect, and inquire, whereas, however we may mourn over such
instances, we have no reason to be surprised at them.  It is quite
enough for Christians to be able to show, as they well can, that belief
in revealed religion is not inconsistent with the highest gifts and
acquirements of mind, that men even of the strongest and highest
intellect have been Christians, but they have as little reason to be
perplexed at finding _other_ men of ability not true believers, as at
finding that certain _rich_ men are not true believers, or certain
_poor_ men, or some in every rank and circumstance of life.  A belief
in Christianity has hardly more connexion with what is called talent,
than it has with riches, station, power, or bodily strength.

Now let me explain what I have said by a further remark.  Is it not
plain that earnestness is necessary for gaining religious truth?  On
the other hand, is it not a natural effect of ability to save us
trouble, and even to tempt us to dispense with it, and to lead us to be
indolent?  Do not we see this even in the case of children--the more
clever are the more idle, because they rely on their own quickness and
power of apprehension?  Is indolence the way to gain knowledge from
God?  Yet this surely is continually forgotten in the world.  It is
forgotten in a measure even by the best of Christians, for no man on
earth seeks to know God's will, and to do His duty with an earnestness
suitable to the importance of the object.  But not to speak thus
rigorously, let us consider for an instant how eagerly men in general
pursue objects of this world; now with what portion of this eagerness
do they exert themselves to know the truth of God's word?  Undeniable,
then, as is the doctrine that God does not reveal Himself to those who
do not seek Him, it is certain that its truth is not really felt by us,
or we should seek Him more earnestly than we do.

Nothing is more common than to think that we shall gain religious
knowledge as a thing of course, without express trouble on our part.
Though there is no art or business of this world which is learned
without time and exertion, yet it is commonly conceived that the
knowledge of God and our duty will come as if by accident or by a
natural process.  Men go by their feelings and likings; they take up
what is popular, or what comes first to hand.  They think it much if
they now and then have serious thoughts, if they now and then open the
Bible; and their minds recur with satisfaction to such seasons, as if
they had done some very great thing, never remembering that to seek and
gain religious truth is a long and systematic work.  And others think
that education will do every thing for them, and that if they learn to
read, and use religious words, they understand religion itself.  And
others again go so far as to maintain that exertion is not necessary
for discovering the truth.  They say that religious truth is simple and
easily acquired; that Scripture, being intended for all, is at once
open to all, and that if it had difficulties, that very circumstance
would be an objection to it.  And others, again, maintain that there
are difficulties in religion, and that this shows that it is an
indifferent matter whether they seek or not as to those matters which
are difficult.

In these and other ways do men deceive themselves into a carelessness
about religious truth.  And is not all this varied negligence
sufficient to account for the varieties of religious opinion which we
see all around us?  Do not these two facts just illustrate each other;
the discordance of our religious opinions needing some explanation; and
our actual indolence and negligence in seeking the truth accounting for
it?  How many sects, all professing Christianity, but opposed to each
other, dishonour this country!  Doubtless if men sought the truth with
one tenth part of the zeal with which they seek to acquire wealth or
secular knowledge, their differences would diminish year by year.
Doubtless if they gave a half or a quarter of the time to prayer for
Divine guidance which they give to amusement or recreation, or which
they give to dispute and contention, they would ever be approximating
to each other.  We differ in opinion; therefore we cannot all be right;
many must be wrong; many must be turned from the truth; and why is
this, but on account of that undeniable fact which we see before us,
that we do not pray and seek for the Truth?

But this melancholy diversity is sometimes explained, as I just now
hinted, in another way.  Some men will tell us that this difference of
opinion in religious matters which exists, is a proof, not that the
Truth is withheld from us on account of our negligence in seeking it,
but that religious truth is not worth seeking at all, or that it is not
given us.  The present confused and perplexed state of things, which is
really a proof of God's anger at our negligence, these men say is a
proof that religious truth cannot be obtained; that there is no such
thing as religious truth; that there is no right or wrong in religion;
that, provided we _think_ ourselves right, one set of opinions is as
good as another; that we shall all come right in the end if we do but
mean well, or rather if we do not mean ill.  That is, we create
confusion by our negligence and disobedience, and then excuse our
negligence by the existence of that confusion.  It is no uncommon
thing, I say, for men to say, "that in religious matters God has willed
that men should differ," and to support their opinion by no better
argument than the fact that they _do_ differ; and they go on to
conclude that _therefore_ we need not perplex ourselves about matters
of _faith_, about which, after all, we cannot be certain.  Others,
again, in a similar spirit, argue that forms and ordinances are of no
account; that they are little matters; that it is uncertain what is
right and what is wrong in them, and that to insist on them as
important to religion is the mark of a narrow mind.  And others, again,
it is to be feared, go so far as to think that indulgence of the
passions, or self-will, or selfishness, or avarice, is not wrong,
because it is the way of the world and cannot be prevented.

To all such arguments against religious truth, it is sufficient to
reply, that no one who does not seek the truth with all his heart and
strength, can tell what is of importance and what is not; that to
attempt carelessly to decide on points of faith or morals is a matter
of serious presumption; that no one knows _whither_ he will be carried
_if_ he seeks the Truth perseveringly, and therefore, that since he
cannot see at first starting the course into which his inquiries will
be divinely directed, he cannot possibly say beforehand whether they
may not lead him on to certainty as to things which at present he
thinks trifling or extravagant or irrational.  "What I do," said our
Lord to St. Peter, "thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know
hereafter."  "_Seek_, and ye shall find;" this is the Divine rule, "If
thou _criest_ after knowledge, and _liftest up_ thy voice for
understanding; if thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as
_for hid_ treasures; _then_ shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God[4]."

This is a subject which cannot too strongly be insisted on.  Act up to
your light, though in the midst of difficulties, and you will be
carried on, you do not know how far.  Abraham obeyed the call and
journeyed, not knowing whither he went; so we, if we follow the voice
of God, shall be brought on step by step into a new world, of which
before we had no idea.  This is His gracious way with us: He gives, not
all at once, but by measure and season, wisely.  To him that hath, more
shall be given.  But we must begin at the beginning.  Each truth has
its own order; we cannot join the way of life at any point of the
course we please; we cannot learn advanced truths before we have
learned primary ones.  "Call upon Me," says the Divine Word, "and I
will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou
knowest not[5]."  Religious men are always learning; but when men
refuse to profit by light already granted, their light is turned to
darkness.  Observe our Lord's conduct with the Pharisees.  They asked
Him on what authority He acted.  He gave them no direct answer, but
referred them to the mission of John the Baptist--"The baptism of John,
whence was it? from heaven or from men[6]?"  They refused to say.  Then
He said, "Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things."
That is, they would not profit by the knowledge they already had from
St. John the Baptist, who spoke of Christ--therefore no more was given
them.

All of us may learn a lesson here, for all of us are in danger of
hastily finding fault with others, and condemning their opinions or
practices; not considering, that unless we have faithfully obeyed our
conscience and improved our talents, we are no fit judges of them at
all.  Christ and His Saints are alike destitute of form or comeliness
in the eyes of the world, and it is only as we labour to change our
nature, through God's help, and to serve Him truly, that we begin to
discern the beauty of holiness.  Then, at length, we find reason to
suspect our own judgments of what is truly good, and perceive our own
blindness; for by degrees we find that those whose opinions and conduct
we hitherto despised or wondered at as extravagant or unaccountable or
weak, really know more than ourselves, and are above us--and so, ever
as we rise in knowledge and grow in spiritual illumination, they (to
our amazement) rise also, while we look at them.  The better we are,
the more we understand their excellence; till at length we are taught
something of their Divine Master's perfections also, which before were
hid from us, and see why it is that, though the Gospel is set on a hill
in the midst of the world, like a city which cannot be hid, yet to
multitudes it is notwithstanding hid, since He taketh the wise in their
own craftiness, and the pure in heart alone can see God.

How are the sheep of Christ's flock scattered abroad in the waste
world!  He came to gather them together in one; but they wander again
and faint by the way, as having lost their Shepherd.  What religious
opinion can be named which some men or other have not at some time
held?  All are equally confident in the truth of their own doctrines,
though the many must be mistaken.  In this confusion let us, my
brethren, look to ourselves, each to himself.  There must be a right
and a wrong, and no matter whether others agree with us or not, it is
to us a solemn practical concern not to turn away our ears from the
truth.  Let not the diversity of opinion, in the world dismay you, or
deter you from seeking all your life long true wisdom.  It is not a
search for this day or that, but as you should ever grow in grace, so
should you ever grow also in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.  Care not for the perplexing question which many will put
to you, "How can you be sure that you are right more than others?"
Others are nothing to you, if they are not holy and devout in their
conversation--and we all know what is meant by being holy; we know whom
we should call holy; to be holy is to be like an Apostle.  Seek truth
in the way of _obedience_; try to act up to your conscience, and let
your opinions be the result, not of mere chance reasoning or fancy, but
of an improved heart.  This way, I say, carries with it an evidence to
ourselves of its being the right way, if any way be right; and that
there is a right and a wrong way conscience also tells us.  God surely
will listen to none but those who strive to obey Him.  Those who thus
proceed, watching, praying, taking all means given them of gaining the
truth, studying the Scriptures, and doing their duty; in short, those
who seek religious truth by principle and habit, as the main business
of their lives, humbly not arrogantly, peaceably not contentiously,
shall not be "turned unto fables."  "The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear Him;" but in proportion as we are conscious to ourselves
that we are indolent, and transgress our own sense of right and wrong,
in the same proportion we have cause to fear, not only that we are not
in a safe state, but, further than this, that we do not know what is a
safe state, and what an unsafe--what is light and what is darkness,
what is truth and what is error; which way leads to heaven and which to
hell.  "The way of the wicked is in darkness; they know not at what
they stumble[7]."

I know we shall find it very hard to rouse ourselves, to break the
force of habit, to resolve to serve God, and persevere in doing so.
And assuredly we must expect, even at best, and with all our efforts,
perhaps backslidings, and certainly much continual imperfection all
through our lives, in all we do.  But this should create in us a horror
of disobedience, not a despair at overcoming ourselves.  We are not
under the law of nature, but under grace; we are not bid do a thing
above our strength, because, though our hearts are naturally weak, we
are not left to ourselves.  According to the command, so is the gift.
