hands. He stumbled a few feet and bent over the writhing mass below him.
With a heave of his shoulders he pulled another man up. The man was dead
but his shoulder pack was still strapped to his back. Bloody fingers
fumbled at the pack, then both men were washed back under the wave of
death.

"That was the bomb!" Kerk shouted to Meta. "If he didn't change the
setting, it's still on ten-second minimum. Get out of here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason had just time to fall back on the acceleration couch before the
rockets blasted. The pressure leaned on him and kept mounting. Vision
blacked out but he didn't lose consciousness. Air screamed across the
hull, then the sound stopped as they left the atmosphere behind.

Just as Meta cut the power a glare of white light burst from the
screens. They turned black instantly as the hull pickups burned out. She
switched filters into place, then pressed the button that rotated new
pickups into position.

Far below, in the boiling sea, a climbing cloud of mushroom-shaped flame
filled the spot where the island had been seconds before. The three of
them looked at it, silently and unmoving. Kerk recovered first.

"Head for home, Meta, and get operations on the screen. Twenty-five men
dead, but they did their job. They knocked out those beasts--whatever
they were--and ended the war. I can't think of a better way for a man to
die."

Meta set the orbit, then called operations.

"Trouble getting through," she said. "I have a robot landing beam
response, but no one is answering the call."

A man appeared on the empty screen. He was beaded with sweat and had a
harried look in his eyes. "Kerk," he said, "is that you? Get the ship
back here at once. We need her firepower at the perimeter. All blazes
broke loose a minute ago, a general attack from every side, worse than
I've ever seen."

"What do you mean?" Kerk stammered in unbelief. "The war is over--we
blasted them, destroyed their headquarters completely."

"The war is going like it never has gone before," the other snapped
back. "I don't know what you did, but it stirred up the stewpot of hell
here. Now stop talking and get the ship back!"

Kerk turned slowly to face Jason, his face pulled back in a look of raw
animal savagery.

"You--! You did it! I should have killed you the first time I saw you. I
wanted to, now I know I was right. You've been like a plague since you
came here, sowing death in every direction. I knew you were wrong, yet I
let your twisted words convince me. And look what has happened. First
you killed Welf. Then you murdered those men in the cave. Now this
attack on the perimeter--all who die there, you will have killed!"

Kerk advanced on Jason, step by slow step, hatred twisting his features.
Jason backed away until he could retreat no further, his shoulders
against the chart case. Kerk's hand lashed out, not a fighting blow, but
an open slap. Though Jason rolled with it, it still battered him and
stretched him full length on the floor. His arm was against the chart
case, his fingers near the sealed tubes that held the jump matrices.

Jason seized one of the heavy tubes with both hands and pulled it out.
He swung it with all his strength into Kerk's face. It broke the skin
on his cheekbone and forehead and blood ran from the cuts. But it didn't
slow or stop the big man in the slightest. His smile held no mercy as he
reached down and dragged Jason to his feet.

"Fight back," he said, "I will have that much more pleasure as I kill
you." He drew back the granite fist that would tear Jason's head from
his shoulders.

"Go ahead," Jason said, and stopped struggling. "Kill me. You can do it
easily. Only don't call it justice. Welf died to save me. But the men on
the island died because of your stupidity. I wanted peace and you wanted
war. Now you have it. Kill me to soothe your conscience, because the
truth is something you can't face up to."

With a bellow of rage Kerk drove the pile-driver fist down.

Meta grabbed the arm in both her hands and hung on, pulling it aside
before the blow could land. The three of them fell together, half
crushing Jason.

"Don't do it," she screamed. "Jason didn't want those men to go down
there. That was your idea. You can't kill him for that!"

Kerk, exploding with rage, was past hearing. He turned his attention to
Meta, tearing her from him. She was a woman and her supple strength was
meager compared to his great muscles. But she was a Pyrran woman and she
did what no off-worlder could. She slowed him for a moment, stopped the
fury of his attack until he could rip her hands loose and throw her
aside. It didn't take him long to do this, but it was just time enough
for Jason to get to the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason stumbled through, and jammed shut the lock behind him. A split
second after he had driven the bolt home Kerk's weight plunged into the
door. The metal screamed and bent, giving way. One hinge was torn loose
and the other held only by a shred of metal. It would go down on the
next blow.

Jason wasn't waiting for that. He hadn't stayed to see if the door would
stop the raging Pyrran. No door on the ship could stop him. Fast as
possible, Jason went down the gangway. There was no safety on the ship,
which meant he had to get off it. The lifeboat deck was just ahead.

Ever since first seeing them, he had given a lot of thought to the
lifeboats. Though he hadn't looked ahead to this situation, he knew a
time might come when he would need transportation of his own. The
lifeboats had seemed to be the best bet, except that Meta had told him
they had no fuel. She had been right in one thing--the boat he had been
in had empty tanks, he had checked. There were five other boats, though,
that he hadn't examined. He had wondered about the idea of useless
lifeboats and come to what he hoped was a correct conclusion.

This spaceship was the only one the Pyrrans had. Meta had told him once
that they always had planned to buy another ship, but never did. Some
other necessary war expense managed to come up first. One ship was
really enough for their uses. The only difficulty lay in the fact they
had to keep that ship in operation or the Pyrran city was dead. Without
supplies they would be wiped out in a few months. Therefore the ship's
crew couldn't conceive of abandoning their ship. No matter what kind of
trouble she got into, they couldn't leave her. When the ship died, so
did their world.

With this kind of thinking, there was no need to keep the lifeboats
fueled. Not all of them, at least. Though it stood to reason at least
one of them held fuel for short flights that would have been wasteful
for the parent ship. At this point Jason's chain of logic grew weak. Too
many "ifs." _If_ they used the lifeboats at all, one of them should be
fueled. _If_ they did, it would be fueled now. And _if_ it were
fueled--which one of the six would it be? Jason had no time to go
looking. He had to be right the first time.

His reasoning had supplied him with an answer, the last of a long line
of suppositions. If a boat were fueled, it should be the one nearest to
the control cabin. The one he was diving towards now. His life depended
on this string of guesses.

Behind him the door went down with a crash. Kerk bellowed and leaped.
Jason hurled himself through the lifeboat port with the nearest thing to
a run he could manage under the doubled gravity. With both hands he
grabbed the emergency launching handle and pulled down.

An alarm bell rang and the port slammed shut, literally in Kerk's face.
Only his Pyrran reflexes saved him from being smashed by it.

Solid-fuel launchers exploded and blasted the lifeboat clear of the
parent ship. Their brief acceleration slammed Jason to the deck, then he
floated as the boat went into free fall. The main drive rockets didn't
fire.

[Illustration]

In that moment Jason learned what it was like to know he was dead.
Without fuel the boat would drop into the jungle below, falling like a
rock and blasting apart when it hit. There was no way out.

Then the rockets caught, roared, and he dropped to the deck, bruising
his nose. He sat up, rubbing it and grinning. There was fuel in the
tanks--the delay in starting had only been part of the launching cycle,
giving the lifeboat time to fall clear of the ship. Now to get it under
control. He pulled himself into the pilot's seat.

The altimeter had fed information to the autopilot, leveling the boat
off parallel to the ground. Like all lifeboat controls these were
childishly simple, designed to be used by novices in an emergency. The
autopilot could not be shut off, it rode along with the manual controls,
tempering foolish piloting. Jason hauled the control wheel into a tight
turn and the autopilot gentled it to a soft curve.

Through the port he could see the big ship blaring fire in a much
tighter turn. Jason didn't know who was flying it or what they had in
mind--he took no chances. Jamming the wheel forward into a dive he
cursed as they eased into a gentle drop. The larger ship had no such
restrictions. It changed course with a violent maneuver and dived on
him. The forward turret fired and an explosion at the stern rocked the
little boat. This either knocked out the autopilot or shocked it into
submission. The slow drop turned into a power dive and the jungle
billowed up.

Jason pulled the wheel back and there was just time to get his arms in
front of his face before they hit.

Thundering rockets and cracking trees ended in a great splash. Silence
followed and the smoke drifted away. High above, the spaceship circled
hesitantly. Dropping a bit as if wanting to go down and investigate.
Then rising again as the urgent message for aid came from the city.
Loyalty won and she turned and spewed fire towards home.




XXIII.


Tree branches had broken the lifeboat's fall, the bow rockets had burned
out in emergency blast, and the swamp had cushioned the landing a bit.
It was still a crash. The battered cylinder sank slowly into the
stagnant water and thin mud of the swamp. The bow was well under before
Jason managed to kick open the emergency hatch in the waist.

There was no way of knowing how long it would take for the boat to go
under, and Jason was in no condition to ponder the situation. Concussed
and bloody, he had just enough drive left to get himself out. Wading and
falling he made his way to firmer land, sitting down heavily as soon as
he found something that would support him.

Behind him the lifeboat burbled and sank under the water. Bubbles of
trapped air kept rising for a while, then stopped. The water stilled
and, except for the broken branches and trees, there was no sign that a
ship had ever come this way.

Insects whined across the swamp, and the only sound that broke the quiet
of the woods beyond was the cruel scream of an animal pulling down its
dinner. When that had echoed away in tiny waves of sound everything was
silent.

Jason pulled himself out of the half trance with an effort. His body
felt like it had been through a meat grinder, and it was almost
impossible to think with the fog in his head. After minutes of
deliberation he figured out that the medikit was what he needed. The
easy-off snap was very difficult and the button release didn't work. He
finally twisted his arm around until it was under the orifice and
pressed the entire unit down. It buzzed industriously, though he
couldn't feel the needles, he guessed it had worked. His sight spun
dizzily for a while then cleared. Pain-killers went to work and he
slowly came out of the dark cloud that had enveloped his brain since the
crash.

Reason returned and loneliness rode along with it. He was without food,
friendless, surrounded by the hostile forces of an alien planet. There
was a rising panic that started deep inside of him, that took
concentrated effort to hold down.

"Think, Jason, don't emote," he said it aloud to reassure himself, but
was instantly sorry, because his voice sounded weak in the emptiness,
with a ragged edge of hysteria to it. Something caught in his throat and
he coughed to clear it, spitting out blood. Looking at the red stain he
was suddenly angry. Hating this deadly planet and the incredible
stupidity of the people who lived on it. Cursing out loud was better and
his voice didn't sound as weak now. He ended up shouting and shaking his
fist at nothing in particular, but it helped. The anger washed away the
fear and brought him back to reality.

Sitting on the ground felt good now. The sun was warm and when he leaned
back he could almost forget the unending burden of doubled gravity.
Anger had carried away fear, rest erased fatigue. From somewhere in the
back of his mind there popped up the old platitude. _Where there's life,
there's hope._ He grimaced at the triteness of the words, at the same
time realizing that a basic truth lurked there.

Count his assets. Well battered, but still alive. None of the bruises
seemed very important, and no bones were broken. His gun was still
working, it dipped in and out of the power holster as he thought about
it. Pyrrans made rugged equipment. The medikit was operating as well. If
he kept his senses, managed to walk in a fairly straight line and could
live off the land, there was a fair chance he might make it back to the
city. What kind of a reception would be waiting for him there was a
different matter altogether. He would find that out after he arrived.
Getting there had first priority.

On the debit side there stood the planet Pyrrus. Strength-sapping
gravity, murderous weather, and violent animals. Could he survive? As if
to add emphasis to his thoughts, the sky darkened over and rain hissed
into the forest, marching towards him. Jason scrambled to his feet and
took a bearing before the rain closed down visibility. A jagged chain of
mountains stood dimly on the horizon, he remembered crossing them on the
flight out. They would do as a first goal. After he had reached them, he
would worry about the next leg of the journey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leaves and dirt flew before the wind in quick gusts, then the rain
washed over him. Soaked, chilled, already bone-tired, he pitted the
tottering strength of his legs against the planet of death.

When nightfall came it was still raining. There was no way of being sure
of the direction, and no point in going on. If that wasn't enough, Jason
was on the ragged edge of exhaustion. It was going to be a wet night.
All the trees were thick-boled and slippery, he couldn't have climbed
them on a one-G world. The sheltered spots that he investigated, under
fallen trees and beneath thick bushes, were just as wet as the rest of
the forest. In the end he curled up on the leeward side of a tree, and
fell asleep, shivering, with the water dripping off him.

The rain stopped around midnight and the temperature fell sharply. Jason
woke sluggishly from a dream in which he was being frozen to death, to
find it was almost true. Fine snow was sifting through the trees,
powdering the ground and drifting against him. The cold bit into his
flesh, and when he sneezed it hurt his chest. His aching and numb body
only wanted rest, but the spark of reason that remained in him, forced
him to his feet. If he lay down now, he would die. Holding one hand
against the tree so he wouldn't fall, he began to trudge around it. Step
after shuffling step, around and around, until the terrible cold eased a
bit and he could stop shivering. Fatigue crawled up him like a muffling,
gray blanket. He kept on walking, half the time with his eyes closed.
Opening them only when he fell and had to climb painfully to his feet
again.

The sun burned away the snow clouds at dawn. Jason leaned against his
tree and blinked up at the sky with sore eyes. The ground was white in
all directions, except around the tree where his stumbling feet had
churned a circle of black mud. His back against the smooth trunk, Jason
sank slowly down to the ground, letting the sun soak into him.

Exhaustion had him light-headed, and his lips were cracked from thirst.
Almost continuous coughing tore at his chest with fingers of fire.
Though the sun was still low it was hot already, burning his skin dry.
Dry and hot.

It wasn't right. This thought kept nagging at his brain until he
admitted it. Turned it over and over and looked at it from all sides.
What wasn't right? The way he felt.

Pneumonia. He had all the symptoms.

His dry lips cracked and blood moistened them when he smiled. He had
avoided all the animal perils of Pyrrus, all the big carnivores and
poisonous reptiles, only to be laid low by the smallest beast of them
all. Well, he had the remedy for this one, too. Rolling up his sleeve
with shaking fingers, he pressed the mouth of the medikit to his bare
arm. It clicked and began to drone an angry whine. That meant something,
he knew, but he just couldn't remember what. Holding it up he saw that
one of the hypodermics was projecting halfway from its socket. Of
course. It was empty of whatever antibiotic the analyzer had called for.
It needed refilling.

Jason hurled the thing away with a curse, and it splashed into a pool
and was gone. End of medicine, end of medikit, end of Jason dinAlt.
Single-handed battler against the perils of deathworld. Strong-hearted
stranger who could do as well as the natives. It had taken him all of
one day on his own to get his death warrant signed.

       *       *       *       *       *

A choking growl echoed behind him. He turned, dropped and fired in the
same motion. It was all over before his conscious mind was aware it had
happened. Pyrran training had conditioned his reflexes on the
pre-cortical level. Jason gaped at the ugly beast dying not a meter from
him and realized he had been trained well.

His first reaction was unhappiness that he had killed one of the grubber
dogs. When he looked closer he realized this animal was slightly
different in markings, size and temper. Though most of its forequarters
were blown away, blood pumping out in dying spurts, it kept trying to
reach Jason. Before the eyes glazed with death it had struggled its way
almost to his feet.

It wasn't quite a grubber dog, though chances were it was a wild
relative. Bearing the same relation as dog to wolf. He wondered if there
were any other resemblances between wolves and this dead beast. Did they
