"I never said that," he cried; "and if needs be I would do it, even to-
night."

"_Even_ to-night!" repeated Singleton.  "What does the man mean?  _Even_
to-night!  I've a good mind to order you to the watch to-night for
talking in riddles, sirrah!"

"The watch here has always been a double one since I can remember," put
in auld Geordie.

"To my mind, one man ought to be able to watch as well as two, for the
matter of that.  And so, Tam, you mean you would be more comfortable
with a comrade on the east terrace to-night.  Perhaps Sir David would
oblige you," he added, with a laugh.

The soldier flushed angrily.

"Ay, you may say that," he muttered, in an undertone; "it's more than
likely Sir David _will_ be walking to-night."

The boy caught these last words, and glanced quickly at the speaker.
The meaning of these mysterious utterances suddenly flashed upon him.
These men, then mistook him, their chief, their captain, for a coward!

A crimson flush suffused his face, a flush of shame and anger, as he
sprang to his feet.

At that instant, and before he could utter a word, a bugle sounded at
the gate, and there entered the hall a soldier whose appearance bore
every mark of desperate haste.

"Singleton," he cried, as he entered, "the king's friends are up!
Glencairn musters his men at daybreak at Scotsboro', and expects the
thirty men of the Singletons promised him, there and then!"

Here was a piece of news!  The long-wished-for summons had come at last,
and the heart of each Singleton present beat high at the prospect of
battle!  And yet in the midst of their elation a serious difficulty
presented itself.

"Thirty men!" said Geordie, looking round him.  "Why there are but
thirty-one men here, counting the laird.  Some must stay."

But the young laird, who had noticed the same thing, cried out promptly
to the messenger--

"Tell your general he shall have his thirty men before dawn," and with
that the soldier withdrew.

The joy of the Singletons now gave place to something like panic, as
they comprehended what the rash pledge of their young chief really
meant.  It meant that thirty of them must go, and one must stay; and
what could one man do to defend a castle like Singleton Towers?  The
elder soldiers were specially concerned.

"Call him back, Singleton," said Geordie.  "You cannot leave this place
defenceless!  Think of the peril!  Ten men must stay, at the least."

"Who says `must' to me?" cried the young chief, impatiently.  "Are the
Singletons to be word-breakers as well as highwaymen?  Thirty men shall
go.  Have we not promised?"

"But who will stay?" asked some one.

"Ah, that's it," cried another.  "Who is to stay?"

Silence ensued on the question, and then--

"_I_ will stay," quietly replied Singleton.

"You!  The laird!" shouted every one, in amazement.  "That can never
be!"

"Why not?" inquired the youth.  "Who is chief here, you or I?"

"But who is to lead us in battle?"

"Ah," said Singleton, "that is my duty, I know, but it is equally my
duty to stay here!"

"But it is certain peril, and you could do no good.  Let one of us stay.
Let me stay with you," said Geordie.

"No, brave Geordie, you must go.  It must never be said the Singletons
broke their word, even to save their castle.  Take the thirty men to
Glencairn.  If he permits ten to return, well and good.  You will find
me here."

"But your place is at our head," said the men.

"And there I will be to-morrow.  To-night I watch here; ay, and on the
east terrace with Sir David, Tam," he added, with a smile.  "But come;
to horse there!  You lose time.  Bring out the guns!  On with your
belts, men!  Be brisk now!  Take every man some bread and meat from the
table!"

And with these words the martial fire of the father blazed out in the
son, so that his men wondered more than ever how they could have
suspected him of faint-heartedness.

"Are you all equipped and mounted?  Lower the drawbridge there!  Open
the gate!  Forward, men! and `Singleton for the king!'"

And waving his hand he bade them march forth, and watched them slowly
defile across the drawbridge and turn their horses' heads eastward.

The last man to cross was Tam.

"Heaven protect you," he said, humbly, "and forgive me for the insult I
put upon you."  Then reining in his horse, he added, almost
beseechingly, "Once again, let me stay with you."

"Not I," replied young Singleton, gaily.  "Forward, Tam, and to-morrow,
if you return, you shall hear how I fared."

Tam said nothing, but setting spurs to his horse, bounded across the
drawbridge and rejoined his comrades.

Singleton, having watched the troop as they slowly wended their way
among the trees of the wood till they were lost to sight, drew up the
bridge and closed and barred the great gate.  Then, with a stout though
anxious heart, he turned and addressed himself to his solitary and
hazardous undertaking.

Sub-Chapter II.

THE NIGHT WATCH.

The young laird of Singleton turned slowly from the courtyard out of
which his men had just ridden, back into the castle.

Young as he was, and inexperienced, he knew enough of the state of his
country to feel that the task which he had imposed upon himself was one
of the greatest peril, not only to his own life, but to the ancestral
castle of his clan, for the country swarmed with freebooters and hostile
clans, on the look-out for any chance of plunder; and they, if only they
got wind of the unprotected state of Singleton Towers, would lose no
time, he knew, in striking a blow during the absence of the clan, which
might end in the loss of the old fortress for ever.  Still, what else
could he have done?  He was bound in honour to fulfil his pledge to the
royal cause by sending the thirty men, and as for himself, he had no
hesitation in deciding that, for this night at least, the post of duty,
if not of honour, was on the ramparts of his own castle, even though on
that account the Singletons must ride leaderless to the king's standard.

Besides, it must be confessed, there was a spice of adventure about the
undertaking which well accorded with his bold spirit; and as his
thoughts went back to the scene of the banquet and the suspicions
entertained there as to his own courage, it pleased him to reflect that,
whatever happened, a Singleton would never again be able to charge his
chief with cowardice.

It was nine o'clock and quite dark when he turned from the gateway out
of which his men had just sallied, and retraced his steps slowly into
the deserted castle.  His solitary footsteps sounded weird and lonely
across the paved yard which a few minutes before had rung with the
clatter of horses and the bustle of preparation.  Still more solitary
did they sound as he passed on his way through the deserted passages,
and found himself once more in the old banqueting-hall, where the feast
remained still on the board, and the empty chairs all round, just as the
clansmen had left them to obey the sudden and urgent order to march
forth.

But dreariest of all did they sound as, forcing open a small and long
disused door, which grated back on its hinges and groaned as he did so,
he stepped out on to the east terrace.

Before he did this, however, he took all the wise precautions necessary
to insure, as far as possible, the safety of the old castle, and in some
respects this was not a difficult task, for Singleton Towers stood at
the head of a narrow arm of the sea, which on three sides completely
surrounded it, leaving only the east side assailable by land.

On the sides of the sea the castle rose perpendicularly from the water,
the only entrance being by way of a creek, half cave, half boathouse,
the entrance to which could at pleasure be barred by a portcullis.  This
precaution Singleton took, and had the satisfaction of feeling that on
its seaboard at least the castle was as secure as if a garrison of a
hundred men watched it.

On the land side, however, security was not so possible.  The water was
continued in the form of a ditch twelve yards wide round this side also;
but it was a narrow protection at the best.  The drawbridge which
spanned it was, as we have already seen, drawn up; and the great iron
gate connecting with the outside world, carefully barred and bolted.
Still, as Singleton looked down, he felt concerned to think how easily a
few bold men could swim the moat and assault the place.  But he was in
for it now!

As auld Geordie had said, the guns of the castle were all loaded and
ready for action; and Singleton was relieved to see that one of these
was mounted on the turret over the great gate; and a further discovery
relieved him still more, and that was that the woods on this side were
so dense that, except along the narrow clearing through the trees, it
would hardly be possible for any number of troops, especially if they
brought artillery, to approach.

He therefore took advantage of the moonlight to point the gun carefully
so as exactly to cover the entrance to this narrow path, a precaution
which, as will be seen, stood him in good stead before the night was
out.

As to the other guns, there was one on the east terrace, rusty and old-
fashioned, but happily loaded; and there were others at various corners
and buttresses, all of which the young laird inspected and ascertained
to be ready for any emergency.  He also placed muskets in readiness at
various points in case of need.

All these preparations occupied a long time in effecting, and it was not
till an hour had passed since the departure of his men that Singleton
felt able to take his place on the watch, and quietly await the result
of his venture.

He had scarcely done so, however, when it occurred to him that though
all the garrison had left the place, there was still plenty of armour in
the castle which might be used to good purpose.  Why not set out helmets
on the ramparts, and pikes as well as guns?  It was a good idea.  He
hurried to the armoury, and quickly took from their places all the steel
helmets and pikes and plumes on which he could lay his hands.  These he
artfully disposed on various parts of the battlements, so that to any
one below it would appear that instead of one man, twenty armed warriors
guarded the place.

"Who knows but these numskulls may serve me in good stead?" said the
youth to himself, laughing to think what excellent substitutes for a
living man an empty helmet with a spear-head beside it may be made to
appear.  This little artifice being satisfactorily accomplished, and
lights set burning in various rooms of the castle still further to aid
the delusion, he returned once more to the east terrace and began his
solitary vigil.

The moon was up, and peeped occasionally from behind the drifting clouds
to light up the dark scene below.  As Singleton peered down from his
lofty post, he could see the water sparkling below him, and catch the
distant lights here and there on wood and mountain.  Not a sound was to
be heard but the moaning of the wind among the turrets and the distant
splash of the water against the south base of the castle.  Not a moving
creature was to be seen, except the uneasy bats which flapped round now
and then over his head.  Everything below was motionless and silent,
without one token of life, except, indeed, the distant light of a
beacon, which tinged the sky with a lurid glare, and added a weird
feature to the dark, solitary landscape.

Singleton, after a turn or two, was conscious of a half-dismal sensation
and a feeling of loneliness, which, as long as he had been busily
occupied, had not oppressed him.  He paced quickly to and fro, whistling
to himself, and determined not to yield to the effects of his position.
He wondered how far his men were on their way by this time.  Was old
Geordie riding at their head?  Suppose they were attacked, how would
they come out of it?  He wondered, too, if Tam was--

What was that?

A low groan from one corner of the terrace, and the clanking of a chain!
Singleton halted dead, and for a moment his heart was in his mouth.
Then he broke into a laugh.

"Jupiter again!  That's the second time he has played ghost to-night!
Well, old doggie, you've woke up, have you, and you're going to keep me
company, eh?"

And then, as he resumed his march, he talked in a low voice to the dog,
who rose quietly from his corner, and with soft, stealthy tread
proceeded to accompany his master to and fro along the terrace.

Singleton was ashamed of himself for being as startled as he had been at
this incident.

"A pretty hero I shall make at this rate," said he; "if this is the
worst alarm I am to have to-night I shall get off easily, eh?"

Jupiter solemnly wagged his tail, and evidently considering he had done
enough in accompanying his master some twenty turns up and down, retired
quietly to his old corner, and once again composed himself to slumber.

Singleton walked on, halting now and then to make a careful scrutiny all
round, and continuing to whistle softly to himself all the time.

Somehow his mind continually found itself reverting to Geordie's story.
It was an old wife's tale, of course, but a queer one too.  And this was
the very terrace on which the old warrior used to walk, and that little
turret-chamber there was his room!  Ah! strange how the reflection of
the moon should make it appear as if there were a light in the room!  If
he were not certain no light was there, he could have vowed that was
one.  Bah! he wished Geordie had kept his story to himself, it made him
feel quite dismal.

Hark!  A footstep!

He was certain he heard one, close at his side too.  He stood still and
listened.  Everything was silent.  He moved on again.  There! he heard
it distinctly! almost in step with his own.  He looked up and down,
everywhere; and then Geordie's words rushed back on his memory, "If ever
again a coward should be laird of Singleton, that old man--"

Here he stepped forward, and again suddenly halted.  The footstep that
time was as distinct as his own.  Pooh! what if it was?  He was not
going to be afraid of all the ghosts in Scotland! and he laughed out
loud by way of assuring himself of his nerve.  But he had hardly done
so, when just above him sounded another laugh, mocking his own, and as
he stepped suddenly forward, the footsteps began again as clear as ever.

This was more than Singleton had bargained for; and he sat down on the
end of the gun in bewilderment and alarm.  Had any one been there to see
his face it would have appeared a good deal paler than was its wont; and
it was certainly something more than the cold that made him shiver.  He
sat perfectly still and listened.  There was not a sound.  He strained
his eyes on every hand.  Nothing was visible through the darkness but
the silent terrace on which he watched.  What could it be?  As he sat
and wondered, the pike which had been resting carelessly across his knee
slipped and fell on to the stone pavement with a sudden clank, which was
instantly repeated overhead, just as the laugh and the footsteps had
been.

Of course it flashed upon Singleton then--an echo! nothing but a simple
echo among the nooks and crannies of the castle; and at a simple echo
his cheek had turned pale and his heart had stood still, and his hands
had actually trembled!  He scorned himself bitterly for his cowardice;
and once more, relieved in mind and humbled in spirit, set out on his
night watch, determined this time that nothing, not even a score of
ghosts, should terrify him.

And now the night began to wear on.  By this time the men must be very
near their rendezvous, for it was an hour past midnight, and the moon
was getting down towards the west.  He wondered what other clans would
