       Heat of combustion = 14,544 {C + 4.265 (H-(O/8))},

and water evaporated from and at 212 deg., taking 966 units as the heat
necessary to evaporate 1 pound of water,

       lb. evaporated = 15.06 {C + 4.265 (H-(O/8))},

carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen being taken at their weight per cent. in
the fuel. Strictly speaking, marsh gas should be separately
determined. It often happens that available energy is not in a form in
which it can be applied directly to our needs. The water flowing down
from the mountains in the neighborhood of the Alpine tunnels was
competent to provide the power necessary for boring through them, but
it was not in a form in which it could be directly applied. The
kinetic energy of the water had first to be changed into the potential
energy of air under pressure, then, in that form, by suitable
mechanism, it was used with signal success to disintegrate and
excavate the hard rock of the tunnels. The energy resulting from
combustion is also incapable of being directly transformed into useful
motive power; it must first be converted into potential force of steam
or air at high temperature and pressure, and then applied by means of
suitable heat engines to produce the motions we require. It is
probably to this circumstance that we must attribute the slowness of
the human race to take advantage of the energy of combustion. The
history of the steam engine hardly dates back 200 years, a very small
fraction of the centuries during which man has existed, even since
historic times.

The apparatus by means of which the potential energy of fuel with
respect to oxygen is converted into the potential energy of steam, we
call a steam boiler; and although it has neither cylinder nor piston,
crank nor fly wheel, I claim for it that it is a veritable heat
engine, because it transmits the undulations and vibrations caused by
the energy of chemical combination in the fuel to the water in the
boiler; these motions expend themselves in overcoming the liquid
cohesion of the water and imparting to its molecules that vigor of
motion which converts them into the molecules of a gas which,
impinging on the surfaces which confine it and form the steam space,
declare their presence and energy in the shape of pressure and
temperature. A steam pumping engine, which furnishes water under high
pressure to raise loads by means of hydraulic cranes, is not more
truly a heat engine than a simple boiler, for the latter converts the
latent energy of fuel into the latent energy of steam, just as the
pumping engine converts the latent energy of steam into the latent
energy of the pumped-up accumulator or the hoisted weight.

If I am justified in taking this view, then I am justified in applying
to my heat engine the general principles laid down in 1824 by Sadi
Carnot, namely, that the proportion of work which can be obtained out
of any substance working between two temperatures depends entirely and
solely upon the difference between the temperatures at the beginning
and end of the operation; that is to say, if T be the higher
temperature at the beginning, and _t_ the lower temperature at the end
of the action, then the maximum possible work to be got out of the
substance will be a function of (T-_t_). The greatest range of
temperature possible or conceivable is from the absolute temperature
of the substance at the commencement of the operation down to absolute
zero of temperature, and the fraction of this which can be utilized is
the ratio which the range of temperature through which the substance
is working bears to the absolute temperature at the commencement of
the action. If W = the greatest amount of effect to be expected, T and
_t_ the absolute temperatures, and H the total quantity of heat
(expressed in foot pounds or in water evaporated, as the case may be)
potential in the substance at the higher temperature, T, at the
beginning of the operation, then Carnot's law is expressed by the
equation:

         / T - t \
   W = H( ------- )
         \   T   /

I will illustrate this important doctrine in the manner which Carnot
himself suggested.

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 2.]

Fig. 2 represents a hillside rising from the sea. Some distance up
there is a lake, L, fed by streams coming down from a still higher
level. Lower down on the slope is a millpond, P, the tail race from
which falls into the sea. At the millpond is established a factory,
the turbine driving which is supplied with water by a pipe descending
from the lake, L. Datum is the mean sea level; the level of the lake
is T, and of the millpond _t_. Q is the weight of water falling
through the turbine per minute. The mean sea level is the lowest level
to which the water can possibly fall; hence its greatest potential
energy, that of its position in the lake, = QT = H. The water is
working between the absolute levels, T and _t_; hence, according to
Carnot, the maximum effect, W, to be expected is--

         / T - t \
   W = H( ------- )
         \   T   /
                                / T - t \
but H = QT [therefore]  W = Q T( ------- )
                                \   T   /

   W = Q (T - t),

that is to say, the greatest amount of work which can be expected is
found by multiplying the weight of water into the clear fall, which
is, of course, self-evident.

Now, how can the quantity of work to be got out of a given weight of
water be increased without in any way improving the efficiency of the
turbine? In two ways:

1. By collecting the water higher up the mountain, and by that means
increasing T.

2. By placing the turbine lower down, nearer the sea, and by that
means reducing _t_.

Now, the sea level corresponds to the absolute zero of temperature,
and the heights T and _t_ to the maximum and minimum temperatures
between which the substance is working; therefore similarly, the way
to increase the efficiency of a heat engine, such as a boiler, is to
raise the temperature of the furnace to the utmost, and reduce the
heat of the smoke to the lowest possible point. It should be noted, in
addition, that it is immaterial what liquid there may be in the lake;
whether water, oil, mercury, or what not, the law will equally apply,
and so in a heat engine, the nature of the working substance, provided
that it does not change its physical state during a cycle, does not
affect the question of efficiency with which the heat being expended
is so utilized. To make this matter clearer, and give it a practical
bearing, I will give the symbols a numerical value, and for this
purpose I will, for the sake of simplicity, suppose that the fuel used
is pure carbon, such as coke or charcoal, the heat of combustion of
which is 14,544 units, that the specific heat of air, and of the
products of combustion at constant pressure, is 0.238, that only
sufficient air is passed through the fire to supply the quantity of
oxygen theoretically required for the combustion of the carbon, and
that the temperature of the air is at 60 deg. Fahrenheit = 520 deg. absolute.
The symbol T represents the absolute temperature of the furnace, a
value which is easily calculated in the following manner: 1 lb. of
carbon requires 2-2/3 lb. of oxygen to convert it into carbonic acid,
and this quantity is furnished by 12.2 lb. of air, the result being
13.2 lb. of gases, heated by 14,544 units of heat due to the energy of
combustion; therefore:

                14,544 units
  T = 520 deg. + ------------------ = 5,150 deg. absolute.
              13.2 lb. X 0.238

The lower temperature, _t_, we may take as that of the feed water, say
at 100 deg. or 560 deg. absolute, for by means of artificial draught and
sufficiently extending the heating surface, the temperature of the
smoke may be reduced to very nearly that of the feed water. Under such
circumstances the proportion of heat which can be realized is

       5,150 deg. - 560 deg.
    = --------------- = 0.891;
           5,150 deg.

that is to say, under the extremely favorable if not impracticable
conditions assumed, there must be a loss of 11 per cent. Next, to give
a numerical value to the potential energy, H, to be derived from a
pound of carbon, calculating from absolute zero, the specific heat of
carbon being 0.25, and absolute temperature of air 520 deg.:

                                              Units.
  1 lb. of carbon X 0.25 X 520              =    130
  12.2 of air X 0.238 X 520                 =  1,485
  Heat of combustion                        = 14,544
                                              ------
                                              16,159
  Deduct heat equivalent to work of       \
    displacing atmosphere by products of   }
    combustion raised from 60 deg. to 100 deg.,    }      32
    or from 149.8 cubic feet to 161.3      }
    cubic feet,                           /
                                              ------
          Total units of heat available       16,127

Equal to 16.69 lb. of water evaporated from and at 212 deg.. Hence the
greatest possible evaporation from and at 212 deg. from a lb. of carbon--

       16,159 u. X 0.891 - 32 u.
  W = --------------------------- = 14.87 lb.
               966 u.

I will now take a definite case, and compare the potential energy of a
certain kind of fuel with the results actually obtained. For this
purpose the boiler of the eight-horse portable engine, which gained
the first prize at the Cardiff show of the Royal Agricultural Society
in 1872, will serve very well, because the trials, all the details of
which are set forth very fully in vol. ix. of the _Journal_ of the
Society, were carried out with great care and skill by Sir Frederick
Bramwell and the late Mr. Menelaus; indeed, the only fact left
undetermined was the temperature of the furnace, an omission due to
the want of a trustworthy pyrometer, a want which has not been
satisfied to this day.[2]

   [Footnote 2: In the fifty-second volume of the _Proceedings_
   (1887-78), page 154, will be found a remarkable experiment on the
   evaporative power of a vertical boiler with internal circulating
   pipes. The experiment was conducted by Sir Frederick Bramwell and
   Dr. Russell, and is remarkable in this respect, that the quantity
   of air admitted to the fuel, the loss by convection and
   radiation, and the composition of the smoke were determined. The
   facts observed were as follows:

   Steam pressure 53 lb................................... = 300.6 deg. F.
                                                               lb.
   Fuel--Water in coke and wood...........................    26.08
         Ash..............................................    10.53
         Hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur..........     7.18
                                                             ------
                Total non-combustible.....................    43.79
         Carbon, being useful combustible.................   194.46
                                                             ------
                Total fuel................................   238.25

   Air per pound of carbon................................   17-1/8 lb.
   Time of experiment.....................................  4 h. 12 min.
   Water evaporated from 60 deg. into steam at 53 lb. pressure   1,620 lb.
   Heat lost by radiation and convection..................  70,430 units.
   Mean temperature of chimney............................    700 deg. F.
    "        "       " air................................     70 deg. F.

   No combustible gas was found in the chimney.

   I will apply Carnot's doctrine to this case.

   Potential energy of the fuel with respect to absolute zero:
                                                               Units.
     239.25 lb. x 530 deg. abs. x 0.238 ...................... =   30,053
     194.46 lb. x 17-1/8 x 530 deg. x 0.238,
         the weight and heat of air.......................    420,660
     194.46 x 14,544 units heat of combustion of carbon...  2,828,200
                                                            ---------
                Total energy                                3,278,813
     Heat absorbed in evaporating 26.08 lb. of water
       in fuel............................................    -29,888
                                                            ---------
                Available energy..........................  3,248,425

   Temperature of furnace--

   The whole of the fuel was heated up, but the heat absorbed in the
   evaporation of the water lowered the temperature of the furnace,
   and must be deducted from the heat of combustion.

                                                                Units.
     Heat of combustion...................................  2,828,200
       "   " evaporation of 26.08 lb. water...............    -29,888
                                                            ---------
                Available heat of combustion..............  2,798,312

     Dividing by 238.25 lb. gives the heat per 1 lb.
       of fuel used................................... = 11,745 units.
     And temperature of furnace:
     11,745 units/(18.125 lb. x 0.238) + 530 deg.......... = 3,253 deg.
     Temperature of chimney 700 deg. + 460 deg................ = 1,160 deg.
     Maximum duty (3,253 deg. - 1,160 deg.)/3,253 deg............. = 0.643 deg.

   Work of displacing atmosphere by smoke at 700 deg.:
                                                         Cubic feet.
      Volumes of gases at  70 deg.........................    = 228.3
        "      "   "    " 700 deg.........................    = 499.8
                                                            -----
                Increase of volume....................      271.5

                                                             Units.
     Work done=
     (194.46 lb. x 271.5 cub. ft. x 144 sq. in. x 15 lb.)
      /722 units ..................................... =   147,720
     Maximum amount of work to be expected =
       3,248,425 x 0.643.............................. = 2,101,700
     Deduct work of displacing atmosphere............. =   147,720
                                                         ---------
                Available work........................   1,953,980

   Actual work done:
                                                             Units.
     1,620 lb. of water raised from 60 deg. and turned
       into steam at 53 lb..... ...................... = 1,855,900
     Loss by radiation and convection.................      70,430
     10-1/2 lb. ashes left, say at 500 deg................       1,129
                                                         ---------
                Total work actually done..............   1,927,459
     Unaccounted for..................................      26,521
                                                         ---------
     Calculated available work........................   1,953,980

   The unaccounted-for work, therefore, amounts to only 11/2 per cent.
   of the calculated available work.

   Sir Frederick Bramwell ingeniously arranged his data in the form
   of a balance sheet, and showed 253,979 units unaccounted for; but
   if from this we deduct the work lost in displacing the air, the
   unaccounted-for heat falls to less than 4 per cent. of the total
   heat of combustion. These results show how extremely accurate the
   observations must have been, and that the loss mainly arises from
   convection and radiation from the boiler.]

The data necessary for our purpose are:

Steam pressure 80 lb. temperature                    324 deg. = 784 deg. absolute.
Mean temperature of smoke                            389 deg. = 849 deg.    "
Water evaporated per 1 lb of coal, from and at 212 deg.  11.83 lb.
Temperature of the air                                60 deg. = 520 deg. absolute.
     "      of feed water                            209 deg. = 669 deg.    "
Heating surface                                      220 square feet.
Grate surface                                        3.29 feet.
Coal burnt per hour                                  41 lb.

The fuel used was a smokeless Welsh coal, from the Llangennech
colleries. It was analyzed by Mr. Snelus, of the Dowlais Ironworks,
and in Table II. are exhibited the details of its composition, and the
weight and volume of air required for its combustion. The total heat
of combustion in 1 lb of water evaporated:

      = 15.06 x (0.8497 + 4.265 x (0.426 - 0.035/8))
      = 15.24 lb. of water from and at 212 deg.
      = 14,727 units of heat.

           TABLE II.--PROPERTIES OF LLANGENNECH COAL.

  ---------------------+----------+------------+---------------------+
                       |          |            |                     |
                       |          |            |    Products of      |
                       |          |  Oxygen    | Combustion at 32 deg. F.|
                       | Analyses | required   +--------+------------+
                       | of 1 lb. |    for     |        |            |
                       | of Coal. | Combustion.| Cubic  |  Volume    |
                       |          | Pounds.    | feet.  | per cent.  |
  ---------------------+----------+------------+--------+------------+
   Carbon...........   |  0.8497  |  2.266     |  25.3  |     11.1   |
   Hydrogen.........   |  0.0426  |  0.309     |   7.6  |      3.4   |
   Oxygen...........   |  0.0350  |    ---     |   ---  |      ---   |
   Sulphur..........   |  0.0042  |    ---     |   ---  | _    ---   |
   Nitrogen.........   |  0.1045  |    ---     |   0.18 |  |         |
   Ash..............   |  0.0540  |    ---     |   ---  |  |         |
                       +----------+------------+        |  |  85.5   |
                       |          |            |        |  |         |
    Total...........   |  1.0000  |  2.572     |   ---  |  |         |
  9-1/3.lb nitrogen    |    ---   |    ---     | 118.9  |  |         |
  6 lb. excess of air. |    ---   |    ---     |  71.4  | _|         |
                       +----------+------------+--------+------------+
  Total cubic feet of  |          |            |        |            |
  products per 1 lb.   |          |            |        |            |
  of coal...........   |    --    |    --      | 226.4  |    100.0   |
  ---------------------+----------+------------+--------+------------+

The temperature of the furnace not having been determined, we must
calculate it on the supposition, which will be justified later on,
that 50 per cent more air was admitted than was theoretically
necessary to supply the oxygen required for perfect combustion. This
would make 18 lb. of air per 1 lb. of coal; consequently 19 lb. of
gases would be heated by 14,727 units of heat. Hence:

         14,727 u.
  T = ---------------- = 3,257 deg.
       19 lb. x 0.238

above the temperatures of the air, or 3,777 deg. absolute. The temperature
of the smoke, _t_, was 849 deg. absolute; hence the maximum duty would be

      3,777 deg. - 849 deg.
     --------------- = 0.7752.
          3,777 deg.

The specific heat of coal is very nearly that of gases at constant
pressure, and may, without sensible error, be taken as such. The
potential energy of 1 lb. of coal, therefore, with reference to the
oxygen with which it will combine, and calculated from absolute zero,
is:

                                                              Units.
19 lb. of coal and air at the temperature
  of the air contained 19 lb. x 520 deg. x 0.238                   2,350
Heat of combustion                                            14,727
                                                             -------
                                                              17,078
Deduct heat expended in displacing atmosphere 151 cubic feet   - 422
                                                              ------
            Total potential energy                            16,656

Hence work to be expected from the boiler:

                    / 3,777 deg. - 849 deg. \
  = 17,078 units X ( --------------- ) - 422 units
                    \     3,777 deg.    /
    ---------------------------------------------- = 13.27 lb.
                         966 units

of water evaporated from and at 212 deg., corresponding to 12,819 units.
The actual result obtained was 11.83 lb.; hence the efficiency of this
boiler was

    11.83
   ------- = 0.892.
    13.27

I have already claimed for a boiler that it is a veritable heat
engine, and I have ventured to construct an indicator diagram to
illustrate its working. The rate of transfer of heat from the furnace
to the water in the boiler, at any given point, is some way
proportional to the difference of temperature, and the quantity of
heat in the gases is proportional to their temperatures. Draw a base
line representing -460 deg. Fahr., the absolute zero of temperature. At
one end erect an ordinate, upon which set off T = 3,777 deg., the
temperature of the furnace. At 849 deg. = _t_, on the scale of
temperature, draw a line parallel to the base, and mark on it a length
proportional to the heating surface of the boiler; join T by a
diagonal with the extremity of this line, and drop a perpendicular on
to the zero line. The temperature of the water in the boiler being
uniform, the ordinates bounded by the sloping line, and by the line,
_t_, will at any point be approximately proportional to the rate of
transmission of heat, and the shaded area above _t_ will be
proportional to the quantity of heat imparted to the water. Join T by
another diagonal with extremity of the heating surface on the zero
line, then the larger triangle, standing on the zero line, will
represent the whole of the heat of combustion, and the ratio of the
two triangles will be as the lengths of their respective bases, that
is, as (T - _t_) / T, which is the expression we have already used. The
heating surface was 220 square feet, and it was competent to transmit
the energy developed by 41 lb. of coal consumed per hour = 12,819 u. x
41 u. = 525,572 units, equal to an average of 2,389 units per square
foot per hour; this value will correspond to the mean pressure in an
ordinary diagram, for it is a measure of the energy with which
molecular motion is transferred from the heated gases to the
boiler-plate, and so to the water. The mean rate of transmission,
multiplied by the area of heating surface, gives the area of the
shaded portion of the figure, which is the total work which should
have been done, that is to say, the work of evaporating 544 lb. of
water per hour. The actual work done, however, was only 485 lb. To
give the speculations we have indulged in a practical turn, it will be
necessary to examine in detail the terms of Carnot's formula. Carnot
labored under great disadvantages. He adhered to the emission theory
of heat; he was unacquainted with its dynamic equivalent; he did not
know the reason of the difference between the specific heat of air at
constant pressure and at constant volume, the idea of an absolute zero
of temperature had not been broached; but the genius of the man, while
it made him lament the want of knowledge which he felt must be
attainable, also enabled him to penetrate the gloom by which he was
surrounded, and enunciate propositions respecting the theory of heat
engines, which the knowledge we now possess enables us to admit as
true. His propositions are:

1. The motive power of heat is independent of the agents employed to
develop it, and its quantity is determined solely by the temperature
of the bodies between which the final transfer of caloric takes place.

2. The temperature of the agent must in the first instance be raised
to the highest degree possible in order to obtain a great fall of
caloric, and as a consequence a large production of motive power.

3. For the same reason the cooling of the agent must be carried to as
low a degree as possible.

4. Matters must be so arranged that the passage of the elastic agent
from the higher to the lower temperature must be due to an increase of
volume, that is to say, the cooling of the agent must be caused by its
rarefaction.

This last proposition indicates the defective information which Carnot
possessed. He knew that expansion of the elastic agent was accompanied
by a fall of temperature, but he did not know that that fall was due
to the conversion of heat into work. We should state this clause more
correctly by saying that "the cooling of the agent must be caused by
the external work it performs." In accordance with these propositions,
it is immaterial what the heated gases or vapors in the furnace of a
boiler may be, provided that they cool by doing external work and, in
passing over the boiler surfaces, impart their heat energy to the
water. The temperature of the furnace, it follows, must be kept as
high as possible. The process of combustion is usually complex. First,
in the case of coal, close to the fire-bars complete combustion of the
red hot carbon takes place, and the heat so developed distills the
volatile hydrocarbons and moisture in the upper layers of the fuel.
The inflammable gases ignite on or near the surface of the fuel, if
there be a sufficient supply of air, and burn with a bright flame for
a considerable distance around the boiler. If the layer of fuel be
thin, the carbonic acid formed in the first instance passes through
the fuel and mixes with the other gases. If, however, the layer of
fuel be thick, and the supply of air through the bars insufficient,
the carbonic acid is decomposed by the red hot coke, and twice the
volume of carbonic oxide is produced, and this, making its way through
the fuel, burns with a pale blue flame on the surface, the result, as
far as evolution of heat is concerned, being the same as if the
intermediate decomposition of carbonic acid had not taken place. This
property of coal has been taken advantage of by the late Sir W.
Siemens in his gas producer, where the supply of air is purposely
limited, in order that neither the hydrocarbons separated by
distillation, nor the carbonic oxide formed in the thick layer of
fuel, may be consumed in the producer, but remain in the form of crude
gas, to be utilized in his regenerative furnaces.

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 3.]

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 4.]

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 5.]

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 6.]

[Illustration: THE GENERATION OF STEAM. Fig 7.]

_(To be continued.)_

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT No. 437, page 6970.]

