The dinner was a good one, much better than the two boys were accustomed
to get at the eating-houses which in times past they had frequented.
Dick noticed carefully how the others did, and acquitted himself quite
creditably, so that no one probably suspected that he had not always
been used to as good a table.

When the boys rose from the table, Mrs. Browning said, "Won't you walk
into the parlor, young gentlemen? We generally have a little music after
dinner. Some of the young ladies are musical. Do either of you play?"

Dick said he sometimes played marbles; at which a young lady laughed,
and Dick, catching the infection, laughed too.

"Miss Peyton, Mr. Hunter," introduced Mrs. Browning.

Miss Peyton made a sweeping courtesy, to which Dick responded by a bow,
turning red with embarrassment.

"Don't you sing, Mr. Hunter?" asked the young lady.

"I aint much on warblin'," said Dick, forgetting for the moment where he
was.

This droll answer, which Miss Peyton supposed to be intentionally funny,
convulsed the young lady with merriment.

"Perhaps your friend sings?" she said.

Thereupon Fosdick was also introduced. To Dick's astonishment, he
answered that he did a little. It was accordingly proposed that they
should enter the next room, where there was a piano. The young lady
played some well-known melodies, and Fosdick accompanied her with his
voice, which proved to be quite sweet and melodious.

"You are quite an acquisition to our circle," said Miss Peyton,
graciously. "Have you boarded in this neighborhood before?"

"No," said Fosdick; "at another part of the city."

He was afraid she would ask him in what street, but fortunately she
forbore.

In about half an hour the boys went up to their own room, where they
lighted the gas, and, opening their trunks, placed the contents in the
bureau-drawers.

"Blessed if it don't seem strange," said Dick, "for a feller brought up
as I have been to live in this style. I wonder what Miss Peyton would
have said if she had known what I had been."

"You haven't any cause to be ashamed of it, Dick. It wasn't a very
desirable business, but it was honest. Now you can do something better.
You must adapt yourself to your new circumstances."

"So I mean to," said Dick. "I'm going in for respectability. When I get
to be sixty years old, I'm goin' to wear gold spectacles and walk round
this way, like the old gentlemen I see most every day on Wall Street."

Dick threw his head back, and began to walk round the room with a
pompous step and an air of great importance.

"I hope we'll both rise, Dick; we've got well started now, and there've
been other boys, worse off than we are, who have worked hard, and risen
to FAME AND FORTUNE."

"We can try," said Dick. "Now let us go out and have a walk."

"All right," said Fosdick.

They went downstairs, and out into the street. Accustomed to the lower
part of the city, there was a novelty in the evening aspect of Broadway,
with its shops and theatres glittering with light. They sauntered
carelessly along, looking in at the shop-windows, feeling more and more
pleased with their change of location. All at once Dick's attention was
drawn to a gentleman accompanied by a boy of about his own size, who was
walking a little in advance.

"Stop a minute," he said to Fosdick, and hurrying forward placed his
hand on the boy's arm.

"How are you, Frank?" he said.

Frank Whitney, for it was he, turned in some surprise and looked at
Dick, but did not at first recognize in the neat, well-dressed boy of
fifteen the ragged boot-black he had encountered a year before.

"I don't think I remember you," he said, surveying Dick with a puzzled
expression.

"Perhaps you'd remember me better if I had on my Washington coat and
Napoleon pants," said our hero, with a smile. He felt rather pleased to
find he was not recognized, since it was a compliment to his improved
appearance.

"What!" exclaimed Frank, his face lighting up with pleasure, "is it
possible that you are--"

"Richard Hunter, at your service," said our hero; "but when you knew me
I was Ragged Dick."




CHAPTER II.

INTRODUCTION TO MERCANTILE LIFE.


Frank Whitney was indeed surprised to find the ragged boot-black of a
year before so wonderfully changed. He grasped Dick's hand, and shook it
heartily.

"Uncle," he said, "this is Dick. Isn't he changed?"

"It is a change I am glad to see," said Mr. Whitney, also extending his
hand; "for it appears to be a change for the better. And who is this
other young man?"

"This is my private tutor," said Dick, presenting Fosdick,--"Professor
Fosdick. He's been teachin' me every evenin' for most a year. His terms
is very reasonable. If it hadn't been for him, I never should have
reached my present high position in literature and science."

"I am glad to make your acquaintance, _Professor_ Fosdick," said Frank,
laughing. "May I inquire whether my friend Dick owes his elegant system
of pronunciation to your instructions?"

"Dick can speak more correctly when he pleases," said Fosdick; "but
sometimes he falls back into his old way. He understands the common
English branches very well."

"Then he must have worked hard; for when I first met him a year ago, he
was--"

"As ignorant as a horse," interrupted Dick. "It was you that first made
me ambitious, Frank. I wanted to be like you, and grow up 'spectable."

"_Re_spectable, Dick," suggested Fosdick.

"Yes, that's what I mean. I didn't always want to be a boot-black, so I
worked hard, and with the help of Professor Fosdick, I've got up a
little way. But I'm goin' to climb higher."

"I am very glad to hear it, my young friend," said Mr. Whitney. "It is
always pleasant to see a young man fighting his way upward. In this free
country there is every inducement for effort, however unpromising may be
the early circumstances in which one is placed. But, young gentlemen, as
my nephew would be glad to speak further with you, I propose that we
adjourn from the sidewalk to the St. Nicholas Hotel, where I am at
present stopping."

"Yes, Dick," said Frank, "you and Professor Fosdick must spend the
evening with me. I was intending to visit some place of amusement, but
would much prefer a visit from you."

Dick and Fosdick readily accepted this invitation, and turned in the
direction of the St. Nicholas, which is situated on Broadway, below
Bleecker Street.

"By the way, Dick, where are your Washington coat and Napoleon pants
now?"

"They were stolen from my room," said Dick, "by somebody that wanted to
appear on Broadway dressed in tip-top style, and hadn't got money enough
to pay for a suit."

"Perhaps it was some agent of Barnum who desired to secure the valuable
relics," suggested Frank.

"By gracious!" said Dick, suddenly, "there they are now. It's the first
time I've seen 'em since they was stolen."

He pointed to a boy, of about his own size, who was coming up Broadway.
He was attired in the well-remembered coat and pants; but, alas! time
had not spared them. The solitary remaining coat-tail was torn in many
places; of one sleeve but a fragment remained; grease and dirt nearly
obliterated the original color; and it was a melancholy vestige of what
it had been once. As for the pantaloons, they were a complete wreck.
When Dick had possessed them they were well ventilated; but they were
now ventilated so much more thoroughly that, as Dick said afterwards, "a
feller would be warmer without any."

"That's Micky Maguire," said Dick; "a partic'lar friend of mine, that
had such a great 'fection for me that he stole my clothes to remember me
by."

"Perhaps," said Fosdick, "it was on account of his great respect for
General Washington and the Emperor Napoleon."

"What would the great Washington say if he could see his coat now?" said
Frank.

"When I wore it," said Dick, "I was sorry he was so great, 'cause it
prevented his clothes fitting me."

It may be necessary to explain to those who are unacquainted with Dick's
earlier adventures, that the clothes in which he was originally
introduced were jocosely referred to by him as gifts from the
illustrious personages whose names have been mentioned.

Micky Maguire did not at first recognize Dick. When he did so, he
suddenly shambled down Prince Street, fearful, perhaps, that the stolen
clothes would be reclaimed.

They had now reached the St. Nicholas, and entered. Mr. Whitney led the
way up to his apartment, and then, having a business engagement with a
gentleman below, he descended to the reading-room, leaving the boys
alone. Left to themselves, they talked freely. Dick related fully the
different steps in his education, with which some of our readers are
already familiar, and received hearty congratulations from Frank, and
earnest encouragement to persevere.

"I wish you were going to be in the city, Frank," said Dick.

"So I shall be soon," said Frank.

Dick's face lighted up with pleasure.

"That's bully," said he, enthusiastically. "How soon are you comin'?"

"I am hoping to enter Columbia College next commencement. I suppose my
time will be a good deal taken up with study, but I shall always find
time for you and Fosdick. I hope you both will call upon me."

Both boys readily accepted the invitation in advance, and Dick promised
to write to Frank at his boarding-school in Connecticut. At about half
past ten, the two boys left the St. Nicholas, and went back to their
boarding-house.

After a comfortable night's sleep, they got up punctually to the seven
o'clock breakfast. It consisted of beefsteak, hot biscuit, potatoes, and
very good coffee. Dick and Fosdick did justice to the separate viands,
and congratulated themselves upon the superiority of their present fare
to that which they had been accustomed to obtain at the restaurants.

Breakfast over, Fosdick set out for the hat and cap store in which he
was employed, and Dick for Rockwell & Cooper's on Pearl Street. It must
be confessed that he felt a little bashful as he stood in front of the
large warehouse, and surveyed the sign. He began to feel some
apprehensions that he would not be found competent for his post. It
seemed such a rise from the streets to be employed in such an imposing
building. But Dick did not long permit timidity to stand in his way. He
entered the large apartment on the first floor, which he found chiefly
used for storing large boxes and cases of goods. There was a
counting-room and office, occupying one corner, partitioned off from the
rest of the department. Dick could see a young man through the glass
partition sitting at a desk; and, opening the door, he entered. He
wished it had been Mr. Rockwell, for it would have saved him from
introducing himself; but of course it was too early for that gentleman
to appear.

"What is your business?" inquired the book-keeper, for it was he.

"I've come to work," said Dick, shortly, for somehow he did not take
much of a fancy to the book-keeper, whose tone was rather supercilious.

"Oh, you've come to work, have you?"

"Yes, I have," said Dick, independently.

"I don't think we shall need your valuable services," said the
book-keeper, with something of a sneer. The truth was, that Mr. Rockwell
had neglected to mention that he had engaged Dick.

Dick, though a little inclined to be bashful when he entered, had quite
got over that feeling now. He didn't intend to be intimidated or driven
away by the man before him. There was only one doubt in his mind. This
might be Mr. Cooper, the second member of the firm, although he did not
think it at all probable. So he ventured this question, "Is Mr. Rockwell
or Mr. Cooper in?"

"They're never here at this hour."

"So I supposed," said Dick, coolly.

He sat down in an arm-chair, and took up the morning paper.

The book-keeper was decidedly provoked by his coolness. He felt that he
had not impressed Dick with his dignity or authority, and this made him
angry.

"Bring that paper to me, young man," he said; "I want to consult it."

"Very good," said Dick; "you can come and get it."

"I can't compliment you on your good manners," said the other.

"Good manners don't seem to be fashionable here," said Dick, composedly.

Apparently the book-keeper did not want the paper very particularly, as
he did not take the trouble to get up for it. Dick therefore resumed his
reading, and the other dug his pen spitefully into the paper, wishing,
but not quite daring, to order Dick out of the counting-room, as it
might be possible that he had come by appointment.

"Did you come to see Mr. Rockwell?" he asked, at length, looking up from
his writing.

"Yes," said Dick.

"Did he tell you to come?"

"Yes."

"What was that you said about coming to work?"

"I said I had come here to work."

"Who engaged you?"

"Mr. Rockwell."

"Oh, indeed! And how much are you to receive for your valuable
services?"

"You are very polite to call my services valuable," said Dick. "I hope
they will be."

"You haven't answered my question."

"I have no objection, I'm sure. I'm to get ten dollars a week."

"Ten dollars a week!" echoed the book-keeper, with a scornful laugh. "Do
you expect you will earn that?"

"No, I don't," said Dick, frankly.

"You don't!" returned the other, doubtfully. "Well, you're more modest
than I thought for. Then why are you to get so much?"

"Perhaps Mr. Rockwell will tell you," said Dick, "if you tell him you're
very particular to know, and will lose a night's rest if you don't find
out."

"I wouldn't give you a dollar a week."

"Then I'm glad I aint goin' to work for you."

"I don't believe your story at all. I don't think Mr. Rockwell would be
such a fool as to overpay you so much."

"P'r'aps I shouldn't be the only one in the establishment that is
overpaid," observed Dick.

"Do you mean me, you young rascal?" demanded the book-keeper, now very
angry.

"Don't call names. It isn't polite."

"I demand an answer. Do you mean to say that I am overpaid?"

"Well," said Dick, deliberately, "if you're paid anything for bein'
polite, I should think you was overpaid considerable."

There is no knowing how long this skirmishing would have continued, if
Mr. Rockwell himself had not just then entered the counting-room. Dick
rose respectfully at his entrance, and the merchant, recognizing him at
once, advanced smiling and gave him a cordial welcome.

"I am glad to see you, my boy," he said. "So you didn't forget the
appointment. How long have you been here?"

