being without succor to sustain themselves in the country: and with
that thought he fell sick. But before he took his bed he sent an
Indian to the Cacique of Quigalta to tell him that he was the child of
the sun, and that all the way that he came all men obeyed and served
him, that he requested him to accept of his friendship and come unto
him, for he would be very glad to see him; and in sign of love and
obedience to bring something with him of that which in his country was
most esteemed....

By the time the Indian returned with his answer, the Governor had
betaken himself to bed, being evil handled with fevers, and was much
aggrieved that he was in case to pass presently the river and to seek
him, to see if he could abate that pride of his, considering the river
went now very strongly in those parts; for it was near half a league
broad, and sixteen fathoms deep, and very furious, and ran with a
great current; and on both sides there were many Indians, and his
power was not now so great, but that he had need to help himself
rather by slights than by force. The Indians of Guachoya came every
day with fish in such numbers, that the town was full of them....

The Governor felt in himself that the hour approached wherein he was
to leave this present life, and called for the king's officers,
captains, and principal persons, to whom he made a speech. Baltasar de
Gallegos answered in the name of all the rest. And first of all
comforting him, he set before his eyes how short the life of this
world was, and with how many troubles and miseries it is accompanied,
and how God showed him a singular favor which soonest left it: telling
him many other things fit for such a time. And touching the Governor
which he commanded they should elect, he besought him, that it would
please his lordship to name him which he thought fit, and him they
would obey. And presently he named Luys de Moscoso de Alvarado, his
captain-general. And presently he was sworn by all that were present,
and elected for governor. The next day being the 21st of May, 1542,
departed out of this life the valorous, virtuous, and valiant captain,
Don Fernando de Soto, Governor of Cuba, and Adelantado of Florida:
whom fortune advanced, as it useth to do others, that he might have
the higher fall. He departed in such a place, and at such a time, as
in his sickness he had but little comfort: and the danger wherein all
his people were of perishing in that country, which appeared before
their eyes, was cause sufficient why every one of them had need of
comfort, and why they did not visit nor accompany him as they ought to
have done. Luys de Moscoso determined to conceal his death from the
Indians, because Fernando de Soto had made them believe that the
Christians were immortal; and also because they took him to be hardy,
wise, and valiant; and if they should know that he was dead, they
would be bold to set upon the Christians, tho they lived peaceably by
them.

As soon as he was dead, Luys de Moscoso commanded to put him secretly
in the house, where he remained three days; and moving him from
thence, commanded him to be buried in the night at one of the gates of
the town within the wall. And as the Indians had seen him sick, and
missed him, so did they suspect what might be. And passing by the
place where he was buried, seeing the earth moved, they looked and
spake one to another. Luys de Moscoso, understanding of it, commanded
him to be taken up by night, and to cast a great deal of sand into the
mantles, wherein he was wound up, wherein he was carried in a canoe,
and thrown into the midst of the river.

The Cacique of Guachoya inquired for him, demanding what was become of
his brother and lord, the Governor. Luys de Moscoso told him that he
was gone to heaven, as many other times he did: and because he was to
stay there certain days he had left him in his place. The cacique
thought with himself that he was dead; and commanded two young and
well-proportioned Indians to be brought thither; and said, that the
use of that country was, when any lord died, to kill Indians to wait
upon him, and serve him by the way, and for that purpose by his
commandment were those come thither: and prayed Luys de Moscoso to
command them to be beheaded, that they might attend and serve his lord
and brother. Luys de Moscoso told him that the Governor was not dead,
but gone to heaven, and that of his own Christian soldiers he had
taken such as he needed to serve him, and prayed him to command those
Indians to be loosed, and not to use any such bad custom from
thenceforth: straightway he commanded them to be loosed, and to get
them home to their houses.

    [1] From the "Narrative of the Gentleman of Elvas," the author's
    name being unknown, but written by one of De Soto's companions, a
    Spaniard, and first printed in 1557. The author has been supposed
    to be Alvaro Fernandez, but this is only a matter of conjecture.
    The translation here used is that made by Hakluyt, printed in
    London in 1809, and included in the "Old South Leaflets."




DRAKE'S VISIT TO CALIFORNIA

(1579)

BY ONE OF DRAKE'S COMPANIONS[1]


From Guatulco we departed the day following, viz, Aprill 16, [1579]
setting our course directly into the sea, whereon we sayled 500
leagues in longitude, to get a winde: and between that and June 3,
1400 leagues in all, till we came into 42 deg. of North latitude,
where in the night following we found such alteration of heate, into
extreame and nipping cold, that our men in generall did grieuously
complaine thereof, some of them feeling their healths much impaired
thereby; neither was it that this chanced in the night alone, but the
day following carried with it not onely the markes, but the stings and
force of the night going before, to the great admiration of vs all;
for besides that the pinching and biting aire was nothing altered, the
very roapes of our ship were stiffe, and the raine which fell was an
unnatural congealed and frozen substance, so that we seemed rather to
be in the frozen Zone then any way so neere vnto the sun, or these
hotter climates....

The 3 day following, uiz., the 21, our ship hauing receiued a leake at
sea, was brought to anchor neerer the shoare, that, her goods being
landed, she might be repaired; but for that we were to preuent any
danger that might chance against our safety, our Generall first of all
landed his men, with all necessary prouision, to build tents and make
a fort for the defence of our selues and goods: and that wee might
vnder the shelter of it with more safety (what euer should befall) end
our businesse; which when the people of the countrey perceiued vs
doing, as men set on fire to war in defence of their countrie, in
great hast and companies, with such weapons as they had, they came
downe vnto vs, and yet with no hostile meaning or intent to hurt vs:
standing, when they drew neere, as men rauished in their mindes, with
the sight of such things as they neuer had seene or heard of before
that time: their errand being rather with submission and feare to
worship vs as Gods, then to haue any warre with vs as with mortall
men, which thing, as it did partly shew itself at that instant, so did
it more and more manifest itself afterwards, during the whole time of
our abode amongst them. At this time, being willed by signes to lay
from them their bowes and arrowes, they did as they were directed, and
so did all the rest, as they came more and more by companies vnto
them, growing in a little while to a great number, both of men and
women.

To the intent, therefore, that this peace which they themselues so
willingly sought might, without any cause of the breach thereof on our
part given, be continued, and that wee might with more safety and
expedition end our businesses in quiet, our Generall, with all his
company, vsed all meanes possible gently to intreate them, bestowing
vpon each of them liberally good and necessary things to couer their
nakednesse; withall signifying vnto them we were no Gods, but men, and
had neede of such things to couer our owns shame; teaching them to vse
them to the same ends, for which cause also wee did eate and drinke in
their presence, giuing them to vnderstand that without that wee could
not liue, and therefore were but men as well as they.

Notwithstanding nothing could perswade them, nor remoue that opinion
which they had conceiued of vs, that wee should be Gods.

In recompence of those things which they had receiued of vs, as
shirts, linnen cloth, etc., they bestowed vpon our Generall, and
diuerse of our company, diuerse things, as feathers, cawles of
networke, the quiuers of their arrowes, made of fawne skins, and the
very skins of beasts that their women wore vpon their bodies. Hauing
thus had their fill of this times visiting and beholding of vs, they
departed with ioy to their houses, which houses are digged round
within the earth, and haue from the vppermost brimmes of the circle
clefts of wood set vp, and ioyned close together at the top, like our
spires on the steeple of a Church; which being couered with earth,
suffer no water to enter, and are very warme; the doore in the most
part of them performes the office also of a chimney to let out the
smoake: its made in bignesse and fashion like to an ordinary scuttle
in a ship, and standing slopewise: their beds are the hard ground,
onely with rushes strewed vpon it, and lying round about the house,
haue their fire in the middest, which by reason that the house is but
low vaulted, round, and close, giueth a maruelous reflexion to their
bodies to heate the same.

Their men for the most part goe naked; the women take a kinde of
bulrushes, and kembing it after the manner of hemp, make themselues
thereof a loose garment, which being knitte about their middles,
hanges downe about their hippes, and so affordes to them a couering of
that which nature teaches should be hidden; about their shoulders they
weare also the skin of a deere, with the haire vpon it. They are very
obedient to their husbands, and exceeding ready in all seruices; yet
of themselues offring to do nothing, without the consents or being
called of the men....

Against the end of three daies more (the newes hauing the while spread
itselfe farther, and as it seemed a great way vp into the countrie),
were assembled the greatest number of people which wee could
reasonably imagine to dwell within any conuenient distance round
about. Amongst the rest the king himselfe, a man of a goodly stature
and comely personage, attended with his guard of about 100 tall and
warlike men, this day, viz., June 26, came downe to see vs.

Before his comming, were sent two embassadors or messengers to our
Generall, to signifie that their Hioh, that is, their king, was
comming and at hand. They in the deliuery of their message, the one
spake with a soft and low voice, prompting his fellow; the other
pronounced the same, word by word, after him with a voice more
audible, continuing their proclamation (for such it was) about halfe
an houre. Which being ended, they by signes made request to our
Generall, to send something by their hands to their Hioh or king, as a
token that his comming might be in peace. Our Generall willingly
satisfied their desire; and they, glad men, made speedy returne to
their Hioh. Neither was it long before their king (making as princely
a shew as possibly he could) with all his traine came forward.

In their comining forwards they cryed continually after a singing
manner, with a lustie courage. And as they drew neerer and neerer
towards vs, so did they more and more striue to behaue themselues with
a certaine comelinesse and grauity in all their actions.

In the forefront came a man of a large body and goodly aspect, bearing
the Scepter or royall mace, made of a certaine kind of blacke wood,
and in length about a yard and a halfe, before the king. Whereupon
hanged two crownes, a bigger and a lesser, with three chaines of a
maruellous length, and often doubled, besides a bagge of the herbe
Tabah. The crownes were made of knitworke, wrought vpon most curiously
with feathers of diners colours, very artificially placed, and of a
formall fashion. The chaines seemed of a bony substance, euery linke
or part thereof being very little, thinne, most finely burnished, with
a hole pierced through the middest. The number of linkes going to make
one chaine is in a manner infinite; but of such estimation it is
amongst them, that few be the persons that are admitted to weare the
same; and euen they to whom its lawfull to use them, yet are stinted
what number they shall vse, as some ten, some twelue, some twentie,
and as they exceed in number of chaines, so thereby are they knowne to
be the more honorable personages.

Next vnto him that bare this Scepter was the king himselfe with his
guard about him; his attire vpon his head was a cawle of knitworke,
wrought vpon somewhat like the crownes, but differing much both in
fashion and perfectnesse of worke; vpon his shoulders he had on a
coate of the skins of conies, reaching to his wast; his guard also had
each coats of the same shape, but of other skins; some hauing cawles
likewise stucke with feathers, or couered ouer with a certaine downe,
which groweth vp in the countrey vpon an herbe much like our lectuce,
which exceeds any other downe in the world for finenesse, and being
layed vpon their cawles, by no winds can be remoued....

In the meane time, our Generall hauing assembled his men together (as
forecasting the danger and worst that might fall out) prepared
himselfe to stand vpon sure ground, that wee might at all times be
ready in our owne defence, if any thing should chance otherwise than
was looked for or expected.

Wherefore euery man being in a warlike readinesse, he marched within
his fenced place, making against their approach a most warlike shew
(as he did also at all other times of their resort), whereby if they
had beene desperate enemies, they could not haue chosen but haue
conceiued terrour and fear, with discouragement to attempt anything
against vs, in beholding of the same.

When they were come somewhat neere vnto vs, trooping together, they
gaue vs a common or generall salutation, observing in the meane time a
generall silence. Whereupon, he who bare the Scepter before the king,
being prompted by another whom the king assigned to that office,
pronounced with an audible and manly voice what the other spake to him
in secret, continuing, whether it were his oration or proclamation, at
the least halfe an houre. At the close whereof there was a common
Amen, in signe of approbation, giuen by euery person: and the king
himselfe, with the whole number of men and women (the little children
onely remaining behind) came further downe the hill, and as they came
set themselues againe in their former order.

And beeing now come to the foot of the hill and neere our fort, the
Scepter bearer, with a composed countenance and stately carriage began
a song, and answerable thereunto obserued a kind of measures in a
dance: whom the king with his guard and euery other sort of person
following, did in like manner sing and daunce, sauing onely the women,
who danced but kept silence. As they danced they still came on: and
our Generall perceiuing their plaine and simple meaning, gaue order
that they might freely enter without interruption within our bulwarke.
Where, after they had entred, they yet continued their song and dance
a reasonable time, their women also following them with their wassaile
boales in their hands, their bodies bruised, their faces tome, their
dugges, breasts, and other parts bespotted with bloud, trickling downe
from the wounds, which with their nailes they had made before their
comming.

After that they had satisfied, or rather tired themselues in this
manner, they made signes to our Generall to haue him sit down; unto
whom both the king and diuers others made seuerall orations, or
rather, indeed, if wee had vnderstood them, supplications, that hee
would take the Prouince and kingdome into his hand, and become their
king and patron: making signes that they would resigne vnto him their
right and title in the whole land, and become his vassals in
themselues and their posterities: which that they might make vs indeed
beleeue that it was their true meaning and intent, the king himselfe,
with all the rest, with one consent and with great reuerence, ioyfully
singing a song, set the crowne vpon his head, inriched his necke with
all their chaines, and offering vnto him many other things, honoured
him by the name of Hyoh. Adding thereunto (as it might seeme) a song
and dance of triumph; because they were not onely visited of the gods
(for so they still iudged vs to be), but the great and chiefe God was
now become their God, their king and patron, and themselues were
become the onely happie and blessed people in the world.

These things being so freely offered, our Generall thought not meet to
reject or refuse the same, both for that he would not giue them any
cause of mistrust or disliking of him (that being the onely place,
wherein at this present, we were of necessitie inforced to seeke
reliefe of many things), and chiefely for that he knew not to what
good end God had brought this to passe, or what honour and profit it
might bring to our countrie in time to come.

Wherefore, in the name and to the vse of her most excellent majesty,
he tooke the scepter, crowue, and dignity of the sayd countrie into
his hand; wishing nothing more than that it had layen so fitly for her
maiesty to enioy, as it was now her proper owne, and that the riches
and treasures thereof (wherewith in the vpland countries it abounds)
might with as great conueniency be transported, to the enriching of
her kingdome here at home, as it is in plenty to be attained there;
and especially that so tractable and louing a people as they shewed
themselues to be, might haue meanes to haue manifested their most
