  On which the dying often raptured gaze,
  And where they live when they are mourned as dead.
  This world was now astir, foretelling day.
  "A king shall come, they say, to rule the world,
  If he will rule; but whence this mighty king?
  My years decline apace, and yet no son
  Of mine to rule or light my funeral pile."

  One night Queen Maya, sleeping by her lord,
  Dreamed a strange dream; she dreamed she saw a star
  Gliding from heaven and resting over her;
  She dreamed she heard strange music, soft and sweet,
  So distant "joy and peace" was all she heard.
  In joy and peace she wakes, and waits to know
  What this strange dream might mean, and whence it came.

  Drums, shells and trumpets sound for joy, not war;
  The streets are swept and sprinkled with perfumes,
  And myriad lamps shine from each house and tree,
  And myriad flags flutter in every breeze,
  And children crowned with flowers dance in the streets,
  And all keep universal holiday
  With shows and games, and laugh and dance and song,
  For to the gentle queen a son is born,
  To King Suddhodana the good an heir.

  But scarcely had these myriad lamps gone out,
  The sounds of revelry had scarcely died,
  When coming from the palace in hot haste,
  One cried, "Maya, the gentle queen, is dead."
  Then mirth was changed to sadness, joy to grief,
  For all had learned to love the gentle queen--
  But at Siddartha's birth this was foretold.

  Among the strangers bringing gifts from far,
  There came an ancient sage--whence, no one knew--
  Age-bowed, head like the snow, eyes filmed and white,
  So deaf the thunder scarcely startled him,
  Who met them, as they said, three journeys back,
  And all his talk was of a new-born king,
  Just born, to rule the world if he would rule.
  He was so gentle, seemed so wondrous wise,
  They followed him, he following, he said,
  A light they could not see; and when encamped,
  Morn, noon and night devoutly would he pray,
  And then would talk for hours, as friend to friend,
  With questionings about this new-born king,
  Gazing intently at the tent's blank wall,
  With nods and smiles, as if he saw and heard,
  While they sit lost in wonder, as one sits
  Who never saw a telephone, but hears
  Unanswered questions, laughter at unheard jests,
  And sees one bid a little box good-by.
  And when they came before the king, they saw,
  Laughing and cooing on its mother's knee,
  Picture of innocence, a sweet young child;
  He saw a mighty prophet, and bowed down
  Eight times in reverence to the very ground,
  And rising said, "Thrice happy house, all hail!
  This child would rule the world, if he would rule,
  But he, too good to rule, is born to save;
  But Maya's work is done, the devas wait."
  But when they sought for him, the sage was gone,
  Whence come or whither gone none ever knew.
  Then gentle Maya understood her dream.
  The music nearer, clearer sounds; she sleeps.
  But when the funeral pile was raised for her,
  Of aloe, sandal, and all fragrant woods,
  And decked with flowers and rich with rare perfumes,
  And when the queen was gently laid thereon,
  As in sweet sleep, and the pile set aflame,
  The king cried out in anguish; when the sage
  Again appeared, and gently said, "Weep not!
  Seek not, O king, the living with the dead!
  'Tis but her cast-off garment, not herself,
  That now dissolves in air.  Thy loved one lives,
  Become thy deva,[9] who was erst thy queen."
  This said, he vanished, and was no more seen.

  Now other hands take up that mother's task.
  Another breast nurses that sweet young child
  With growing love; for who can nurse a child,
  Feel its warm breath, and little dimpled hands,
  Kiss its soft lips, look in its laughing eyes,
  Hear its low-cooing love-notes soft and sweet,
  And not feel something of that miracle,
  A mother's love--so old yet ever new,
  Stronger than death, bravest among the brave,
  Gentle as brave, watchful both night and day,
  That never changes, never tires nor sleeps.
  Whence comes this wondrous and undying love?
  Whence can it come, unless it comes from heaven,
  Whose life is love--eternal, perfect love!

  From babe to boy, from boy to youth he grew,
  But more in grace and knowledge than in years.
  At play his joyous laugh rang loud and clear,
  His foot was fleetest in all boyish games,
  And strong his arm, and steady nerve and eye,
  To whirl the quoit and send the arrow home;
  Yet seeming oft to strive, he'd check his speed
  And miss his mark to let a comrade win.
  In fullness of young life he climbed the cliffs
  Where human foot had never trod before.
  He led the chase, but when soft-eyed gazelles
  Or bounding deer, or any harmless thing,
  Came in the range of his unerring dart,
  He let them pass; for why, thought he, should men
  In wantonness make war on innocence?

  One day the Prince Siddartha saw the grooms
  Gathered about a stallion, snowy white,
  Descended from that great Nisaean stock
  His fathers brought from Iran's distant plain,
  Named Kantaka.  Some held him fast with chains
  Till one could mount.  He, like a lion snared,
  Frantic with rage and fear, did fiercely bound.
  They cut his tender mouth with bloody bit,
  Beating his foaming sides until the Prince,
  Sterner than was his wont, bade them desist,
  While he spoke soothingly, patted his head
  And stroked his neck, and dropped those galling chains,
  When Kantaka's fierce flaming eyes grew mild,
  He quiet stood, by gentleness subdued--
  Such mighty power hath gentleness and love--
  And from that day no horse so strong and fleet,
  So kind and true, easy to check and guide,
  As Kantaka, Siddartha's noble steed.

  To playmates he was gentle as a girl;
  Yet should the strong presume upon their strength
  To overbear or wrong those weaker than themselves,
  His sturdy arm and steady eye checked them,
  And he would gently say, "Brother, not so;
  Our strength was given to aid and not oppress."
  For in an ancient book he found a truth--
  A book no longer read, a truth forgot,
  Entombed in iron castes, and buried deep
  In speculations and in subtle creeds--
  That men, high, low, rich, poor, are brothers all,[10]
  Which, pondered much in his heart's fruitful soil,
  Had taken root as a great living truth
  That to a mighty doctrine soon would grow,
  A mighty tree to heal the nations with its leaves--
  Like some small grain of wheat, appearing dead,
  In mummy-case three thousand years ago[11]
  Securely wrapped and sunk in Egypt's tombs,
  Themselves buried beneath the desert sands,
  Which now brought forth, and planted in fresh soil,
  And watered by the dews and rains of heaven,
  Shoots up and yields a hundred-fold of grain,
  Until in golden harvests now it waves
  On myriad acres, many thousand miles
  From where the single ancient seed had grown.

  Thus he grew up with all that heart could wish
  Or power command; his very life itself,
  So fresh and young, sound body with sound mind,
  The living fountain of perpetual joy.
  Yet he would often sit and sadly think
  Sad thoughts and deep, and far beyond his years;
  How sorrow filled the world; how things were shared--
  One born to waste, another born to want;
  One for life's cream, others to drain its dregs;
  One born a master, others abject slaves.
  And when he asked his masters to explain,
  When all were brothers, how such things could be,
  They gave him speculations, fables old,
  How Brahm first Brahmans made to think for all,
  And then Kshatriyas, warriors from their birth,
  Then Sudras, to draw water and hew wood.
  "But why should one for others think, when all
  Must answer for themselves?  Why brothers fight?
  And why one born another's slave, when all
  Might serve and help each other?" he would ask.
  But they could only answer: "Never doubt,
  For so the holy Brahmans always taught."
  Still he must think, and as he thought he sighed,
  Not for his petty griefs that last an hour,
  But for the bitter sorrows of the world
  That crush all men, and last from age to age.

  The good old king saw this--saw that the prince,
  The apple of his eye, dearer than life,
  Stately in form, supple and strong in limb,
  Quick to learn every art of peace and war,
  Displaying and excelling every grace
  And attribute of his most royal line,
  Whom all would follow whereso'er he led,
  So fit to rule the world if he would rule,
  Thought less of ruling than of saving men.
  He saw the glory of his ancient house
  Suspended on an if--if he will rule
  The empire of the world, and power to crush
  Those cruel, bloody kings who curse mankind,
  And power to make a universal peace;
  If not this high career, with glory crowned,
  Then seeking truth through folly's devious ways;
  By self-inflicted torture seeking bliss,
  And by self-murder seeking higher life;
  On one foot standing till the other pine,
  Arms stretched aloft, fingers grown bloodless claws,
  Or else, impaled on spikes, with festering sores
  Covered from head to foot, the body wastes
  With constant anguish and with slow decay.[12]
  "Can this be wisdom?  Can such a life be good
  That shuns all duties lying in our path--
  Useless to others, filled with grief and pain?
  Not so my father's god teaches to live.
  Rising each morning most exact in time,
  He bathes the earth and sky with rosy light
  And fills all nature with new life and joy;
  The cock's shrill clarion calls us to awake
  And breathe this life and hear the bursts of song
  That fill each grove, inhale the rich perfume
  Of opening flowers, and work while day shall last.
  Then rising higher, he warms each dank, cold spot,
  Dispels the sickening vapors, clothes the fields
  With waving grain, the trees with golden fruit,
  The vines with grapes; and when 'tis time for rest,
  Sinks in the west, and with new glory gilds
  The mountain-tops, the clouds and western sky,
  And calls all nature to refreshing sleep.
  If he be God, the useful are like God;
  If not, God made the sun, who made all men
  And by his great example teaches them
  The diligent are wise, the useful good."

  Sorely perplexed he called his counselors,
  Grown gray in serving their beloved king,
  And said: "Friends of my youth, manhood and age,
  So wise in counsel and so brave in war,
  Who never failed in danger or distress,
  Oppressed with fear, I come to you for aid.
  You know the prophecies, that from my house
  Shall come a king, or savior of the world.
  You saw strange signs precede Siddartha's birth,
  And saw the ancient sage whom no one knew
  Fall down before the prince, and hail my house.
  You heard him tell the queen she soon would die,
  And saw her sink in death as in sweet sleep;
  You laid her gently on her funeral pile,
  And heard my cry of anguish, when the sage
  Again appeared and bade me not to weep
  For her as dead who lived and loved me still.
  We saw the prince grow up to man's estate,
  So strong and full of manliness and grace,
  And wise beyond his teachers and his years,
  And thought in him the prophecies fulfilled,
  And that with glory he would rule the world
  And bless all men with universal peace.
  But now dark shadows fall athwart our hopes.
  Often in sleep the prince will start and cry
  As if in pain, 'O world, sad world, I come!'
  But roused, he'll sometimes sit the livelong day,
  Forgetting teachers, sports and even food,
  As if with dreadful visions overwhelmed,
  Or buried in great thoughts profound and deep.
  But yet to see our people, riding forth,
  To their acclaims he answers with such grace
  And gentle stateliness, my heart would swell
  As I would hear the people to each other say;
  'Who ever saw such grace and grandeur joined?'
  Yet while he answers gladness with like joy,
  His eyes seem searching for the sick and old,
  The poor, and maimed, and blind--all forms of grief,
  And oft he'd say, tears streaming from his eyes,[13]
  'Let us return; my heart can bear no more.'
  One day we saw beneath a peepul-tree
  An aged Brahman, wasted with long fasts,
  Loathsome with self-inflicted ghastly wounds,
  A rigid skeleton, standing erect,
  One hand stretched out, the other stretched aloft,
  His long white beard grown filthy by neglect.
  Whereat the prince with shuddering horror shook,
  And cried, 'O world! must I be such for thee?'
  And once he led the chase of a wild boar
  In the great forest near the glacier's foot;
  On Kantaka so fleet he soon outstripped
  The rest, and in the distance disappeared.
  But when at night they reached the rendezvous,
  Siddartha was not there; and through the night
  They searched, fearing to find their much loved prince
  A mangled corpse under some towering cliff,
  But searched in vain, and searched again next day,
  Till in despair they thought to bring me word
  The prince was lost, when Kantaka was seen
  Loose-reined and free, and near Siddartha sat
  Under a giant cedar's spreading shade.
  Absorbed in thought, in contemplation lost,
  Unconscious that a day and night had passed.
  I cannot reason with such earnestness--
  I dare not chide such deep and tender love,
  But much I fear his reason's overthrow
  Or that he may become like that recluse
  He shuddered at, and not a mighty king
  With power to crush the wrong and aid the right.
  How can we turn his mind from such sad thoughts
  To life's full joys, the duties of a king,
  And his great destiny so long foretold?"

  The oldest and the wisest answered him:
  "Most noble king, your thoughts have long been mine.
  Oft have I seen him lost in musings sad,
  And overwhelmed with this absorbing love.
  I know no cure for such corroding thoughts
  But thoughts less sad, for such absorbing love
  But stronger love."
                   "But how awake such thoughts?"
  The king replied.  "How kindle such a love?
  His loves seem but as phosphorescent flames
  That skim the surface, leaving him heart-whole--
  All but this deep and all-embracing love
  That folds within its arms a suffering world."

  "Yes, noble king, so roams the antlered deer,
  Adding each year a branch to his great horns,
  Until the unseen archer lays him low.
  So lives our prince; but he may see the day
  Two laughing eyes shall pierce his inmost soul,
  And make his whole frame quiver with new fire.
  The next full moon he reaches man's estate.
  We all remember fifty years ago
  When you became a man, the sports and games,
  The contests of fair women and brave men,
  In beauty, arts and arms, that filled three days
  With joy and gladness, music, dance and song.
  Let us with double splendor now repeat
  That festival, with prizes that shall draw
  From all your kingdom and the neighbor states
  Their fairest women and their bravest men.
  If any chance shall bring his destined mate,
  You then shall see love dart from eye to eye,
  As darts the lightning's flash from cloud to cloud."
  And this seemed good, and so was ordered done.

  The king to all his kingdom couriers sent,
  And to the neighbor states, inviting all
  To a great festival and royal games
  The next full moon, day of Siddartha's birth,
  And offering varied prizes, rich and rare,
  To all in feats of strength and speed and skill,
  And prizes doubly rich and doubly rare
  To all such maidens fair as should compete
  In youth and beauty, whencesoe'er they came,
  The prince to be the judge and give the prize.

  Now all was joy and bustle in the streets,
  And joy and stir in palace and in park,
  The prince himself joining the joyful throng,
  Forgetting now the sorrows of the world.
  Devising and directing new delights
  Until the park became a fairy scene.

  Behind the palace lay a maidan wide
  For exercise in arms and manly sports,
  Its sides bordered by gently rising hills,
  Where at their ease the city's myriads sat
  Under the shade of high-pruned spreading trees,
  Fanned by cool breezes from the snow-capped peaks;
  While north, and next the lake, a stately dome
  Stood out, on slender, graceful columns raised,
  With seats, rank above rank, in order placed,
  The throne above, and near the throne were bowers
  Of slender lattice-work, with trailing vines,
  Thick set with flowers of every varied tint,
  Breathing perfumes, where beauty's champions
  Might sit, unseen of all yet seeing all.

  At length Siddartha's natal day arrives
  With joy to rich and poor, to old and young---
  Not joy that wealth can buy or power command,
  But real joy, that springs from real love,
  Love to the good old king and noble prince.

  When dawning day tinges with rosy light
  The snow-capped peaks of Himalaya's chain,
  The people are astir.  In social groups,
  The old and young, companions, neighbors, friends,
  Baskets well filled, they choose each vantage-ground,
  Until each hill a sea of faces shows,
  A sea of sparkling joy and rippling mirth.

  At trumpet-sound all eyes are eager turned
  Up toward the palace gates, now open wide,
  From whence a gay procession issues forth,
  A chorus of musicians coming first,
  And next the prince mounted on Kantaka;
  Then all the high-born, youth in rich attire,
  Mounted on prancing steeds with trappings gay;
  And then the good old king, in royal state,
  On his huge elephant, white as the snow,
  Surrounded by his aged counselors,
  Some on their chargers, some in litters borne,
  Their long white beards floating in every breeze;
  And next, competitors for every prize:
  Twelve archers, who could pierce the lofty swans
  Sailing from feeding-grounds by distant seas
  To summer nests by Thibet's marshy lakes,
  Or hit the whirring pheasant as it flies--
  For in this peaceful reign they did not make
  Men targets for their art, and armor-joints
  The marks through which to pierce and kill;
  Then wrestlers, boxers, those who hurl the quoit,
  And runners fleet, both lithe and light of limb;
  And then twelve mighty spearmen, who could pierce
  The fleeing boar or deer or fleet gazelle;
  Then chariots, three horses yoked to each,
  The charioteers in Persian tunics clad,
  Arms bare, legs bare--all were athletes in power,
  In form and race each an Apollo seemed;
  Yoked to the first were three Nisaean steeds,[14]
  Each snowy white, proud stepping, rangy, tall,
  Chests broad, legs clean and strong, necks arched and high,
  With foreheads broad, and eyes large, full and mild,
  A race that oft Olympic prizes won,
  And whose descendants far from Iran's plains
  Bore armored knights in battle's deadly shock
  On many bloody European fields;
  Then three of ancient Babylonian stock,[15]
  Blood bay and glossy as rich Tyrian silk--
  Such horses Israel's sacred prophets saw
  Bearing their conquerors in triumph home,
  A race for ages kept distinct and pure,
  Fabled from Alexander's charger sprung;
  Then three from distant desert Tartar steppes,
  Ewe-necked, ill-favored creatures, lank and gaunt,
  That made the people laugh as they passed by--
  Who ceased to laugh when they had run the race--
  Such horses bore the mighty Mongol hosts[16]
  That with the cyclone's speed swept o'er the earth;
  Then three, one gray, one bay, one glossy black,
  Descended from four horses long since brought
  By love-sick chief from Araby the blest,
  Seeking with such rare gifts an Indian bride,
  Whose slender, graceful forms, compact and light,
  Combined endurance, beauty, strength and speed--
  A wondrous breed, whose famed descendants bore
  The Moslem hosts that swept from off the earth
  Thy mighty power, corrupt, declining Rome,
  And with each other now alone contend
  In speed, whose sons cast out, abused and starved,
  Alone can save from raging whirlwind flames[17]
  That all-devouring sweep our western plains;
  Then stately elephants came next in line,
  With measured step and gently swaying gait,
  Covered with cloth of gold richly inwrought,
  Each bearing in a howdah gaily decked
  A fair competitor for beauty's prize,
  With merry comrades and some sober friend;
  The vina, bansuli, sitar and harp
  Filling the air with sweetest melody,
  While rippling laughter from each howdah rang,
  And sweetest odors, as from op'ning flowers,
  Breathed from their rich apparel as they passed.

  And thus they circle round the maidan wide,
  And as they pass along the people shout,
  "Long live the king! long live our noble prince!"
  To all which glad acclaims the prince responds
  With heartfelt courtesy and royal grace.

  When they had nearly reached the palace gate
  On their return, the king drew to the right
  With his attendants, while the prince with his
  Drew to the left, reviewing all the line
  That passed again down to the judges' seat,
  Under the king's pavilion near the lake.
  The prince eagerly watched them as they passed,
  Noting their brawny limbs and polished arms,
  The pose and skill of every charioteer,
  The parts and varied breed of every horse,
  Aiding his comrades with his deeper skill.
  But when the queens of beauty passed him by,
  He was all smiles and gallantry and grace,
  Until the last, Yasodhara, came near,
  Whose laugh was clearest of the merry crowd,
  Whose golden hair imprisoned sunlight seemed,
  Whose cheek, blending the lily with the rose,
  Spoke of more northern skies and Aryan blood,
  Whose rich, not gaudy, robes exquisite taste
  Had made to suit her so they seemed a part
  Of her sweet self; whose manner, simple, free,
  Not bold or shy, whose features--no one saw
  Her features, for her soul covered her face
  As with a veil of ever-moving life.
  When she came near, and her bright eyes met his,
  He seemed to start; his gallantry was gone,
  And like an awkward boy he sat and gazed;
  And her laugh too was hushed, and she passed on,
  Passed out of sight but never out of mind,
  The king and all his counselors saw this.
  "Good king, our deer is struck," Asita said,
  "If this love cure him not, nothing can cure."


[1]Lieutenant-General Briggs, in his lectures on the aboriginal races
of India, says the Hindoos themselves refer the excavation of caves and
temples to the period of the aboriginal kings.

[2]The art of irrigation, once practiced on such a mighty scale, now
seems practically a lost art but just now being revived on our western
plains.

[3]"And, that which all faire workes doth most aggrace, The art, which
all that wrought, appeared in no place."

--Faerie Queene, B. 2, Canto 12.

[4]See Miss Gordon Cumming's descriptions of the fields of wild dahlias
in Northern India.

[5]By far the finest display of the mettle and blood of high-bred
horses I have ever seen has been in the pasture-field, and this
description is drawn from life.

[6]Once, coming upon a little prairie in the midst of a great forest, I
saw a herd of startled deer bound over the grass, a scene never to be
forgotten.

[7]See Miss Gordon Cumming's description of a hill covered with this
luminous grass.

[8]There can be no doubt that the fire-worship of the East is the
remains of a true but largely emblematic religion.

[9]The difference between the Buddhist idea of a deva and the Christian
idea of an attendant angel is scarcely perceptible.

[10]The Brahmans claim that Buddha's great doctrine of universal
brotherhood was taken from their sacred books and was not an
originality of Buddha, as his followers claim.

[11]The Mediterranean or Egyptian wheat is said to have this origin.

[12]At the time of Buddha's birth there seemed to be no mean between
the Chakravartin or absolute monarch and the recluse who had renounced
all ordinary duties and enjoyments, and was subjecting himself to all
deprivations and sufferings.  Buddha taught the middle course of
diligence in daily duties and universal love.

[13]I am aware that some Buddhist authors whom Arnold has followed in
his "Light of Asia" make Buddha but little better than a stale
prisoner, and would have us believe that the glimpses he got of the
ills that flesh is heir to were gained in spite of all precautions, as
he was occasionally taken out of his rose embowered, damsel filled
prison-house, and not as any prince of high intelligence and tender
sensibilities who loved his people and mingled freely with them would
gain a knowledge of suffering and sorrow; but we are justified in
passing all such fancies, not only on account of their intrinsic
improbability, but because the great Asvaghosha, who wrote about the
beginning of our era, knew nothing of them.
