"Nor drink?"

"Look if there's anything in the tea-pot," said the fairy.

Willie looked, shook his head, and said, "Not a drop."

"Any leaves?"

"Why, y-yes," he brought the pot nearer to the candle; "there are a few
used-up ones."

"Oh, _do_ pour some hot water into it; but I fear the water is cold, and
the fire's too low to boil it, and I know the coals are done; but father
gets paid his salary to-morrow, and he'll give me some tea then.  He's
very kind to me, father is, and so is Jim."

She sighed as she spoke, and shut her eyes.

"Ziza," said Willie in a careless tone, "you won't object to my leavin'
you for a few minutes; only a few; I want to get a little fresh air, an'
see what sort of a night it is; I won't be long gone."

Ziza, so far from objecting, said that she was used to being left alone
for long, long hours at a time, and wouldn't mind it.  So Willie put the
candle nearer to her bedside, placed a tea-cup of water within reach,
went out, shut the door softly behind him, groped his way through the
passage and up the stair, and got into the street.

That day his eccentric employer had paid him his first month's wage, a
sovereign, with many complimentary remarks as to his usefulness.  The
golden coin lay in his pocket.  It was the first he had ever earned.  He
had intended to go straight home and lay the shining piece in his
mother's lap, for Willie was a peculiar boy, and had some strange
notions in regard to the destination of "first-fruits."  Where he had
got them nobody could tell.  Perhaps his mother knew, but nobody ever
questioned her upon the point.

Taking this gold piece from his pocket, he ran into the nearest
respectable street, and selected there the most respectable grocer's
shop, into which he entered, and demanded a pound of the shopman's best
tea, a pound of his best sugar, a pound of his best butter, a cut of his
best bacon, and one of his best wax-candles.  Willie knew nothing about
relative proportion in regard to such things; he only knew that they
were usually bought and consumed together.

The shopman looked at the little purchaser in surprise, but as Willie
emphatically repeated his demands he gave him the required articles.  On
receiving the sovereign he looked twice at Willie, rung the piece of
money three times on the counter, and then returned the change.

Gathering the packages in his arms, and putting the candle between his
vest and bosom, he went into a baker's shop, purchased a loaf, and
returned to the "subterraneous grotto" laden like the bee.  To say that
the fairy was surprised when he displayed these things, would be a
feeble use of language.  She opened her large eyes until Willie begged
her in alarm not to open them wider for fear they should come out, at
which sally she laughed, and then, being weak, she cried.

After that she fell in with her nurse's humour, and the two proceeded to
"have a night of it."  Ziza said she'd be a real fairy and tell him what
to do, and Willie said he'd be a gnome or a he-fairy and do it.

At the outset Willie discovered that he had forgotten coals, but this
was rectified by another five minutes' airing, and a rousing fire was
quickly roaring in the chimney, while the kettle sang and spluttered on
it like a sympathetic thing, as no doubt it was.  Willie cleared the
small table that stood at the invalid's bed side, and arranged upon it
the loaf, the tea-pot, two cracked tea-cups, the butter and sugar, and
the wax-candle--which latter was stuck into a quart bottle in default of
a better candle-stick.

"Now, ain't that jolly?" said the nurse, sitting down and rubbing his
hands.

"Very!" replied the patient, her eyes sparkling with delight.

"It's so like a scene in a play," continued Willie.

"Only much more real," suggested the fairy.

"Now, then, Ziza, have a cup o' tea, fresh from the market o' Chiny, as
your dad would say, if he was sellin' it by auction.  He's a knowin'
codger your dad is, Ziza.  There.  I knowed I forgot somethin' else--the
cream!"

"I don't mind it, indeed I don't," said Ziza earnestly.

Willie had started up to run out and rectify this omission, but on being
assured that the fairy liked tea almost as well without as with cream,
and that there was no cream to be got near at hand, he sat down again
and continued to do the honours of the table.  First he made the fairy
sit up in bed, and commented sadly on her poor thin neck as she did it,
observing that she was nothing better than a skeleton in a skin.  Then
he took off his own jacket and put it on her shoulders, tying the arms
round her neck.  Next he placed a piece of board in front of her, saying
that it was a capital tray, and on this he arranged the viands neatly.

"Now, then, go at it, Ziza," he said, when all was arranged.

Ziza, who received his attentions with looks that were wonderfully
gleeful for one in her weak state of health, went at it with such vigour
that the bread was eaten and the tea drunk in a few minutes, and the
supply had to be renewed.  When she was in the middle of her second
round of buttered toast (for Willie had toasted the bread), she stopped
suddenly.

"Why don't you go on?" asked Willie.

"Because you have not eaten or drunk one mouthful yet."

"But I'm lookin' at you, and ain't that better?  Howsever, if ye won't
go on, I'll not keep you back," and with that Willie set to work, and,
being uncommonly hungry, did what he styled "terrible execution among
the wittles."

For some time the nurse and patient ate in comparative silence, but by
degrees they began to talk, and as they became more confidential their
talk became more personal.

"D'you like bein' a fairy?" said Willie, after a lull in the
conversation.

"No, I don't," replied Ziza.

"Why not?"

"Because--because--I don't like the kind of things we have to do, and--
and--in short, I don't like it at all, and I often pray God to deliver
me from it."

"That's strange, now," said Willie, "I would have thought it great fun
to be a fairy.  I'd rather be a little clown or a he-fairy myself, now,
than anything else I know of, except a fireman."

"A fireman, Willie?"

"Yes, a fireman.  My brother, Blaz--a--Frank, I mean, is one, and he
saved the lives of some people not long since."

Of course Willie here diverged into a graphic account of the fire in
Beverly Square, and, seeing that Ziza listened with intense earnestness,
he dilated upon every point, and went with special minuteness into the
doings of Frank.

When he concluded, Ziza heaved a very deep sigh and closed her eyes.

"I've tired you, Ziza," exclaimed Willie, jumping up, with a look of
anxiety, and removing the tea-board and jacket, as the child slipped
down under the clothes.  He asked if she wanted to go to sleep.

"Yes, for I'm _very_ tired," she sighed languidly; then added, "but
please read to me a little first."

"What book am I to read you?" said Willie, looking round the room, where
no book of any kind was to be seen.

"Here, it's under the pillow."

Willie put his hand under the pillow and pulled out a small
pocket-Bible.

"Read the third chapter of Saint John's Gospel," said the child, closing
her eyes.

Willie read in the monotonous tones of a schoolboy's voice until he came
to the sixteenth verse, "For God so loved the world, that He gave His
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish,
but have everlasting life."

"Stop at _that_ verse," whispered Ziza.  "I'll go to sleep now."

Her deep breathing soon proclaimed that she was in the land of dreams,
so Willie removed the candle a little further away from her, and then,
resting his elbows on the table and his head in his hands, began to read
the Bible.  He turned over a few pages without much intention of finding
any particular place, for he was beginning to feel sleepy.

The first words his eyes fell upon were, "Blessed are they that consider
the poor."

He roused up a little at this, and read the verse again, for he
connected it with the fact that the fairy was poor.  Then he pondered it
for some time, and, falling asleep, dropt his head on the Bible with
such force that he woke up for a little and tried to read again, but do
what he would he could not get beyond that verse; finally he gave up the
attempt, and, laying his forehead down upon it, quickly fell sound
asleep.

In this state the couple were discovered an hour or two later by Messrs.
Cattley senior and junior on their return from the theatre.

"Inscrutable mysteries! say, what is this?" exclaimed the elder clown,
advancing into the room on tiptoe.

Apostrophising his eye and one Betty Martin, the younger clown said that
it was a "rare go and no mistake," whereupon his father laid his hand on
Willie's shoulder and gently shook him.

"Eh! another cup, Ziza?" exclaimed the self-accused nurse, as he put out
his hand to seize the tea-pot.  "Hallo!  I thought it was the fairy," he
added, looking up with a sleepy smile; "I do believe I've gone and fell
asleep."

"Why, lad, where got ye all those things?" inquired the senior Cattley,
laying aside his cloak and cap, and speaking in a low tone, for Ziza was
still sleeping soundly.

"Well, I got 'em," replied Willie in a meditative tone, "from a friend
of mine--a very partikler friend o' mine--as declines to let me mention
his name, so you'll have to be satisfied with the wittles and without
the name of the wirtuous giver.  P'r'aps it was a dook, or a squire, or
a archbishop as did it.  Anyway his name warn't Walker.  See now, you've
bin an' woke up the fairy."

The sick child moved as he spoke, but it was only to turn, without
awaking, on her side.

"Well, lad," said the clown, sitting down and looking wistfully in the
face of his daughter, "you've got your own reasons for not tellin' me--
mayhap I've a pretty good guess--anyhow I say God bless him, for I do
b'lieve he's saved the child's life.  I've not seen her sleep like that
for weeks.  Look at her, Jim; ain't she like her old self?"

"Yes, father, she don't need no paint and flour to make a fairy on her
just now.  She's just like what she was the last time I seed her go up
in a gauze cloud to heaven, with red and blue fire blazin' all round
her."

"I'll bid ye good-night now," said Willie, buttoning up his jacket to
the chin, and pulling his cap down on his brows with the air of a man
who has a long walk before him.

"You're off, are you--eh?" said the elder clown, rising and taking
Willie by the hand, "well, you're a good lad.  Thank'ee for comin' here
an' takin' care of Ziza.  My subterranean grotto ain't much to boast of,
but such as it is you're welcome to it at all times.  Good-night."

"Good-night," said Willie; "good-night, Jim."  Jim replied good-night
heartily, and then Willie stepped into the dark passage.  He glanced
back at the fairy before shutting the door, but her eyes were closed, so
he said good-night to her in his heart, and went home.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

HOME LIFE.

"My dear Miss Tippet, I shall never, no never, get over it."

So said, and so undoubtedly thought, a thin little old lady with
remarkably bright eyes, and a sweet old face, as she sat sipping tea at
Miss Tippet's elbow.

It was in the drawing-room of Miss Deemas that she sat, and the Eagle
sat opposite to her.

"It was very dreadful," responded Miss Tippet with a sigh--"very."

"It was awful.  I know I shall never get over it,--never," repeated the
little old lady, finishing her tea, and asking for another cup in the
calmest possible voice, with the sweetest possible smile.

"Oh yes, you will, Mrs Denman," said Miss Deemas snappishly.

"No, indeed, I won't," repeated Mrs Denman; "how can I?  Just think of
the situation.  Sitting in my chair in dishabille, when a man--a Man,
Miss Dee--"

"Well, I know what a _man_ is," said the Eagle bitterly; "why don't you
go on?"

"Burst himself through my bedroom-door," continued Mrs Denman, "with
lime and charcoal and brick-dust and water streaming down his face--
f-fo-olded me in his arms, bore me out into the street--the _street_!
Oh!  I shall never, _never_ get over it; and so little, so _very_ little
clothing on me--"

"How much had you on?" asked Miss Deemas in a deep voice, the calmness
of which contrasted forcibly with Mrs Denman's excited tones.

"Really, Miss Deemas, I see no necessity for going into particulars.  It
is sufficient to know that I was carried by a _man_ into the _street_ in
the face of some thousands of people, for I heard them cheering though I
saw them not.  I know I shall never get over it--another cup, my love;
not _quite_ so much sugar--no, not if I were to live to the age of
Methusaleh."

"I don't wonder, indeed I don't," murmured the sympathetic Miss Tippet.
"I think, Julia dear, you are a little too hard on Mrs Denman.  How
would _you_ like to have been carried out of a burning house in such a
way by a big rough man?"

"Oh, my dear," interposed Mrs Denman, "I did not say he was rough.  Big
he certainly was, and strong, but I must do him the justice to say that
the man li--lif--oh me! lifted me up very tenderly, and carried me as
though I had been an infant and he my mother, through smoke and fire and
water, into the street, before the eyes of the--whole--oh, it's too
awful to think of!"

"Stuff!" ejaculated Miss Deemas, pecking a piece of cake out of her
fingers as she would, metaphorically of course, have pecked the eyes out
of the head of Frank Willders, or any other man.  "Didn't you say he put
a blanket round you?"

"Of course, Miss Deemas; I should have died otherwise of pure shame."

"No, you wouldn't," retorted the Eagle.  "You would probably have been
half suffocated and a good deal dirtied, and you might have been singed,
but you wouldn't have died; and what need you care now, for the people
saw nothing but a bundle.  You might have been a bundle of old clothes
for all they knew or cared.  All they wanted to see was the bravery, as
they call it, of the man; as if there were not hundreds upon hundreds of
women who would do the same thing if their muscles were strong enough,
and occasion served."

"But it _was_ a brave act, you know," said Miss Tippet timidly.

"I don't know that," retorted Miss Deemas, helping herself to more cake
with as much decision of manner as if she had been carrying it off by
force of arms from before the very muzzles of a masculine battery.  "I
don't know that.  He had to escape, you know, for his own life, and he
might as well bring a bundle along with him as not."

"Yes; but then," said Miss Tippet, "he first went up the--the thingumy,
you know."

"No, he didn't," retorted Miss Deemas smartly; "he was in the house at
the time, and only came down the `thingumy,' as you call it!"

It was a peculiarity of Miss Deemas's character, that she claimed the
right to be as rude as she chose to people in her own house, and rather
prided herself on this evidence of independence.

"In my opinion," said Mrs Denman, "his being in the burning house at
all of his own accord, was of itself evidence of courage.  I think the
fireman is a brave young man."

Thus much Mrs Denman said with dignity to Miss Deemas.  The remainder
of her speech she addressed to Miss Tippet.

"But, my dear, I feel that although I owe this young man a debt of
gratitude which I can never repay, I shall never be able to look my
preserver in the face.  I _know_ that his mind will always revert, when
he sees me, to the fi--fig--the figure that he lifted out of that
easy-chair.  But there is one thing I have resolved on," continued the
little old lady in more cheerful tones, as she asked for another cup of
tea, "and that is, to get a fireman to instruct me as to the best method
of saving my own life should fire again break out in my dwelling."

The Eagle gave a hysterical chuckle at this.

"I have already written to one who has been recommended to me as a
shrewd man, and he is coming to call on me this very evening at seven
o'clock."

Mrs Denman started, as if her own remark had recalled something, and
pulled out her watch.

