
"I believe I am in time," he said.

"Yes," answered Jim Morrison. "Have you brought the money?"

"No."

"Why not?" demanded Morrison, with a frown.

"There was something wrong about the bonds you gave me to sell."

"Weren't they all right? They weren't counterfeit, were they?"

"They were genuine, but---"

"But what?"

"A lady claims that they belong to her--that they were stolen from
her. Of course you can explain how they came into your hands?"

"They were given me by a party that owed me money. If he's played a
trick on me, it will be the worse for him. Did you sell them?"

"Yes."

"Then give me the money."

"Mr. Reynolds won't let me."

"Does he think I took the bonds?" asked Morrison, hastily.

"No, he doesn't," answered Grant, proudly, "but he would like to
have an interview with you, and make some inquiries, so that he may
form some idea as to the person who did take them. They belonged to
his housekeeper, Mrs. Estabrook, who is the stepmother of Mr. Ford,
a young man employed in our office."

Tom Calder and Jim Morrison exchanged glances. Grant's story agreed
with Ford's, and tended to confirm their confidence in his good
faith.

"When does he want to see me?" asked Morrison.

"Can you call at his house this evening at eight o'clock?"

"Where does he live?"

Grant mentioned the street and number.

"I will be there," he said, briefly.

"Can I come, too?" asked Tom Calder, addressing the question to
Grant.

"There will be no objection, I think."

"Tell him we'll be on hand."

The three left the hotel together, Grant taking a Broadway stage at
the door. The quiet man seemed no longer interested in the Boston
Journal, for he hung it up in its place, and sauntered out of the
hotel. He had not attracted the attention of Jim Morrison or Tom.

When Grant entered the office, and with his usual manner asked Ford
if he should go to the post-office, the young man eyed him
curiously.

"Are you to remain in the office?" he said.

"Yes, I suppose so."

"After what you have done?"

"What have I done, Mr. Ford?" asked Grant, eyeing the young man,
steadily.

"I don't think you need to have me tell you," he said, with a sneer.
"I don't think Mr. Reynolds is very prudent to employ a boy
convicted of dishonesty."

"Do you believe me guilty, Mr. Ford?" asked our hero, calmly.

"The evidence against you is overwhelming. My mother ought to have
you arrested."

"The person who stole the bonds may be arrested."

"What do you mean?" asked Willis Ford, flushing, and looking
disconcerted.

"I mean that I have no concern in the matter. Shall I go to the
post-office?"

"Yes," snapped Ford, "and take care you don't steal any of the
letters."

Grant did not reply. He knew that his vindication was certain, and
he was willing to wait.

If Willis Ford had been prudent he would have dropped the matter
there, but his hatred of Grant was too great to be easily concealed.
When a few minutes later the broker entered the office and inquired,
"Where is Grant?" Ford, after answering, "he has gone to the
post-office," could not help saying, "Are you going to keep that
boy, Mr. Reynolds?"

"Why should I not?" the broker replied.

"I thought a boy in his position ought to be honest."

"I agree with you, Mr. Ford," said the broker, quietly.

"After taking my mother's bonds, that can hardly be said of Grant
Thornton."

"You seem to be sure he did take them, Mr. Ford."

"The discovery of the key settled that to my mind."

"Grant says he has no knowledge of the key."

Ford laughed scornfully.

"Of course he would say so," he replied.

"I propose to investigate the matter further," said the broker. "Can
you make it convenient to call at my house this evening? Possibly
something may be discovered by that time."

"Yes, sir; I will come, with pleasure. I have no feeling in regard
to the boy, except that I don't think it safe to employ him in a
business like yours."

"I agree with you, Mr. Ford. One who is capable of stealing bonds
from a private house is unfit to be employed in an office like
mine."

"Yet you retain the boy, sir?"

"For the present. It is not fair to assume that he is guilty till we
have demonstrated it beyond a doubt."

"I think there will be no difficulty about that, Mr. Reynolds," said
Willis Ford, well pleased at these words.

"I sincerely hope that his innocence may be proved."

Soon afterward Mr. Reynolds went to the Stock Exchange, and Willis
Ford returned to his routine duties.

"With the testimony of Jim Morrison I shall be able to fix you, my
young friend," he said to himself, as Grant returned from the
post-office.

No further allusion was made to the matter during the day. Grant and
Willis Ford were both looking forward to the evening, but for
different reasons. Grant expected to be vindicated, while Ford hoped
he could convince the broker of the boy's guilt.



CHAPTER XXI -- THE THIEF IS DISCOVERED



Willis Ford ascended the steps of the broker's residence with a
jaunty step. The servant admitted him, but he met Grant in the hall.

"Won't you come upstairs, Mr. Ford?" he said.

Willis Ford nodded superciliously.

"Your stay in the house will be short, young man," he thought. "You
had better make the most of it."

He was ushered not into the housekeeper's room, but into a
sitting-room on the second floor. He found Mr. Reynolds and his
stepmother there already. Both greeted him, the broker gravely, but
his stepmother cordially. Grant did not come in.

"I have come as you requested, Mr. Reynolds," he said. "I suppose
it's about the bonds. May I ask if you have discovered anything
new?"

"I think I have," answered the broker, slowly.

The housekeeper looked surprised. If anything new had been
discovered, she at least had not heard it.

"May I ask what it is?" Ford inquired, carelessly.

"You shall know in good time. Let me, however, return the question.
Have you heard anything calculated to throw light on the mystery?"

"No, sir, I can't say I have. To my mind there is no mystery at all
about the affair."

"I presume I understand what you mean. Still I will ask you to
explain yourself."

"Everything seems to throw suspicion upon that boy, Grant Thornton.
Nobody saw him take the bonds, to be sure, but he has had every
opportunity of doing so, living in the same house, as he does.
Again, a key has been found in his pocket, which will open the
bureau drawer in which the bonds were kept; and, thirdly, I can
testify, and the boy admits, that he presented them at our office
for sale, and received the money for them. I think, sir, that any
jury would consider this accumulation of proof conclusive."

"It does seem rather strong," said the broker, gravely. "I
compliment you on the way you have summed up, Mr. Ford."

Willis Ford looked much gratified. He was susceptible to flattery,
and he was additionally pleased, because, as he thought, Mr.
Reynolds was impressed by the weight of evidence.

"I have sometimes thought," he said, complacently, "that I ought
to have become a lawyer. I always had a liking for the profession."

"Still," said the broker, deliberately, "we ought to consider
Grant's explanation of the matter. He says that the bonds were
intrusted to him for sale by a third party."

"Of course he would say something like that," returned Willis,
shrugging his shoulders. "He can hardly expect anyone to be taken in
by such a statement as that."

"You think, then, that he had no dealings with this Morrison?"

"I don't say that, sir," said Ford, remembering the story which he
and Morrison had agreed upon. It may be stated here that he had been
anxious to meet Morrison before meeting the coming appointment, in
order to ascertain what had passed between him and Grant. With this
object in view, he had gone to the usual haunts of the gambler, but
had been unable to catch sight of him. However, as he had seen him
the evening previous, and agreed upon the story to be told, he
contented himself with that.

"You think, then, that Morrison may have given Grant the bonds?"
said Mr. Reynolds.

"No, sir; that is not my idea."

"Have you any other notion?"

"I think the boy may have been owing him money, and took this method
of raising it."

"But how should he owe him money?" asked the broker, curiously.

"I don't wish to say anything against Morrison, but I have been told
that he is a gambler. Grant may have lost money to him at play."

"Or you," thought the broker; but he said:

"Your suggestion is worth considering, but I don't think Grant has
had any opportunity to lose money in that way, as he spends his
evenings usually at home."

"It wouldn't take long to lose a great deal of money, sir."

"That explains it," said the housekeeper, speaking for the first
time. "I have no doubt Willis is right, and the boy gambles."

"I presume, Mr. Ford," said the broker, with a peculiar look, "that
you do not approve of gambling?"

"Most certainly not, sir," said Ford, his face expressing the horror
which a so-well-conducted young man must naturally feel for so
pernicious a habit.

"I am glad to hear it. Will you excuse me a moment?"

After the broker had left the room, Mrs. Estabrook turned to Willis
and said: "You are pretty sharp, Willis. You have found out this
wretched boy, and now I think we shall get rid of him."

"I flatter myself, mother," said Willis, complacently, "that I
have given the old man some new ideas as to the character of his
favorite. I don't think we shall see him in the office again."

As he spoke, his ears caught the sound of ascending footsteps on the
stairs without. He was rather puzzled. He conjectured that Grant had
been summoned to confront his accuser, but there seemed, from the
sound, to be more than two approaching. When the door opened, and
the broker gravely ushered in Jim Morrison and Tom Calder, both
looking ill at ease, followed by Grant Thornton, he looked amazed
and perplexed.

"I believe you know these gentlemen," said Mr. Reynolds, gravely. "I
have thought it best to make our present investigation thorough and
complete."

"I have met the gentlemen before," said Ford, uncomfortably.

"You also have met them, Grant, have you not?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you had any business transaction with either?"

"Yes, sir. Mr. Morrison met me on Wall Street and handed me two
bonds, with a request that I would sell them for him, and hand him
the money the next morning, at the Fifth Avenue Hotel."

"Were these the same bonds that you sold to Mr. Ford?"

"Yes, sir."

"I think the boy is lying, sir," burst out Ford.

"What have you to say to the boy's story, Mr. Morrison?" asked the
broker.

"He's made a little mistake," answered Jim Morrison, who by this
time was feeling more at his ease. "I didn't give him no bonds."

Willis Ford looked triumphant, and Grant amazed.

"How, then, could there be any business between you?"

"I may as well own up that I am a gambler," replied Morrison, with
virtuous frankness. "The boy lost the money to me at play, and said
he'd meet and pay me at the Fifth Avenue Hotel. I didn't know where
he was goin' to get the money, but I expect he must have stolen the
bonds, and got it that way."

Considering the damaging nature of the revelation, Grant showed
considerable self-command. He did not turn pale, nor did he look
guilty and conscience-stricken.

"What have you to say to this charge, Grant?" asked the broker.

"It is not true, sir."

"What a hardened young villain!" said the housekeeper, in a low, but
audible voice.

"Mr. Reynolds will hardly believe you," said Ford, turning upon our
hero and speaking in a tone of virtuous indignation. "You see, sir,"
he continued, addressing the broker, "that I was right in my
conjecture."

"I am not quite satisfied yet," said Mr. Reynolds. "Grant, call the
boy."

Great was the perplexity of Willis Ford and his friends when Grant
left the room, and almost immediately reappeared with a small boy in
blue uniform. Not one of them recognized him.

"Have you ever seen any of these gentlemen before, my boy?" asked
the broker.

"I've seed 'em all, sir," answered the boy.

"State where you saw them last."

"I seed him, and him, and him," said Johnny, pointing out Willis
Ford, Jim Morrison and Tom Calder, "at the Grand Central Hotel
yesterday mornin'."

Ford started and became very pale.

"What passed between them?"

"He," indicating Ford, "gave some bonds to him," indicating
Morrison, "and got back a bit of paper. I don't know what was on
it."

"It is false!" ejaculated Willis Ford, hoarsely.



CHAPTER XXII -- WILLIS FORD AT BAY



The telegraph boy's evidence overwhelmed Willis Ford and his
confederates with dismay. The feeling was greater in Ford, for it
tended to fasten the theft upon him, while Jim Morrison and Tom
Calder, though convicted of falsehood, were at all events sustained
by the consciousness that nothing worse could be alleged against
them.

"It is false!" asserted Willis Ford, with a flushed face.

"It is true!" declared the telegraph boy, sturdily.

"I don't believe a word of it," said the housekeeper, angrily.

"This is a startling revelation, Mr. Ford," said the broker,
gravely.

"It is a base conspiracy, sir," returned Ford, hoarsely. "I submit,
sir, that the word of a boy like that ought not to weigh against
mine. Besides, these gentlemen," indicating Jim Morrison and Tom
Calder, "will corroborate my statement."

"Of course we do," blustered Morrison. "That boy is a liar!"

"I have spoken the truth, sir, and they know it," asserted Johnny,
resolutely.

"How much did Grant Thornton pay you for telling this lie?" demanded
Willis Ford, furiously.

"I will answer that question, Mr. Ford," said Grant, thinking it
time to speak for himself. "I paid him nothing, and did not know
till last evening that he had witnessed the interview between you
and Mr. Morrison."

