The shock-absorbing frame folded, was crushed. At the same instant
Prochaska silenced its rockets. It settled down, its tail tubes pushed
into the plain's powdery ash scarcely a mile from the Aztec.

"Perfect." Prochaska sounded pleased with himself. His thin face broke
into a satisfied smile.

"Nice going," Crag agreed. "Now let's get out of this trap."

His eyes lingered for an instant on the analog. Red Dog had already
cleared Ptolemaeus. He snapped his face plate shut, clicked on the
interphone and turned the oxygen valve. His suit began to swell and grow
rigid against his body. When they were pressurized, he opened the hatch
and they clambered out onto the plain. He closed the hatch behind them
and struck off in the direction of Bandit with the Chief at his heels.

They moved as rapidly as possible. Their feet in the heavy insulated
space boots kicked up small fountains of dust which dropped as quickly
as they rose. From time to time Crag looked back toward the brimming
cliffs. Prochaska plodded head down. His quickened breathing in the
interphones sounded harsh to Crag. Plainly the long hours of monitoring
the Aztec's instruments had made him soft. The microphone in his helmet
came to life. It was Larkwell.

"Red Dog's cleared the rim," he told them.

Crag glanced back. His eyes caught the wispish trail of white vapor high
above the cliffs before he saw the rocket itself. It was already in
vertical attitude, letting down amid a cloud of white vapor from its
stern braking rockets.

"All hands disconnect their interphones," he commanded. "From here on
out we operate in silence." The Red Dog interphone system might or might
not be on the same band they used. He wasn't about to take that risk.

"Okay," Larkwell acknowledged. "We're shutting off."

Crag remembered that the German's interphones were still connected. Slip
one. He decided to leave his own open--at least he'd be forewarned if
anyone tried to alert the Red Dog crew. He turned back toward the
rocket. Red Dog was dropping about two or three miles from the Aztec in
the direction of the wrecked Baker.

White smoke and flame poured from its stern tubes. It slowed visibly as
it neared the lunar surface. He thought that a plumb bob dropped through
the long axis of the rocket would form a right angle with the surface
of Arzachel. Pilot's good, he thought. He watched until it touched down
teetering on its stern tubes for a moment before coming to rest; then he
turned and hurried to overtake Prochaska.

The Chief's face behind his mask was covered with perspiration. He
panted heavily. Crag beckoned him to follow and moved behind a low swale
of rock where they would be safe from detection. The nose of Bandit
jutted into the sky about a mile ahead of them. He motioned toward it,
gesturing for Prochaska to go on. The Chief nodded understanding and
struck off.

Crag turned and began climbing a low rocky ridge that now lay between
him and Red Dog. He stopped just below its crest and searched for a safe
vantage point. To his right a serrated rock structure extended up over
the backbone of the ridge. He angled toward it, then followed the
outcropping to a point where he could see the plain beyond. Red Dog had
its tail planted in the ash about three miles distant.

Minute figures milled at its base, small blobs of movement against the
crater floor. No sounds broke the silence of Crag's open interphones. He
took this as a sign that the Red Dog sets operated on a different band.
But he couldn't be sure. The tremendous advantage of having
communication with his own men must be discarded.

His vigil was rewarded a few moments later when the blobs around Red
Dog's base began moving in the direction of the Aztec. It struck him
that they couldn't see the rocket from their present position due to
small intervening hillocks, although both Baker and Charlie were clearly
visible. He decided the Aztec's horizontal position had tipped them to
its identity while they were still space-borne. One of the Red Dog
crewmen, obviously the leader, drew ahead of his companions. The other
two seemed to be struggling with some object they carried between them.
They moved close together, halting from time to time. He returned his
gaze to the rocket, conjecturing that another crewman would have
remained behind. If so, he was in the space cabin. The ship seemed
lifeless. The landing party approached a small ridge overlooking the
Aztec, bringing them closer to his lookout.

He saw that the two men following the leader were having difficulty with
their burden. They walked slowly, uncertainly, pausing from time to
time. The lead man started up the rocky knoll overlooking the Aztec. His
movements were slow, wary. He crouched near the top of the ridge,
scanning the plain beyond before waving to his companions to follow. The
gesture told Crag that their interphones were disconnected. The crewmen
near the base of the knoll started climbing, moving with extreme
difficulty. He watched them, wondering, until they reached the leader.
They stood for a moment scouting the plain, then two of the men crouched
over the burden they had lugged up the knoll.

A weapon, Crag guessed. He tried to discern its shape but failed. A few
moments later one of the men stepped back. A puff of white rose from the
knoll. A trail of vapor shot toward the Aztec. A portable rocket
launcher! His eyes tracked the missile's flight. The vapor trail
terminated at its target. An instant later the Aztec disintegrated.
Black chunks of the rocket hurtled into the lunar skies, becoming lost
to sight. Within seconds only a jagged few feet of broken torn metal
marked the site of man's first successful landing on the moon. _Wow,
what a weapon_, he thought. It didn't merely push a hole in the Aztec.
It disintegrated it, completely. That was one for Gotch. He filed the
thought away and watched.

The figures on the knoll searched the scene for a long time. Finally
they turned and started back, carrying the rocket launcher with them.
The act of saving the weapon told him that Red Dog carried more rockets
than just the single shot fired--a disconcerting thought.

He cautiously withdrew from his post and picked his way down the ridge
toward Bandit, moving as rapidly as the rough terrain permitted.
Everything now depended on the next move of the Red Dog's crew, he
thought. One thing was certain--there would be no quarter shown. The
ruthless destruction of the Aztec had set the pattern for the coming
battle of Arzachel. It was a declaration of war with all rules of human
warfare discarded. Well, that was okay with him.

He was breathing heavily by the time he reached a spot overlooking
Bandit. Nagel had decompressed the cabin and they were waiting for him
with the hatch open. He crossed the clearing and a moment later was in
the space cabin. He watched the gauge until it was safe to cut off his
suit pressure and open his face plate. He looked at Richter; his face
was blank. Tersely, then, he related what had happened.

"I sort of expected that," Prochaska said quietly when he had finished.
"It was the logical way."

"Logical to attempt to murder men?" Nagel asked bitterly.

"Entirely logical," Crag interjected. "The stakes are too big for a few
human lives to matter. At least we've been warned."

He turned to Prochaska. "Disconnect Richter's mikes until this show's
over."

The Chief nodded. Richter stood quietly by while his lip microphone was
disconnected and withdrawn from the helmet. Nagel's face showed
satisfaction at the act, but Larkwell's expression was wooden.

Crag said, "Defense of Bandit will be under Prochaska's command." He
looked grimly at his second-in-command. "Your fort has one automatic
rifle. Make it count if you have to use it." The Chief nodded.

Larkwell spoke up, "How about you?"

"I'll be scouting with the other automatic rifle. Stay in your suits and
keep ready. If they start to bring up the rocket launcher I'll signal.
If that happens you'll have to get out of here, pronto. You'd better
check your oxygen," he added as an afterthought.

"If they think we're dead ducks they won't be toting the launcher,"
Prochaska said.

"We hope." Crag exchanged his oxygen cylinder for a fresh one, then
checked one of the automatic rifles, slipping two extra clips in his
belt. On second thought he hooked a spare oxygen cylinder to the back
straps. He nodded to Nagel, snapped his face plate shut and pressurized
his suit. When the cabin was decompressed, he opened the hatch, scanning
the knoll carefully before descending to the plain. He struck off toward
the ridge overlooking Red Dog. The ground on this side of the spur was
fairly flat and he made good time, but was panting heavily by the time
he reached his lookout point on the crest.




CHAPTER 15


Crag sighted the Red Dog party immediately--three figures plodding in
single file toward Drone Baker. He saw with satisfaction that they had
discarded the rocket launcher. He took that as a sign they believed the
Aztec crew dead. He found a halfway comfortable sitting position, and
settled back to await developments.

The distant figures moved across the plain with maddening slowness. From
time to time he returned his eyes to the enemy rocket. It showed no
signs of life. Once he debated taking the gamble of trying to reach it,
but as quickly discarded the idea. Caught on the open plain and he'd be
a gone gosling.

He waited.

After what seemed a long while, the invaders reached a point overlooking
Drone Baker. One of the figures remained on a small rise overlooking the
drone while the other two separated and approached it from different
directions. The tactic disquieted him. It indicated that the newcomers
were not entirely convinced that they were alone in Crater Arzachel.

After another interminably long time, the two figures approaching the
rocket met at its base. They walked around the rocket several times,
then struck out, this time toward Drone Charlie. Their companion left
his lookout point and cut across the plain to join them.

Crag squirmed uncomfortably. He was tired and hungry; his muscles ached
from the constriction of the suit. His body was hot and clammy, and
perspiration from his brow stung his eyes. He sighed, wishing he had a
cigarette. Strange, he hadn't smoked in over a year but all at once the
need for tobacco seemed overwhelming. He pushed the thought aside.

The invaders were strung out in single file, moving in a direction which
brought them closer to his position. He shifted to a point below the
crest, moving slowly to avoid detection. Their path crossed his field of
vision at a distance of about half a mile. At the closest point he saw
they carried rifles in shoulder slings. He took this as another
indication they suspected the presence of survivors. The invaders
stopped and rested at a point almost opposite him. He fidgeted, trying
to get his body into a more comfortable position.

Finally they resumed their trek. Before they reached the drone they
halted. One man remained in the cover of a spur of rock while the other
two separated and advanced on the drone from different directions. Crag
cursed under his breath. They certainly weren't going to be sitting
ducks. Perhaps it was just a precaution. Simply good infantry tactics,
he told himself, but it still raised a complication.

He waited. The two invaders closed on the drone, meeting at its base.
They evidently decided it was abandoned, for they left within a few
minutes walking to join their waiting companion. After a short huddle
they struck out in the direction of Bandit. This was the move he had
waited for.

He withdrew to the lee side of the ridge and picked his way toward
Bandit as rapidly as possible, taking care not to brush against the
sharp slivers of rock. He drew near the rocket, thinking that the open
hatch would be a dead giveaway. Still, there was no alternative. A fort
without a gunport was no fort at all. He climbed to a spot close to the
crest of the ridge and peered back in the direction of the invaders,
startled to find they were nearer than he had supposed. He hastily
withdrew his head, deciding it was too late to warn the others to
abandon the rocket. If the invaders climbed straight up the opposite
side of the ridge, they conceivably could catch his crew on the open
plain. That made another complication.

He scanned the ridge. Off to his right a series of granite spurs jutted
from the base rock in finger formation. He picked his way toward them,
then descended until he found shelter between two rock outcroppings
which gave him a clear view of Bandit. He checked his automatic rifle,
moving the control lever to the semi-automatic position. The black
rectangle that marked Bandit's hatch seemed lifeless.

He waited.

Long minutes passed. He cursed the eternal silence of the moon which
robbed him of the use of his ears. A cannon could fire within an inch of
his back and he'd never know it, he thought. He moved his head slightly
forward from time to time in an effort to see the slope behind him.
Nothing happened. His body itched intolerably from perspiration. He
readjusted the suit temperature setting, gaining a slight respite from
the heat. All at once he caught movement out of the corner of his face
plate and involuntarily jerked his head back. He waited a moment, aware
that his heart was pounding heavily, then cautiously moved forward. One
of the invaders was picking his way down the slope in a path that would
take him within thirty yards of his position. The man moved slowly,
half-crouched, keeping his rifle cradled across his arm.

They know, he thought. The open hatch was the giveaway. He anxiously
searched Bandit. No sign of life was visible. He gave silent thanks that
the invaders had not lugged their rocket launcher with them. Prochaska,
he knew, would be watching, crouched in the shadow of the hatch opening
behind the heavy automatic rifle. He estimated the distance between the
base of the slope and the rocket at 400 yards--close enough for
Prochaska to pick off anyone who ventured onto the plain.

He waited while the invader passed abreast of him and descended to the
base of the plain, taking cover in the rocks. He halted there and looked
back. A few moments later Crag saw the second of the invaders moving
down the slope about a hundred yards beyond his companion. He, too,
stopped near the base of the rocks. Where was the third man? The same
technique they used before, Crag decided. He would be covering his
companions' advance from the ridge. That made it more difficult.

He studied the two men at the edge of the plain. It looked like a
stalemate. They either had to advance or retreat. Their time was
governed by oxygen. If they advanced, they'd be dead pigeons. Prochaska
couldn't miss if they chose to cross the clearing. As it was, neither
side could get a clear shot at the distance separating them, although
the invaders could pour a stream of shells into the open hatch. But
Prochaska would be aware of that danger and would have taken refuge to
one side of the opening, he decided. There was another complication.
The shells were heavy enough to perforate the rocket. Well, he'd worry
about that later. He moved his head for a better view of the invaders.

The man nearest him had gotten into a prone position and was doing
something with the end of his rifle. Crag watched, puzzled. Suddenly the
man brought the rifle to his shoulder, and he saw that the end of the
muzzle was bulged. Rifle grenade! Damn, they'd brought a regular
arsenal. If he managed to place one in the open hatch, the Bandit crew
was doomed. Heedless of the other two Red Dog crewmen, he stepped out
between the shoulders of rock to gain freedom of movement and snapped
his own weapon to his shoulder. He had trouble fitting his finger into
the trigger guard. The enemy was spraddled on his stomach, legs apart,
adjusting his body to steady his weapon.

Crag moved his weapon up, bringing the prone man squarely into his
sights. He squeezed the trigger, feeling the weapon jump against his
padded shoulder, and leaped back into the protective cover of rock.
Something struck his face plate. Splinter of rock, he thought. The
watcher on the ridge hadn't been asleep. He dropped to his knees and
crawled between the rock spurs to gain a new position. The sharp needle
fragments under his hands and knees troubled him. One small rip and he'd
be the late Adam Crag. He finally reached a place where he could see the
lower end of the ridge.

The man he'd shot was a motionless blob on the rocky floor, his arms and
legs pulled up in a grotesque fetal position. The vulnerability of human
life on the moon struck Crag forcibly. A bullet hole anywhere meant
sudden violent death. A hit on the finger was as fatal as a shot through
the heart. Once air pressure in a suit was lost a man was dead--horribly
dying within seconds. A pinhole in the suit was enough to do it. His
eyes searched for the dead man's companions. The ridge and plain seemed
utterly lifeless. Bandit was a black canted monolith rising above the
plain, seeming to symbolize the utter desolation and silence of Crater
Arzachel. For a moment he was fascinated. The very scene portended
death. It was an eery feeling. He shook it off and waited. He was
finally rewarded by movement. A portion of rock near the edge of the
plain seemed to rise--took shape. The dead man's companion had risen to
a kneeling position, holding his rifle to his shoulder.

Crag raised his gun, wondering if he could hold the man in his sights. A
hundred and fifty yards to a rifleman clothed in a cumbersome space suit
seemed a long way. Before he could pull the trigger, the man flung his
arms outward, clawing at his throat for an instant before slumping to
the rocks. It took Crag a second to comprehend what had happened.
Prochaska had been ready.

A figure suddenly filled the dark rectangle of Bandit, pointing toward
the ridge behind Crag. He apparently was trying to tell him something.
Crag scanned the ridge. It seemed deserted. He turned toward Bandit and
motioned toward his faceplate. The other understood. His interphones
crackled to life. Prochaska's voice was welcome.

"I see him," he broke in. "He's moving up the slope to your right,
trying to reach the top of the ridge. Too far for a shot," he added.

Crag scrambled into a clearing and scanned the ridge, just in time to
see a figure disappear over the skyline. He started up the slope in a
beeline for the crest. If he could reach it in time, he might prevent
the sniper from crossing the open plain which lay between the ridge and
Red Dog. Cops and robbers, he thought. Another childhood game had
suddenly been recreated, this time on the bleak plain of an airless
alien crater 240,000 miles from the sunny Southern California lands of
his youth.

Crag reached the ridge. The plain on the other side seemed devoid of
life. In the distance the squat needle that was Red Dog jutted above
the ashy plain, an incongruous human artifact lost on the wastelands of
the moon. Only its symmetry distinguished it from the jagged monolithic
structures that dotted this end of the crater floor. He searched the
slope. Movement far down the knoll to his right caught his eye. The
fugitive was trying to reach a point beyond range of Crag's weapon
before cutting across the plain. He studied the terrain. Far ahead and
to the left of the invader the crater floor became broken by bizarre
rock formations of Backbone Ridge--a great half-circle which arced back
toward Red Dog. He guessed that the fantastic land ahead was the
fugitive's goal.

He cut recklessly down the opposite slope and gained the floor of the
crater before turning in the direction he had last seen the invader. He
cursed himself for having lost sight of him. Momentarily, he slowed his
pace, thinking he was ripe for a bushwhacking job. His eyes roved the
terrain. No movement, no sign of his quarry. He moved quickly, but
warily, attempting to search every inch of the twisted rock formations
covering the slope ahead. His eye detected movement off to one side. At
the same instant a warning sounded in his brain and he flung himself
downward and to the side, hitting the rough ground with a sickening
thud. He sensed that the action had saved his life. He crawled between
some rock outcroppings, hugging the ground until he reached a vantage
point overlooking the area ahead. He waited, trying to search the slope
without exposing his position. Minutes passed.

He tossed his head restlessly. His eyes roved the plain, searching,
attempting to discern movement. No movement--only a world of still
life-forms. The plain--its rocks and rills--stretched before him, barren
and endless. Strange, he thought, there should be vultures in the sky.
