
"'Suppose I wish to communicate with you respecting the child? Suppose
he is sick?'

"'Then write to A. M., care of Giles Warner, No. ---- Nassau Street.
By the way, it will be necessary for you to send him your postoffice
address after your removal in order that he may send you your quarterly
dues.'

"With this he left us, entered the hack, and drove off. I have never
seen him since."



CHAPTER III

LEFT ALONE

Frank listened to this revelation with wonder. For the first time in his
life he asked himself, "Who am I?"

"How came I by my name, mother?" he asked.

"I must tell you. After the sudden departure of the gentleman who
brought you, we happened to think that we had not asked your name. We
accordingly wrote to the address which had been given us, making the
inquiry. In return we received a slip of paper containing these words:
'The name is immaterial; give him any name you please. A. M.'"

"You gave me the name of Frank."

"It was Mr. Fowler's name. We should have given it to you had you been
our own boy; as the choice was left to us, we selected that."

"It suits me as well as any other. How soon did you leave Brooklyn,
mother?"

"In a week we had made all arrangements, and removed to this place. It
is a small place, but it furnished as much work as my husband felt able
to do. With the help of the allowance for your support, we not only got
on comfortably, but saved up a hundred and fifty dollars annually, which
we deposited in a savings bank. But after five years the money stopped
coming. It was the year 1857, the year of the great panic, and among
others who failed was Giles Warner's agent, from whom we received our
payments. Mr. Fowler went to New York to inquire about it, but only
learned that Mr. Warner, weighed down by his troubles, had committed
suicide, leaving no clew to the name of the man who left you with us."

"How long ago was that, mother?"

"Seven years ago nearly eight."

"And you continued to keep me, though the payments stopped."

"Certainly; you were as dear to us as our own child--for we now had a
child of our own--Grace. We should as soon have thought of casting off
her as you."

"But you must have been poor, mother."

"We were economical, and we got along till your father died three years
ago. Since then it has been hard work."

"You have had a hard time, mother."

"No harder on your account. You have been a great comfort to me, Frank.
I am only anxious for the future. I fear you and Grace will suffer after
I am gone."

"Don't fear, mother, I am young and strong; I am not afraid to face the
world with God's help."

"What are you thinking of, Frank?" asked Mrs. Fowler, noticing the boy's
fixed look.

"Mother," he said, earnestly, "I mean to seek for that man you have told
me of. I want to find out who I am. Do you think he was my father?"

"He said he was, but I do not believe it. He spoke with hesitation, and
said this to deceive us, probably."

"I am glad you think so, I would not like to think him my father. From
what you have told me of him I am sure I would not like him."

"He must be nearly fifty now--dark complexion, with dark hair and
whiskers. I am afraid that description will not help you any. There are
many men who look like that. I should know him by his expression, but I
cannot describe that to you."

Here Mrs. Fowler was seized with a very severe fit of coughing, and
Frank begged her to say no more.

Two days later, and Mrs. Fowler was no better. She was rapidly failing,
and no hope was entertained that she would rally. She herself felt
that death was near at hand and told Frank so, but he found it hard to
believe.

On the second of the two days, as he was returning from the village
store with an orange for his mother, he was overtaken by Sam Pomeroy.

"Is your mother very sick, Frank?" he asked.

"Yes, Sam, I'm afraid she won't live."

"Is it so bad as that? I do believe," he added, with a sudden change of
tone, "Tom Pinkerton is the meanest boy I ever knew. He is trying to get
your place as captain of the baseball club. He says that if your mother
doesn't live, you will have to go to the poorhouse, for you won't have
any money, and that it will be a disgrace for the club to have a captain
from the poorhouse."

"Did he say that?" asked Frank, indignantly.

"Yes."

"When he tells you that, you may say that I shall never go to the
poorhouse."

"He says his father is going to put you and your sister there."

"All the Deacon Pinkertons in the world can never make me go to the
poorhouse!" said Frank, resolutely.

"Bully for you, Frank! I knew you had spunk."

Frank hurried home. As he entered the little house a neighbor's wife,
who had been watching with his mother, came to meet him.

"Frank," she said, gravely, "you must prepare yourself for sad news.
While you were out your mother had another hemorrhage, and--and--"

"Is she dead?" asked the boy, his face very pale.

"She is dead!"



CHAPTER IV

THE TOWN AUTOCRAT


"The Widder Fowler is dead," remarked Deacon Pinkerton, at the supper
table. "She died this afternoon."

"I suppose she won't leave anything," said Mrs. Pinkerton.

"No. I hold a mortgage on her furniture, and that is all she has."

"What will become of the children?"

"As I observed, day before yesterday, they will be constrained to find a
refuge in the poorhouse."

"What do you think Sam Pomeroy told me, father?"

"I am not able to conjecture what Samuel would be likely to observe, my
son."

"He observed that Frank Fowler said he wouldn't go to the poorhouse."

"Ahem!" coughed the deacon. "The boy will not be consulted."

"That's what I say, father," said Tom, who desired to obtain his
father's co-operation. "You'll make him go to the poorhouse, won't you?"

"I shall undoubtedly exercise my authority, if it should be necessary,
my son."

"He told Sam Pomeroy that all the Deacon Pinkertons in the world
couldn't make him go to the poorhouse."

"I will constrain him," said the deacon.

"I would if I were you, father," said Tom, elated at the effect of his
words. "Just teach him a lesson."

"Really, deacon, you mustn't be too hard upon the poor boy," said his
better-hearted wife. "He's got trouble enough on him."

"I will only constrain him for his good, Jane. In the poorhouse he will
be well provided for."

Meanwhile another conversation respecting our hero and his fortunes was
held at Sam Pomeroy's home. It was not as handsome as the deacon's, for
Mr. Pomeroy was a poor man, but it was a happy one, nevertheless, and
Mr. Pomeroy, limited as were his means, was far more liberal than the
deacon.

"I pity Frank Fowler," said Sam, who was warm-hearted and sympathetic,
and a strong friend of Frank. "I don't know what he will do."

"I suppose his mother left nothing."

"I understood," said Mr. Pomeroy, "that Deacon Pinkerton holds a
mortgage on her furniture."

"The deacon wants to send Frank and his sister to the poorhouse."

"That would be a pity."

"I should think so; but Frank positively says he won't go."

"I am afraid there isn't anything else for him. To be sure, he may get a
chance to work in a shop or on a farm, but Grace can't support herself."

"Father, I want to ask you a favor."

"What is it, Sam?"

"Won't you invite Frank and his sister to come and stay here a week?"

"Just as your mother says."

"I say yes. The poor children will be quite welcome. If we were rich
enough they might stay with us all the time."

"When Frank comes here I will talk over his affairs with him," said Mr.
Pomeroy. "Perhaps we can think of some plan for him."

"I wish you could, father."

"In the meantime, you can invite him and Grace to come and stay with us
a week, or a fortnight. Shall we say a fortnight, wife?"

"With all my heart."

"All right, father. Thank you."

Sam delivered the invitation in a way that showed how strongly his own
feelings were enlisted in favor of its acceptance. Frank grasped his
hand.

"Thank you, Sam, you are a true friend," he said.

"I hadn't begun to think of what we were to do, Grace and I."

"You'll come, won't you?"

"You are sure that it won't trouble your mother, Sam?"

"She is anxious to have you come."

"Then I'll come. I haven't formed any plans yet, but I must as soon--as
soon as mother is buried. I think I can earn my living somehow. One
thing I am determined about--I won't go to the poorhouse."

The funeral was over. Frank and Grace walked back to the little house,
now their home no longer. They were to pack up a little bundle of
clothes and go over to Mr. Pomeroy's in time for supper.

When Frank had made up his bundle, urged by some impulse, he opened a
drawer in his mother's bureau. His mind was full of the story she had
told him, and he thought it just possible that he might find something
to throw additional light upon his past history. While exploring the
contents of the drawer he came to a letter directed to him in his
mother's well-known handwriting. He opened it hastily, and with a
feeling of solemnity, read as follows:


"My Dear Frank: In the lower drawer, wrapped in a piece of brown paper,
you will find two gold eagles, worth twenty dollars. You will need them
when I am gone. Use them for Grace and yourself. I saved these for my
children. Take them, Frank, for I have nothing else to give you. The
furniture will pay the debt I owe Deacon Pinkerton. There ought to be
something over, but I think he will take all. I wish I had more to leave
you, dear Frank, but the God of the Fatherless will watch over you--to
Him I commit you and Grace.

"Your affectionate mother,

"RUTH FOWLER."


Frank, following the instructions of the letter, found the gold pieces
and put them carefully into his pocketbook. He did not mention the
letter to Grace at present, for he knew not but Deacon Pinkerton might
lay claim to the money to satisfy his debt if he knew it.

"I am ready, Frank," said Grace, entering the room. "Shall we go?"

"Yes, Grace. There is no use in stopping here any longer."

As he spoke he heard the outer door open, and a minute later Deacon
Pinkerton entered the room.

None of the deacon's pompousness was abated as he entered the house and
the room.

"Will you take a seat?" said our hero, with the air of master of the
house.

"I intended to," said the deacon, not acknowledging his claim. "So your
poor mother is gone?"

"Yes, sir," said Frank, briefly.

"We must all die," said the deacon, feeling that it was incumbent on him
to say something religious. "Ahem! your mother died poor? She left no
property?"

"It was not her fault."

"Of course not. Did she mention that I had advanced her money on the
furniture?"

"My mother told me all about it, sir."

"Ahem! You are in a sad condition. But you will be taken care of. You
ought to be thankful that there is a home provided for those who have no
means."

"What home do you refer to, Deacon Pinkerton?" asked Frank, looking
steadily in the face of his visitor.

"I mean the poorhouse, which the town generously provides for those who
cannot support themselves."

This was the first intimation Grace had received of the possibility that
they would be sent to such a home, and it frightened her.

"Oh, Frank!" she exclaimed, "must we go to the poorhouse?"

"No, Grace; don't be frightened," said Frank, soothingly. "We will not
go."

"Frank Fowler," said the deacon, sternly, "cease to mislead your
sister."

"I am not misleading her, sir."

"Did you not tell her that she would not be obliged to go to the
poorhouse?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then what do you mean by resisting my authority?"

"You have no authority over us. We are not paupers," and Frank lifted
his head proudly, and looked steadily in the face of the deacon.

"You are paupers, whether you admit it or not."

"We are not," said the boy, indignantly.

"Where is your money? Where is your property?"

"Here, sir," said our hero, holding out his hands.

"I have two strong hands, and they will help me make a living for my
sister and myself."

"May I ask whether you expect to live here and use my furniture?"

"I do not intend to, sir. I shall ask no favors of you, neither for
Grace nor myself. I am going to leave the house. I only came back to get
a few clothes. Mr. Pomeroy has invited Grace and me to stay at his house
for a few days. I haven't decided what I shall do afterward."

"You will have to go to the poorhouse, then. I have no objection to your
making this visit first. It will be a saving to the town."

"Then, sir, we will bid you good-day. Grace, let us go."



CHAPTER V

A LITTLE MISUNDERSTANDING


"Have you carried Frank Fowler to the poorhouse?" asked Tom Pinkerton,
eagerly, on his father's return.

"No," said the deacon, "he is going to make a visit at Mr. Pomeroy's
first."

"I shouldn't think you would have let him make a visit," said Tom,
discontentedly. "I should think you would have taken him to the
poorhouse right off."

"I feel it my duty to save the town unnecessary expense," said Deacon
Pinkerton.

So Tom was compelled to rest satisfied with his father's assurance that
the removal was only deferred.

Meanwhile Frank and Grace received a cordial welcome at the house of Mr.
Pomeroy. Sam and Frank were intimate friends, and our hero had been in
the habit of calling frequently, and it seemed homelike.

"I wish you could stay with us all the time, Frank--you and Grace," said
Sam one evening.

"We should all like it," said Mr. Pomeroy, "but we cannot always have
what we want. If I had it in my power to offer Frank any employment
which it would be worth his while to follow, it might do. But he has got
his way to make in the world. Have you formed any plans yet, Frank?"

"That is what I want to consult you about, Mr. Pomeroy."

"I will give you the best advice I can, Frank. I suppose you do not mean
to stay in the village."

"No, sir. There is nothing for me to do here. I must go somewhere where
I can make a living for Grace and myself."

"You've got a hard row to hoe, Frank," said Mr. Pomeroy, thoughtfully.
"Have you decided where to go?"

"Yes, sir. I shall go to New York."

"What! To the city?"

"Yes, sir. I'll get something to do, no matter what it is."

"But how are you going to live in the meantime?"

"I've got a little money."

"That won't last long."

"I know it, but I shall soon get work, if it is only to black boots in
the streets."

"With that spirit, Frank, you will stand a fair chance to succeed. What
do you mean to do with Grace?"

"I will take her with me."

"I can think of a better plan. Leave her here till you have found
something to do. Then send for her."

"But if I leave her here Deacon Pinkerton will want to put her in the
poorhouse. I can't bear to have Grace go there."

"She need not. She can stay here with me for three months."

"Will you let me pay her board?"

"I can afford to give her board for three months."

"You are very kind, Mr. Pomeroy, but it wouldn't be right for me to
accept your kindness. It is my duty to take care of Grace."

"I honor your independence, Frank. It shall be as you say. When you are
able--mind, not till then--you may pay me at the rate of two dollars a
week for Grace's board."

"Then," said Frank, "if you are willing to board Grace for a while, I
think I had better go to the city at once."

"I will look over your clothes to-morrow, Frank," said Mrs. Pomeroy,
"and see if they need mending."

"Then I will start Thursday morning--the day after."

About four o'clock the next afternoon he was walking up the main street,
when just in front of Deacon Pinkerton's house he saw Tom leaning
against a tree.

"How are you Tom?" he said, and was about to pass on.

"Where are you going?" Tom asked abruptly.

"To Mr. Pomeroy's."

"How soon are you going to the poorhouse to live?"

