this promise. Release him, I pray of you."

"The promise cannot be recalled, my child," the Puritan replied. "But I
shall never claim its fulfilment save for some high and holy purpose."

"Are you sure your purpose _is_ holy, father?" Aveline said in a low
tone.

"What mean you, child?" cried Hugh Calveley, knitting his brows. "I am
but an instrument in the hands of Heaven, appointed to do its work; and
as directed, so I must act. Heaven may make me the scourge of the
oppressor and evil-doer, or the sword to slay the tyrant. I may die a
martyr for my faith, or do battle for it with carnal weapons. For all
these I am ready; resigning myself to the will of God. Is it for
nothing, think'st thou, that this young man--the son of my dear departed
friend--has been brought hither at this particular conjuncture? Is it
for nothing that, wholly unsolicited, he has placed his life at my
disposal, and in doing so has devoted himself to a great cause? Like
myself he hath wrongs to avenge, and the Lord of Hosts will give him
satisfaction."

"But not in the way you propose, father," Aveline rejoined. "Heaven
will assuredly give you both satisfaction for the wrongs you have
endured; but it must choose its own means of doing so, and its own
time."

"It _hath_ chosen the means, and the time is coming quickly," cried the
Puritan, his eye again kindling with fanatical light. "'The Lord will
cut off from Israel head and tail.'"

"These things are riddles to me," observed Jocelyn, who had listened to
what was passing with great uneasiness. "I would solicit an
explanation?"

"You shall have it, my son," Hugh Calveley replied. "But not now. My
hour for solitary prayer and self-communion is come, and I must withdraw
to my chamber. Go forth into the garden, Jocelyn--and do thou attend
him, Aveline. I will join you when my devotions are ended."

So saying he quitted the room, while the youthful pair went forth as
enjoined.




CHAPTER XVIII.

How the promise was cancelled.


It was a large garden, once fairly laid out and planted, but now sadly
neglected. The broad terrace walk was overgrown with weeds; the stone
steps and the carved balusters were broken in places, and covered with
moss; the once smooth lawn was unconscious of the scythe; the parterres
had lost their quaint devices; and the knots of flowers--tre-foil,
cinque-foil, diamond, and cross-bow--were no longer distinguishable in
their original shapes. The labyrinths of the maze were inextricably
tangled, and the long green alleys wanted clearing out.

But all this neglect passed unnoticed by Jocelyn, so completely was he
engrossed by the fair creature at his side. Even the noise of the May
Games, which, temporarily interrupted by Hugh Calveley, had recommenced
with greater vigour than ever--the ringing of the church bells, the
shouts of the crowd, and the sounds of the merry minstrelsy, scarcely
reached his ear. For the first time he experienced those delicious
sensations which new-born love excites within the breast; and the
enchantment operated upon him so rapidly and so strongly, that he was
overpowered by its spell almost before aware of it. It seemed that he
had never really lived till this moment; never, at least, comprehended
the bliss afforded by existence in the companionship of a being able to
awaken the transports he now experienced. A new world seemed suddenly
opened to him, full of love, hope, sunshine, of which he and Aveline
were the sole inhabitants. Hitherto his life had been devoid of any
great emotion. The one feeling latterly pervading it had been a sense of
deep wrong, coupled with the thirst of vengeance. No tenderer influence
had softened his almost rugged nature; and his breast continued arid as
the desert. Now the rock had been stricken, and the living waters gushed
forth abundantly. Not that in Norfolk, and even in the remote part of
the county where his life had been passed, female beauty was rare.
Nowhere, indeed, is the flower of loveliness more thickly sown than in
that favoured part of our isle. But all such young damsels as he had
beheld had failed to move him; and if any shaft had been aimed at his
breast it had fallen wide of the mark. Jocelyn Mounchensey was not one
of those highly susceptible natures--quick to receive an impression,
quicker to lose it. Neither would he have been readily caught by the
lures spread for youth by the designing of the sex. Imbued with
something of the antique spirit of chivalry, which yet, though but
slightly, influenced the age in which he lived, he was ready and able to
pay fervent homage to his mistress's sovereign beauty (supposing he had
one), and maintain its supremacy against all questioners, but utterly
incapable of worshipping at any meaner shrine. Heart-whole, therefore,
when he encountered the Puritan's daughter, he felt that in her he had
found an object he had long sought, to whom he could devote himself
heart and soul; a maiden whose beauty was without peer, and whose mental
qualities corresponded with her personal attractions.

Nor was it a delusion under which he laboured. Aveline Calveley was all
his imagination painted her. Purity of heart, gentleness of disposition,
intellectual endowments, were as clearly revealed by her speaking
countenance as the innermost depths of a fountain are by the pellucid
medium through which they are viewed. Hers was a virgin heart, which,
like his own, had received no previous impression. Love for her father
alone had swayed her; though all strong demonstrations of filial
affection had been checked by that father's habitually stern manner.
Brought up by a female relative in Cheshire, who had taken charge of her
on her mother's death, which had occurred during her infancy, she had
known little of her father till late years, when she had come to reside
with him, and, though devout by nature, she could ill reconcile herself
to the gloomy notions of religion he entertained, or to the ascetic mode
of life he practised. With no desire to share in the pomps and vanities
of life, she could not be persuaded that cheerfulness was incompatible
with righteousness; nor could all the railings she heard against them
make her hate those who differed from her in religious opinions. Still
she made no complaint. Entirely obedient to her father's will, she
accommodated herself, as far as she could, to the rule of life
prescribed by him. Aware of his pertinacity of opinion, she seldom or
ever argued a point with him, even if she thought right might be on her
side; holding it better to maintain peace by submission, than to hazard
wrath by disputation. The discussion on the May Games was an exception
to her ordinary conduct, and formed one of the few instances in which
she had ventured to assert her own opinion in opposition to that of her
father.

Of late, indeed, she had felt great uneasiness about him. Much changed,
he seemed occupied by some dark, dread thought, which partially revealed
itself in wrathful exclamations and muttered menaces. He seemed to
believe himself chosen by Heaven as an instrument of vengeance against
oppression; and her fears were excited lest he might commit some
terrible act under this fatal impression. She was the more confirmed in
the idea from the eagerness with which he had grasped at Jocelyn's rash
promise, and she determined to put the young man upon his guard.

If, in order to satisfy the reader's curiosity, we are obliged to
examine the state of Aveline's heart, in reference to Jocelyn, we must
state candidly that no such ardent flame was kindled within it as burnt
in the breast of the young man. That such a flame might arise was very
possible, nay even probable, seeing that the sparks of love were there;
and material for combustion was by no means wanting. All that was
required was, that those sparks should be gently fanned--not heedlessly
extinguished.

Little was said by the two young persons, as they slowly paced the
terrace. Both felt embarrassed: Jocelyn longing to give utterance to his
feelings, but restrained by timidity--Aveline trembling lest more might
be said than she ought to hear, or if obliged to hear, than she could
rightly answer. Thus they walked on in silence. But it was a silence
more eloquent than words, since each comprehended what the other felt.
How much they would have said was proclaimed by the impossibility they
found of saying anything!

At length, Jocelyn stopped, and plucking a flower, observed, as he
proffered it for her acceptance, "My first offering to you was rejected.
May this be more fortunate."

"Make me a promise, and I will accept it," she replied.

"Willingly,", cried Jocelyn, venturing to take her hand, and gazing at
her tenderly. "Most willingly."

"You are far too ready to promise," she rejoined with a sad, sweet
smile. "What I desire is this. Recall your hasty pledge to my father,
and aid me in dissuading him from the enterprise in which he would
engage you."

As the words were uttered the Puritan stepped from behind the alley
which had enabled him to approach them unperceived, and overhear their
brief converse.

"Hold!" he exclaimed in a solemn tone, and regarding Jocelyn with great
earnestness. "That promise is sacred. It was made in a father's name,
and must be fulfilled. As to my purpose it is unchangeable."

The enthusiast's influence over Jocelyn would have proved irresistible
but for the interposition of Aveline.

"Be not controlled by him," she said in a low tone to the young man;
adding to her father, "For my sake, let the promise be cancelled."

"Let him ask it, and it shall be," rejoined the Puritan, gazing steadily
at the young man, as if he would penetrate his soul. "Do you hesitate?"
he cried in accents of deep disappointment, perceiving Jocelyn waver.

"You cannot misunderstand his wishes, father," said Aveline.

"Let him speak for himself," Hugh Calveley exclaimed angrily. "Jocelyn
Mounchensey!" he continued, folding his arms upon his breast, and
regarding the young man fixedly as before, "son of my old friend! son
of him who died in my arms! son of him whom I committed to the earth! if
thou hast aught of thy father's true spirit, thou wilt rigidly adhere to
a pledge voluntarily given, and which, uttered as it was uttered by
thee, has all the sanctity, all the binding force of a vow before
Heaven, where it is registered, and approved by him who is gone before
us."

Greatly moved by this appeal, Jocelyn might have complied with it, but
Aveline again interposed.

"Not so, father," she cried. "The spirits of the just made perfect--and
of such is the friend you mention--would never approve of the design
with which you would link this young man, in consequence of a promise
rashly made. Discharge him from it, I entreat you."

Her energy shook even the Puritan's firmness.

"Be it as thou wilt, daughter," he said, after the pause of a few
moments, during which he waited for Jocelyn to speak; but, as the young
man said nothing, he rightly interpreted his silence,--"be it as thou
wilt, since he, too, wills it so. I give him back his promise. But let
me see him no more."

"Sir, I beseech you--" cried Jocelyn.

But he was cut short by the Puritan, who, turning from him
contemptuously, said to his daughter--"Let him depart immediately."

Aveline signed to the young man to go; but finding him remain
motionless, she took him by the hand, and led him some way along the
terrace. Then, releasing her hold, she bade him farewell!

"Wherefore have you done this?" inquired Jocelyn reproachfully.

"Question me not; but be satisfied I have acted for the best," she
replied. "O Jocelyn!" she continued anxiously, "if an opportunity should
occur to you of serving my father, do not neglect it."

"Be assured I will not," the young man replied. "Shall we not meet
again?" he asked, in a tone of deepest anxiety.

"Perhaps," she answered. "But you must go. My father will become
impatient. Again farewell!"

On this they separated: the young man sorrowfully departing, while her
footsteps retreated in the opposite direction.

Meanwhile the May games went forward on the green with increased spirit
and merriment, and without the slightest hinderance. More than once the
mummers had wheeled their mazy rounds, with Gillian and Dick Taverner
footing it merrily in the midst of them. More than once the audacious
'prentice, now become desperately enamoured of his pretty partner, had
ventured to steal a kiss from her lips. More than once he had whispered
words of love in her ear; though, as yet, he had obtained no tender
response. Once--and once only--had he taken her hand; but then he had
never quitted it afterwards. In vain other swains claimed her for a
dance. Dick refused to surrender his prize. They breakfasted together in
a little bower made of green boughs, the most delightful and lover-like
retreat imaginable. Dick's appetite, furious an hour ago, was now clean
gone. He could eat nothing. He subsisted on love alone. But as she was
prevailed upon to sip from a foaming tankard of Whitsun ale, he quaffed
the remainder of the liquid with rapture. This done, they resumed their
merry sports, and began to dance, again. The bells continued to ring
blithely, the assemblage to shout, and the minstrels to play. A strange
contrast to what was passing in the Puritan's garden.




CHAPTER XIX.

Theobalds' Palace.


The magnificent palace of Theobalds, situated near Cheshunt, in
Hertfordshire, originally the residence of the great Lord Treasurer
Burleigh, and the scene of his frequent and sumptuous entertainments to
Queen Elizabeth and the ambassadors to her Court, when she "was seen,"
says Stow, "in as great royalty, and served as bountifully and
magnificently as at any other time or place, all at his lordship's
charge; with rich shows, pleasant devices, and all manner of sports, to
the great delight of her Majesty and her whole train, with great thanks
from all who partook of it, and as great commendations from all that
heard of it abroad:"--this famous and delightful palace, with its
stately gardens, wherein Elizabeth had so often walked and held converse
with her faithful counsellor; and its noble parks and chases, well
stocked with deer, wherein she had so often hunted; came into possession
of James the First, in the manner we shall proceed to relate, some years
before the date of this history.

James first made acquaintance with Theobalds during his progress from
Scotland to assume the English crown, and it was the last point at
which he halted before entering the capital of his new dominions. Here,
for four days, he and his crowd of noble attendants were guests of Sir
Robert Cecil, afterwards Earl of Salisbury, who proved himself the
worthy son of his illustrious and hospitable sire by entertaining the
monarch and his numerous train in the same princely style that the Lord
Treasurer had ever displayed towards Queen Elizabeth. An eyewitness has
described the King's arrival at Theobalds on this occasion. "Thus,
then," says John Savile, "for his Majesty's coming up the walk, there
came before him some of the nobility, barons, knights, esquires,
gentlemen, and others, amongst whom was the sheriff of Essex, and most
of his men, the trumpets sounding next before his highness, sometimes
one, sometimes another; his Majesty riding not continually betwixt the
same two, but sometimes one, sometimes another, as seemed best to his
highness; the whole nobility of our land and Scotland round about him
observing no place of superiority, all bare-headed, all of whom alighted
from their horses at their entrance into the first court, save only his
Majesty alone, who rid along still, four noblemen laying their hands
upon his steed, two before and two behind. In this manner he came to the
court door, where I myself stood. At the entrance into that court stood
many noblemen, amongst whom was Sir Robert Cecil, who there meeting his
Majesty conducted him into his house, all which was practised with as
great applause of the people as could be, hearty prayer, and throwing up
of hats. His Majesty had not stayed above an hour in his chamber, but
hearing the multitude throng so fast into the uppermost court to see his
highness, he showed himself openly out of his chamber window by the
space of half an hour together; after which time he went into the
labyrinth-like garden to walk, where he secreted himself in the
Meander's compact of bays, rosemary, and the like overshadowing his
walk, to defend him from the heat of the sun till supper time, at which
was such plenty of provision for all sorts of men in their due places as
struck me with admiration. And first, to begin with the ragged
regiments, and such as were debarred the privilege of any court, these
were so sufficiently rewarded with beef, veal, mutton, bread, and beer,
that they sung holiday every day, and kept a continual feast. As for
poor maimed and distressed soldiers, which repaired thither for
maintenance, the wine, money, and meat which they had in very bounteous
sort, hath become a sufficient spur to them to blaze it abroad since
their coming to London." The reader will marvel at the extraordinary and
unstinting hospitality practised in those days, which, as we have shown,
was exhibited to all comers, irrespective of rank, even to the "ragged
regiments," and which extended its bounties in the shape of alms to the
wounded and disabled veteran. We find no parallel to it in modern times.

Theobalds produced a highly favourable impression upon James, who,
passionately attached to the chase, saw in its well-stocked parks the
means of gratifying his tastes to the fullest extent. Its contiguity to
Enfield Chase was also a great recommendation; and its situation,
beautiful in itself, was retired, and yet within easy distance of the
metropolis. It appeared to him to combine all the advantages of a royal
hunting-seat with all the splendours of a palace; and his predilections
were confirmed by a second visit paid by him to it in 1606, when he was
accompanied by his brother-in-law, Christianus, King of Denmark, and
when the two monarchs were gloriously entertained by the Earl of
Salisbury. The Danish king drank inordinately; so did the whole of his
suite: and they soon inoculated the English Court with their sottish
tastes. Bonnie King Jamie himself got _fou_ twice a-day; and, melancholy
to relate, the ladies of the Court followed the royal example, and,
"abandoning their sobriety, were seen to roll about in intoxication." So
says Sir John Harington, who has given a very diverting account of the
orgies at Theobalds, and the inebriate extravagances of Christianus.
"One day," writes Sir John, "a great feast was held; and after dinner
the representation of Solomon's Temple and the coming of the Queen of
Sheba was made, or (as I may better say) was meant to have been made
before their Majesties, by device of the Earl of Salisbury and others.
But alas! as all earthly things do fail to poor mortals in enjoyment, so
did prove our presentment thereof. The lady that did play the Queen's
part did carry most precious gifts to both their Majesties, but
forgetting the steps arising to the canopy, overset her casket into his
Danish Majesty's lap, and fell at his feet, though I rather think it was
into his face. Much was the hurry and confusion. Cloths and napkins were
at hand to make all clean. His Majesty then got up, and would dance with
the Queen of Sheba; but he fell down and humbled himself before her, and
was carried to an inner chamber, and laid on a bed of state. The
entertainment and show went forward, and most of the presenters went
backward, or fell down; wine did so occupy their upper chambers." Worthy
Sir John seems to have been greatly scandalized, as he well might be, at
these shameless proceedings, and he exclaims pathetically, "The Danes
have again conquered the Britons; for I see no man, or woman either,
that can command himself or herself." Nor does he fail to contrast these
"strange pageantries" with what occurred of the same sort, in the same
place, in Queen Elizabeth's time, observing, "I never did see such lack
of good order, discretion, and sobriety as I have now done."

Having set his heart upon Theobalds, James offered the Earl of
Salisbury, in exchange for it, the palace and domains of Hatfield; and
the proposal being accepted (it could not very well be refused), the
delivery of the much-coveted place was made on the 22nd May, 1607; the
Prince Joinville, brother to the Duke de Guise, being present on the
occasion, where fresh festivities were held, accompanied by an
indifferent Masque from Ben Jonson. Whether the King or the Earl had the
best of the bargain, we are not prepared to decide.

Enchanted with his acquisition, James commenced the work of improvement
and embellishment by enlarging the park, appropriating a good slice of
Enfield Chace, with parts of Northaw and Cheshunt Commons, and
surrounding the whole with a high brick wall ten miles in circumference.
Within this ring he found ample scope for the indulgence of his hunting
propensities, since it contained an almost inexhaustible stock of the
finest deer in the kingdom; and within it might be heard the sound of
his merry horn, and the baying of his favourite stag-hounds, whenever he
could escape from the cares of state, or the toils of the
council-chamber. His escapes from these demands upon his time were so
frequent, and the attraction of the woods of Theobalds so irresistible,
that remonstrances were made to him on the subject; but they proved
entirely ineffectual. He declared he would rather return to Scotland
than forego his amusements.

Theobalds, in the time of its grandeur, might be styled the
Fontainebleau of England. Though not to be compared with Windsor Castle
in grandeur of situation, or magnificence of forest scenery, still it
was a stately residence, and worthy of the monarch of a mighty country.
Crowned with four square towers of considerable height and magnitude,
each with a lion and vane on the top; it had besides, a large,
lantern-shaped central turret, proudly domineering over the others, and
"made with timber of excellent workmanship, curiously wrought with
divers pinnacles at each corner, wherein were hung twelve bells for
chimage, and a clock with chimes of sundry work." The whole structure
was built, says the survey, "of excellent brick, with coigns, jambs, and
cornices of stone." Approached from the south by a noble avenue of
trees, planted in double rows, and a mile in length, it presented a
striking and most picturesque appearance, with its lofty towers, its
great gilded vanes, supported, as we have said, by lions, its crowd of
twisted chimnies, its leaded and arched walks, its balconies, and its
immense bay windows. Nor did it lose its majestic and beautiful aspect
as you advanced nearer, and its vast proportions became more fully
developed. Then you perceived its grand though irregular facades, its
enormous gates, its cloistered walks, and its superb gardens; and
comprehended that with its five courts and the countless apartments they
contained, to say nothing of the world of offices, that the huge edifice
