Then globe, man and all, vanished. The room was empty.

Karnes checked his headlong rush into the room and peered around in
the early morning gloom. For a full minute his brain refused even to
attempt rationalizing what he had seen. He looked wildly around, but
there was no one there. Suddenly he felt very foolish.

_All right. So men can run into round gray things and vanish. Now use
a little sense and look around._

There was something else in the room. Karnes knelt and looked at the
little object that lay on the floor a few feet from where the gray
globe had been. A cigarette case; one of those flat, coat-pocket jobs
with a jet black enamel surface laid over tiny checked squares that
would be absolutely useless for picking up fingerprints. If there were
any prints, they'd be on the inside.

He started to pick it up and realized he must still be a bit confused;
his hands were full. His right held the heavy automatic, and between
the thumb and forefinger of his left were the four tiny sheets of
microfilm.

Karnes holstered the pistol, took an envelope from his pocket, put the
films in it, replaced the envelope, and picked up the cigarette case.
It was, he thought, a rather odd-looking affair. It--

"Awright, you. Stand up slow, with your hands where I can see 'em."

_Great God_, thought Karnes, I _didn't know they were holding a tea
party in this building_. He did as he was told.

There were two of them at the door, both wearing the uniform of
Carlson Spacecraft. Plant protection squad.

"Who are you, bud?" asked the heavy-jawed one who had spoken before.
"And whataya doin' here?"

Karnes, keeping his hands high, said: "Take my billfold out of my hip
pocket."

"Okay. But first get over against that wall and lean forward."
Evidently the man was either an ex-cop or a reader of detective
stories.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Karnes had braced himself against the wall, the guard went
through his pockets, all of them, but he didn't take anything out
except the pistol and the billfold.

The card in the special case of the wallet changed the guard's manner
amazingly.

"Oh," he said softly. "Government, huh? Gee, I'm sorry, sir, but we
didn't know--"

Karnes straightened up, and put his hands down. The cigarette case
that had been in his right hand all along dropped into his coat
pocket.

"That's all right," he said. "Did you see the lad at the foot of the
stairs?"

"Sure. Jim Avery. Worked in Assembly. What happened to him?"

"He got in the way of the bullet. Resisting arrest. He's the jasper
that set off the little incendiaries that started that mess out there.
We've been watching him for months, now, but we didn't get word of
this cute stroke until too late."

The guard looked puzzled. "Jim Avery. But why'd he want to do that?"

Karnes looked straight at him. "Leaguer!"

The guard nodded. You never could tell when the League would pop up
like that.

Even after the collapse of Communism after the war, the world hadn't
learned anything, it seemed. The Eurasian League had seemed, at first,
to be patterned after the Western world's United Nations, but it
hadn't worked out that way.

The League was jealous of the UN lead in space travel, for one thing,
and they had neither the money nor the know-how to catch up. The UN
might have given them help, but, as the French delegate had remarked:
"For what reason should we arm a potential enemy?"

After all, they argued, with the threat of the UN's Moonbase hanging
over the League to keep them peaceful, why should we give them
spaceships so they can destroy Moonbase?

The Eurasian League had been quiet for a good many years, brooding,
but behaving. Then, three years ago, Moonbase had vanished in a flash
of actinic light, leaving only a new minor crater in the crust of
Luna.

There was no proof of anything, of course. It had to be written off as
an accident. But from that day on, the League had become increasingly
bolder; their policy was: "Smash the UN and take the planets for
ourselves!"

And now, with Carlson Spacecraft going up in flames, they seemed to be
getting closer to their goal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Karnes accepted his weapon and billfold from the guard and led them
back down the stairway. "Would one of you guys phone the State Police?
They'll want to know what happened."

The State Police copters came and went, taking Karnes and the late Mr.
Avery with them, and leaving behind the now dying glow of Carlson
Spacecraft.

There were innumerable forms to fill out and affidavits to make; there
was a long-distance call to UN headquarters in New York to verify
Karnes' identity. And Karnes asked to borrow the police lab for an
hour or so.

That evening, he caught the rocket for Long Island.

As the SR-37 floated through the hard vacuum five hundred miles above
central Nebraska, Karnes leaned back in his seat, turning the odd
cigarette case over and over in his hands.

Except for the neat, even checking that covered it, the little
three-by-four inch object was entirely featureless. There were no
catches or hinges, or even any line of cleavage around the edge. He
had already found that it wouldn't open.

Whatever it was, it was most definitely _not_ a cigarette case.

The X-ray plates had shown it to be perfectly homogeneous throughout.

_As far as I can see_, thought Karnes, _it's nothing but a piece of
acid-proof plastic, except that the specific gravity is way the hell
too high_. _Maybe if I had cut it open, I could have--_

Karnes didn't push anything on the case, of that he was sure. Nor did
he squeeze, shake, or rub it in any unusual way. But something
happened; something which he was convinced came from the case in his
hands.

He had the definite impression of something akin to a high-pressure
firehose squirting from the interior of the case, through his skull,
and into and over his brain, washing it and filling it. Little rivers
of knowledge trickled down through the convolutions of his brain,
collected in pools, and soaked in.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was never sure just how long the process took but it was certainly
not more than a second or two. Afterwards, he just sat there, staring.

From far across the unimaginable depths of the galaxy, fighting its
way through the vast, tenuous dust clouds of interstellar space, came
a voice: "Are you ill, sir?"

Karnes looked up at the stewardess. "Oh. Oh, no. No, I'm all right.
Just thinking. I'm perfectly all right."

He looked at the "cigarette case" again. He knew what it was, now.
There wasn't any English word for it, but he guessed "mind impressor"
would come close.

It had done just that; impressed his mind with knowledge he should not
