The Project Gutenberg EBook of B-12's Moon Glow, by Charles A. Stearns

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: B-12's Moon Glow

Author: Charles A. Stearns

Release Date: February 23, 2010 [EBook #31364]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK B-12'S MOON GLOW ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.




[Illustration]

[Illustration]


B-12's MOON GLOW

By CHARLES A. STEARNS


    _Among the metal-persons of Phobos, robot B-12 held a special
    niche. He might not have been stronger, larger, faster than
    some ... but he could be devious ... and more important, he
    was that junkyard planetoid's only moonshiner._


I am B-12, a metal person. If you read _Day_ and the other progressive
journals you will know that in some quarters of the galaxy there is
considerable prejudice directed against us. It is ever so with
minority races, and I do not complain. I merely make this statement so
that you will understand about the alarm clock.

An alarm clock is a simple mechanism used by the Builders to shock
themselves into consciousness after the periodic comas to which they
are subject. It is obsolescent, but still used in such out of the way
places as Phobos.

My own contact with one of these devices came about in the following
manner:

I had come into Argon City under cover of darkness, which is the only
sensible thing to do, in my profession, and I was stealing through the
back alleyways as silently as my rusty joints would allow.

I was less than three blocks from Benny's Place, and still undetected,
when I passed the window. It was a large, cheerful oblong of light, so
quite naturally I stopped to investigate, being slightly phototropic,
by virtue of the selenium grids in my rectifier cells. I went over and
looked in, unobtrusively resting my grapples on the outer ledge.

There was a Builder inside such as I had not seen since I came to
Phobos half a century ago, and yet I recognized the subspecies at
once, for they are common on Earth. It was a she.

It was in the process of removing certain outer sheaths, and I noted
that, while quite symmetrical, bilaterally, it was otherwise oddly
formed, being disproportionately large and lumpy in the anterior
ventral region.

I had watched for some two or three minutes, entirely forgetting my
own safety, when then she saw me. Its eyes widened and it snatched up
the alarm clock which was, as I have hinted, near at hand.

"Get out of here, you nosey old tin can!" it screamed, and threw the
clock, which caromed off my headpiece, damaging one earphone. I ran.

If you still do not see what I mean about racial prejudice, you will,
when you hear what happened later.

I continued on until I came to Benny's Place, entering through the
back door. Benny met me there, and quickly shushed me into a side
room. His fluorescent eyes were glowing with excitement.

Benny's real name is BNE-96, and when on Earth he had been only a
Servitor, not a General Purpose like myself.

But perhaps I should explain.

We metal people are the children of the Builders of Earth, and later
of Mars and Venus. We were not born of two parents, as they are. That
is a function far too complex to explain here; in fact I do not even
understand it myself. No, we were born of the hands and intellects of
the greatest of their scientists, and for this reason it might be
natural to suppose that we, and not they, would be considered a
superior race. It is not so.

Many of us were fashioned in those days, a metal person for every kind
of task that they could devise, and some, like myself, who could do
almost anything. We were contented enough, for the greater part, but
the scientists kept creating, always striving to better their former
