The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hyborian Age, by Robert E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hyborian Age

Author: Robert E. Howard

Release Date: February 24, 2013 [EBook #42182]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HYBORIAN AGE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          THE HYBORIAN AGE

                         By Robert E. Howard

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was first published in The
    Phantagraph February, August, and October-November 1936 issues.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.]


    (Nothing in this article is to be considered as an attempt to
    advance any theory in opposition to accepted history. It is simply a
    fictional background for a series of fiction-stories. When I began
    writing the Conan stories a few years ago, I prepared this 'history'
    of his age and the peoples of that age, in order to lend him and his
    sagas a greater aspect of realness. And I found that by adhering to
    the 'facts' and spirit of that history, in writing the stories, it
    was easier to visualize (and therefore to present) him as a real
    flesh-and-blood character rather than a ready-made product. In
    writing about him and his adventures in the various kingdoms of his
    Age, I have never violated the 'facts' or spirit of the 'history'
    here set down, but have followed the lines of that history as
    closely as the writer of actual historical-fiction follows the lines
    of actual history. I have used this 'history' as a guide in all the
    stories in this series that I have written.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Of that epoch known by the Nemedian chroniclers as the Pre-Cataclysmic
Age, little is known except the latter part, and that is veiled in the
mists of legendry. Known history begins with the waning of the
Pre-Cataclysmic civilization, dominated by the kingdoms of Kamelia,
Valusia, Verulia, Grondar, Thule and Commoria. These peoples spoke a
similar language, arguing a common origin. There were other kingdoms,
equally civilized, but inhabited by different, and apparently older
races.

The barbarians of that age were the Picts, who lived on islands far out
on the western ocean; the Atlanteans, who dwelt on a small continent
between the Pictish Islands and the main, or Thurian Continent; and the
Lemurians, who inhabited a chain of large islands in the eastern
hemisphere.

There were vast regions of unexplored land. The civilized kingdoms,
though enormous in extent, occupied a comparatively small portion of the
whole planet. Valusia was the western-most kingdom of the Thurian
Continent; Grondar the eastern-most. East of Grondar, whose people were
less highly cultured than those of their kindred kingdoms, stretched a
wild and barren expanse of deserts. Among the less arid stretches of
desert, in the jungles, and among the mountains, lived scattered clans
and tribes of primitive savages. Far to the south there was a mysterious
civilization, unconnected with the Thurian culture, and apparently
pre-human in its nature. On the far-eastern shores of the Continent
there lived another race, human, but mysterious and non-Thurian, with
which the Lemurians from time to time came in contact. They apparently
came from a shadowy and nameless continent lying somewhere east of the
Lemurian Islands.

The Thurian civilization was crumbling; their armies were composed
largely of barbarian mercenaries. Picts, Atlanteans and Lemurians were
their generals, their statesmen, often their kings. Of the bickerings of
the kingdoms, and the wars between Valusia and Commoria, as well as the
conquests by which the Atlanteans founded a kingdom on the mainland,
there were more legends than accurate history.

Then the Cataclysm rocked the world. Atlantis and Lemuria sank, and the
Pictish Islands were heaved up to form the mountain peaks of a new
continent. Sections of the Thurian Continent vanished under the waves,
or sinking, formed great inland lakes and seas. Volcanoes broke forth
and terrific earthquakes shook down the shining cities of the empires.
Whole nations were blotted out.

The barbarians fared a little better than the civilized races. The
inhabitants of the Pictish Islands were destroyed, but a great colony of
them, settled among the mountains of Valusia's southern frontier to
serve as a buffer against foreign invasion, was untouched. The
Continental kingdom of the Atlanteans likewise escaped the common ruin,
and to it came thousands of their tribesmen in ships from the sinking
land. Many Lemurians escaped to the eastern coast of the Thurian
Continent, which was comparatively untouched. There they were enslaved
by the ancient race which already dwelt there, and their history, for
thousands of years, is a history of brutal servitude.

In the western part of the Continent, changing conditions created
strange forms of plant and animal life. Thick jungles covered the
plains, great rivers cut their roads to the sea, wild mountains were
heaved up, and lakes covered the ruins of old cities in fertile valleys.
To the Continental kingdom of the Atlanteans, from sunken areas, swarmed
myriads of beasts and savages--ape-men and apes. Forced to battle
continually for their lives, they yet managed to retain vestiges of
their former state of highly advanced barbarism. Robbed of metals and
ores, they became workers in stone like their distant ancestors, and
