
The under-jets roared out their fiery atomic blast; dirt and bits of
shattered biopods spun away in a cloud as the rocket rose. Harrison
watched the projectile trail its flaming way into the south, then turned
back to his work.

It was four days before he saw the rocket again. Just at evening, as the
sun dropped behind the horizon with the suddenness of a candle falling
into the sea, the auxiliary flashed out of the southern heavens, easing
gently down on the flaming wings of the under-jets. Jarvis and Leroy
emerged, passed through the swiftly gathering dusk, and faced him in the
light of the _Ares_. He surveyed the two; Jarvis was tattered and
scratched, but apparently in better condition than Leroy, whose
dapperness was completely lost. The little biologist was pale as the
nearer moon that glowed outside; one arm was bandaged in thermo-skin and
his clothes hung in veritable rags. But it was his eyes that struck
Harrison most strangely; to one who lived these many weary days with the
diminutive Frenchman, there was something queer about them. They were
frightened, plainly enough, and that was odd, since Leroy was no coward
or he'd never have been one of the four chosen by the Academy for the
first Martian expedition. But the fear in his eyes was more
understandable than that other expression, that queer fixity of gaze
like one in a trance, or like a person in an ecstasy. "Like a chap who's
seen Heaven and Hell together," Harrison expressed it to himself. He was
yet to discover how right he was.

He assumed a gruffness as the weary pair sat down. "You're a fine
looking couple!" he growled. "I should've known better than to let you
wander off alone." He paused. "Is your arm all right, Leroy? Need any
treatment?"

Jarvis answered. "It's all right--just gashed. No danger of infection
here, I guess; Leroy says there aren't any microbes on Mars."

"Well," exploded the Captain, "Let's hear it, then! Your radio reports
sounded screwy. 'Escaped from Paradise!' Huh!"

"I didn't want to give details on the radio," said Jarvis soberly.
"You'd have thought we'd gone loony."

"I think so, anyway."

"_Moi aussi!_" muttered Leroy. "I too!"

"Shall I begin at the beginning?" queried the chemist. "Our early
reports were pretty nearly complete." He stared at Putz, who had come in
silently, his face and hands blackened with carbon, and seated himself
beside Harrison.

"At the beginning," the Captain decided.

"Well," began Jarvis, "we got started all right, and flew due south
along the meridian of the _Ares_, same course I'd followed last week. I
was getting used to this narrow horizon, so I didn't feel so much like
being cooped under a big bowl, but one does keep overestimating
distances. Something four miles away looks eight when you're used to
terrestrial curvature, and that makes you guess its size just four times
too large. A little hill looks like a mountain until you're almost over
it."

"I know that," grunted Harrison.

"Yes, but Leroy didn't, and I spent our first couple of hours trying to
explain it to him. By the time he understood (if he does yet) we were
past Cimmerium and over that Xanthus desert, and then we crossed the
canal with the mud city and the barrel-shaped citizens and the place
where Tweel had shot the dream-beast. And nothing would do for Pierre
here but that we put down so he could practice his biology on the
remains. So we did.

"The thing was still there. No sign of decay; couldn't be, of course,
without bacterial forms of life, and Leroy says that Mars is as sterile
as an operating table."

"_Comme le coeur d'une fileuse_," corrected the little biologist, who
was beginning to regain a trace of his usual energy. "Like an old maid's
heart!"

"However," resumed Jarvis, "about a hundred of the little grey-green
biopods had fastened onto the thing and were growing and branching.
Leroy found a stick and knocked 'em off, and each branch broke away and
became a biopod crawling around with the others. So he poked around at
the creature, while I looked away from it; even dead, that rope-armed
devil gave me the creeps. And then came the surprise; the thing was part
plant!"

"_C'est vrai!_" confirmed the biologist. "It's true!"

"It was a big cousin of the biopods," continued Jarvis. "Leroy was quite
excited; he figures that all Martian life is of that sort--neither plant
nor animal. Life here never differentiated, he says; everything has both
natures in it, even the barrel-creatures--even Tweel! I think he's
right, especially when I recall how Tweel rested, sticking his beak in
the ground and staying that way all night. I never saw him eat or drink,
either; perhaps his beak was more in the nature of a root, and he got
his nourishment that way."

"Sounds nutty to me," observed Harrison.

"Well," continued Jarvis, "we broke up a few of the other growths and
they acted the same way--the pieces crawled around, only much slower
than the biopods, and then stuck themselves in the ground. Then Leroy
had to catch a sample of the walking grass, and we were ready to leave
when a parade of the barrel-creatures rushed by with their push-carts.
They hadn't forgotten me, either; they all drummed out, 'We are
v-r-r-iends--ouch!' just as they had before. Leroy wanted to shoot one
and cut it up, but I remembered the battle Tweel and I had had with
them, and vetoed the idea. But he did hit on a possible explanation as
to what they did with all the rubbish they gathered."

"Made mud-pies, I guess," grunted the captain.

"More or less," agreed Jarvis. "They use it for food, Leroy thinks. If
they're part vegetable, you see, that's what they'd want--soil with
organic remains in it to make it fertile. That's why they ground up sand
and biopods and other growths all together. See?"

"Dimly," countered Harrison. "How about the suicides?"

"Leroy had a hunch there, too. The suicides jump into the grinder when
the mixture has too much sand and gravel; they throw themselves in to
adjust the proportions."

"Rats!" said Harrison disgustedly. "Why couldn't they bring in some
extra branches from outside?"

"Because suicide is easier. You've got to remember that these creatures
can't be judged by earthly standards; they probably don't feel pain, and
they haven't got what we'd call individuality. Any intelligence they
have is the property of the whole community--like an ant-heap. That's
it! Ants are willing to die for their ant-hill; so are these creatures."

"So are men," observed the captain, "if it comes to that."

"Yes, but men aren't exactly eager. It takes some emotion like
patriotism to work 'em to the point of dying for their country; these
things do it all in the day's work." He paused.

"Well, we took some pictures of the dream-beast and the
barrel-creatures, and then we started along. We sailed over Xanthus,
keeping as close to the meridian of the _Ares_ as we could, and pretty
soon we crossed the trail of the pyramid-builder. So we circled back to
let Leroy take a look at it, and when we found it, we landed. The thing
had completed just two rows of bricks since Tweel and I left it, and
there it was, breathing in silicon and breathing out bricks as if it had
eternity to do it in--which it has. Leroy wanted to dissect it with a
