The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thompson's Cat, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thompson's Cat

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: April 11, 2010 [EBook #31948]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOMPSON'S CAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              THOMPSON'S CAT

                         By ROBERT MOORE WILLIAMS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Planet Stories September
1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _The weird, invisible insect depopulated an entire planet.
Now it was felling Thompson's crew as his ship hurtled toward the
sun ... certain death for all, including the disease carrier. Forgotten
in the panic was Buster, Thompson's wise cat._]


"It's a dead world," Thompson spoke. There was awe in his voice, and in
spite of his sure knowledge that nothing could happen to him or to his
crew here on this world, there was also somewhere inside of him the
trace of a beginning fear.

Standing beside him on the rooftop of the building, Kurkil spoke in a
whisper, asking a question that had been better unasked. "What killed
it?"

Thompson stirred fretfully. He hadn't wanted to hear this question, he
didn't want to hear it now. His gaze went automatically to the trim
lines of the space cruiser resting quietly in the square below the
building. His spirits lifted at the sight. That was his ship, he was in
charge of this far-flung exploring expedition thrown out from Sol
Cluster to the fringes of the universe, thrown out by Earth-sired races
beginning their long exploration of the mysteries of space and of the
worlds of space. There was pride in the sight of the ship and pride in
the thought of belonging to this space-ranging race. Then his gaze went
over the deserted city radiating in all directions from them and he was
aware again of the touch of fear.

Resolutely he turned the feeling out of his mind, began seeking an
answer to Kurkil's question.

This place had been a city once. If you counted buildings and streets,
tall structures where people might work quietly and effectively, broad
avenues leading out to trim homes where they might rest in peace after
their labors of the day, if you counted these things as being important,
it was still a city. But if you thought that the important element in
the make-up of a city was its inhabitants then this place no longer
deserved the name.

It had no inhabitants.

"I don't know what killed it," Thompson said. Before landing they had
circled this world. From the air they had seen more than a dozen cities
such as this one. All of them dead, all of them deserted, all of them
with streets overgrown by shrubbery, the pavements buckling from the
simple pressure of roots pushing upward, the buildings falling away into
ruin for the same reason. But they had seen no inhabitants. They had
seen the roads the inhabitants had built to connect their cities,
deserted now. They had seen the fields where these people had once
worked, fields that now were turning back into forests. They had seen no
evidence of landing fields for air craft or space ships. The race that
had built the cities had not yet learned the secret of wings.

From the roof of the building where they stood, the only living
creatures to be seen were visible through the plastic viewport of the
ship below them--Grant, the communication specialist, and Buster, the
ship's cat.

Grant had been left to guard the vessel. Buster had been required to
remain within the ship, obviously against his will. He had wanted to
