


CHAPTER XX.


THE TWO FRANCOISES.

Madame de Montespan had retired to rest, easy in her mind, after
receiving the message from her brother.  She knew Louis as few others
knew him, and she was well aware of that obstinacy in trifles which was
one of his characteristics.  If he had said that he would be married by
the archbishop, then the archbishop it must be; to-night, at least,
there should be no marriage.  To-morrow was a new day, and if it did not
shake the king's plans, then indeed she must have lost her wit as well
as her beauty.

She dressed herself with care in the morning, putting on her powder, her
little touch of rouge, her one patch near the dimple of her cheek, her
loose robe of violet velvet, and her casconet of pearls with all the
solicitude of a warrior, who is bracing on his arms for a life and death
contest.  No news had come to her of the great event of the previous
night, although the court already rang with it, for her haughtiness and
her bitter tongue had left her without a friend or intimate.  She rose,
therefore, in the best of spirits, with her mind set on the one question
as to how best she could gain an audience with the king.

She was still in her boudoir putting the last touches to her toilet when
her page announced to her that the king was waiting in her _salon_.
Madame de Montespan could hardly believe in such good fortune.  She had
racked her brain all morning as to how she should win her way to him,
and here he was waiting for her.  With a last glance at the mirror, she
hastened to meet him.

He was standing with his back turned, looking up at one of Snyders's
paintings, when she entered; but as she closed the door, he turned and
took two steps towards her.  She had run forward with a pretty little
cry of joy, her white arms outstretched, and love shining on her face;
but he put out his hand, gently and yet with decision, with a gesture
which checked her approach.  Her hands dropped to her side, her lip
trembled, and she stood looking at him with her grief and her fears all
speaking loudly from her eyes.  There was a look upon his features which
she had never seen before, and already something was whispering at the
back of her soul that to-day at least his spirit was stronger than her
own.

"You are angry with me again," she cried.

He had come with every intention of beginning the interview by telling
her bluntly of his marriage; but now, as he looked upon her beauty and
her love, he felt that it would have been less brutal to strike her down
at his feet.  Let some one else tell her, then.  She would know soon
enough.  Besides, there would be less chance then of a scene, which was
a thing abhorrent to his soul.  His task was, in any case, quite
difficult enough.  All this ran swiftly through his mind, and she as
swiftly read it off in the brown eyes which gazed at her.

"You have something you came to say, and now you have not the heart to
say it.  God bless the kindly heart which checks the cruel tongue."

"No, no, madame," said Louis; "I would not be cruel.  I cannot forget
that my life has been brightened and my court made brilliant during all
these years by your wit and your beauty.  But times change, madame, and
I owe a duty to the world which overrides my own personal inclinations.
For every reason I think that it is best that we should arrange in the
way which we discussed the other day, and that you should withdraw
yourself from the court."

"Withdraw, sire! For how long?"

"It must be a permanent withdrawal, madame."

She stood with clenched hands and a pale face staring at him.

"I need not say that I shall make your retirement a happy one as far as
in me lies.  Your allowance shall be fixed by yourself; a palace shall
be erected for you in whatever part of France you may prefer, provided
that it is twenty miles from Paris.  An estate also--"

"Oh, sire, how can you think that such things as these would compensate
me for the loss of your love?"  Her heart had turned to lead within her
breast.  Had he spoken hotly and angrily she might have hoped to turn
him as she had done before; but this gentle and yet firm bearing was new
to him, and she felt that all her arts were vain against it.  His
coolness enraged her, and yet she strove to choke down her passion and
to preserve the humble attitude which was least natural to her haughty
and vehement spirit; but soon the effort became too much for her.

"Madame," said he, "I have thought well over this matter, and it must be
as I say.  There is no other way at all.  Since we must part, the
parting had best be short and sharp.  Believe me, it is no pleasant
matter for me either.  I have ordered your brother to have his carriage
at the postern at nine o'clock, for I thought that perhaps you would
wish to retire after nightfall."

"To hide my shame from a laughing court!  It was thoughtful of you,
sire.  And yet, perhaps, this too was a duty, since we hear so much of
duties nowadays, for who was it but you--"

"I know, madame, I know.  I confess it.  I have wronged you deeply.
Believe me that every atonement which is in my power shall be made.
Nay, do not look so angrily at me, I beg.  Let our last sight of each
other be one which may leave a pleasant memory behind it."

"A pleasant memory!"  All the gentleness and humility had fallen from
her now, and her voice had the hard ring of contempt and of anger.
"A pleasant memory!  It may well be pleasant to you, who are released
from the woman whom you ruined, who can turn now to another without any
pale face to be seen within the _salons_ of your court to remind you of
your perfidy.  But to me, pining in some lonely country house, spurned
by my husband, despised by my family, the scorn and jest of France, far
from all which gave a charm to life, far from the man for whose love I
have sacrificed everything--this will be a very pleasant memory to me,
you may be sure!"

The king's eyes had caught the angry gleam which shot from hers, and yet
he strove hard to set a curb upon his temper.  When such a matter had to
be discussed between the proudest man and the haughtiest woman in all
France, one or the other must yield a point.  He felt that it was for
him to do so, and yet it did not come kindly to his imperious nature.

"There is nothing to be gained, madame," said he, "by using words which
are neither seemly for your tongue nor for my ears.  You will do me the
justice to confess that where I might command I am now entreating, and
that instead of ordering you as my subject, I am persuading you as my
friend."

"Oh, you show too much consideration, sire!  Our relations of twenty
years or so can scarce suffice to explain such forbearance from you.
I should indeed be grateful that you have not set your archers of the
guard upon me, or marched me from the palace between a file of your
musketeers.  Sire, how can I thank you for this forbearance?"
She curtsied low, with her face set in a mocking smile.

"Your words are bitter, madame."

"My heart is bitter, sire."

"Nay, Francoise, be reasonable, I implore you.  We have both left our
youth behind."

"The allusion to my years comes gratefully from your lips."

"Ah, you distort my words.  Then I shall say no more.  You may not see
me again, madame.  Is there no question which you would wish to ask me
before I go?"

"Good God!" she cried; "is this a man?  Has it a heart?  Are these the
lips which have told me so often that he loved me?  Are these the eyes
which have looked so fondly into mine?  Can you then thrust away a woman
whose life has been yours as you put away the St. Germain palace when a
more showy one was ready for you?  And this is the end of all those
vows, those sweet whispers, those persuasions, those promises--This!"

"Nay, madame, this is painful to both of us."

"Pain!  Where is the pain in your face?  I see anger in it because I
have dared to speak truth; I see joy in it because you feel that your
vile task is done.  But where is the pain?  Ah, when I am gone all will
be so easy to you--will it not?  You can go back then to your
governess--"

"Madame!"

"Yes, yes, you cannot frighten me!  What do I care for all that you can
do!  But I know all.  Do not think that I am blind.  And so you would
even have married her!  You, the descendant of St. Louis, and she the
Scarron widow, the poor drudge whom in charity I took into my household!
Ah, how your courtiers will smile! how the little poets will scribble!
how the wits will whisper!  You do not hear of these things, of course,
but they are a little painful for your friends."

"My patience can bear no more," cried the king furiously.  "I leave you,
madame, and forever."

But her fury had swept all fear and discretion from her mind.
She stepped between the door and him, her face flushed, her eyes
blazing, her face thrust a little forward, one small white satin slipper
tapping upon the carpet.

"You are in haste, sire!  She is waiting for you, doubtless."

"Let me pass, madame."

"But it was a disappointment last night, was it not, my poor sire?
Ah, and for the governess, what a blow!  Great heaven, what a blow!
No archbishop!  No marriage!  All the pretty plan gone wrong!  Was it
not cruel?"

Louis gazed at the beautiful furious face in bewilderment, and it
flashed across his mind that perhaps her grief had turned her brain.
What else could be the meaning of this wild talk of the archbishop and
the disappointment?  It would be unworthy of him to speak harshly to one
who was so afflicted.  He must soothe her, and, above all, he must get
away from her.

"You have had the keeping of a good many of my family jewels," said he.
"I beg that you will still retain them as a small sign of my regard."

He had hoped to please her and to calm her, but in an instant she was
over at her treasure-cupboard hurling double handfuls of precious stones
down at his feet.  They clinked and rattled, the little pellets of red
and yellow and green, rolling, glinting over the floor and rapping up
against the oak panels at the base of the walls.

"They will do for the governess if the archbishop comes at last," she
cried.

He was more convinced than ever that she had lost her wits.  A thought
struck him by which he might appeal to all that was softer and more
gentle in her nature.  He stepped swiftly to the door, pushed it half
open, and gave a whispered order.  A youth with long golden hair waving
down over his black velvet doublet entered the room.  It was her
youngest son, the Count of Toulouse.

"I thought that you would wish to bid him farewell," said Louis.

She stood staring as though unable to realise the significance of his
words.  Then it was borne suddenly in upon her that her children as well
as her lover were to be taken from her, that this other woman should see
them and speak with them and win their love while she was far away.
All that was evil and bitter in the woman flashed suddenly up in her,
until for the instant she was what the king had thought her.  If her son
was not for her, then he should be for none.  A jewelled knife lay among
her treasures, ready to her hand.  She caught it up and rushed at the
cowering lad.  Louis screamed and ran forward to stop her; but another
had been swifter than he.  A woman had darted through the open door, and
had caught the upraised wrist.  There was a moment's struggle, two
queenly figures swayed and strained, and the knife dropped between their
feet.  The frightened Louis caught it up, and seizing his little son by
the wrist, he rushed from the apartment.  Francoise de Montespan
staggered back against the ottoman to find herself confronted by the
steady eyes and set face of that other Francoise, the woman whose
presence fell like a shadow at every turn of her life.

"I have saved you, madame, from doing that which you would have been the
first to bewail."

"Saved me! It is you who have driven me to this!"

The fallen favourite leaned against the high back of the ottoman, her
hands resting behind her upon the curve of the velvet.  Her lids were
half closed on her flashing eyes, and her lips just parted to show a
gleam of her white teeth.  Here was the true Francoise de Montespan, a
feline creature crouching for a spring, very far from that humble and
soft-spoken Francoise who had won the king back by her gentle words.
Madame de Maintenon's hand had been cut in the struggle, and the blood
was dripping down from the end of her fingers, but neither woman had
time to spare a thought upon that.  Her firm gray eyes were fixed upon
her former rival as one fixes them upon some weak and treacherous
creature who may be dominated by a stronger will.

"Yes, it is you who have driven me to this--you, whom I picked up when
you were hard pressed for a crust of bread or a cup of sour wine.
What had you?  You had nothing--nothing except a name which was a
laughing-stock.  And what did I give you? I gave you everything.
You know that I gave you everything.  Money, position, the entrance to
the court.  You had them all from me.  And now you mock me!"

"Madame, I do not mock you.  I pity you from the bottom of my heart."

"Pity?  Ha! ha!  A Mortemart is pitied by the widow Scarron!
Your pity may go where your gratitude is, and where your character is.
We shall be troubled with it no longer then."

"Your words do not pain me."

"I can believe that you are not sensitive."

"Not when my conscience is at ease."

"Ah! it has not troubled you, then?"

"Not upon this point, madame."

"My God!  How terrible must those other points have been!"

"I have never had an evil thought towards you."

"None towards me?  Oh, woman, woman!"

"What have I done, then?  The king came to my room to see the children
taught.  He stayed.  He talked.  He asked my opinion on this and that.
Could I be silent? or could I say other than what I thought?"

"You turned him against me!"

"I should be proud indeed if I thought that I had turned him to virtue."

"The word comes well from your lips."

"I would that I heard it upon yours."

"And so, by your own confession, you stole the king's love from me, most
virtuous of widows!"

"I had all gratitude and kindly thought for you.  You have, as you have
so often reminded me, been my benefactress.  It was not necessary for
you to say it, for I had never for an instant forgotten it.  Yet if the
king has asked me what I thought, I will not deny to you that I have
said that sin is sin, and that he would be a worthier man if he shook
off the guilty bonds which held him."

"Or exchanged them for others."

"For those of duty."

"Pah! Your hypocrisy sickens me!  If you pretend to be a nun, why are
you not where the nuns are?  You would have the best of two worlds--
would you not?--have all that the court can give, and yet ape the
manners of the cloister.  But you need not do it with me!  I know you as
your inmost heart knows you.  I was honest, and what I did, I did before
the world.  You, behind your priests and your directors and your
_prie-dieus_ and your missals--do you think that you deceive me, as you
deceive others?"

Her antagonist's gray eyes sparkled for the first time, and she took a
quick step forward, with one white hand half lifted in rebuke.

"You may speak as you will of me," said she.  "To me it is no more than
the foolish paroquet that chatters in your ante-room.  But do not touch
upon things which are sacred.  Ah, if you would but raise your own
thoughts to such things--if you would but turn them inwards, and see,
before it is too late, how vile and foul is this life which you have
led!  What might you not have done?  His soul was in your hands like
clay for the potter.  If you had raised him up, if you had led him on
the higher path, if you had brought out all that was noble and good
within him, how your name would have been loved and blessed, from the
chateau to the cottage!  But no; you dragged him down; you wasted his
youth; you drew him from his wife; you marred his manhood.  A crime in
one so high begets a thousand others in those who look to him for an
example; and all, all are upon your soul.  Take heed, madame, for God's
sake take heed ere it be too late!  For all your beauty, there can be
for you, as for me, a few short years of life.  Then, when that brown
hair is white, when that white cheek is sunken, when that bright eye is
dimmed--ah, then God pity the sin-stained soul of Francoise de
Montespan!"

Her rival had sunk her head for the moment before the solemn words and
the beautiful eyes.  For an instant she stood silent, cowed for the
first time in all her life; but then the mocking, defiant spirit came
back to her, and she glanced up with a curling lip.

"I am already provided with a spiritual director, thank you," said she.
"Oh, madame, you must not think to throw dust in my eyes!  I know you,
and know you well!"

"On the contrary, you seem to know less than I had expected.  If you
know me so well, pray what am I?"

All her rival's bitterness and hatred rang in the tones of her answer.
"You are," said she, "the governess of my children, and the secret
mistress of the king."

"You are mistaken," answered Madame de Maintenon  serenely.  "I am the
governess of your children, and I am the king's wife."



CHAPTER XXI.


THE MAN IN THE CALECHE.

Often had De Montespan feigned a faint in the days when she wished to
disarm the anger of the king.  So she had drawn his arms round her, and
won the pity which is the twin sister of love.  But now she knew what it
was to have the senses struck out of her by a word.  She could not doubt
the truth of what she heard.  There was that in her rival's face, in her
steady eye, in her quiet voice, which carried absolute conviction with
it.  She stood stunned for an instant, panting, her outstretched hands
feeling at the air, her defiant eyes dulling and glazing.  Then, with a
short sharp cry, the wail of one who has fought hard and yet knows that
she can fight no more, her proud head drooped, and she fell forward
senseless at the feet of her rival.  Madame de Maintenon stooped and
raised her up in her strong white arms.  There was true grief and pity
in her eyes as she looked down at the snow-pale face which lay against
her bosom, all the bitterness and pride gone out of it, and nothing left
save the tear which sparkled under the dark lashes, and the petulant
droop of the lip, like that of a child which had wept itself to sleep.
She laid her on the ottoman and placed a silken cushion under her head.
Then she gathered together and put back into the open cupboard all the
jewels which were scattered about the carpet.  Having locked it, and
placed the key on the table where its owner's eye would readily fall
upon it, she struck a gong, which summoned the little black page.

"Your mistress is indisposed," said she.  "Go and bring her maids to
her."  And so, having done all that lay with her to do, she turned away
from the great silent room, where, amid the velvet and the gilding, her
beautiful rival lay like a crushed flower, helpless and hopeless.

Helpless enough, for what could she do? and hopeless too, for how could
fortune aid her?  The instant that her senses had come back to her she
had sent away her waiting women, and lay with clasped hands and a drawn
face planning out her own weary future.  She must go; that was certain.
Not merely because it was the king's order, but because only misery and
mockery remained for her now in the palace where she had reigned
supreme.  It was true that she had held her position against the queen
before, but all her hatred could not blind her to the fact that her
rival was a very different woman to poor meek little Maria Theresa.
No; her spirit was broken at last.  She must accept defeat, and she must
go.

She rose from the couch, feeling that she had aged ten years in an hour.
There was much to be done, and little time in which to do it.  She had
cast down her jewels when the king had spoken as though they would atone
for the loss of his love; but now that the love was gone there was no
reason why the jewels should be lost too.  If she had ceased to be the
most powerful, she might still be the richest woman in France.  There
was her pension, of course.  That would be a munificent one, for Louis
was always generous.  And then there was all the spoil which she had
collected during these long years--the jewels the pearls, the gold, the
vases, the pictures, the crucifixes, the watches, the trinkets--together
they represented many millions of livres.  With her own hands she packed
away the more precious and portable of them, while she arranged with her
brother for the safe-keeping of the others.  All day she was at work in
a mood of feverish energy, doing anything and everything which might
distract her thoughts from her own defeat and her rival's victory.
By evening all was ready, and she had arranged that her property should
be sent after her to Petit Bourg, to which castle she intended to
retire.

It wanted half an hour of the time fixed for her departure, when a young
cavalier, whose face was strange to her, was ushered into the room.

He came with a message from her brother.

"Monsieur de Vivonne regrets, madame, that the rumour of your departure
has got abroad among the court."

"What do I care for that, monsieur?" she retorted, with all her old
spirit.

"He says, madame, that the courtiers may assemble at the west gate to
see you go; that Madame de Neuilly will be there, and the Duchesse de
Chambord, and Mademoiselle de Rohan, and--"

The lady shrank with horror at the thought of such an ordeal.  To drive
away from the palace, where she had been more than queen, under the
scornful eyes and bitter gibes of so many personal enemies!  After all
the humiliations of the day, that would be the crowning cup of sorrow.
Her nerve was broken.  She could not face it.

"Tell my brother, monsieur, that I should be much obliged if he would
make fresh arrangements, by which my departure might be private."

"He bade me say that he had done so, madame."

"Ah! at what hour then?"

"Now.  As soon as possible."

"I am ready.  At the west gate then?"

"No; at the east.  The carriage waits."

"And where is my brother?"

"We are to pick him up at the park gate."

"And why that?"

"Because he is watched; and were he seen beside the carriage, all would
be known."

"Very good.  Then, monsieur, if you will take my cloak and this casket
we may start at once."

They made their way by a circuitous route through the less-used
corridors, she hurrying on like a guilty creature, a hood drawn over her
face, and her heart in a flutter at every stray footfall.  But fortune
stood her friend.  She met no one, and soon found herself at the eastern
postern gate.  A couple of phlegmatic Swiss guardsmen leaned upon their
muskets upon either side, and the lamp above shone upon the carriage
which awaited her.  The door was open, and a tall cavalier swathed in a
black cloak handed her into it.  He then took the seat opposite to her,
slammed the door, and the caleche rattled away down the main drive.

It had not surprised her that this man should join her inside the coach,
for it was usual to have a guard there, and he was doubtless taking the
place which her brother would afterwards occupy.  That was all natural
enough.  But when ten minutes passed by, and he had neither moved nor
spoken, she peered at him through the gloom with some curiosity.  In the
glance which she had of him, as he handed her in, she had seen that he
was dressed like a gentleman, and there was that in his bow and wave as
he did it which told her experienced senses that he was a man of courtly
manners.  But courtiers, as she had known them, were gallant and
