it be open both above and below, and the open space at each end be not less
than one inch for each occupant of the room, when the window is about a
yard wide. The direction of the current is generally from below upward,
since the foul, heated air tends to rise; but this is not essential. Its
rate need not be rapid; a "draught," or perceptible current, is never
necessary to good ventilation. The temperature of the air admitted may be
warm or cold. It is thought by many that if the {143} air is cold, it is
pure; but this is an error, since cold air will receive and retain the same
impurities as warm air.

[Sidenote: 44. State what Florence Nightingale says about inhaling night
air?]

44. Shall we open our bedrooms to the night air? Florence Nightingale says,
in effect, that night air is the only air that we can then breathe. "The
choice is between pure air without and impure air within. Most people
prefer the latter,--an unaccountable choice. An open window, most nights in
the year, can hurt no one. In great cities, night air is the best and
purest to be had in twenty-four hours. I could better understand, in towns,
shutting the windows during the day than during the night."

[Sidenote: 45. Warmth of the bird as compared with that of the air? Of the
fish and the water? Heat in animals and plants? How illustrated with the
thermometer?]

45. ANIMAL HEAT.--Intimately connected with respiration is the production
of animal heat, or the power of maintaining the temperature of the body
above that of the medium in which the creature moves; thus, the bird is
warmer than the air, and the fish than the water. This elevation of
temperature is a result of the various chemical changes which are
constantly taking place in the system. Although common to all animals, in a
greater or less degree, heat is not peculiar to them; since plants also
generate it, especially at the time of sprouting and flowering. If a
thermometer be placed in a cluster of geranium flowers, it will indicate a
temperature several degrees above that of the surrounding air.

[Sidenote: 46. Amount of heat in animals, how apportioned? As regards the
birds? Frogs, and other sluggish animals? Arrangement made by zoologists?]

46. Among animals great differences are noticed in this respect, but the
degree of heat produced is always proportional to the activity of
respiration and the amount of oxygen consumed. Accordingly, the birds,
whose habits are extremely active, and whose breathing capacity is the
greatest, have uniformly the highest temperature. Sluggish animals, on the
contrary, as frogs, lizards, and snakes, have little need for oxygen, and
have incompletely {144} developed lungs; these animals are cold to the
touch, that is, they have relatively a lower temperature than man, and
their positive temperature is but little above that of the external air.
Accordingly, zoologists have so arranged the animal kingdom that
_warm-blooded_ animals, including man, the birds, and the quadrupeds, are
classified together; while the _cold-blooded_ animals, such as the fish,
tortoise, frog, and all that have no vertebral column, are classed by
themselves.

[Sidenote: 47. State what is said respecting the temperature of the human
body.]

47. The temperature of the human body is about 100deg Fahrenheit, and
remains about the same through winter and summer, in the tropics as well as
in the frozen regions of the north. It may change temporarily within the
range of about twelve degrees; but any considerable, or long-continued
elevation or diminution of the bodily heat is certain to result
disastrously.

[Sidenote: 48. Ability of man to adapt himself to different climates? In
what does the power to resist cold consist? What is said about warm
clothing?]

48. Man is able to adapt himself to all extremes of climate; and, in fact,
by means of clothing, shelter, and food, is able to create for himself an
artificial climate where-ever he choses to reside. The power to resist cold
consists chiefly in preventing the heat which is generated by the vital
processes of the body from being lost by radiation. Warm clothing, such as
we wear in winter, has, in reality, the same temperature as that which is
worn in summer; but, by reason of being thick and porous, it is a bad
conductor of heat, and thus prevents the escape of that produced by the
body. If woollen fabrics were intrinsically warm, no one would wrap a piece
of flannel, or blanket, around a block of ice to prevent its melting in
summer.

[Sidenote: 49. Men in an atmosphere above the boiling-point? In foundries
and glass works?]

49. The faculty of generating heat explains how it is that we are enabled
to resist the effects of cold; but how does the body withstand a
temperature higher than its {145} own? Men have been known to remain
several minutes in an atmosphere heated above the boiling-point of water,
and yet the temperature of their own bodies was not greatly elevated. Those
who labor in foundries and glass-works are habitually subjected to very
high degrees of temperature, but they do not suffer in health more than
those engaged in many other occupations.

[Sidenote: 50. The regulation of the temperature of the body. Give the
explanation.]

50. The regulation of the temperature of the body is effected by means of
perspiration, and by its evaporation. So long as the skin acts freely and
the air freely absorbs the moisture, the heat of the body does not
increase, for whenever evaporation takes place, it is attended by the
abstraction of heat--that is, the part becomes relatively colder. This may
be tested by moistening some part of the surface with cologne, ether, or
other volatile liquid, and then causing it to evaporate rapidly by fanning.
The principle that evaporation produces cold has been ingeniously and
practically employed, in the manufacture of ice, by means of freezing
machines.

[Sidenote: 51, 52. State what is said of spontaneous combustion.]

51. SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION.--Is it possible that the temperature of the
living body can be so increased, that its tissues will burn spontaneously?
From time to time, cases have been reported in which, by some mysterious
means, considerable portions of the human body have been consumed,
apparently by fire, the victim being found dead, or incapable of explaining
the occurrence. Hence, the theory has been current that, under certain
conditions, the tissues of the body might become self-ignited; and the fact
that this so-called _spontaneous combustion_ has ordinarily taken place in
those who had been addicted to the use of alcoholic drinks, has given a
color of probability to the opinion. It has been supposed that the flesh of
these unfortunate persons becoming saturated with the inflammable
properties of the alcohol thus taken into the {146} system, took fire upon
being exposed to a flame, as of a lighted candle, or, indeed, without any
external cause. But, whether this be possible or not, one thing is certain,
this strange kind of combustion has never been actually witnessed by any
one competent to give a satisfactory account of it.

52. The results that have been observed may be satisfactorily explained by
the accidental ignition of the clothes, or other articles near the body,
and by the supposition that the individual was at the time too much
stupefied by intoxication, to notice the source of danger, and provide for
his safety. The highest temperature that has been observed in the body,
about 112deg Fahrenheit, is too low to ignite the vapor of alcohol; much
less will it cause the burning of animal tissues. It is undoubtedly true
that when the tissues are filled with alcohol, combustion will more easily
take place than when the body is in a normal state; but, under any
condition, the combustion of the body requires a higher degree of heat than
can be generated by the body itself, or the mere _proximity_ of a lighted
candle, or any cause of a similar character. {147}

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                       PAGE
  1. What is the object of respiration?                                 123
  2. What are the special organs of respiration?                        123
  3. In what organs does a change in the blood take place?              123
  4. What is the nature of the change?                             123, 133
  5. Where are the lungs situated, and what is the character of the
        substance of which they are composed?                      123, 125
  6. Describe the facilities provided for the lung movements.           124
  7. Describe the trachea, or windpipe.                  124, 125, 127, 128
  8. Describe the bronchial tubes, and their uses.                 125, 126
  9. What can you state in relation to the epiglottis?             126, 127
  10. What are the cilia and what use do they probably serve?           128
  11. How may the lungs be affected by not being properly protected?    128
  12. Describe the movements necessary to the act of perfect
        respiration.                                               128, 129
  13. What is the diaphragm, and what is its office?               128, 129
  14. How may the organs of respiration be so improved as to
        increase their capacity and power?                         129, 137
  15. What is stated in relation to the frequency of respiration?  129, 130
  16. To what extent may the act of respiration be subjected to
        our wills?                                                      130
  17. What may be said to be the capacity of the lungs?            130, 131
  18. How long does it take every particle of air in the lungs to
        be expelled and new air to take its place?                      130
  19. What would be the consequences, if the entire capacity of
        the lungs were constantly used?                            130, 131
  20. What would be the consequences to a fish put into water from
        which the air had been completely exhausted? Why?               131
  21. What is the air, and what are its parts?                131, 136, 138
  22. What is the character of the air that has been just breathed?     132
  23. Why is it that such air is not fit for respiration?          132, 139
  24. What are the effects, as recorded in notable cases, of confinement
        in places the air of which has been breathed "over and over?"   133
  25. What can you state of changes in the blood from respiration?      133
  26. What of the air, as an article of food?                      133, 134
  27. What, on the subject of interchange of gases in the lungs?        134
  28. Explain the difference between arterial and venous blood.    134, 135
  29. Explain, if you can, the cause of the difference.                 135
  30. State what you can in relation to blue blood.                     135
  31. In relation to the amount of labor exerted in respiration.   135, 136
  32. In relation to the deleterious properties of different
        gases.                                                     136, 137
  33. In relation to the dust that floats in the air.              137, 138
  34. What are the properties of carbonic acid gas?           132, 138, 141
  35. In what places is carbonic acid gas commonly found?     132, 138, 139
  36. Describe the effects of carbonic acid gas.         132, 138, 139, 141
  37. What are the general effects of breathing any impure
        atmosphere?                                                139, 140
  38. What are Nature's provisions for purifying the air?          141, 142
  39. What hints and directions are given on the subject of
        ventilation?                                               142, 143
  40. How does the temperature of the body compare with the medium
        in which it lives?                                              143
  41. How is temperature of the body regulated and sustained? 143, 144, 145
  42. State what you can on the subject of spontaneous combustion. 145, 146

       *       *       *       *       *


{148}

CHAPTER IX.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.

    _Animal and Vegetative Functions--Sensation, Motion, and Volition--The
    Structure of the Nervous System--The White and Gray Substances--The
    Brain--Its Convolutions--The Cerebellum--The Spinal Cord and its System
    of Nerves--The Anterior and Posterior Roots--The Sympathetic System of
    Nerves--The Properties of Nervous Tissue--Excitability of Nervous
    Tissues--The Functions of the Spinal Nerves and Cord--The Direction of
    the Fibres of the Cord--Reflex Activity, and its Uses--The Functions of
    the Medulla Oblongata and the Cranial Ganglia--The Reflex Action of the
    Brain._

[Sidenote: 1. What processes are known as the vegetative functions? Why so
called? What properties and functions does the plant possess? Their
object?]

1. ANIMAL FUNCTIONS.--The vital processes which we have been considering,
in the three previous chapters, of digestion, circulation, and
respiration--belong to the class of functions known as _vegetative_
functions. That is, they are common to vegetables as well as animals; for
the plant, like the animal, can originate nothing, not even the smallest
particle of matter; and yet it grows, blossoms, and bears fruit, by reason
of obtaining and digesting the nutriment which the air and soil provide.
The plant has its circulatory fluid and channels, by which the nutriment is
distributed to all its parts. It has, also, a curious apparatus in its
foliage, by which it abstracts from the air those gaseous elements so
necessary to its support; and thus it accomplishes vegetable respiration.
These vegetative functions have their beginning and end within the organism
of the plant; and their object is the preservation of the plant itself, as
well as of the entire species.

[Sidenote: 2. What second set of powers has the animal? What functions are
mentioned? The advantage they give?]

2. The animal, in addition to these vegetative functions, has another set
of powers, by the use of which he becomes conscious of a world external to
himself, and brings {149} himself into active relations with it. By means
of the vegetative processes, his life and species are maintained; while, by
means of certain animal functions, he feels, acts, and thinks. These
functions, among which are sensation, motion, and volition, not only
distinguish the animal from the plant, but, in proportion to their
development, elevate one creature above another; and it is by virtue of his
pre-eminent endowment, in these respects, that man holds his position at
the head of the animal creation.

[Sidenote: 3. Animals whose structure is simple? As we approach man?
Dependence of the animal functions of man?]

3. Among animals whose structure is very simple, the hydra, or fresh-water
polyp, being an example, no special organs are empowered to perform
separate functions; but every part is endowed alike, so that if the animal
be cut into pieces, each portion has all the properties of the entire
original; and, if the circumstances be favorable, each of the pieces will
soon become a complete hydra. As we approach man, in the scale of beings,
we find that the organs multiply, and the functions become more complete.
The function of motion, the instruments of which--the muscles and
bones--have been considered in former chapters, and all the other animal
functions of man, depend upon the set of organs known as the nervous
system.

[Sidenote: 4. The nervous tissues, of what composed? When examined by the
aid of the microscope? The white substance? The gray substance?]

4. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.--The intimate structure of this system differs from
any tissue which we have before examined. It is composed of a soft, pulpy
substance, which, early in life, is almost fluid, but which gradually
hardens with the growth of the body. When examined under the microscope, it
is found to be composed of two distinct elements:--(1) the white substance,
composing the larger proportion of the nervous organs of the body, which is
formed of delicate cylindrical filaments, about 1/6000 of an inch in
diameter, termed the nerve-fibres; and (2) the gray substance, composed of
grayish-red, or {150} ashen-colored cells, of various sizes, generally
possessing one or more off-shoots, which are continuous with the
nerve-fibres just mentioned.

[Sidenote: 5. Nervous centres and ganglia? Nerves? What do they serve?
Cerebro-spinal system?]

5. The gray, cellular substance constitutes the larger portion of those
important masses, which bear the name of _nervous centres_ and _ganglia_
(from _ganglion_, a knot), and in which all the nerve-fibres unite. These
white nerve-fibres are found combined together in long and dense cords,
called _nerves_ (from _neuron_, a cord), which serve to connect the nervous
centres with each other, and to place them in communication with all the
other parts of the body which have sensibility or power of motion. That
part of the nervous system which is concerned in the animal functions,
comprises the brain, the spinal cord, and the nerves which are derived
therefrom; these are, together, called the _cerebro-spinal_ system (Fig.
40); while that other set of organs, which presides over, and regulates the
vegetative functions, is called the sympathetic system of nerves.

[Sidenote: 6. Location of the brain? Its weight? Its shape? Of what it
consists? What organs at the base?]

6. THE BRAIN.--The brain is the great volume of nervous tissue that is
lodged within the skull. It is the largest and most complex of the nervous
centres, its weight, in the adult, being about fifty ounces, or
one-fortieth of that of the whole body. The shape of the brain is oval, or
egg-shaped, with one extremity larger than the other, which is placed
posteriorly in the skull, to the concavity of which it very closely
conforms. The brain consists chiefly of two parts; the _cerebrum_, or brain
proper, and the _cerebellum_, or "little brain." In addition to these,
there are several smaller organs at the base, among which is the
commencement or expansion of the spinal cord, termed the _medulla
oblongata_, or oblong marrow.

{151}

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--THE CEREBRO-SPINAL SYSTEM.]

{152} [Sidenote: 7. The tissue of the brain? What, therefore, is required?
Blows on the head? Membranes of the brain? Blood sent to the brain?]

7. The tissue of the brain is soft and easily altered in shape by pressure;
it therefore requires to be placed in a well-protected position, such as is
afforded by the skull, or _cranium_, which is strong without being
cumbrous. In the course of an ordinary lifetime, this bony box sustains
many blows, with little inconvenience; while, if they fell directly upon
the brain, they would at once, and completely, disorganize that structure.
Within the skull, the brain is enveloped by certain membranes, which at
once protect it from friction, and furnish it with a supply of nutrient
vessels; they are called the _arachnoid_, or "spider's web," the _dura
mater_ and the _pia mater_, or the "tough" and "delicate coverings." The
supply of blood sent to the brain is very liberal, amounting to one-fifth
of all that the entire body possesses. The brain of man is heavier than
that of any other animal, except the elephant and whale.

[Sidenote: 8. Size of the brain proper? How divided? The exterior of the
hemispheres? The interior?]

8. THE CEREBRUM.--The brain proper, or _cerebrum_, is the largest of the
intracranial organs, and occupies the entire upper and front portion of the
skull. It is almost completely bisected, by a fissure, or cleft, running
through it lengthwise, into two equal parts called _hemispheres_. The
exterior of these hemispheres is gray in color, consisting chiefly of
nerve-cells, arranged so as to form a layer of gray matter one-fifth of an
inch in thickness, and is abundantly supplied with blood-vessels. The
interior of the brain, however, is composed almost wholly of white
substance, or nerve-fibres.
