"I don't know about that," said Elwood, who sometimes seemed to
alternate with Howard in his knowledge of the ways of the wood. "I can't
see that there was any more chance of seeing birds there than upon the
island. That same fowl passed closer to us than it did to him."

"I suppose," laughed Howard, "that he was hunting after game of some
kind, and had no idea of shooting the bird until it passed so near him
that he saw it was quite the thing we needed, and so he toppled it
over."

"Me views intirely," assented Tim. "I agraas wid both of yees."

A few moments later the Pah Utah appeared with the bird in his hand, and
flinging it into the canoe quickly paddled back to the island. His bird
proved to be a species of wild goose, that seemed to have strayed from
its flock and gone wandering through the Salinas Valley at this season
of the year ultimately to fall before the rifle of Shasta.

Our friends were in ecstasies over their prospective meal. The Indian
displayed the same skill in dressing the bird that he did in preparing
the fish. The feathers were quickly twitched off, and the dry driftwood
piled upon the upper end of the island was the best fuel they could have
had for the purpose. When done, it was "done brown," and to a turn; and
to the famishing travelers nothing could have been more savory and
luscious.

The truth of it was, the boys found that this kind of life was agreeing
with them amazingly. Their appetites were fierce, their sleep sound, and
a feeling of perfect health diffused itself through their glowing
frames, such as they had never known before. Their exposure to the night
air troubled them at first, but they soon recovered from it and enjoyed
"camping out" as thoroughly as did old campaigners.

It was a very good thing, it is true, for a while; but don't let any
boys get the idea of following their example, unless they are compelled
in precisely the same manner to do so. If any youngster imagines he has
formed true ideas of distant countries from the narratives of adventures
which he may have read, he will find himself most woefully mistaken.
Never think of traveling until you are a married man, and by that time
you will have made up your mind to be sensible and stay at home.

When the meal was finished, and their appetites satisfied, the Pah Utah,
instead of immediately embarking, walked to the lower end of the island,
and stood for some time apparently examining some sign further down the
river. Following the direction of his eyes, our friends could see
nothing unusual until Elwood detected something in the air on the
western bank which at first resembled a light cloud, but which they
imagined might be caused by a camp-fire.

Whatever it was that attracted the attention of Shasta he took but a few
moments to decide regarding it. Going again to his canoe, he entered it
without a word or sign, and paddled away at his swiftest rate straight
toward it, while his companions watched the proceeding with as much
interest as in the preceding case.

The camp appeared fully a half-mile distant, and it took but a short
time for the Indian to reach a point opposite, when he sprung lightly
ashore and disappeared with his usual celerity.

"He is cautious," remarked Elwood. "He doesn't wish us to undertake to
pass it unless he is sure there will be no trouble."

"A sinsible young man!" asserted Tim. "His parents have the best raison
for faaling proud of so promising a young gintleman."

"And so have we."

A few moments elapsed, when the Pah Utah reappeared and came back as
rapidly as he went.

The first thing he did upon reaching the island was again to fasten the
boats together, and then motion to the three to enter. This, of course,
they did without delay, and took their usual positions.

But Shasta was not satisfied. He told them, in his manner, to lie down;
and not until the three had so arranged themselves as to be invisible
from both shores, did he dip his paddle and resume his journey.

"This means danger," said Elwood. "He doesn't wish any one to know we
are in the boats."

"And we must be sure and obey him."

"It's aisy doing, as my brother used to say whin his wife tould him, in
her gintle manner, by the help of her broomstick, to go to bed."

"And, Elwood, you are close to Terror, see that he doesn't let his
curiosity got the better of his judgment."

The Pah Utah was satisfied, and now began plying his paddle. It was
difficult for the three so to govern their curiosity as not to peep over
the side of the canoe; but there were good reasons for their not doing
so, and they scarcely moved a limb for the next hour.

They had gone but a little way when Terror raised his head and uttered a
slight bark; but a word from Elwood quieted him. Finally, Shasta paused
and uttered a guttural sound in his own tongue, which was taken as
permission for them to rise.

As they did so, they looked behind. The dim smoke ascending in the
summer sky was seen far behind, and between it and them the Salinas made
another bend, so that they had no cause to fear observation from that
party at least.

Shasta again disconnected the two canoes--an act which did not surprise
them; but his next proceeding astonished them a good deal.

Reaching across the boats, he shook hands with them all, at the same
time muttering a word or two to each.

"He is going to leave us," said Elwood, with an air of disappointment.

"He has good reason for doing so, but I am afraid it will be bad for
us."

"Adieu, Mr. Shasta, adieu!" said Tim O'Rooney, with considerable
feeling. "You've done us a good turn and we'll not forget you. If yez
ever drifts into San Francisco, give us a call."

The Indian motioned to them to proceed, and using his paddle with his
extraordinary skill, he sped up the river toward the camp-fire, and in a
very short time vanished.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE WESTERN SHORE.


The departure of Shasta gave rise to all manner of doubt and
speculation. None of them believed he meditated bidding the party
good-by until he went through the ceremony of shaking hands. This
settled the matter, and they could have no cause for hope of seeing him
again.

"That must have been a party of his people," said Howard, "or he would
not have taken the pains to help us out of sight."

"At any rate, he has done us good service," replied Elwood. "I don't
know what would have become of us but for him."

They had not yet begun using their paddle, but were drifting with the
current, debating upon their course of action.

"I think I understand why he left us," added Howard, after a moment's
pause.

Tim and Elwood looked up in his face.

"I think we have passed through most of the danger, and he thought we
were just as safe without him as with him. Don't you see, Elwood, that
we have come a good ways down the river, and we must be near some
settlement. I think there is a place called Soledad somewhere along this
river, but whether on the eastern or western bank I cannot tell."

"It is a good ways off, I should say fifty miles, and is on the western
bank."

"How comes it that _you_ are so well informed?" asked Howard, repeating
the question that had been asked him by his cousin when on the steamer.

"It is only accidentally that I know that. A few weeks ago I was
comparing an old and new geography and noticed what different views they
gave of the western part of our country. The old maps had the
Buenaventura so wrong in every particular that I learned considerable
about the true one, which you know is called Salinas by most people."

"If we are very careful, I think we can get home without trouble; but
although there must be white people--settlers and miners--in these
parts, still they are so scattered that we are less likely to see them
than we are the Indians."

"Boys," said Tim O'Rooney, who had not let his pipe go out since
morning. "Shall I give yez some good advice?"

Both expressed their eagerness to receive it.

"There bees plenty of the rid gintlemen yet in this counthry, and we
haven't got beyant them. If we goes paddling in this canoe when the sun
is shining overhead, some of 'em will see us, and if we don't put into
shore they'll put out after us--that they will."

"What is it that you propose, then?"

"That we turns the night into day, and slaaps and smokes and meditates
by sunlight, and does our traveling by moonlight, or what is bether,
without any light at all."

This proposal suited the boys exactly. It was so plainly dictated by
common sense that the wonder was they had not thought of it long before.
Elwood took the paddle in his hand and held it poised.

"Which way--east or west?"

Howard pointed to the left bank.

"That is the side where _they_ are," replied Elwood, referring to the
Indian party they had passed.

"And where _he_ is," meaning their good friend, the Pah Utah.

"To the left--to the left," said Tim. "Didn't I git into the worst
throuble of me life--always barring the repulse me Bridget give me--by
hunting in them parts?"

Elwood delayed no longer, but plied the oars with a dexterity that
showed his experience had not been lost upon him.

"You understand it quite well," said Howard approvingly.

"Yes; but my arms ache terribly."

"Ah! here we are."

The prow of the canoe moved as silently and easily into the undergrowth
as if it were water, and our friends at a step passed from every portion
of it to dry land.

As they intended remaining in their present quarters until darkness,
they took some pains to select a suitable place. They finally hit upon a
spot, on an incline of the river bank, and about a dozen yards distant.
Here the grass was green and velvety, and the wood so thick that they
had little fear of discovery, unless by some who had seen them land and
took the trouble to hunt them out.

It was about noon when they landed, and as they had all spent a wakeful
night, their first proceeding was so to arrange themselves as to enjoy a
quiet sleep. Terror was placed on duty as sentinel, and all lay down
with a sense of security to which they had been strangers in a long
time.

As usual, the boys were the first to awake, doing so almost at the same
moment. They saw by the sun that the afternoon was about half gone, but
they were not troubled from hunger, as their morning meal may be said to
have been their midday one, and had been one of those royal ones whose
memory is apt to linger a long time with us, especially if we are boys.

"This is tiresome," said Elwood, yawning and stretching his limbs, "let
us take a tramp of discovery."

The proposal suited Howard, although prudence told him to remain where
he was and keep his friend with him. But the restraint was so irksome
that he was all too willing a listener to the persuasions of his
companion.

"I noticed there was quite a high range of hills just back of us," added
Elwood. "Let's take a look at them."

"Is it prudent?" and Howard only repeated audibly the question that his
conscience had just asked him.

"Prudent? Of course it is, if we only take good care of ourselves."

"Shall we awake Tim before we go?"

"No; he will sleep until to-morrow morning."

"We must leave Terror to watch him then, for it wouldn't do for him to
lie alone and asleep."

"Of course not."

The Newfoundland, which had risen to his feet, was told to remain on
guard, and the boys started off on a ramble that was to be a most
eventful one to them.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE RAMBLE.


After the restraint the boys had undergone, cramped in the canoe, and
not daring to wander out of sight of their camp-fire when upon shore,
there was a delicious relief in rambling through the woods. The clear,
pure air that was dry and cool in the shadow of the forest, the
undulating, charming scenery, the novel look that rested upon all they
saw--these possessed a charm to our young friends which they hardly
could have resisted, even if they had the will to do so; but when we say
that after starting forth scarcely a thought of their imprudence entered
their heads, it was but natural that they should find themselves led
much further away than was either wise or consistent with the resolves
with which they left their friends, Tim and Terror.

They took no notice of the direction they were following, nor of the
distance they had gone, until near the middle of the afternoon Howard
abruptly paused and asked, with a look of alarm:

"Elwood, what have we done?"

"Why? What is the matter?"

"We must be a mile off from Tim, and it will be dark before we can get
back."

"O! I think not. You know we have walked very slowly, and we can hurry
when we take it into our heads to return."

"But do you know the way?"

"Certainly. Don't you?"

"What course must we follow?"

Elwood pointed to the northwest, which, while it was not far from their
general course, was by no means the proper one by which to rejoin their
companion.

"How strange!" said Howard. "It seems to me that yonder is the point
from which we started."

And _he_ pointed nearly due west, just as wrong as he could possibly be.

"You are wrong," said Elwood positively. "I am sure of the right way."

"We won't dispute over it," replied his companion, with some sadness,
"for it is very doubtful if either of us is right."

"All we have to do then, is to hunt for the river and follow that up
until we find Tim sound asleep."

"Yea; but how is the river to be found? To you it lies in one place, and
to me in another."

"But I can prove that you are wrong, and," laughed Elwood, "that I am,
too, although I was never right."

"How so?"

"The sun sets in the west, and notice where it is."

Howard now opened his eyes in amazement. He would have been sure that it
was going down in the other part of the sky; but the proof before his
eyes was irrefragable.

"It must be," he replied. "We have been 'turned round.' Just as when we
left the wharf at New York. I was below when the steamer came out, and
so long as New York was in sight I was sure it lay in the wrong place."

"But, how bad even that makes it! We cannot reach the river before dark,
and we shall not know whether we am a mile above or below where Tim is
sleeping."

"If we go straight for the river, I think it likely that we shall come
much nearer him than that."

"It may be, but how are we to tell?"

"Why, if we don't find him by night, we can fire oft our guns and call
to him."

"And bring a party of the savages down upon us."

"That may be if there are any in the neighborhood, but we shall have to
run the risk."

By this time the boys were fully impressed with their want of discretion
and with the urgent necessity of making all haste back to the river.

"Let us keep our thoughts about us," said Howard, "for we have been
without them long enough. Now, the Salinas River runs very nearly north
and south, doesn't it?"

"This portion of it does."

"Then we must go as nearly east as we can, and let's be off."

Turning their backs upon the sun, they began retracing their steps; but
they had journeyed scarce half an hour when they found themselves near a
range of hills, which they were sure they had not passed through, and
did not remember to have seen.

"What does this mean?" asked Howard, still more alarmed. "We never have
been near these."

"Are they not the hills we noticed just us we were about starting?"

"They cannot be;--these are larger, have not half as much wood upon
them. I tell you, Elwood, there is one thing sure."

"I know what you mean."

"What is it?"

_"We are lost!"_

[Illustration: "We are lost."]

"You are right. We may find Tim again, but we are going to have trouble
to do it."

"Listen! He may call to us."

They stopped walking find held their breath, but not a sound broke the
solemn stillness, save a faint, hollow roar--whether the deep murmur
that is always heard in a great forest, or the sound of the distant
Pacific Ocean they could not tell.

"No; he is asleep yet," said Elwood. "If he would only wake up he would
shout to us."

"Thus you see, if we shoot our guns, the chances are that _he_ will not
hear it, while it may be the means of bringing to us the very ones we
are so anxious to keep away."

So they concluded not to fire their rifles for the present.

"But these hills," continued Howard, "they don't extend in any great
direction either north or south. The question now is, shall we pass
around the northern or southern end?"

"What difference will it make?"

"All the difference in the world. If Tim is to the south of us, and we
pass around that way, I think we shall find him without much hunting,
while if we take the wrong course it will be night before we can get
anywhere near him."

"I see," replied Elwood. "We shall have to guess at it. But, hold!" he
exclaimed, with sparkling eyes. "You go one way and I will another!"

Howard shook his head.
