feet in diameter and towering two hundred feet into the air. The silos
were not, however, being used as yet. One of the two Oman ships had been
converted into a fuel-tanker and its yawning holds were being filled
first.

The _Orion_ went back to Ardane and an eight-day wait began. For the
first time in over seven months Hilton found time actually to loaf; and
he and Temple, lolling on the beach or hiking in the mountains, enjoyed
themselves and each other to the full.

All too soon, however, the heavily laden tanker appeared in the sky over
Ardane. The _Orion_ joined it; and the two ships slipped into sub-space
for Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days out, Hilton used his sense of perception to release the
thought-controlled blocks that had been holding all the controls of the
_Perseus_ in neutral. He informed her officers--by releasing a
public-address tape--that they were now free to return to Terra.

Three days later, one day short of Sol, Sawtelle got Five-Jet Admiral
Gordon's office on the sub-space radio. An officious underling tried to
block him, of course.

"Shut up, Perkins, and listen," Sawtelle said, bruskly. "Tell Gordon I'm
bringing in one hundred twenty thousand two hundred forty-five metric
tons of pelleted uranexite. And if he isn't on this beam in sixty
seconds he'll never get a gram of it."

The admiral, outraged almost to the point of apoplexy, came in.
"Sawtelle, report yourself for court-martial at ..."

"Keep still, Gordon," the captain snapped. In sheer astonishment old
Five-Jets obeyed. "I am no longer Terran Navy; no longer subject to your
orders. As a matter of cold fact, I am no longer human. For reasons
which I will explain later to the full Advisory Board, some of the
personnel of Project Theta Orionis underwent transformation into a form
of life able to live in an environment of radioactivity so intense as to
kill any human being in ten seconds. Under certain conditions we will
supply, free of charge, FOB Terra or Luna, all the uranexite the Solar
System can use. The conditions are these," and he gave them. "Do you
accept these conditions or not?"

"I ... I would vote to accept them, Captain. But that weight! One
hundred twenty thousand _metric tons_--incredible! Are you _sure_ of
that figure?"

"Definitely. And that is minimum. The error is plus, not minus."

"This crippling power-shortage would really be over?" For the first time
since Sawtelle had known him, Gordon showed that he was not quite solid
Navy brass.

"It's over. Definitely. For good."

"I'd not only agree; I'd raise you a monument. While I can't speak for
the Board, I'm sure they'll agree."

"So am I. In any event, your cooperation is all that's required for this
first load." The chips had vanished from Sawtelle's shoulders. "Where do
you want it, Admiral? Aristarchus or White Sands?"

"White Sands, please. While there may be some delay in releasing it to
industry ..."

"While they figure out how much they can tax it?" Sawtelle asked,
sardonically.

"Well, if they don't tax it it'll be the first thing in history that
isn't. Have you any objections to releasing all this to the press?"

"None at all. The harder they hit it and the wider they spread it, the
better. Will you have this beam switched to Astrogation, please?"

"Of course. And thanks, Captain. I'll see you at White Sands."

Then, as the now positively glowing Gordon faded away, Sawtelle turned
to his own staff. "Fenway--Snowden--take over. Better double-check
micro-timing with Astro. Put us into a twenty-four-hour orbit over White
Sands and hold us there. We won't go down. Let the load down on remote,
wherever they want it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The arrival of the Ardvorian superdreadnought _Orion_ and the _UC-1_
(Uranexite Carrier Number One) was one of the most sensational events
old Earth had ever known. Air and space craft went clear out to
Emergence Volume Ninety to meet them. By the time the _UC-1_ was coming
in on its remote-controlled landing spiral the press of small ships was
so great that all the police forces available were in a lather trying to
control it.

This was exactly what Hilton had wanted. It made possible the completely
unobserved launching of several dozen small craft from the _Orion_
herself.

One of these made a very high and very fast flight to Chicago. With all
due formality and under the aegis of a perfectly authentic Registry
Number it landed on O'Hare Field. Eleven deeply tanned young men
emerged from it and made their way to a taxi stand, where each engaged a
separate vehicle.

Sam Bryant stepped into his cab, gave the driver a number on Oakwood
Avenue in Des Plaines, and settled back to scan. He was lucky. He would
have gone anywhere she was, of course, but the way things were, he could
give her a little warning to soften the shock. She had taken the baby
out for an airing down River Road, and was on her way back. By having
the taxi kill ten minutes or so he could arrive just after she did.
Wherefore he stopped the cab at a public communications booth and dialed
his home.

"Mrs. Bryant is not at home, but she will return at fifteen thirty," the
instrument said, crisply. "Would you care to record a message for her?"

He punched the RECORD button. "This is Sam, Dolly baby. I'm right behind
you. Turn around, why don't you, and tell your ever-lovin' star-hoppin'
husband hello?"

The taxi pulled up at the curb just as Doris closed the front door; and
Sam, after handing the driver a five-dollar bill, ran up the walk.

He waited just outside the door, key in hand, while she lowered the
stroller handle, took off her hat and by long-established habit reached
out to flip the communicator's switch. At the first word, however, she
stiffened rigidly--froze solid.

Smiling, he opened the door, walked in, and closed it behind him.
Nothing short of a shotgun blast could have taken Doris Bryant's
attention from that recorder then.

"That simply is not so," she told the instrument firmly, with both eyes
resolutely shut. "They made him stay on the _Perseus_. He won't be in
for at least three days. This is some cretin's idea of a joke."

"Not this time, Dolly honey. It's really me."

Her eyes popped open as she whirled. "SAM!" she shrieked, and hurled
herself at him with all the pent-up ardor and longing of two hundred
thirty-four meticulously counted, husbandless, loveless days.

After an unknown length of time Sam tipped her face up by the chin,
nodded at the stroller, and said, "How about introducing me to the
little stranger?"

"_What_ a mother I turned out to be! That was the first thing I was
going to rave about, the very first thing I saw you! Samuel Jay the
Fourth, seventy-six days old today." And so on.

Eventually, however, the proud young mother watched the slightly
apprehensive young father carry their first-born upstairs; where
together, they put him--still sound asleep--to bed in his crib. Then
again they were in each other's arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some time later, she twisted around in the circle of his arm and tried
to dig her fingers into the muscles of his back. She then attacked his
biceps and, leaning backward, eyed him intently.

"You're you, I know, but you're different. No athlete or any laborer
could ever possibly get the muscles you have all over. To say nothing of
a space officer on duty. And I know it isn't any kind of a disease.
You've been acting all the time as though I were fragile, made out of
glass or something--as though you were afraid of breaking me in two.
So--what is it, sweetheart?"

"I've been trying to figure out an easy way of telling you, but there
isn't any. I am different. I'm a hundred times as strong as any man ever
was. Look." He upended a chair, took one heavy hardwood leg between
finger and thumb and made what looked like a gentle effort to bend it.
The leg broke with a pistol-sharp report and Doris leaped backward in
surprise. "So you're right. I _am_ afraid, not only of breaking you in
two, but killing you. And if I break any of your ribs or arms or legs
I'll never forgive myself. So if I let myself go for a second--I don't
think I will, but I might--don't wait until you're really hurt to start
screaming. Promise?"

"I promise." Her eyes went wide. "But _tell_ me!"

He told her. She was in turn surprised, amazed, apprehensive, frightened
and finally eager; and she became more and more eager right up to the
end.

"You mean that we ... that I'll stay just as I am--for thousands of
_years_?"

"Just as you are. Or different, if you like. If you really mean any of
this yelling you've been doing about being too big in the hips--I think
you're exactly right, myself--you can rebuild yourself any way you
please. Or change your shape every hour on the hour. But you haven't
accepted my invitation yet."

"Don't be silly." She went into his arms again and nibbled on his left
ear. "I'd go anywhere with you, of course, any time, but _this_--but
you're positively _sure_ Sammy Small will be all right?"

"Positively sure."

"Okay, I'll call mother...." Her face fell. "I _can't_ tell her that
we'll never see them again and that we'll live ..."

"You don't need to. She and Pop--Fern and Sally, too, and their
boy-friends--are on the list. Not this time, but in a month or so,
probably."

Doris brightened like a sunburst. "And your folks, too, of course?" she
asked.

"Yes, all the close ones."

"Marvelous! How soon are we leaving?"

       *       *       *       *       *

At six o'clock next morning, two hundred thirty-five days after leaving
Earth, Hilton and Sawtelle set out to make the Ardans' official call
upon Terra's Advisory Board. Both were wearing prodigiously heavy lead
armor, the inside of which was furiously radioactive. They did not need
it, of course. But it would make all Ardans monstrous in Terran eyes and
would conceal the fact that any other Ardans were landing.

Their gig was met at the spaceport; not by a limousine, but by a
five-ton truck, into which they were loaded one at a time by a hydraulic
lift. Cameras clicked, reporters scurried, and tri-di scanners whirred.
One of those scanners, both men knew, was reporting directly and only to
the Advisory Board--which, of course, never took anything either for
granted or at its face value.

Their first stop was at a truck-scale, where each visitor was weighed.
Hilton tipped the beam at four thousand six hundred fifteen pounds;
Sawtelle, a smaller man, weighed in at four thousand one hundred ninety.
Thence to the Radiation Laboratory, where it was ascertained and
reported that the armor did not leak--which was reasonable enough,
since each was lined with Masters' plastics.

Then into lead-lined testing cells, where each opened his face-plate
briefly to a sensing element. Whereupon the indicating needles of two
meters in the main laboratory went enthusiastically through the full
range of red and held unwaveringly against their stops.

Both Ardans felt the wave of shocked, astonished, almost unbelieving
consternation that swept through the observing scientists and, in
slightly lesser measure (because they knew less about radiation) through
the Advisory Board itself in a big room halfway across town. And from
the Radiation Laboratory they were taken, via truck and freight
elevator, to the Office of the Commandant, where the Board was sitting.

The story, which had been sent in to the Board the day before on a
scrambled beam, was one upon which the Ardans had labored for days. Many
facts could be withheld. However, every man aboard the _Perseus_ would
agree on some things. Indeed, the Earthship's communications officers
had undoubtedly radioed in already about longevity and perfect health
and Oman service and many other matters. Hence all such things would
have to be admitted and countered.

Thus the report, while it was air-tight, perfectly logical, perfectly
consistent, and apparently complete, did not please the Board at all. It
wasn't intended to.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We cannot and do not approve of such unwarranted favoritism," the
Chairman of the Board said. "Longevity has always been man's prime goal.
Every human being has the inalienable right to ..."

"Flapdoodle!" Hilton snorted. "This is not being broadcast and this room
is proofed, so please climb down off your soapbox. You don't need to
talk like a politician here. Didn't you read paragraph 12-A-2, one of
the many marked 'Top Secret'?"

"Of course. But we do not understand how purely mental qualities can
possibly have any effect upon purely physical transformations. Thus it
does not seem reasonable that any except rigorously screened personnel
would die in the process. That is, of course, unless you contemplate
deliberate, cold-blooded murder."

That stopped Hilton in his tracks, for it was too close for comfort to
the truth. But it did not hold the captain for an instant. He was used
to death, in many of its grisliest forms.

"There are a lot of things no Terran ever will understand," Sawtelle
replied instantly. "Reasonable, or not, that's exactly what will
happen. And, reasonable or not, it'll be suicide, not murder. There
isn't a thing that either Hilton or I can do about it."

Hilton broke the ensuing silence. "You can say with equal truth that
every human being has the _right_ to run a four-minute mile or to
compose a great symphony. It isn't a matter of right at all, but of
ability. In this case the mental qualities are even more necessary than
the physical. You as a Board did a very fine job of selecting the BuSci
personnel for Project Theta Orionis. Almost eighty per cent of them
proved able to withstand the Ardan conversion. On the other hand, only a
very small percentage of the Navy personnel did so."

"Your report said that the remaining personnel of the Project were not
informed as to the death aspect of the transformation," Admiral Gordon
said. "Why not?"

"That should be self-explanatory," Hilton said, flatly. "They are still
human and still Terrans. We did not and will not encroach upon either
the duties or the privileges of Terra's Advisory Board. What you tell
all Terrans, and how much, and how, must be decided by yourselves. This
also applies, of course, to the other 'Top Secret' paragraphs of the
report, none of which are known to any Terran outside the Board."

"But you haven't said anything about the method of selection," another
Advisor complained. "Why, that will take all the psychologists of the
world, working full time; continuously."

"We said we would do the selecting. We meant just that," Hilton said,
coldly. "No one except the very few selectees will know anything about
it. Even if it were an unmixed blessing--which it very definitely is
_not_--do you want all humanity thrown into such an uproar as that would
cause? Or the quite possible racial inferiority complex it might set up?
To say nothing of the question of how much of Terra's best blood do you
want to drain off, irreversibly and permanently? No. What we suggest is
that you paint the picture so black, using Sawtelle and me and what all
humanity has just seen as horrible examples, that nobody would take it
as a gift. Make them shun it like the plague. Hell, I don't have to tell
you what your propaganda machines can do."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chairman of the Board again mounted his invisible rostrum. "Do you
mean to intimate that we are to falsify the record?" he declaimed. "To
try to make liars out of hundreds of eyewitnesses? You ask us to
distort the truth, to connive at ..."

"We aren't asking you to do _anything_!" Hilton snapped. "We don't give
a damn what you do. Just study that record, with all that it implies.
Read between the lines. As for those on the _Perseus_, no two of them
will tell the same story and not one of them has even the remotest idea
of what the real story is. I, personally, not only did not want to
become a monster, but would have given everything I had to stay human.
My wife felt the same way. Neither of us would have converted if there'd
been any other way in God's universe of getting the uranexite and doing
some other things that simply _must_ be done."

"What other things?" Gordon demanded.

"You'll never know," Hilton answered, quietly. "Things no Terran ever
will know. We hope. Things that would drive any Terran stark mad. Some
of them are hinted at--as much as we dared--between the lines of the
report."

The report had not mentioned the Stretts. Nor were they to be mentioned
now. If the Ardans could stop them, no Terran need ever know anything
about them.

If not, no Terran should know anything about them except what he would
learn for himself just before the end. For Terra would never be able to
do anything to defend herself against the Stretts.

"Nothing whatever can drive _me_ mad," Gordon declared, "and I want to
know all about it--right now!"

"You can do one of two things, Gordon," Sawtelle said in disgust. His
sneer was plainly visible through the six-ply, plastic-backed lead glass
of his face-plate. "Either shut up or accept my personal invitation to
come to Ardvor and try to go through the wringer. That's an invitation
to your own funeral." Five-Jet Admiral Gordon, torn inwardly to ribbons,
made no reply.

