(FELICITY: "Dan just copied that word for word out of the Family Guide,
except about the hat part.")

P-r C-g:--Yes, it would be quite proper to say good evening to the
family ghost if you met it.

F-x K-g:--No, it is not polite to sleep with your mouth open. What's
more, it isn't safe. Something might fall into it.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Crocheted watch pockets are all the rage now. If you haven't a watch
they do to carry your pencil in or a piece of gum.

It is stylish to have hair ribbons to match your dress. But it is hard
to match gray drugget. I like scarlet for that.

It is stylish to pin a piece of ribbon on your coat the same colour as
your chum wears in her hair. Mary Martha Cowan saw them doing it in town
and started us doing it here. I always wear Kitty's ribbon and Kitty
wears mine, but the Story Girl thinks it is silly.

                                       CECILY KING.


AN ACCOUNT OF OUR VISIT TO COUSIN MATTIE'S

We all walked over to Cousin Mattie's last week. They were all well
there and we had a fine dinner. On our way back a snow-storm came up and
we got lost in the woods. We didn't know where we were or nothing. If we
hadn't seen a light I guess we'd all have been frozen and snowed over,
and they would never have found us till spring and that would be very
sad. But we saw a light and made for it and it was Peg Bowen's. Some
people think she is a witch and it's hard to tell, but she was real
hospitable and took us all in. Her house was very untidy but it was
warm. She has a skull. I mean a loose skull, not her own. She lets on it
tells her things, but Uncle Alec says it couldn't because it was only an
Indian skull that old Dr. Beecham had and Peg stole it when he died,
but Uncle Roger says he wouldn't trust himself with Peg's skull for
anything. She gave us supper. It was a horrid meal. The Story Girl says
I must not tell what I found in the bread and butter because it would
be too disgusting to read in Our Magazine but it don't matter because
we were all there, except Sara Ray, and know what it was. We stayed all
night and us boys slept in straw. None of us had ever slept on straw
before. We got home in the morning. That is all I can write about our
visit to Cousin Mattie's.

                                        FELIX KING.


MY WORST ADVENTURE

It's my turn to write it so I suppose I must. I guess my worst adventure
was two years ago when a whole lot of us were coasting on Uncle Rogers
hill. Charlie Cowan and Fred Marr had started, but half-way down their
sled got stuck and I run down to shove them off again. Then I stood
there just a moment to watch them with my back to the top of the hill.
While I was standing there Rob Marr started Kitty and Em Frewen off on
his sled. His sled had a wooden tongue in it and it slanted back over
the girls' heads. I was right in the way and they yelled to me to get
out, but just as I heard them it struck me. The sled took me between the
legs and I was histed back over the tongue and dropped in a heap behind
before I knew what had happened to me. I thought a tornado had struck
me. The girls couldn't stop though they thought I was killed, but Rob
came tearing down and helped me up. He was awful scared but I wasn't
killed nor my back wasn't broken but my nose bled something awful and
kept on bleeding for three days. Not all the time but by spells.

                                          DAN KING.


THE STORY OF HOW CARLISLE GOT ITS NAME

This is a true story to. Long ago there was a girl lived in charlotte
town. I dont know her name so I cant right it and maybe it is just as
well for Felicity might think it wasnt romantik like Miss Jemima Parrs.
She was awful pretty and a young englishman who had come out to make his
fortune fell in love with her and they were engaged to be married the
next spring. His name was Mr. Carlisle. In the winter he started off to
hunt cariboo for a spell. Cariboos lived on the island then. There aint
any here now. He got to where it is Carlisle now. It wasn't anything
then only woods and a few indians. He got awful sick and was sick for
ever so long in a indian camp and only an old micmac squaw to wait on
him. Back in town they all thought he was dead and his girl felt bad for
a little while and then got over it and took up with another beau. The
girls say that wasnt romantik but I think it was sensible but if it had
been me that died I'd have felt bad if she forgot me so soon. But he
hadnt died and when he got back to town he went right to her house
and walked in and there she was standing up to be married to the other
fellow. Poor Mr. Carlisle felt awful. He was sick and week and it went
to his head. He just turned and run and run till he got back to the old
micmac's camp and fell in front of it. But the indians had gone because
it was spring and it didnt matter because he really was dead this time
and people come looking for him from town and found him and buryed him
there and called the place after him. They say the girl was never happy
again and that was hard lines on her but maybe she deserved it.

                                       PETER CRAIG.


MISS ALICE READE

Miss Alice Reade is a very pretty girl. She has kind of curly blackish
hair and big gray eyes and a pale face. She is tall and thin but her
figure is pretty fair and she has a nice mouth and a sweet way of
speaking. The girls are crazy about her and talk about her all the time.

                                        FELIX KING.


BEAUTIFUL ALICE

That is what we girls call Miss Reade among ourselves. She is divinely
beautiful. Her magnificent wealth of raven hair flows back in glistening
waves from her sun-kissed brow. (DAN: "If Felix had said she was
sunburned you'd have all jumped on him." (CECILY, COLDLY: "Sun-kissed
doesn't mean sunburned." DAN: "What does it mean then?" CECILY,
EMBARRASSED: "I--I don't know. But Miss Montague says the Lady
Geraldine's brow was sun-kissed and of course an earl's daughter
wouldn't be sunburned. "THE STORY GIRL: "Oh, don't interrupt the reading
like this. It spoils it.") Her eyes are gloriously dark and deep, like
midnight lakes mirroring the stars of heaven. Her features are like
sculptured marble and her mouth is a trembling, curving Cupid's bow.
(PETER, ASIDE: "What kind of a thing is that?") Her creamy skin is as
fair and flawless as the petals of a white lily. Her voice is like the
ripple of a woodland brook and her slender form is matchless in its
symmetry. (DAN: "That's Valeria's way of putting it, but Uncle Roger
says she don't show her feed much." FELICITY: "Dan! if Uncle Roger is
vulgar you needn't be!") Her hands are like a poet's dreams. She dresses
so nicely and looks so stylish in her clothes. Her favourite colour is
blue. Some people think she is stiff and some say she is stuck-up, but
she isn't a bit. It's just that she is different from them and they
don't like it. She is just lovely and we adore her.)

                                       CECILY KING.




CHAPTER X. DISAPPEARANCE OF PADDY


As I remember, the spring came late that year in Carlisle. It was May
before the weather began to satisfy the grown-ups. But we children were
more easily pleased, and we thought April a splendid month because the
snow all went early and left gray, firm, frozen ground for our rambles
and games. As the days slipped by they grew more gracious; the hillsides
began to look as if they were thinking of mayflowers; the old orchard
was washed in a bath of tingling sunshine and the sap stirred in the
big trees; by day the sky was veiled with delicate cloud drift, fine and
filmy as woven mist; in the evenings a full, low moon looked over the
valleys, as pallid and holy as some aureoled saint; a sound of laughter
and dream was on the wind and the world grew young with the mirth of
April breezes.

"It's so nice to be alive in the spring," said the Story Girl one
twilight as we swung on the boughs of Uncle Stephen's walk.

"It's nice to be alive any time," said Felicity, complacently.

"But it's nicer in the spring," insisted the Story Girl. "When I'm dead
I think I'll FEEL dead all the rest of the year, but when spring comes
I'm sure I'll feel like getting up and being alive again."

"You do say such queer things," complained Felicity. "You won't be
really dead any time. You'll be in the next world. And I think it's
horrid to talk about people being dead anyhow."

"We've all got to die," said Sara Ray solemnly, but with a certain
relish. It was as if she enjoyed looking forward to something in which
nothing, neither an unsympathetic mother, nor the cruel fate which had
made her a colourless little nonentity, could prevent her from being the
chief performer.

"I sometimes think," said Cecily, rather wearily, "that it isn't so
dreadful to die young as I used to suppose."

She prefaced her remark with a slight cough, as she had been all too apt
to do of late, for the remnants of the cold she had caught the night we
were lost in the storm still clung to her.

"Don't talk such nonsense, Cecily," cried the Story Girl with unwonted
sharpness, a sharpness we all understood. All of us, in our hearts,
though we never spoke of it to each other, thought Cecily was not as
well as she ought to be that spring, and we hated to hear anything said
which seemed in any way to touch or acknowledge the tiny, faint shadow
which now and again showed itself dimly athwart our sunshine.

"Well, it was you began talking of being dead," said Felicity angrily.
"I don't think it's right to talk of such things. Cecily, are you sure
your feet ain't damp? We ought to go in anyhow--it's too chilly out here
for you."

"You girls had better go," said Dan, "but I ain't going in till old
Isaac Frewen goes. I've no use for him."

"I hate him, too," said Felicity, agreeing with Dan for once in her
life. "He chews tobacco all the time and spits on the floor--the horrid
pig!"

"And yet his brother is an elder in the church," said Sara Ray
wonderingly.

"I know a story about Isaac Frewen," said the Story Girl. "When he was
young he went by the name of Oatmeal Frewen and he got it this way. He
was noted for doing outlandish things. He lived at Markdale then and he
was a great, overgrown, awkward fellow, six feet tall. He drove over to
Baywater one Saturday to visit his uncle there and came home the next
afternoon, and although it was Sunday he brought a big bag of oatmeal in
the wagon with him. When he came to Carlisle church he saw that service
was going on there, and he concluded to stop and go in. But he didn't
like to leave his oatmeal outside for fear something would happen to it,
because there were always mischievous boys around, so he hoisted the bag
on his back and walked into church with it and right to the top of the
aisle to Grandfather King's pew. Grandfather King used to say he
would never forget it to his dying day. The minister was preaching and
everything was quiet and solemn when he heard a snicker behind him.
Grandfather King turned around with a terrible frown--for you know in
those days it was thought a dreadful thing to laugh in church--to rebuke
the offender; and what did he see but that great, hulking young Isaac
stalking up the aisle, bending a little forward under the weight of a
big bag of oatmeal? Grandfather King was so amazed he couldn't laugh,
but almost everyone else in the church was laughing, and grandfather
said he never blamed them, for no funnier sight was ever seen. Young
Isaac turned into grandfather's pew and thumped the bag of oatmeal down
on the seat with a thud that cracked it. Then he plumped down beside
it, took off his hat, wiped his face, and settled back to listen to the
sermon, just as if it was all a matter of course. When the service was
over he hoisted his bag up again, marched out of church, and drove home.
He could never understand why it made so much talk; but he was known by
the name of Oatmeal Frewen for years."

Our laughter, as we separated, rang sweetly through the old orchard and
across the far, dim meadows. Felicity and Cecily went into the house
and Sara Ray and the Story Girl went home, but Peter decoyed me into the
granary to ask advice.

"You know Felicity has a birthday next week," he said, "and I want to
write her an ode."

"A--a what?" I gasped.

"An ode," repeated Peter, gravely. "It's poetry, you know. I'll put it
in Our Magazine."

"But you can't write poetry, Peter," I protested.

"I'm going to try," said Peter stoutly. "That is, if you think she won't
be offended at me."

"She ought to feel flattered," I replied.

"You never can tell how she'll take things," said Peter gloomily. "Of
course I ain't going to sign my name, and if she ain't pleased I won't
tell her I wrote it. Don't you let on."

I promised I wouldn't and Peter went off with a light heart. He said he
meant to write two lines every day till he got it done.

Cupid was playing his world-old tricks with others than poor Peter that
spring. Allusion has been made in these chronicles to one, Cyrus Brisk,
and to the fact that our brown-haired, soft-voiced Cecily had found
favour in the eyes of the said Cyrus. Cecily did not regard her conquest
with any pride. On the contrary, it annoyed her terribly to be teased
about Cyrus. She declared she hated both him and his name. She was as
uncivil to him as sweet Cecily could be to anyone, but the gallant Cyrus
was nothing daunted. He laid determined siege to Cecily's young heart by
all the methods known to love-lorn swains. He placed delicate tributes
of spruce gum, molasses taffy, "conversation" candies and decorated
slate pencils on her desk; he persistently "chose" her in all school
games calling for a partner; he entreated to be allowed to carry her
basket from school; he offered to work her sums for her; and rumour had
it that he had made a wild statement to the effect that he meant to
ask if he might see her home some night from prayer meeting. Cecily was
quite frightened that he would; she confided to me that she would rather
die than walk home with him, but that if he asked her she would be too
bashful to say no. So far, however, Cyrus had not molested her out of
school, nor had he as yet thumped Willy Fraser--who was reported to be
very low in his spirits over the whole affair.

And now Cyrus had written Cecily a letter--a love letter, mark you.
Moreover, he had sent it through the post-office, with a real stamp
on it. Its arrival made a sensation among us. Dan brought it from the
office and, recognizing the handwriting of Cyrus, gave Cecily no peace
until she showed us the letter. It was a very sentimental and rather
ill-spelled epistle in which the inflammable Cyrus reproached her in
heart-rending words for her coldness, and begged her to answer his
letter, saying that if she did he would keep the secret "in violets."
Cyrus probably meant "inviolate" but Cecily thought it was intended for
a poetical touch. He signed himself "your troo lover, Cyrus Brisk" and
added in a postcript that he couldn't eat or sleep for thinking of her.

"Are you going to answer it?" asked Dan.

"Certainly not," said Cecily with dignity.

"Cyrus Brisk wants to be kicked," growled Felix, who never seemed to be
any particular friend of Willy Fraser's either. "He'd better learn how
to spell before he takes to writing love letters."

"Maybe Cyrus will starve to death if you don't," suggested Sara Ray.

"I hope he will," said Cecily cruelly. She was truly vexed over the
letter; and yet, so contradictory a thing is the feminine heart, even at
twelve years old, I think she was a little flattered by it also. It was
her first love letter and she confided to me that it gives you a very
queer feeling to get it. At all events--the letter, though unanswered,
was not torn up. I feel sure Cecily preserved it. But she walked past
Cyrus next morning at school with a frozen countenance, evincing not the
