stupa.[582] So, too, in ceremonial, the great prominence given to
funeral rites and many superstitious details are Chinese, yet, as I
have often mentioned in this work, rites on behalf of the dead were
tolerated by early Buddhism. The curious mingling of religious
services with theatrical pagents which Hsuan Chuang witnessed at
Allahabad in the reign of Harsha, has its modest parallel to-day in
many popular festivals.

The numerous images which crowd a Chinese temple, the four kings,
Arhats and Bodhisattvas, though of unfamiliar appearance to the Indian
student, are Indian in origin. A few Taoist deities may have side
chapels, but they are not among the principal objects of worship. The
greater part of the Chinese Tripitaka is a translation from the
Sanskrit and the Chinese works (only 194 against 1467 translations)
are chiefly exegetical. Thus, though Chinese bonzes countenance native
superstitions and gladly undertake to deal with all the gods and
devils of the land, yet in its doctrine, literature, and even in many
externals their Buddhism remains an Indian importation. If we seek in
it for anything truly Chinese, it is to be found not in the
constituents, but in the atmosphere, which, like a breeze from a
mountain monastery sometimes freshens the gilded shrines and libraries
of verbose sutras. It is the native spirit of the Far East which finds
expression in the hill-side hermit's sense of freedom and in dark
sayings such as _Buddhism is the oak-tree in my garden_. Every free
and pure heart can become a Buddha, but also is one with the life of
birds and flowers. Both the love of nature[583] and the belief that
men can become divine can easily be paralleled in Indian texts, but
they were not, I think, imported into China, and joy in natural beauty
and sympathy with wild life are much more prominent in Chinese than in
Indian art.

Is then Buddhist doctrine, as opposed to the superstitions tolerated
by Buddhism, something exotic and without influence on the national
life? That also is not true. The reader will perceive from what has
gone before that if he asks for statistics of Buddhism in China, the
answer must be, in the Buddha's own phrase, that the question is not
properly put. It is incorrect to describe China as a Buddhist country.
We may say that it contains so many million Mohammedans or Christians,
because these creeds are definite and exclusive. We cannot quote
similar figures for Buddhism or Confucianism. Yet assuredly Buddhism
has been a great power in China, as great perhaps as Christianity in
Europe, if we remember how much is owed by European art, literature,
law and science to non-Christian sources. The Chinese language is full
of Buddhist phraseology,[584] not only in literature but in
popular songs and proverbs and an inspection of such entries in a
Chinese dictionary as _Fo_ (Buddha), _Kuan Yin_, _Ho Shang_
(monk)[585] will show how large and not altogether flattering a part
they play in popular speech.

Popular literature bears the same testimony. It is true that in what
are esteemed the higher walks of letters Buddhism has little place.
The quotations and allusions which play there so prominent a part are
taken from the classics and Confucianism can claim as its own the
historical, lexicographical and critical[586] works which are the
solid and somewhat heavy glory of Chinese literature. But its lighter
and less cultivated blossoms, such as novels, fairy stories and
poetry, are predominantly Buddhist or Taoist in inspiration. This may
be easily verified by a perusal of such works as the _Dream of the Red
Chamber_, _Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio_, and Wieger's _Folk
Lore Chinois Moderne_. The same is true in general of the great
Chinese poets, many of whom did not conceal that (in a poetic and
unascetic fashion) they were attached to Buddhism.

It may be asked if the inspiration is not Taoist in the main rather
than Buddhist. Side by side with ethics and ceremony, a native stream
of bold and weird imagination has never ceased to flow in China and
there was no need to import tales of the Genii, immortal saints and
vampire beauties. But when any coherency unites these ideas of the
supernatural, that I think is the work of Buddhism and so far as
Taoism itself has any coherency it is an imitation of Buddhism. Thus
the idea of metempsychosis as one of many passing fancies may be
indigenous to China but its prevalence in popular thought and language
is undoubtedly due to Buddhism, for Taoism and Confucianism have
nothing definite to say as to the state of the dead.

Much the same story of Buddhist influence is told by Chinese art,
especially painting and sculpture. Here too Taoism is by no means
excluded: it may be said to represent the artistic side of the
Chinese mind, as Confucianism represents the political. But it is
impossible to mistake the significance of chronology. As soon as
Buddhism was well established in China, art entered on a new phase
which culminated in the masterpieces of the T'ang and Sung.[587]
Buddhism did not introduce painting into China or even perfect a
rudimentary art. The celebrated roll of Ku K'ai-chih[588] shows no
trace of Indian influence and presupposes a long artistic tradition.
But Mahayanist Buddhism brought across Central Asia new shapes and
motives. Some of its imports were of doubtful artistic value, such as
figures with many limbs and eyes, but with them came ideas which
enriched Chinese art with new dramatic power, passion and solemnity.
Taoism dealt with other worlds but they were gardens of the
Hesperides, inhabited by immortal wizards and fairy queens, not those
disquieting regions where the soul receives the reward of its deeds.
But now the art of Central Asia showed Chinese painters something new;
saints preaching the law with a gesture of authority and deities of
infinite compassion inviting suppliants to approach their thrones. And
with them came the dramatic story of Gotama's life and all the legends
of the Jatakas.

This clearly is not Taoism, but when the era of great art and
literature begins, any distinction between the two creeds, except for
theological purposes, becomes artificial, for Taoism borrowed many
externals of Buddhism, and Buddhism, while not abandoning its austere
and emaciated saints, also accepted the Taoist ideal of the careless
wandering hermit, friend of mountain pines and deer. Wei Hsieh[589]
who lived under the Chin dynasty, when the strength of Buddhism was
beginning to be felt, is considered by Chinese critics as the earliest
of the great painters and is said to have excelled in both Buddhist
and Taoist subjects. The same may be said of the most eminent names,
such as Ku K'ai-chih and Wu Tao-tzu,[590] and we may also remember
that Italian artists painted the birth of Venus and the origin of the
milky way as well as Annunciations and Assumptions, without any
hint that one incident was less true than another. Buddhism not only
provided subjects like the death of the Buddha and Kuan Yin, the
Goddess of Mercy, which hold in Chinese art the same place as the
Crucifixion and the Madonna in Europe, and generation after generation
have stimulated the noblest efforts of the best painters. It also
offered a creed and ideals suited to the artistic temperament: peace
and beauty reigned in its monasteries: its doctrine that life is one
and continuous is reflected in that love of nature, that sympathetic
understanding of plants and animals, that intimate union of sentiment
with landscape which marks the best Chinese pictures.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 557: For Chinese Buddhism see especially Johnston, _Chinese
Buddhism_, 1913 (cited as Johnston). Much information about the
popular side of Buddhism and Taoism nay be found in _Recherches sur
les superstitions en Chine_ par le Pere Henri Dore, 10 vols.
1911-1916, Shanghai (cited as Dore).]

[Footnote 558: A curious instance of deification is mentioned in
_Museon_, 1914, p. 61. It appears that several deceased Jesuits have
been deified. For a recent instance of deification in 1913 see Dore,
X. p. 753.]

[Footnote 559: The spirits called San Kuan [Chinese: ] or San Yuan
[Chinese: ] are a good instance of Chinese deities. The words mean
Three Agents or Principles who strictly speaking have no names: (_a_)
Originally they appear to represent Heaven, Earth and Water. (_b_)
Then they stand for three periods of the year and the astrological
influences which rule each, (_c_) As Agents, and more or less
analogous to human personalities, Heaven gives happiness, Earth
pardons sins and Water delivers from misfortune. _(d)_They are
identified with the ancient Emperors Yao, Shun, Yu. (_e_) They are
also identified with three Censors under the Emperor Li-Wang, B.C.
878-841.]

[Footnote 560: [Chinese: ] Hsuan Chuang's own account of his travels
bears the slightly different title of Hsi-Yu-Chi. [Chinese: ] The
work noticed here is attributed to Chiu Ch'ang Ch'un, a Taoist priest
of the thirteenth century. It is said to be the Buddhist book most
widely read in Korea where it is printed in the popular script. An
abridged English translation has been published by T. Richard under
the title of _A Mission to Heaven_.]

[Footnote 561: I am writing immediately after the abolition of the
Imperial Government (1912), and what I say naturally refers to a state
of things which is passing away. But it is too soon to say how the new
regime will affect religion. There is an old saying that China is
supported by the three religions as a tripod by three legs.]

[Footnote 562: [Chinese: ] strictly speaking the title of his reign
1573-1620.]

[Footnote 563: Compare _Anal_. IX. 1 and xiv. 38. 2. See also
_Doctrine of the Mean_, chap, xvi, for more positive views about
spirits.]

[Footnote 564: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ] See De Groot, "Origins of
the Taoist Church" in _Trans. Third Congress Hist. Relig_. 1908.]

[Footnote 565: Chang Yuan-hsu, who held office in 1912, was deprived
of his titles by the Republican Government. In 1914 petitions were
presented for their restoration, but I do not know with what result.
See _Peking Daily News_, September 5th, 1914.]

[Footnote 566: Something similar may be seen in Mormonism where
angels and legends have been invented by individual fancy without any
background of tradition.]

[Footnote 567: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 568: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 569: The sixth Aeneid would seem to a Chinese quite a natural
description of the next world. In it we have Elysium, Tartarus,
transmigration of souls, souls who can find no resting place because
their bodies are unburied, and phantoms showing still the wounds which
their bodies received in life. Nor is there any attempt to harmonize
these discordant ideas.]

[Footnote 570: [Chinese: ] A somewhat similar pseudo-science called
vatthu-vijja is condemned in the Pali scriptures. _E.g._ Digha N. I.
21. Astrology also has been a great force in Chinese politics. See
Bland and Backhouse, _Ann. and Memoirs, passim_. The favour shown at
different times to Buddhist, Manichaean and Catholic priests was often
due to their supposed knowledge of astrology.]

[Footnote 571: I may again remind the reader that I am not speaking of
the Chinese Republic but of the Empire. The long history of its
relations to Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism, though it concerns the
past, is of great interest.]

[Footnote 572: De Groot and Parker. For an elaboration of the first
thesis see especially De Groot's _Sectarianism and Religious
Persecution in China_.]

[Footnote 573: But it must be remembered that the Chinese canon is not
entirely analogous to the collections of the scriptures current in
India, Ceylon or Europe.]

[Footnote 574: The Emperor is the Lord of all spirits and has the
right to sacrifice to all spirits, whereas others should sacrifice
only to such spirits as concern them. For the Emperor's title "Lord of
Spirits," see Shu Ching IV., VI. 2-3, and Shih Ching, III., II. 8, 3.]

[Footnote 575: The title is undoubtedly very ancient and means Son of
Heaven or Son of God. See Hirth, _Ancient History of China_, pp.
95-96. But the precise force of _Son_ is not clear. The Emperor was
Viceregent of Heaven, high priest and responsible for natural
phenomena, but he could not in historical times be regarded as sprung
(like the Emperor of Japan) from a family of divine descent, because
the dynasties, and with them the imperial family, were subject to
frequent change.]

[Footnote 576: Similarly it is a popular tenet that if a man becomes a
monk all his ancestors go to Heaven. See _Paraphrase of sacred Edict_,
VII.]

[Footnote 577: Japanese Emperors did the same, _e.g._ Kwammu
Tenno in 793.]

[Footnote 578: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 579: K'ang Hsi is responsible only for the text of the Edict
which merely forbids heterodoxy. But his son Yung Cheng who published
the explanation and paraphrase repaired the Buddhist temples at P'uto
and the Taoist temple at Lung-hu-shan.]

[Footnote 580: See Johnston, p. 352. I have not seen the Chinese text
of this edict. In Laufer and Francke's _Epigraphische Denkmaler aus
China_ is a long inscription of Kang Hsi's giving the history both
legendary and recent of the celebrated sandal-wood image of the
Buddha.]

[Footnote 581: This indicates that the fusion of Buddhism and Hinduism
was less complete than some scholars suppose. Where there was a
general immigration of Hindus, the mixture is found, but the Indian
visitors to China were mostly professional teachers and their teaching
was definitely Buddhist. There are, however, two non-Buddhist books in
the Chinese Tripitaka. Nanjio Cat. Nos. 1295 and 1300.]

[Footnote 582: It has been pointed out by Fergusson and others that
there were high towers in China before the Buddhist period. Still, the
numerous specimens extant date from Buddhist times, many were built
over relics, and the accounts of both Fa-hsien and Hsuan Chuang show
that the Stupa built by Kanishka at Peshawar had attracted the
attention of the Chinese.

I regret that de Groot's interesting work _Der Thupa: das heiligste
Heiligtum des Buddhismus in China_, 1919, reached me too late for me
to make use of it.]

[Footnote 583: The love of nature shown in the Pali Pitakas
(particularly the Thera and Theri Gatha) has often been noticed, but
it is also strong in Mahayanist literature. _E.g._ Bodhicaryavatara
VIII. 26-39 and 86-88.]

[Footnote 584: See especially Watters, _Essays on the Chinese
Language_, chaps, VIII and IX, and Clementi, _Cantonese Love Songs in
English_, pp. 9 to 12]

[Footnote 585: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 586: I cannot refrain from calling attention to the
difference between the Chinese and most other Asiatic peoples
(especially the Hindus) as exhibited in their literature. Quite apart
from European influence the Chinese produced several centuries ago
catalogues of museums and descriptive lists of inscriptions, works
which have no parallel in Hindu India.]

[Footnote 587: There are said to have been four great schools of
Buddhist painting under the T'ang. See Kokka 294 and 295.]

[Footnote 588: Preserved in the British Museum and published.]

[Footnote 589: [Chinese: ] of the [Chinese: ] dynasty.]

[Footnote 590: [Chinese: ]




CHAPTER XLIII

CHINA _(continued)_

HISTORY.


The traditional date for the introduction of Buddhism is 62 A.D., when
the chronicles tell how the Emperor Ming-Ti of the Later Han Dynasty
dreamt that he saw a golden man fly into his palace[591] and how his
courtiers suggested that the figure was Fo-t'o[592] or Buddha, an
Indian God. Ming-Ti did not let the matter drop and in 65 sent an
embassy to a destination variously described as the kingdom of the Ta
Yueh Chih[593] or India with instructions to bring back Buddhist
scriptures and priests. On its return it was accompanied by a monk
called Kasyapa Matanga,[594] a native of Central India. A second
called Chu Fa-Lan,[595] who came from Central Asia and found some
difficulty in obtaining permission to leave his country, followed
shortly afterwards. Both were installed at Loyang, the capital of the
dynasty, in the White Horse Monastery,[596] so called because the
foreign monks rode on white horses or used them for carrying books.

The story has been criticized as an obvious legend, but I see no
reason why it should not be true to this extent that Ming-Ti sent an
embassy to Central Asia (not India in our sense) with the result that
a monastery was for the first time established under imperial
patronage. The gravest objection is that before the campaigns of Pan
Ch'ao,[597] which began about 73 A.D., Central Asia was in rebellion
against China. But those campaigns show that the Chinese Court was
occupied with Central Asian questions and to send envoys to enquire
about religion may have been politically advantageous, for they could
obtain information without asserting or abandoning China's claims to
sovereignty. The story does not state that there was no Buddhism in
China before 62 A.D. On the contrary it implies that though it was not
sufficiently conspicuous to be known to the Emperor, yet there was no
difficulty in obtaining information about it and other facts support
the idea that it began to enter China at least half a century earlier.
The negotiations of Chang Ch'ien[598] with the Yueh Chih (129-119
B.C.) and the documents discovered by Stein in the ancient military
posts on the western frontier of Kansu[599] prove that China had
communication with Central Asia, but neither the accounts of Chang
Ch'ien's journeys nor the documents contain any allusion to Buddhism.
In 121 B.C. the Annals relate that "a golden man" was captured from
the Hsiung-nu but, even if it was an image of Buddha, the incident had
no consequences. More important is a notice in the Wei-lueh which
gives a brief account of the Buddha's birth and states that in the
year 2 B.C. an ambassador sent by the Emperor Ai to the court of the
Yueh Chih was instructed in Buddhism by order of their king.[600] Also
the Later Han Annals intimate that in 65 A.D. the Prince of Ch'u[601]
was a Buddhist and that there were Sramanas and Upasakas in his
territory.

The author of the Wei-lueh comments on the resemblance of Buddhist
writings to the work of Lao-tzu, and suggests that the latter left
China in order to teach in India. This theory found many advocates
among the Taoists, but is not likely to commend itself to European
scholars. Less improbable is a view held by many Chinese
critics[602] and apparently first mentioned in the Sui annals, namely,
that Buddhism was introduced into China at an early date but was
exterminated by the Emperor Shih Huang Ti (221-206) in the course of
his crusade against literature. But this view is not supported by any
details and is open to the general objection that intercourse between
China and India _via_ Central Asia before 200 B.C. is not only
unproved but improbable.

Still the mystical, quietist philosophy of Lao-tzu and
Chuang-tzu has an undoubted resemblance to Indian thought. No one
who is familiar with the Upanishads can read the Tao-Te-Ching without
feeling that if Brahman is substituted for Tao the whole would be
intelligible to a Hindu. Its doctrine is not specifically Buddhist,
yet it contains passages which sound like echoes of the Pitakas.
Compare Tao-Te-Ching, 33. 1, "He who overcomes others is strong: he
who overcomes himself is mighty," with Dhammapada, 103, "If one man
overcome a thousand thousand in battle and another overcome himself,
this last is the greatest of conquerors"; and 46. 2, "There is no
greater sin that to look on what moves desire: there is no greater
evil than discontent: there is no greater disaster than covetousness,"
with Dhammapada, 251, "There is no fire like desire, there is no
monster like hatred, there is no snare like folly, there is no torrent
like covetousness." And if it be objected that these are the
coincidences of obvious ethics, I would call attention to 39. 1,
"Hence if we enumerate separately each part that goes to form a cart,
we have no cart at all." Here the thought and its illustration cannot
be called obvious and the resemblance to well-known passages in the
Samyutta Nikaya and Questions of Milinda[603] is striking.

Any discussion of the indebtedness of the Tao-Te-Ching to India is too
complicated for insertion here since it involves the question of
its date or the date of particular passages, if we reject the
hypothesis that the work as we have it was composed by Lao-tzu in
the sixth century B.C.[604] But there is less reason to doubt the
genuineness of the essays of Chuang-tzu who lived in the fourth
century B.C. In them we find mention of trances which give superhuman
wisdom and lead to union with the all-pervading spirit, and of magical
powers enjoyed by sages, similar to the Indian _iddhi_. He approves
the practice of abandoning the world and enunciates the doctrines of
evolution and reincarnation. He knows, as does also the Tao-Te-Ching,
methods of regulating the breathing which are conducive to mental
culture and long life. He speaks of the six faculties of perception,
which recall the Shadayatana, and of name and real existence
(namarupam) as being the conditions of a thing.[605] He has also a
remarkable comparison of death to the extinction of a fire: "what we
can point to are the faggots that have been consumed: but the fire is
transmitted and we know not that it is over and ended." Several
Buddhist parallels to this might be cited.[606]

The list of such resemblances might be made longer and the explanation
that Indian ideas reached China sporadically, at least as early as the
fourth century B.C., seems natural. I should accept it, if there were
any historical evidence besides these literary parallels. But there
seems to be none and it may be justly urged that the roots of this
quietism lie so deep in the Chinese character, that the plant cannot
have sprung from some chance wind-wafted seed. That character has two
sides, one seen in the Chinese Empire and the classical philosophy,
excellent as ethics but somewhat stiff and formal: the other in
revolutions and rebellions, in the free life of hermits and wanderers,
in poetry and painting. This second side is very like the temper of
Indian Buddhism and easily amalgamated with it,[607] but it has a
special note of its own.

The curiosity of Ming-Ti did not lead to any immediate triumph of
Buddhism. We read that he was zealous in honouring Confucius but not
that he showed devotion to the new faith. Indeed it is possible that
his interest was political rather than religious. Buddhism was also
discredited by its first convert, the Emperor's brother Chu-Ying, who
rebelled unsuccessfully and committed suicide. Still it flourished in
a quiet way and the two foreign monks in the White Horse Monastery
began that long series of translations which assumed gigantic
proportions in the following centuries. To Kasyapa is ascribed a
collection of extracts known as the Sutra of forty-two sections which
is still popular.[608] This little work adheres closely to the
teaching of the Pali Tripitaka and shows hardly any traces of the
Mahayana. According to the Chinese annals the chief doctrines preached
by the first Buddhist missionaries were the sanctity of all animal
life, metempsychosis, meditation, asceticism and Karma.

It is not until the third century[609] that we hear much of Buddhism
as a force at Court or among the people, but meanwhile the task of
translation progressed at Lo-yang. The Chinese are a literary race and
these quiet labours prepared the soil for the subsequent
efflorescence. Twelve[610] translators are named as having worked
before the downfall of the Han Dynasty and about 350 books are
attributed to them. None of them were Chinese. About half came from
India and the rest from Central Asia, the most celebrated of the
latter being An Shih-kao, a prince of An-hsi or Parthia.[611] The
Later Han Dynasty was followed by the animated and romantic epoch
known as the Three Kingdoms (221-265) when China was divided between
the States of Wei, Wu and Shu. Loyang became the capital of Wei and
the activity of the White Horse Monastery continued. We have the names
of five translators who worked there. One of them was the first to
translate the Patimokkha,[612] which argues that previously few
followed the monastic life. At Nanking, the capital of Wu, we also
hear of five translators and one was tutor of the Crown Prince. This
implies that Buddhism was spreading in the south and that monks
inspired confidence at Court.

The Three Kingdoms gave place to the Dynasty known as Western
Tsin[613] which, for a short time (A.D. 265-316), claimed to unite the
Empire, and we now reach the period when Buddhism begins to become
prominent. It is also a period of political confusion, of contest
between the north and south, of struggles between Chinese and Tartars.
Chinese histories, with their long lists of legitimate sovereigns,
exaggerate the solidity and continuity of the Empire, for the
territory ruled by those sovereigns was often but a small fraction of
what we call China. Yet the Tartar states were not an alien and
destructive force to the same extent as the conquests made by
Mohammedan Turks at the expense of Byzantium. The Tartars were neither
fanatical, nor prejudiced against Chinese ideals in politics and
religion. On the contrary, they respected the language, literature and
institutions of the Empire: they assumed Chinese names and sometimes
based their claim to the Imperial title on the marriage of their
ancestors with Chinese princesses.

During the fourth century and the first half of the fifth some twenty
ephemeral states, governed by Tartar chieftains and perpetually
involved in mutual war, rose and fell in northern China. The most
permanent of them was Northern Wei which lasted till 535 A.D. But the
Later Chao and both the Earlier and Later Ts'in are important for our
purpose.[614] Some writers make it a reproach to Buddhism that its
progress, which had been slow among the civilized Chinese, became
rapid in the provinces which passed into the hands of these ruder
tribes. But the phenomenon is natural and is illustrated by the fact
that even now the advance of Christianity is more rapid in Africa than
in India. The civilization of China was already old and
self-complacent: not devoid of intellectual curiosity and not
intolerant, but sceptical of foreign importations and of dealings with
the next world. But the Tartars had little of their own in the way of
literature and institutions: it was their custom to assimilate the
arts and ideas of the civilized nations whom they conquered: the more
western tribes had already made the acquaintance of Buddhism in
Central Asia and such native notions of religion as they possessed
disposed them to treat priests, monks and magicians with respect.

Of the states mentioned, the Later Chao was founded by Shih-Lo[615]
(273-332), whose territories extended from the Great Wall to the Han
and Huai in the South. He showed favour to an Indian monk and diviner
called Fo-t'u-ch'eng[616] who lived at his court and he appears to
have been himself a Buddhist. At any rate the most eminent of his
successors, Shih Chi-lung,[617] was an ardent devotee and gave general
permission to the population to enter monasteries, which had not been
granted previously. This permission is noticeable, for it implies,
even at this early date, the theory that a subject of the Emperor has
no right to become a monk without his master's leave.

In 381 we are told that in north-western China nine-tenths of the
inhabitants were Buddhists. In 372 Buddhism was introduced into Korea
and accepted as the flower of Chinese civilization.

The state known as the Former Ts'in[618] had its nucleus in
Shensi, but expanded considerably between 351 and 394 A.D. under
the leadership of Fu-Chien,[619] who established in it large colonies
of Tartars. At first he favoured Confucianism but in 381 became a
Buddhist. He was evidently in close touch with the western regions and
probably through them with India, for we hear that sixty-two states
of Central Asia sent him tribute.

The Later Ts'in dynasty (384-417) had its headquarters in Kansu and
was founded by vassals of the Former Ts'in. When the power of Fu-Chien
collapsed, they succeeded to his possessions and established
themselves in Ch'ang-an. Yao-hsing,[620] the second monarch of this
line was a devout Buddhist, and deserves mention as the patron of
Kumarajiva,[621] the most eminent of the earlier translators.

Kumarajiva was born of Indian parents in Kucha and, after following
the school of the Sarvastivadins for some time, became a Mahayanist.
When Kucha was captured in 383 by the General of Fu-Chien, he was
carried off to China and from 401 onwards he laboured at Ch'ang-an for
about ten years. He was appointed Kuo Shih,[622] or Director of Public
Instruction, and lectured in a hall specially built for him. He is
said to have had 3000 disciples and fifty extant translations are
ascribed to him. Probably all the Tartar kingdoms were well disposed
towards Buddhism, though their unsettled condition made them
precarious residences for monks and scholars. This was doubtless true
of Northern Wei, which had been growing during the period described,
but appears as a prominent home of Buddhism somewhat later.

Meanwhile in the south the Eastern Tsin Dynasty, which represented the
legitimate Empire and ruled at Nanking from 317 to 420, was also
favourable to Buddhism and Hsiao Wu-Ti, the ninth sovereign of this
line, was the first Emperor of China to become a Buddhist.

The times were troubled, but order was gradually being restored. The
Eastern Tsin Dynasty had been much disturbed by the struggles of rival
princes. These were brought to an end in 420 by a new dynasty known as
Liu Sung which reigned in the south some sixty years. The north
was divided among six Tartar kingdoms, which all perished before 440
except Wei. Wei then split into an Eastern and a Western kingdom which
lasted about a hundred years. In the south, the Liu Sung gave place to
three short dynasties, Ch'i, Liang and Ch'en, until at last the Sui
(589-605) united China.

The Liu Sung Emperor Wen-Ti (424-454) was a patron of Confucian
learning, but does not appear to have discouraged Buddhism. The Sung
annals record that several embassies were sent from India and Ceylon
to offer congratulations on the flourishing condition of religion in
his dominions, but they also preserve memorials from Chinese officials
asking for imperial interference to prevent the multiplication of
monasteries and the growing expenditure on superstitious ceremonies.
This marks the beginning of the desire to curb Buddhism by restrictive
legislation which the official class displayed so prominently and
persistently in subsequent centuries. A similar reaction seems to have
been felt in Wei, where the influential statesman Ts'ui Hao,[623] a
votary of Taoism, conducted an anti-Buddhist campaign. He was helped
in this crusade by the discovery of arms in a monastery at Ch'ang-an.
The monks were accused of treason and debauchery and in 446 Toba
Tao,[624] the sovereign of Wei, issued an edict ordering the
destruction of Buddhist temples and sacred books as well as the
execution of all priests. The Crown Prince, who was a Buddhist, was
able to save many lives, but no monasteries or temples were left
standing. The persecution, however, was of short duration. Toba Tao
was assassinated and almost the first act of his successor was to
re-establish Buddhism and allow his subjects to become monks. From
this period date the sculptured grottoes of Yun-Kang in northern
Shan-si which are probably the oldest specimens of Buddhist art in
China. In 471 another ruler of Wei, Toba Hung, had a gigantic image of
Buddha constructed and subsequently abdicated in order to devote
himself to Buddhist studies. His successor marks a reaction, for
he was an ardent Confucianist who changed the family name to Yuan and
tried to introduce the Chinese language and dress. But the tide of
Buddhism was too strong. It secured the favour of the next Emperor in
whose time there are said to have been 13,000 temples in Wei.

In the Sung dominions a conspiracy was discovered in 458 in which a
monk was implicated, and restrictive, though not prohibitive,
regulations were issued respecting monasteries. The Emperor Ming-Ti,
though a cruel ruler was a devout Buddhist and erected a monastery in
Hu-nan, at the cost of such heavy taxation that his ministers
remonstrated. The fifty-nine years of Liu Sung rule must have been on
the whole favourable to Buddhism, for twenty translators flourished,
partly natives and partly foreigners from Central Asia, India and
Ceylon. In 420 a band of twenty-five Chinese started on a pilgrimage
to India. They had been preceded by the celebrated pilgrim
Fa-Hsien[625] who travelled in India from 399 to 414.

In the reign of Wu-Ti, the first Emperor of the Ch'i dynasty, one of
the imperial princes, named Tzu Liang,[626] cultivated the society
of eminent monks and enjoyed theological discussions. From the
specimens of these arguments which have been preserved we see that the
explanation of the inequalities of life as the result of Karma had a
great attraction for the popular mind and also that it provoked the
hostile criticism of the Confucian literati.

The accession of the Liang dynasty and the long reign of its first
emperor Wu-Ti (502-549) were important events in the history of
Buddhism, for this monarch rivalled Asoka in pious enthusiasm if not
in power and prosperity. He obviously set the Church above the state
and it was while he was on the throne that Bodhidharma came to China
and the first edition of the Tripitaka was prepared.

His reign, though primarily of importance for religion, was not
wanting in political interest, and witnessed a long conflict with Wei.
Wu-Ti was aided by the dissensions which distracted Wei but failed to
achieve his object, probably as a result of his religious
preoccupations, for he seemed unable to estimate the power of the
various adventurers who from time to time rose to pre-eminence in the
north and, holding war to be wrong, he was too ready to accept
insincere overtures for peace. Wei split into two states, the Eastern
and Western, and Hou-Ching,[627] a powerful general who was not
satisfied with his position in either, offered his services to Wu-Ti,
promising to add a large part of Ho-nan to his dominions. He failed in
his promise but Wu-Ti, instead of punishing him, first gave him a post
as governor and then listened to the proposals made by the ruler of
Eastern Wei for his surrender. On this Hou-Ching conspired with an
adopted son of Wu-Ti, who had been set aside as heir to the throne and
invested Nanking. The city was captured after the horrors of a
prolonged siege and Wu-Ti died miserably.

Wu-Ti was not originally a Buddhist. In fact until about 510, when he
was well over forty, he was conspicuous as a patron of Confucianism.
The change might be ascribed to personal reasons, but it is noticeable
that the same thing occurred in Wei, where a period of Confucianism
was succeeded by a strong wave of Buddhism which evidently swept over
all China. Hu,[628] the Dowager Empress of Wei, was a fervent devotee,
though of indifferent morality in both public and private life since
she is said to have poisoned her own son. In 518 she sent Sung Yun and
Hui Sheng[629] to Udyana in search of Buddhist books of which they
brought back 175.

Wu-Ti's conversion is connected with a wandering monk and magician
called Pao-Chih,[630] who received the privilege of approaching him at
all hours. A monastery was erected in Nanking at great expense and
edicts were issued forbidding not only the sacrifice of animals but
even the representation of living things in embroidery, on the ground
that people might cut up such figures and thus become callous to the
sanctity of life. The emperor expounded sutras in public and wrote a
work on Buddhist ritual.[631] The first Chinese edition of the
Tripitaka, in manuscript and not printed, was collected in 518.
Although Wu-Ti's edicts, particularly that against animal
sacrifices, gave great dissatisfaction, yet the Buddhist movement
seems to have been popular and not merely an imperial whim, for many
distinguished persons, for instance the authors Liu Hsieh and Yao
Ch'a,[632] took part in it.

In 520 (or according to others, in 525) Bodhidharma (generally called
Ta-mo in Chinese) landed in Canton from India. He is described as the
son of a king of a country called Hsiang-chih in southern India, and
the twenty-eighth Patriarch.[633] He taught that merit does not lie in
good works and that knowledge is not gained by reading the scriptures.
The one essential is insight, which comes as illumination after
meditation. Though this doctrine had subsequently much success in the
Far East, it was not at first appreciated and Bodhidharma's
introduction to the devout but literary Emperor in Nanking was a
fiasco. He offended his Majesty by curtly saying that he had acquired
no merit by causing temples to be built and books to be transcribed.
Then, in answer to the question, what is the most important of the
holy doctrines, he replied "where all is emptiness, nothing can be
called holy." "Who," asked the astonished Emperor, "is he who thus
replies to me?" "I do not know," said Bodhidharma.

Not being able to come to any understanding with Wu-Ti, Bodhidharma
went northwards, and is said to have crossed the Yang-tse standing on
a reed, a subject frequently represented in Chinese art.[634] He
retired to Lo-yang where he spent nine years in the Shao-Lin[635]
temple gazing silently at a wall, whence he was popularly known as the
wall-gazer. One legend says that he sat so long in contemplation that
his legs fell off, and a kind of legless doll which is a favourite
plaything in Japan is still called by his name. But according to
another tale he preserved his legs. He wished to return to India but
died in China. When Sung Yun, the traveller mentioned above, was
returning from India, he met him in a mountain pass bare-footed and
carrying one sandal in his hand.[636] When this was reported, his
coffin was opened and was found to contain nothing but the other
sandal which was long preserved as a precious relic in the Shao-Lin
temple.

Wu-Ti adopted many of the habits of a bonze. He was a strict
vegetarian, expounded the scriptures in public and wrote a work on
ritual. He thrice retired into a monastery and wore the dress of a
Bhikkhu. These retirements were apparently of short duration and his
ministers twice redeemed him by heavy payments.

In 538 a hair of the Buddha was sent by the king of Fu-nan and
received with great ceremony. In the next year a mission was
despatched to Magadha to obtain Sanskrit texts. It returned in 546
with a large collection of manuscripts and accompanied by the learned
Paramartha who spent twenty years in translating them.[637] Wu-Ti, in
his old age, became stricter. All luxury was suppressed at Court, but
he himself always wore full dress and showed the utmost politeness,
even to the lowest officials. He was so reluctant to inflict the
punishment of death that crime increased. In 547 he became a monk for
the third time and immediately afterwards the events connected with
Hou-Ching (briefly sketched above) began to trouble the peace of his
old age. During the siege of Nanking he was obliged to depart from his
vegetarian diet and eat eggs. When he was told that his capital was
taken he merely said, "I obtained the kingdom through my own efforts
and through me it has been lost. So I need not complain."

Hou-Ching proceeded to the palace, but,[638] overcome with awe, knelt
down before Wu-Ti who merely said, "I am afraid you must be fatigued
by the trouble it has cost you to destroy my kingdom." Hou-Ching was
ashamed and told his officers that he had never felt such fear
before and would never dare to see Wu-Ti again. Nevertheless, the aged
Emperor was treated with indignity and soon died of starvation. His
end, though melancholy, was peaceful compared with that in store for
Hou-Ching who, after two years of fighting and murdering, assumed the
imperial title, but immediately afterwards was defeated and slain. The
people ate his body in the streets of Nanking and his own wife is said
to have swallowed mouthfuls of his flesh.

One of Wu-Ti's sons, Yuan-Ti, who reigned from 552 to 555, inherited
his father's temper and fate with this difference that he was a
Taoist, not a Buddhist. He frequently resided in the temples of that
religion, studied its scriptures and expounded them to his people. A
great scholar, he had accumulated 140,000 volumes, but when it was
announced to him in his library that the troops of Wei were marching
on his capital, he yielded without resistance and burnt his books,
saying that they had proved of no use in this extremity.

This alternation of imperial patronage in the south may have been the
reason why Wen Hsuan Ti, the ruler of Northern Ch'i,[639] and for the
moment perhaps the most important personage in China, summoned
Buddhist and Taoist priests to a discussion in 555. Both religions
could not be true, he said, and one must be superfluous. After hearing
the arguments of both he decided in favour of Buddhism and ordered the
Taoists to become bonzes on pain of death. Only four refused and were
executed.

Under the short Ch'en dynasty (557-589) the position of Buddhism
continued favourable. The first Emperor, a mild and intelligent
sovereign, though circumstances obliged him to put a great many people
out of the way, retired to a monastery after reigning for two years.
But in the north there was a temporary reaction. Wu-Ti, of the
Northern Chou dynasty,[640] first of all defined the precedence of the
three religions as Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism and then, in 575,
prohibited the two latter, ordering temples to be destroyed and
priests to return to the world. But as usual the persecution was not
of long duration. Five years later Wu-Ti's son withdrew his father's
edict and in 582, the founder of the Sui dynasty, gave the population
permission to become monks. He may be said to have used Buddhism
as his basis for restoring the unity of the Empire and in his old age
he became devout. The Sui annals observe that Buddhist books had
become more numerous under this dynasty than those of the
Confucianists, and no less than three collections of the Tripitaka
were made between 594 and 616.

With the seventh century began the great T'ang dynasty (620-907).
Buddhism had now been known to the rulers of China for about 550
years. It began as a religion tolerated but still regarded as exotic
and not quite natural for the sons of Han. It had succeeded in
establishing itself as the faith of the majority among both Tartars
and Chinese. The rivalry of Taoism was only an instance of that
imitation which is the sincerest flattery. Though the opposition of
the mandarins assumed serious proportions whenever they could induce
an Emperor to share their views, yet the hostile attitude of the
Government never lasted long and was not shared by the mass of the
people. It is clear that the permissions to practise Buddhism which
invariably followed close on the prohibitions were a national relief.
Though Buddhism tended to mingle with Taoism and other indigenous
ideas, the many translations of Indian works and the increasing
intercourse between Chinese and Hindus had diffused a knowledge of its
true tenets and practice.

The T'ang dynasty witnessed a triangular war between Confucianism,
Buddhism and Taoism. As a rule Confucianism attacked the other two as
base superstitions but sometimes, as in the reign of Wu Tsung, Taoism
seized a chance of being able to annihilate Buddhism. This war
continued under the Northern Sung, though the character of Chinese
Buddhism changed, for the Contemplative School, which had considerable
affinities to Taoism, became popular at the expense of the T'ien T'ai.
After the Northern Sung (except under the foreign Mongol dynasty) we
feel that, though Buddhism was by no means dead and from time to time
flourished exceedingly, yet Confucianism had established its claim to
be the natural code and creed of the scholar and statesman. The
Chinese Court remained a strange place to the end but scholarship and
good sense had a large measure of success in banishing extravagance
from art and literature. Yet, alas, the intellectual life of China
lost more in fire and brilliancy than it gained in sanity. Probably
the most critical times for literature and indeed for thought were
those brief periods under the Sui and T'ang[641] when Buddhist and
Taoist books were accepted as texts for the public examinations and
the last half century of the Northern Sung, when the educational
reforms of Wang An Shih were intermittently in force. The innovations
were cancelled in all cases. Had they lasted, Chinese style and
mentality might have been different.

The T'ang dynasty, though on the whole favourable to Buddhism, and
indeed the period of its greatest prosperity, opened with a period of
reaction. To the founder, Kao Tsu, is attributed the saying that
Confucianism is as necessary to the Chinese as wings to a bird or
water to a fish. The imperial historiographer Fu I[642] presented to
his master a memorial blaming Buddhism because it undervalued natural
relationships and urging that monks and nuns should be compelled to
marry. He was opposed by Hsiao Yu,[643] who declared that hell was
made for such people as his opponent--an argument common to many
religions. The Emperor followed on the whole advice of Fu I.
Magistrates were ordered to inquire into the lives of monks and nuns.
Those found pure and sincere were collected in the large
establishments. The rest were ordered to return to the world and the
smaller religious houses were closed. Kao Tsu abdicated in 627 but his
son Tai Tsung continued his religious policy, and the new Empress was
strongly anti-Buddhist, for when mortally ill she forbade her son to
pray for her recovery in Buddhist shrines. Yet the Emperor cannot have
shared these sentiments at any rate towards the end of his reign.[644]
He issued an edict allowing every monastery to receive five new monks
and the celebrated journey of Hsuan Chuang[645] was made in his
reign. When the pilgrim returned from India, he was received with
public honours and a title was conferred on him. Learned monks were
appointed to assist him in translating the library he had brought back
and the account of his travels was presented to the Emperor who also
wrote a laudatory preface to his version of the Prajnaparamita. It was
in this reign also that Nestorian missionaries first appeared in China
and were allowed to settle in the capital. Diplomatic relations were
maintained with India. The Indian Emperor Harsha sent an envoy in 641
and two Chinese missions were despatched in return. The second, led by
Wang Hsuan-Ts'e,[646] did not arrive until after the death of Harsha
when a usurper had seized the throne. Wang Hsuan-Ts'e collected a
small army in Tibet, dethroned the usurper and brought him as a
prisoner to China.

The latter half of the seventh century is dominated by the figure of
the Dowager Empress Wu, the prototype of the celebrated lady who took
charge of China's fate in our own day and, like her, superhuman in
decision and unscrupulousness, yet capable of inspiring loyalty. She
was a concubine of the Emperor Tai Tsung and when he died in 649 lived
for a short time as a Buddhist nun. The eventful life of Wu Hou, who
was at least successful in maintaining order at home and on the
frontiers, belongs to the history of China rather than of Buddhism.
She was not an ornament of the faith nor an example of its principles,
but, mindful of the protection it had once afforded her, she gave it
her patronage even to the extent of making a bonze named Huai I[647]
the minister of her mature passions when she was nearly seventy
years old. A magnificent temple, at which 10,000 men worked daily, was
built for him, but the Empress was warned that he was collecting a
body of vigorous monks nominally for its service, but really for
political objects. She ordered these persons to be banished. Huai I
was angry and burnt the temple. The Empress at first merely ordered it
to be rebuilt, but finding that Huai I was growing disrespectful, she
had him assassinated.

We hear that the Mahamegha-sutra[648] was presented to her and
circulated among the people with her approval. About 690 she assumed
divine honours and accommodated these pretensions to Buddhism by
allowing herself to be styled Maitreya or Kuan-yin. After her death at
the age of 80, there does not appear to have been any religious
change, for two monks were appointed to high office and orders were
issued that Buddhist and Taoist temples should be built in every
Department. But the earlier part of the reign of Hsuan Tsung[649]
marks a temporary reaction. It was represented to him that rich
families wasted their substance on religious edifices and that the
inmates were well-to-do persons desirous of escaping the burdens of
public service. He accordingly forbade the building of monasteries,
making of images and copying of sutras, and 12,000 monks were ordered
to return to the world. In 725 he ordered a building known as "Hall of
the Assembled Spirits" to be renamed "Hall of Assembled Worthies,"
because spirits were mere fables.

In the latter part of his life he became devout though addicted to
Taoism rather than Buddhism. But he must have outgrown his
anti-Buddhist prejudices, for in 730 the seventh collection of the
Tripitaka was made under his auspices. Many poets of this period such
as Su Chin and the somewhat later Liu Tsung Yuan[650] were Buddhists
and the paintings of the great Wu Tao-tzu and Wang-wei (painter as
well as poet) glowed with the inspiration of the T'ien-t'ai teaching.
In 740 there were in the city of Ch'ang-An alone sixty-four
monasteries and twenty-seven nunneries. A curious light is thrown
on the inconsistent and composite character of Chinese religious
sentiment--as noticeable to-day as it was twelve hundred years ago--by
the will of Yao Ch'ung[651] a statesman who presented a celebrated
anti-Buddhist memorial to this Emperor. In his will he warns his
children solemnly against the creed which he hated and yet adds the
following direction. "When I am dead, on no account perform for me the
ceremonies of that mean religion. But if you feel unable to follow
orthodoxy in every respect, then yield to popular custom and from the
first seventh day after my death until the last (_i.e._ seventh)
seventh day, let mass be celebrated by the Buddhist clergy seven
times: and when, as these masses require, you must offer gifts to me,
use the clothes which I wore in life and do not use other valuable
things."

In 751 a mission was sent to the king of Ki-pin.[652] The staff
included Wu-K'ung,[653] also known as Dharmadhatu, who remained some
time in India, took the vows and ultimately returned to China with
many books and relics. It is probable that in this and the following
centuries Hindu influence reached the outlying province of Yunnan
directly through Burma.[654]

Letters, art and pageantry made the Court of Hsuan Tsung brilliant,
but the splendour faded and his reign ended tragically in disaster and
rebellion. The T'ang dynasty seemed in danger of collapse. But it
emerged successfully from these troubles and continued for a century
and a half. During the whole of this period the Emperors with one
exception[655] were favourable to Buddhism, and the latter half of the
eighth century marks in Buddhist history an epoch of increased
popularity among the masses but also the spread of ritual and
doctrinal corruption, for it is in these years that its connection
with ceremonies for the repose and honour of the dead became more
intimate.

These middle and later T'ang Emperors were not exclusive
Buddhists. According to the severe judgment of their own officials,
they were inclined to unworthy and outlandish superstitions. Many of
them were under the influence of eunuchs, magicians and soothsayers,
and many of those who were not assassinated died from taking the
Taoist medicine called Elixir of Immortality. Yet it was not a period
of decadence and dementia. It was for China the age of Augustus, not
of Heliogabalus. Art and literature flourished and against Han-Yu, the
brilliant adversary of Buddhism, may be set Liu Tsung Yuan,[656] a
writer of at least equal genius who found in it his inspiration. A
noble school of painting grew up in the Buddhist monasteries and in a
long line of artists may be mentioned the great name of Wu Tao-tzu,
whose religious pictures such as Kuan-yin, Purgatory and the death of
the Buddha obtained for him a fame which is still living. Among the
streams which watered this paradise of art and letters should
doubtless be counted the growing importance of Central and Western
Asia in Chinese policy and the consequent influx of their ideas. In
the mid T'ang period Manichaeism, Nestorianism and Zoroastrianism all
were prevalent in China. The first was the religion of the Uigurs. So
long as the Chinese had to keep on good terms with this tribe
Manichaeism was respected, but when they were defeated by the Kirghiz
and became unimportant, it was abruptly suppressed (843). In this
period, too, Tibet became of great importance for the Chinese. Their
object was to keep open the passes leading to Ferghana and India. But
the Tibetans sometimes combined with the Arabs, who had conquered
Turkestan, to close them and in 763 they actually sacked Chang An.
China endeavoured to defend herself by making treaties with the Indian
border states, but in 175 the Arabs inflicted a disastrous defeat on
her troops. A treaty of peace was subsequently made with Tibet.[657]

When Su-Tsung (756-762), the son of Hsuan-Tsung, was safely
established on the throne, he began to show his devotion to Buddhism.
He installed a chapel in the Palace which was served by several
hundred monks and caused his eunuchs and guards to dress up as
Bodhisattvas and Genii. His ministers, who were required to worship
these maskers, vainly remonstrated as also when he accepted a sort of
Sibylline book from a nun who alleged that she had ascended to heaven
and received it there.

The next Emperor, Tai-Tsung, was converted to Buddhism by his Minister
Wang Chin,[658] a man of great abilities who was subsequently
sentenced to death for corruption, though the Emperor commuted the
sentence to banishment. Tai-Tsung expounded the scriptures in public
himself and the sacred books were carried from one temple to another
in state carriages with the same pomp as the sovereign. In 768 the
eunuch Yu Chao-En[659] built a great Buddhist temple dedicated to the
memory of the Emperor's deceased mother. In spite of his minister's
remonstrances, His Majesty attended the opening and appointed 1000
monks and nuns to perform masses for the dead annually on the
fifteenth day of the seventh month. This anniversary became generally
observed as an All Souls' Day, and is still one of the most popular
festivals in China. Priests both Buddhist and Taoist recite prayers
for the departed, rice is scattered abroad to feed hungry ghosts and
clothes are burnt to be used by them in the land of shadows. Large
sheds are constructed in which are figures representing scenes from
the next world and the evening is enlivened by theatricals, music and
fire-works.[660]

The establishment of this festival was due to the celebrated teacher
Amogha (Pu-k'ung), and marks the official recognition by Chinese
Buddhism of those services for the dead which have rendered it popular
at the cost of forgetting its better aspects. Amogha was a native of
Ceylon (or, according to others, of Northern India), who arrived in
China in 719 with his teacher Vajrabodhi. After the latter's death he
revisited India and Ceylon in search of books and came back in 746. He
wished to return to his own country, but permission was refused and
until his death in 774 he was a considerable personage at Court,
receiving high rank and titles. The Chinese Tripitaka contains 108
translations[661] ascribed to him, mostly of a tantric character,
though to the honour of China it must be said that the erotic
mysticism of some Indian tantras never found favour there. Amogha is a
considerable, though not auspicious, figure in the history of Chinese
Buddhism, and, so far as such changes can be the work of one man, on
him rests the responsibility of making it become in popular estimation
a religion specially concerned with funeral rites.[662]

Some authors[663] try to prove that the influx of Nestorianism under
the T'ang dynasty had an important influence on the later development
of Buddhism in China and Japan and in particular that it popularized
these services for the dead. But this hypothesis seems to me unproved
and unnecessary. Such ceremonies were an essential part of Chinese
religion and no faith could hope to spread, if it did not countenance
them: they are prominent in Hinduism and not unknown to Pali
Buddhism.[664] Further the ritual used in China and Japan has often
only a superficial resemblance to Christian masses for the departed.
Part of it is magical and part of it consists in acquiring merit by
the recitation of scriptures which have no special reference to the
dead. This merit is then formally transferred to them. Doubtless
Nestorianism, in so far as it was associated with Buddhism, tended to
promote the worship of Bodhisattvas and prayers addressed directly to
them, but this tendency existed independently and the Nestorian
monument indicates not that Nestorianism influenced Buddhism but that
it abandoned the doctrine of the atonement.

In 819 a celebrated incident occurred. The Emperor Hsien-Tsung had
been informed that at the Fa-men monastery in Shen-si a bone of the
Buddha was preserved which every thirty years exhibited miraculous
powers. As this was the auspicious year, he ordered the relic to be
brought in state to the capital and lodged in the Imperial Palace,
after which it was to make the round of the monasteries in the city.
This proceeding called forth an animated protest from Han-Yu,[665] one
of the best known authors and statesmen then living, who presented a
memorial, still celebrated as a masterpiece. The following extract
will give an idea of its style. "Your Servant is well aware that your
Majesty does not do this (give the bone such a reception) in the vain
hope of deriving advantage therefrom but that in the fulness of our
present plenty there is a desire to comply with the wishes of the
people in the celebration at the capital of this delusive mummery....
For Buddha was a barbarian. His language was not the language of
China. His clothes were of an alien cut. He did not utter the maxims
of our ancient rulers nor conform to the customs which they have
handed down. He did not appreciate the bond between prince and
minister, the tie between father and son. Had this Buddha come to our
capital in the flesh, your Majesty might have received him with a few
words of admonition, giving him a banquet and a suit of clothes,
before sending him out of the country with an escort of soldiers.

"But what are the facts? The bone of a man long since dead and
decomposed is to be admitted within the precincts of the Imperial
Palace. Confucius said, 'respect spiritual beings but keep them at a
distance.' And so when princes of old paid visits of condolence, it
was customary to send a magician in advance with a peach-rod in his
hand, to expel all noxious influences before the arrival of his
master. Yet now your Majesty is about to introduce without reason a
disgusting object, personally taking part in the proceedings without
the intervention of the magician or his wand. Of the officials not one
has raised his voice against it: of the Censors[666] not one has
pointed out the enormity of such an act. Therefore your servant,
overwhelmed with shame for the Censors, implores your Majesty that
these bones may be handed over for destruction by fire or water,
whereby the root of this great evil may be exterminated for all time
and the people may know how much the wisdom of your Majesty surpasses
