
Annie walked quickly until she came to number thirty. Then, raising her
eyes and seeing Mrs. Myrtle's name over the door, she boldly entered.
The shop was the sort that ladies delight in. One side of it was
entirely devoted to the best class of haberdashery, the other was
extremely attractive with coloured wools and silks, and all sorts of
materials for crewel and other fancy works. A thin, pale girl, of about
sixteen, was attending to the haberdashery department, and a little old
lady, with pink cheeks, bright dark eyes and white hair, was busily
serving several customers at the fancy goods side.

Annie had to wait until these customers had completed their business.
The girl who had charge of the haberdashery asked if she could serve
her.

"I wish to speak to Mrs. Myrtle," replied Annie in a decided tone. The
little woman raised her head at hearing her own name pronounced, and
said in a respectful voice--

"I'll be at leisure to serve you in a moment, miss."

"She seems very nice," said Annie to herself; "she has a decidedly kind
face. What can there be objectionable in pawnbrokers, if she is one?
Perhaps I'd better call her aunt; she'll be sure to like it."

In a couple of moments Mrs. Myrtle was at leisure, and Annie went up to
the counter. Now that the critical instant had come, she felt her heart
beating quickly, and knew that her cheeks were pale. Annie could look
wonderfully pathetic when any emotion stirred her. She had a voice full
of vibrations, and her eyes could assume the dumb pleading expression of
a dog's.

"I want to speak to you about a very private matter," she said, looking
full at Mrs. Myrtle.

The little woman could not help giving her a glance of great surprise.
What could such a pretty, nicely-dressed young lady want with her; then
suddenly it flashed through her mind that Annie must want to buy a
present; perhaps the present was for her sweetheart; if so, the state of
affairs was perfectly natural.

"Yes, miss," she said, in a cordial voice of sympathy, "but Netty, my
niece, is a bit deaf and won't hear a word you're saying. I have got
some really nice things, miss, and quite suitable; tobacco pouches made
of different coloured plushes, and flowers traced very beautifully on
them; you could work the pouch yourself, miss, and it would look most
suitable; then I've got braces, too; they're quite the newest thing, and
can be embroidered with any colour, and cases for gentlemen's evening
ties, they really are very new; shall I show you some, miss?"

"Oh, no, thank you," said Annie in a choking voice. "I'm in an awful
hurry and I don't want to buy any present for a gentleman; I don't know
any gentleman except my father well enough to think of giving presents
to. No, no, I don't want to buy anything, but I want--I want you to give
me something, aunt."

Mrs. Myrtle looked at Annie as if she were now quite sure that the poor
pretty young lady was not quite right in her head. She did not speak at
all, but waited for Annie to continue.

"You're a female pawnbroker, are you not?" said Annie.

"A female what, my dear?" said Mrs. Myrtle, her face growing crimson.
This was really the last straw. "I don't understand you, miss," she said
in a stiff tone. "I have nothing whatever to do with the trade you
indicate."

Just then some ladies, very good customers, entered the shop.

"You'll excuse me for a moment, miss," said Mrs. Myrtle; "but if you
don't want to buy, I shall be obliged to leave you to attend to my
customers. Good morning, Lady Dalgetty; what can I show your ladyship?"

Poor Annie found herself pushed into a corner. Lady Dalgetty and her
suite occupied all Mrs. Myrtle's attention. Even the humble-looking
Netty was busy serving out spools of cotton, needles, and pins to a
prim-looking lady. Neither of the women in the shop had a moment to
attend to Annie's sore need.

She began to think that Mrs. Myrtle was not so kind as she looked, and
to understand a little of nurse's repugnance to the pawnbroker class.

"They must be low people," she murmured to herself; "for this woman
won't even own to the fact that she is a pawnbroker."

The shop became empty once more; and Mrs. Myrtle, who was really quite
as kind hearted as she looked, raised her eyes, and encountered a very
forlorn glance from Annie.

"Poor, pretty young lady," she said to herself. "She's gone in the head
without any manner of doubt, calling me aunt, and asking me if I'm a
female pawnbroker; but I'd best humour her a bit, and try to find out
who she belongs to."

Accordingly Mrs. Myrtle called Annie back to the counter in a kind
voice.

"I can attend to you now, miss," she said; "but if you have anything to
say, perhaps you'll say it quickly, for this is market day, and heaps of
farmer's wives come in for no end of small matters."

"Do they pawn rings, and then take them out by degrees in instalments?"
asked poor Annie in an eager voice.

"Poor, poor young lady, she's very, very bad," murmured Mrs. Myrtle to
herself.

"I couldn't say for positive, miss," she replied, "that a farmer's wife
has never pawned a ring; but if they are reduced to such straits, I know
nothing about it."

"Then you are not a pawnbroker yourself?"

"I am _not_, miss. Wouldn't you like to come into my parlour and rest a
bit if you're tired, and maybe you'll tell me your name?"

"She's getting quite kind again," thought Annie. "Of course she is a
pawnbroker, but she doesn't like to own it; it evidently is a very
disgraceful calling."

"My name is Annie Forest," she said; "and I'm not at all tired, thank
you, aunt. You don't mind me calling you aunt, do you? for we always
call the men in your trade uncles."

"I hope heaven will preserve my patience," muttered poor Mrs. Myrtle.
"I must get this young lady to her friends whatever happens. Netty!"

"Oh, don't call Netty here," exclaimed Annie. "Now, look here, do you
see this piece of blue paper?"

"Yes, miss. It's my address, sure and certain."

"Do you know the handwriting?"

"Well, I can't say that I do; it seems a sort of an ordinary hand, don't
it, miss?"

"Is Mrs. Martin, who lives at the Grange, a friend of yours?" asked
Annie suddenly.

Mrs. Myrtle's face glowed all over with pleased relief.

"Mrs. Martin of the Grange," she exclaimed, "old nurse to Miss Hester
and Miss Nan Thornton? I should rather think she is a friend of mine. I
have known her ever since we went to school together, and that's many a
year ago."

"Oh, how glad I am," exclaimed Annie; "then I am sure, quite sure, you
will be kind to me. You will do what I ask for the sake of your friend
Mrs. Martin. You won't mind just confiding to me that you are a
pawnbroker? I promise most faithfully not to call you aunt if you really
dislike it."

"I'm afraid I don't understand you, Miss Forest. I am _not_ a
pawnbroker; not one of my belongings would own to such a trade; and if
Patty Martin gave you to understand that I am, I'll quarrel with her,
late as it is in the day."

"But she pawned a ring to you," said Annie; "an old-fashioned gold ring
with one big diamond in the middle. You lent her thirty shillings on it,
and the interest is two shillings. That ring is mine. She did pawn a
ring to you, did she not?"

A light at last broke over Mrs. Myrtle's face.

"Well, well," she exclaimed; "I begin to see what you're driving at.
Won't I have a crow to pick with Patty Martin for this. No, no, miss,
she pawned no ring to me; but she gave me a diamond ring to keep for her
early one morning about three weeks ago. 'And keep it safe until I ask
for it, Martha Myrtle,' said she; and safe I will keep it until then,
Miss Annie Forest."

"But it's my ring," said Annie in great distress. "You'll give it back
to me now when I ask for it?"

"I'll give it back to Patty Martin, miss, and to no one else."

"Oh, but really, really, don't you understand? It's _my_ ring."

"I've only your word for that, miss. It was given to me by Mrs. Martin."

"But I know Patty Martin would let you give it back to me. Why, she gave
me your address and told me to go to you; and I thought, of course, you
were a pawnbroker."

"Won't I have a crow to pluck with her for this?" exclaimed Mrs. Myrtle.
"Pawnbroker, indeed! Why my poor mother who's dead would rise up from
her grave if she thought I was called by such a name. No, miss, I'm
sorry not to oblige, but Mrs. Martin gave me the ring to keep for her,
and she must come herself to fetch it away, for to no one else will I
give it."

Some farmers' wives, looking flourishing and handsome and full of
purpose, now entered the shop. Mrs. Myrtle devoted all her energies to
serving them, and poor Annie with sinking heart had to go away.




CHAPTER XV.

"THE WAY OF TRANSGRESSORS."


The week that followed passed all too quickly. There was no hitch
whatever in the girls' plans. Mrs. Lorrimer wrote to Molly to express
her complete satisfaction with the arrangement proposed by Hester. The
workwomen who had now taken up their abode at the Grange were both
efficient and clever. With Annie's help the different dresses began to
assume form and completion with marvellous rapidity. Annie was the life
and soul of the dressmaking. She sketched pictures of the proposed
toilettes; she coloured these sketches; then she tried on and cut out,
and basted, and tacked. She helped to hang draperies and to arrange the
wings of the fairies. The women became interested themselves in such an
artistic assistant, and did everything in their power to help her. At
the Towers the ball-room began to show its noble proportions to the best
advantage. Hester and Annie and Nan and Molly went backwards and
forwards at all hours of the day. By Monday evening, the ball-room was
in complete order. Every possible direction was given with regard to the
different refreshments, and the last stitch in the pretty fancy dresses
had been done. The news of Nan's fancy ball had spread far and wide.
Almost every invitation met with an acceptance, and the Thornton and
Lorrimer households were borne forward just at present on a full tide of
victorious excitement. Even Molly felt herself obliged to enter into
the full spirit of the fun. Not a murmur of anxiety from her father and
mother in London reached her. Mrs. Lorrimer, in writing to Molly, had
assumed as cheerful a tone as possible; she had alluded to no possible
care, had hinted at no canker root of possible trouble. She had said, it
is true, that it was rather unlikely that she and the Squire would
return in time for the ball; but if this could not be managed, she hoped
the children would enjoy themselves to the full in their absence; and
finally, she said how heartily she rejoiced in the thought of their
having such a delightful time. Hester also forgot the small worrying
thought which came to her now and again about her father, in this week
of rush and pleasure. Hester was by nature a very quiet-mannered girl,
but she became nearly as lively now as Annie; she laughed, and joked,
and danced, and skipped until Mrs. Martin, who watched her from the
nursery window, began to shake her head gravely, and to say that such
mirth was not "fey" as she expressed it, and that it surely forbode a
season of gloom by-and-by.

Annie's high spirits being natural to her, no one specially noticed
them, and according to her custom, she put dull care aside and was as
lively as she looked.

It is true that she had been obliged to ignore Mrs. Willis's letter; it
is true that the ring was still being jealously guarded by that dreadful
Mrs. Myrtle, for Annie had not the courage to ask Mrs. Martin for it.
The whole situation was now quite plain; Mrs. Martin had never gone near
the pawnbroker's, but had lent Annie the money herself. Why she had
parted with the ring under these circumstances was a problem which poor
Annie could not attempt to fathom. All she could do now was to abide the
issue of events as patiently as possible. All her life long she had
found that, somehow or other, matters did right themselves for her, and
she trusted to her usual good luck on this occasion.

The preparations were almost all completed for the fancy ball by Monday
night. Nan's birthday would be on Wednesday. No second letter had
arrived from Sir John Thornton, and Hester wondered whether he would be
present on the birthday or not. The day was to be one long scene of
triumph for the young birthday queen. Annie and Hester both stole out of
bed at an early hour that morning, and going out into the garden, they
picked baskets full of flowers with the dew on them, with which they
made wreaths to decorate the breakfast table, and to cover the piles of
presents which lay not only on Nan's plate, but all round it.

As soon as Nan appeared in the breakfast-room, Annie tripped up to her,
bent on one knee as if to a liege lady, told her that she was her lawful
sovereign for that entire day, and then begged leave to crown the
birthday queen with flowers. Nan's cheeks were flushed already, and her
eyes bright with excitement. Molly came in by-and-by, and Nora, who was
now much better, was wheeled into the room on her sofa. She wore the
white cambric dress which Annie had made for her. Her dark hair was
swept back from her pretty, low forehead, her cheeks had roses in them,
and her eyes sparkled.

"Molly, Molly," she exclaimed, "look at me, look at me. Now you know the
secret of the locked door. Annie made me this frock; she had some bits
of cambric over from dresses of her own, and she made this and a blue
one, and a pink one also; I have the other two in my drawer; I know they
are all sweetly becoming, aren't they? It's nearly as good as having a
_trousseau_. Oh, do kiss me and congratulate me, Molly; you know how I
have always longed for pretty dresses. Was not it perfectly _darling_ of
Annie to make them for me?"

Before Molly could reply a loud exclamation from Hester turned all eyes
in her direction.

"What do you think?" she exclaimed. "The crowning bliss of our day is
come. Nan, you will never guess. Annie, dear, how charmed you will be.
Here is a letter from Mrs. Willis; she expects to reach Nortonbury by
the mid-day train, and asks me to send to meet her. Oh, dear, this is
lovely. I have not seen my dear Mrs. Willis for over a year. What a rest
and comfort it will be to talk to her again. Molly, you will delight in
her; she is just the woman to captivate you completely. Nora, you will
lose your heart to her, too. I don't know what wonderful thing there is
about her; she is so strong, so noble, so gentle, that she wins all
hearts; it is impossible for anybody to be naughty when Mrs. Willis is
in the house. Nan, the arrival of Mrs. Willis on your birthday is the
happiest possible omen for the whole year. Oh, how truly rejoiced I am!"

"Yes, it's awfully jolly of her to come," said Nan. "Of course I'm very
fond of her, but I hope she won't remind me of my holiday task, for,
frankly, I have not looked at it yet, and I don't mean to do so until
the last week of the holidays. Now, do let's all begin breakfast; even
though I am queen, I happen to have an appetite. Annie, what are you in
a brown study about? Why, you look quite pale!"

"I expect Annie is so glad about Mrs. Willis that she can scarcely
speak," said Hester, glancing at her friend in an affectionate manner.
"Yes, we had better get breakfast through. I shall give Mrs. Willis the
maple room, with that lovely west view. There is a little sitting-room
which goes with it, where she can be quiet whenever she wants to be
quiet. How glad nursey will be when she hears that dear Mrs. Willis is
coming."

Hester began to perform the duties of tea-maker in a rather abstracted
manner. As she kept on filling up cups of tea, she also glanced from
time to time at the letter which gave her such delight.

"It is such a surprise," she said; "perhaps that is half the pleasure."

"Please don't put any more sugar into my tea," exclaimed Annie in an
almost cross voice; "you know I never touch sugar, and that is the
fourth lump."

"Oh, I am sorry," exclaimed Hester; "I'll take that cup and you shall
have mine."

