suit and prepared to stand watch. But that was too much. He
over-estimated his capacity. He had come through thirty hours of
hellish sleep-denied delirium, and he could not stave sleep off any
longer. He staggered and went down, and his eyelids were glued in
sleep when his body hit the ground.

But mechanically, with an instinct that sleep could not deny, his left
hand kept clasped around the butt of the ray-gun....

       *       *       *       *       *

Satellite III's day has an average of seven hours' duration, her night
of six. It was perhaps the last hour of daylight when the three metal
and fabric-clad figures lying outsprawled on the little thumb-shaped
piece of soil had landed. Now quickly the huge sweeping rim of Jupiter
plunged down, and night fell over the land.

Fierce darkness. Jungle and swamp awoke with their scale of savage
life. Swift swooping shapes winged out from the trees, prey-hungry
eyes gleaming green. And from the swamps came bellowings and stirrings
from monster mud-encrusted bodies, awakening to their nocturnal quest
for food. The night reechoed with the harsh cacophony of their cries.

With lumbering caution, its smooth knob head waving on a long
reptilian neck, its heavy armored tail dragging behind its body's
folds of flesh, a giant night-thing came stumping out of a copse of
jungle growth--a buru. Its eyes were watchful, but centered mainly on
the pool of water to one side of the peninsula of firm soil. Its
drinking water was there. With several pauses, it went right out on
the spit, and a flat-bottomed foot twice the size of an elephant's
missed one of the sleeping forms by inches. But the buru cared not for
them. It was not a flesh-eater. Its undulating neck stretched far out;
its head dipped; water was lapped up--until it caught sight of the
uprooted giant stump lying pitched in the pool. The beast drank but
little after that, and retreated as cautiously as it had come.

Five or six of its fellows of the swamps followed at intervals to the
water, grotesque hulking shapes, odorous and slimy with mud. All drank
from the same spot; all ignored, save for a tentative rooting snuffle,
the unconscious figures lying puny beneath them. But all noticed the
twisted roots of the stump, sticking out in a score of directions, and
avoided them.

And then there came smaller, more cautious animals who did not drink
from the favored spot, who surveyed it, sniffed, hesitated, and
finally retreated. There was a good reason for this caution.

For with the falling of night the stump had been at least thirty feet
out in the water; now it was not ten feet from the side of the spit,
and not twelve feet from the nearest sleeping figure. The suits that
clad the three figures were sealed, the face-plates closed, so there
was probably--after their trip through the void--no man smell to
attract the giants of swamp and trees. But those three figures had
moved. That was lure enough for one monster.

When the first ruddy arrows of Jupiter's light laced through the
jungle's highest foliage, the twisted, gnarled stump was settled on
the peninsula's rim, half out of the water. And when day burst, when
Jupiter's flaming arch pushed over into view, the long seeming-roots
eeled forward in sinuous reptilian life.

       *       *       *       *       *

In one second Hawk Carse was snatched from sleep into the turmoil of a
fight for life.

Something hard and enormously powerful was wrapping his waist with a
vise-like grip that threatened to cut him in two. He felt a leg go up
and crumple back, almost breaking under the force of a lashing blow.
He was squeezed in, caged, compressed, by a score of tough, encircling
tentacles, and his whole body was drawn toward a wide, flexible,
black-lipped mouth yawning in the center of the monster he had thought
a stump. Moving with loathsome life, its sinewy root-tentacles sucking
him whole into the maw, the thing hunched itself back to the water.

The water frothed around Carse. He had been too dazed to resist; he
had not known what had gripped him in his unconsciousness and
weakness. But he remembered his ray-gun.

The lips of the hideous mouth were pressing close. Both were now under
the surface. Carse's suit was still tight and he could breathe even
while totally submerged in the water. He strained his left arm against
the tentacle that looped it, worked the ray-gun still clasped in his
hand in line with the thing's monstrous carcass, and at once, gasping
and sick, pulled the trigger clear back.

The orange stream sizzled as it cleared a path through the water and
bit true into the gaping mouth. There sounded a curious, subterranean
sob; beady eyes on each side of the mouth bulged; the woodish body
quivered in agony. Its tentacles slackened, and, half fainting, the
Hawk wrenched free. He staggered up onto the land, streams of water
running off the suit, and toppled over; and from there he saw the
thing drag its writhing shuddering shape farther out from the shore.
When perhaps sixty feet away it again subsided into a "harmless"
uprooted old stump....

       *       *       *       *       *

Carse lay resting and collecting himself for a quarter of an hour,
while Leithgow and Friday slept on, unconscious of what had happened;
then he got to his feet, opened their face-plates and bathed
Leithgow's pale brow with water. The scientist awoke with the
quickness of old men, but Friday stirred and stretched and blinked and
sat up at last, yawning.

The Hawk answered their questions about his wet suit with a brief
explanation of the fight, then got down to business.

"There's water here, but we must have food," he said. "Friday, you go
back and find fruit; some isuan weed, too, if it's growing nearby. A
chew of it will stimulate us. Keep your ray-gun ready. I wouldn't be
here if I'd not had mine."

The isuan was a big help. In its prepared form it is degrading,
mind-destroying, but in natural state it gives a powerful and
comparatively harmless stimulation. Chewing on the leaves that the
Negro brought back, they made strength and renewed vitality for their
bodies, and came, for the first time since they had started their
flight through space, to a near-normal state. Meaty, yellow globules
of pear-like fruit, followed by prudent drafts of water, aided also.
Friday's long-absent grin returned as he bit into the juicy fruit, and
he announced through a mouthful:

"Well, things're lookin' sunny again! We've got food and water inside
us; we can reach Master Leithgow's laboratory in these here suits; an'
to top it all we've finished high an' mighty Ku Sui. He's dead at
last! Boy, it sure feels good to know it!"

Eliot Leithgow was lying back, breathing deeply of the fresh morning
air. His lined, worn face and body were relaxed. "Yes," he murmured,
"it is good to know that Dr. Ku is now just a thing of the past. He
and his coordinated brains." He glanced aside at the Hawk, sitting
silent and still, and stroking, as always when in meditation, the
bangs of flaxen hair which obscured his forehead. "Why so serious,
Carse?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The adventurer's gray eyes were cold and sober. No relaxation showed
in them. His hand paused in its slow smoothing movement and he spoke.

"Why I overlooked it before," he said quietly, almost as if to
himself, "I don't know. Probably because I was too tired, and too
busy, and too sick to think. But now I see."

"What?" Leithgow sat up straight.

"Eliot," said the Hawk clearly, "doesn't it seem strange to you that
Ku Sui's asteroid continued to be invisible after we had smashed
through its dome?"

"What do you mean?"

"We've assumed that our smashing the dome and opening it to space
killed Ku Sui and everyone inside, and destroyed all the mechanisms,
including the coordinated brains. But the mechanism controlling the
asteroid's invisibility was not destroyed. The place remained
invisible."

The old scientist's face grew tense. Carse paused for a moment.

"That means," he went on, "that Ku Sui provided the invisibility
machine with special protection for just such an emergency. And do you
think he would give it such protection and not his coordinated brains?
Wouldn't he first protect the brains, his most cherished possession?"

Eliot Leithgow knew what this meant. The Hawk had promised the brains
in that machine--brains of five renowned scientists, kept cruelly,
unnaturally alive by Dr. Ku--that he would destroy them. And his
promises were always kept.

There was no evading the logic of this reasoning. The Master Scientist
nodded. "Yes," he answered. "He certainly would."

"I couldn't damage the case they were in," Carse continued. "The whole
device seemed self-contained. It means just one thing: special
protection. Since the mechanism for invisibility survived the crashing
of the dome, we may be sure that the brain machine did too. And more
than that: we may assume that there was special protection for the
most precious thing of all to Dr. Ku Sui--his own life."

Friday's mouth gaped open. The old scientist cried out:

"My God! Ku Sui--still alive?"

"It would seem so," said Hawk Carse.

He amplified his evidence. "Look at these space-suits we're wearing.
We got them and escaped by them, but they're Dr. Ku's. Couldn't he
have protected himself with one too? He had plenty of time. And then
the construction of the asteroid's buildings--all metal, with tight,
sealed doors! Oh, stupid, stupid! Why didn't I see it all before?
Here, in my weakness and sickness, I thought we'd killed Ku Sui and
destroyed the coordinated brains!"

Leithgow looked suddenly very old and tired. The calamity did not end
there. There were other angles, and an immediate one of high danger.
In a lifeless voice he said:
