positions of a few stars when observed from opposite points of the
terrestrial orbit.

It had long been the ambitious desire of astronomers to accomplish, if
possible, a measurement of the abyss which separates our system from the
nearest of the fixed stars. No imaginary measuring line had ever been
stretched across this region of space, nor had its unfathomed depths
ever been sounded by any effort of the human mind. The stars were known
to be inconceivably remote, but how far away no person could tell, nor
did there exist any guide by which an approximation of their distances
could be arrived at.

In attempting to calculate the distances of the stars, astronomers have
had recourse to a method called 'Parallax,' by which is meant the
apparent change of position of a heavenly body when viewed from two
different points of observation.

The annual parallax of a heavenly body is the angle subtended at that
body by the radius of the Earth's orbit.

The stars have no diurnal parallax, because, owing to their great
distance, the Earth's radius does not subtend any measurable angle, but
the radius of the Earth's orbit, which is immensely larger, does, in the
case of a few stars, subtend a very minute angle.

'This enormous base line of 183 millions of miles is barely sufficient,
in conjunction with the use of the most delicate and powerful
astronomical instruments, to exhibit the minutest measureable
displacement of two or three of the nearest stars.'--Proctor.

The efforts of early astronomers to detect any perceptible alteration in
the positions of the stars when observed from any point of the
circumference of the Earth's orbit were unsuccessful. Copernicus
ascribed the absence of any parallax to the immense distances of the
stars as compared with the dimensions of the terrestrial orbit. Tycho
Brahe, though possessing better appliances, and instruments of more
perfect construction, was unable to perceive any annual displacement of
the stars, and brought this forward as evidence against the Copernican
theory.

Galileo suggested a method of obtaining the parallax of the fixed stars,
by observing two stars of unequal magnitude apparently near to each
other, though really far apart. Those, when observed from different
points of the Earth's orbit, would appear to change their positions
relatively to each other. The smaller and more distant star would remain
unaltered, whilst the larger and nearer star would have changed its
position with respect to the other. By continuing to observe the larger
star during the time that the Earth accomplished a revolution of her
orbit, Galileo believed that its parallax might be successfully
determined. Though he did not himself put this method into practice, it
has been tried by others with successful results.

In 1669, Hooke made the first attempt to ascertain the parallax of a
fixed star, and selected for this purpose Gamma Draconis, a bright star
in the Head of the Dragon. This constellation passed near the zenith of
London at the time that he made his observations, and was favourably
situated, so as to avoid the effects of refraction. Hooke made four
observations in the months of July, August, and October, and believed
that he determined the parallax of the star; but it was afterwards
discovered that he was in error, and that the apparent displacement of
the star was mainly due to the aberration of light--a phenomenon which
was not discovered at that time.

A few years later, Picard, a French astronomer, attempted to find the
parallax of Alpha Lyrae, but was unsuccessful. In 1692-93, Roemer, a
Danish astronomer, observed irregularities in the declinations of the
stars which could neither be ascribed to parallax or refraction, and
which he imagined resulted from a changing position of the Earth's axis.

One of the principal causes which baffled astronomers in their
endeavours to determine the parallax of the fixed stars was a phenomenon
called the 'Aberration of Light,' which was discovered and explained by
Bradley in 1727. The peculiar effect of aberration was perceived by him
when endeavouring to obtain the parallax of Gamma Draconis.

Owing to the progressive transmission of light, conjointly with the
motion of the Earth in her orbit, there results an apparent slight
displacement of a star from its true position. The extent of the
displacement depends upon the ratio of the velocity of light as compared
with the speed of the Earth in her orbit, which is as 10,000 to 1. As a
consequence of this, each star describes a small ellipse in the course
of a year, the central point of which would indicate the place occupied
by the star if the Earth were at rest. The shifting position of the star
is very slight, and at the end of a year it returns to its former place.

Prior to the discovery of aberration, astronomers ascribed the apparent
displacement of the stars arising from this cause as being due to
parallax--a conclusion which led to erroneous results; but after
Bradley's discovery this source of error was avoided, and it was found
that the parallax of the stars had to be considerably reduced.

Bessel was the first astronomer who merited the high distinction of
having determined the first reliable stellar parallax, and by this
achievement he was enabled to fathom the profound abyss which separates
our solar system from the stars.

Frederick William Bessel was born in 1764 at Minden, in Westphalia. It
was his intention to pursue a mercantile career, and he commenced life
by becoming apprenticed to a firm of merchants at Bremen. Soon
afterwards he accompanied a trading expedition to China and the East
Indies, and while on this voyage picked up a good deal of information
with regard to many matters which came under his observation. He
acquired a knowledge of Spanish and English, and made himself acquainted
with the art of navigation. On his return home, Bessel endeavoured to
determine the longitude of Bremen. The only appliances which he made use
of were a sextant constructed by himself, and a common clock; and yet,
with those rude instruments, he successfully accomplished his object.
During the next two years he devoted all his spare time to the study of
mathematics and astronomy, and, having obtained possession of Harriot's
observations of the celebrated comet of 1607--known as Halley's
comet--Bessel, after much diligent application and careful calculation,
was enabled to deduce from them an orbit, which he assigned to that
remarkable body. This meritorious achievement was the means of procuring
for him a widely known reputation.

A vacancy for an assistant having occurred at Schroeter's Observatory at
Lilienthal, the post was offered to Bessel and accepted by him. Here he
remained for four years, and was afterwards appointed Director of the
new Prussian Observatory at Koenigsberg, where he pursued his
astronomical labours for a period of upwards of thirty years. Bessel
directed his energies chiefly to the study of stellar astronomy, and
made many observations in determining the number, the exact positions,
and proper motions of the stars. He was remarkable for the precision
with which he carried out his observations, and for the accuracy which
characterised all his calculations.

In 1837 Bessel, by the exercise of his consummate skill, endeavoured to
solve a problem which for many years baffled the efforts of the ablest
astronomers, viz., the determination of the parallax of the fixed stars.
This had been so frequently attempted, and without success, that the
results of any new observations were received with incredulity before
their value could be ascertained.

Bessel was ably assisted by Joseph Frauenhofer, an eminent optician of
Munich, who constructed a magnificent heliometer for the Observatory at
Koenigsberg, and in its design introduced a principle which admirably
adapted it for micrometrical measurement.

The star selected by Bessel is a binary known as 61 Cygni, the
components being of magnitudes 5.5 and 6 respectively. It has a large
proper motion, which led him to conclude that its parallax must be
considerable.

This star will always be an object of interest to astronomers, as it was
the first of the stellar multitude that revealed to Bessel the secret of
its distance.

Bessel commenced his observations in October 1837, and continued them
until March 1840. During this time he made 402 measurements, and, before
arriving at a conclusive result, carefully considered every imaginable
cause of error, and rigorously calculated any inaccuracies that might
arise therefrom. Finally, he determined the parallax of the star to be
0''.3483--a result equivalent to a distance about 600,000 times that of
the Earth from the Sun. In 1842-43 M. Peters, of the Pulkova
Observatory, arrived at an almost similar result, having obtained a
parallax of 0''.349; but by more recent observations the parallax of the
star has been increased to about half a second.

About the same time that Bessel was occupied with his observation of 61
Cygni, Professor Henderson, of Edinburgh, when in charge of the
Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope, directed his attention to Alpha
Centauri, one of the brightest stars in the Southern Hemisphere. During
1832-33 he made a series of observations of the star, with the object
of ascertaining its mean declination; and, having been informed
afterwards of its large proper motion, he resolved to make an endeavour
to determine its parallax. This he accomplished after his return to
Scotland, having been appointed Astronomer Royal in that country. By an
examination of the observations made by him at the Cape, he determined
the parallax of Alpha Centauri to be 1''.16, but later astronomers have
reduced it to 0''.75.

Professor Henderson's detection of the parallax of Alpha Centauri was
communicated to the Astronomical Society two months after Bessel
announced his determination of the parallax of 61 Cygni.

The parallax of 61 Cygni assigns to the star a distance of forty
billions of miles from the Earth, and that of Alpha Centauri--regarded
as the nearest star to our system--a distance of twenty-five billions of
miles.

It is utterly beyond the capacity of the human mind to form any adequate
conception of those vast distances, even when measured by the velocity
with which the ether of space is thrilled into light. Light, which
travels twelve millions of miles in a minute, requires 4-1/3 years to
cross the abyss which intervenes between Alpha Centauri and the Earth,
and from 61 Cygni the period required for light to reach our globe is
rather less than double that time.

The parallax of more than a dozen other stars has been determined, and
the light passage of a few of the best known is estimated as
follows:--Sirius, eight years; Procyon, twelve; Altair, sixteen;
Aldebaran, twenty-eight; Capella, thirty; Regulus, thirty-five; Polaris,
sixty-three; and Vega, ninety-six years.

It does not always follow that the brightest stars are those situated
nearest to our system, though in a general way this may be regarded as
correct. The diminishing magnitudes of the stars can be accounted for
mainly by their increased distances, rather than by any difference in
their intrinsic brilliancy. We should not err by inferring that the most
minute stars are also the most remote; the telescope revealing thousands
that are invisible to the naked eye. There are, however, exceptions to
this general rule, and there are many stars of small magnitude less
remote than those whose names have been enumerated, and whose light
passage testifies to their profound distances and surpassing magnitude
when compared with that of our Sun.

Sirius, 'the leader of the heavenly host,' is distant fifty billions of
miles. The orb shines with a brilliancy far surpassing that of the Sun,
and greatly exceeds him in mass and dimensions. Arcturus, the bright
star in Booetes, whose golden yellow light renders it such a conspicuous
object, is so far distant that its measurement gives no reliable
parallax; and if we may infer from what little we know of the stars,
Arcturus is believed to be the most magnificent and massive orb entering
into the structure of that portion of the sidereal system which comes
within our cognisance. Judging by its relative size and brightness,
this star is ten thousand times more luminous, and may exceed the Sun
one million times in volume.

Deneb, in the constellation of the Swan, though a first-magnitude star,
possesses no perceptible proper motion or parallax--a circumstance
indicative of amazing distance, and magnitude equalling, or surpassing,
Arcturus and Sirius.

Canopus, in the constellation Argo, in the Southern Hemisphere, the
brightest star in the heavens with the exception of Sirius, possesses no
sensible parallax; consequently, its distance is unknown, though it has
been estimated that its light passage cannot be less than sixty-five
years.

By establishing a mean value for the parallax of stars of different
magnitudes, it was believed that an approximation of their distances
could be obtained by calculating the time occupied in their light
passage. The light period for stars of the first magnitude has been
estimated at thirty-six and a half years; this applies to the brightest
stars, which are also regarded as the nearest. At the distance indicated
by this period, the Sun would shrink to the dimensions of a
seventh-magnitude star and become invisible to the naked eye; this of
itself affords sufficient proof that the great luminary of our system
cannot be regarded as one of the leading orbs of the firmament. Stars of
the second magnitude have a mean distance of fifty-eight light years,
those of the third magnitude ninety-two years, and so on. M. Peters
estimated that light from stars of the sixth magnitude, which are just
visible to the naked eye, requires a period of 138 years to accomplish
its journey hither; whilst light emitted from the smallest stars visible
in large telescopes does not reach the Earth until after the lapse of
thousands of years from the time of leaving its source.

The profound distances of the nearest stars by which we are surrounded
lead us to consider the isolated position of the solar system in space.
A pinnacle of rock, or forsaken raft floating in mid-ocean, is not more
distant from the shore than is the Sun from his nearest neighbours. The
inconceivable dimensions of the abyss by which the orb and his
attendants are surrounded in utter loneliness may be partially
comprehended when it is known that light, which travels from the Sun to
the Earth--a distance of ninety-three millions of miles--in eight
minutes, requires a period of four and a third years to reach us from
the nearest fixed star. A sphere having the Sun at its centre and this
nearest star at its circumference would have a diameter of upwards of
fifty billions of miles; the volume of the orb when compared with the
dimensions of this circular vacuity of space is as a small shot to a
globe 900 miles in diameter. It has been estimated by Father Secchi
that, if a comet when at aphelion were to arrive at a point midway
between the Sun and the nearest fixed star, it would require one hundred
million years in the accomplishment of its journey thither. And yet the
Sun is one of a group of stars which occupy a region of the heavens
adjacent to the Milky Way and surrounded by that zone; nor is his
isolation greater than that of those stars which are his companions, and
who, notwithstanding their profound distance, influence his movements by
their gravitational attraction, and in combination with the other stars
of the firmament control his destiny.

Ancient astronomers, for the purpose of description, have mapped out the
heavens into numerous irregular divisions called 'constellations.' They
are of various forms and sizes, according to the configuration of the
stars which occupy them, and have been named after different animals,
mythological heroes, and other objects which they appear to resemble. In
a few instances there does exist a similitude to the object after which
a constellation is called; this is evident in the case of Corona
Borealis (the Northern Crown), in which there can be seen a conspicuous
arrangement of stars resembling a coronet, and in the constellations of
the Dolphin and Scorpion, where the stars are so distributed that the
forms of those creatures can be readily recognised. There is some slight
resemblance to a bear in Ursa Major, and to a lion in Leo, and no great
effort of the mind is required to imagine a chair in Cassiopeia, and a
giant in Orion; but in the majority of instances it is difficult to
perceive any likeness of the object after which a constellation is
named, and in many cases there is no resemblance whatever.

The constellations are sixty-seven in number: excluding those of the
Zodiac, which have been already mentioned, the constellations of the
Northern Hemisphere number twenty-nine. The most important of these are
Ursa Major and Minor, Andromeda, Cassiopeia, Cepheus, Cygnus, Lyra,
Aquila, Auriga, Draco, Booetes, Hercules, Pegasus, and Corona Borealis.

To an observer of the nocturnal sky the stars appear to be very
unequally distributed over the celestial sphere. In some regions they
are few in number and of small magnitude, whilst in other parts of the
heavens, and especially in the vicinity of the Milky Way, they are
present in great numbers and form groups and aggregations of striking
appearance and conspicuous brilliancy. On taking a casual glance at the
midnight sky on a clear moonless night, one is struck with the apparent
countless multitude of the stars; yet this impression of their vast
number is deceptive, for not more than two thousand stars are usually
visible at one time.

