him.

"Will says the truth," she exclaimed--"we want to be tied up with some
of the words out of your book, parson; so that no one can untie us, and
so as we'll be true mates to one another for ever and ever. For Will
and me we loves one another, and I could-yes, I could be good ef I was
Will's true wife. But there are them--there are them as wants to part
us, and to ruin me, and to ruin him; and they'll do it, ef you don't
wed us tonight, parson."

"And we don't want to cheat by it," continued Will; "for we know that
Government must have its fees; and the license is ordered, and you
shall have it to-morrow, parson, and here's thirty shillings to pay for
it. It ain't no case of cheating-only the lass here she's skeered like,
and it's right as she should have her way. Wed us to-night, ef you can,
parson," continued Will, and he laid a sovereign and a half-sovereign
on the little study table.

"Kneel down, Will," said Bet. "He'll say the good words over us--I know
he will, and we don't want to cheat. It's only as we mustn't be parted.
Kneel down, Will."

"She knelt herself, and held out her hand to Will, who dropped at her
side. Nothing could be more impressive than the little scene, nor the
brief expectant silence which followed.

"God bless you, my children," said the curate--"God abundantly bless
you"--and he laid one hand for an instant on Bet's head, and the other
on Will's--"but"--here he paused, and seemed to swallow something, and
the next words came out with difficulty: "I can't do what you wish. I
would gladly if it were possible; but it is not. If I were to say the
marriage service over you tonight, I should be breaking the laws of the
Church and the laws of England. I won't ask you what your need is, but
I am quite certain it is sore. I would give five pounds this moment to
be able to pronounce you two man and wife before you leave this room.
But it is impossible; the matter is not in my hands. Trust in God, and
wait until Thursday."

Bet rose to her feet without a word. All the color had left her cheeks,
and the sparkle her eyes; and the hand with which she tried to
rearrange her mother's shawl about her shoulders trembled violently.

"Good-bye, parson," she said; and she did not lift her eyes as she
turned away.

"Good-bye, sir," said Will sorrowfully, as he followed her into the
street.

"Parson blessed us, darling," said Will, putting his arm round Bet's
waist. "Kiss me, Bet. Thursday ain't long to wait."




CHAPTER XVII.


Bet went home, and all Wednesday she stayed indoors, taking little or
no notice of her brothers, and never alluding to the subject of the
wedding which was to take place the next morning. The boys, finding her
intensely unsociable, devoted themselves to their own occupations,
which were, after a fashion, absorbing enough. They discovered how to
climb on to the roof of this very tall house, and the spice of danger
which accompanied such a proceeding rendered it quite delightful to
them. From the roof of Mother Bunch's house they could slide or crawl
on to other roofs; and Bet knew very little of the amount of liberty
they enjoyed on these dirty but airy pinnacles.

She heard their laughter as they scampered in and out of the attic
to-day without paying much attention to it. She felt stupid and heavy,
and the excitement she had undergone on the previous evening had in its
recoil reduced her to a state of almost inertia.

The slow hours dragged themselves along, and Bet's wedding-day, the day
when parson could make her and Will one--when, the license being there,
and the necessary formalities gone through, they might really stand up
in God's house and have the sacred knot tied between them forever--had
arrived.

It was a dull, foggy morning, with a drizzling mist. No matter; it was
their wedding-day, thought Will, and no one could be more cheerful than
he as he donned his becoming sailor suit and brushed his curly hair,
and made himself look as spruce and neat as any jack-tar in the land.
Rain and mist were nothing to this son of the briny ocean, the sunshine
was in his heart, and he could scarcely believe in the wonderful good
fortune which was to give him the brightest, the dearest, the
handsomest girl in the town.

"Wish me luck, Mrs. Jobling," he said, as he rushed downstairs and
encountered his sour-faced landlady in the tiny entrance hall--"I'm to
be wed this morning to Bet Granger, the finest and the best lass in
Liverpool. You needn't keep the bedroom for me, Mrs. Jobling; for Bet
and me, we are going to Birkenhead for our honeymoon, and on Monday I'm
off on another cruise. By the way"--here Will suddenly remembered the
pretty sealskin purse; he thrust his hand into his trousers pocket--"is
this yourn?" he said, holding the dainty treasure out for his landlady
to see.

"No, no," she said, backing a step or two; "I'd have no call to a
pretty thing like that--why, it _is_ fine! Looks as if it belonged to a
lady. However did you come by it, Will?"

"That's more than I can tell you, ma'am. It lay on the floor in my room
two nights back, and I picked it up. Well, if it ain't yourn, and I
can't find no owner, it'ull do as a wedding-present for Bet." He
slipped the purse again into his pocket and made off.

Hester Wright had gone early to Paradise Row to fetch Bet, for she was
to be her sole bridesmaid--in fact, the only friend who was to see her
give herself to Will. Will had no best man. But what of that? His heart
did feel light this morning, and the gay notes which he sang as he
hurried along the streets had an undertone of thanksgiving running
through them. He was glad the day had really arrived, and thought to
himself how relieved his poor girl would be, and how he could laugh at
the unreasonable fear which she had shown two nights ago. He had
certainly never guessed that Bet was nervous; but she had shown the
most unreasonable, the queerest terror when last they had met. Well, it
was all right now, and he could prove to her how vain were her alarms.

The doors of the church were not yet opened when the little wedding
party of three met. Bet's face was still pale, and her eyes had a
tired, almost hunted expression. She came close to Will and took his
hand, utterly regardless of the significant looks of the passers-by.
The words and glances of the multitude were nothing to her at that
moment. She was holding her true love's hand; and the minutes were
flying, flying, and the danger that she dreaded must be even now on
their heels.

"What ail's you, Bet?" whispered Will, tenderly. "I'm here, and the
hour ha' come. In a minute or two now nought can sever us."

Bet did not speak. She clasped both her hands over Will's, and looked
anxiously over her shoulder to right and left.

"Don't worry her," whispered Hester Wright. "She has a dread on her,
and there's no argufying it away. After you are wed it will pass. Don't
worry her with questions."

Will sighed, and a cold little cloud seemed to come between him and the
sun of happiness in which he had been basking all the morning.

Just then there was a bustle and a little commotion. It was only the
verger unlocking the church doors. A small crowd of people who scent
out even the humblest wedding had already collected-mostly ragged
people, shoeless and stockingless boys and girls, women who sold
watercress, one or two loafers from the wharves. Will, Bet and Hester
were just about to go into the church, when into the midst of this
motley group a man neatly dressed in plain clothes stepped briskly. He
came straight up to Scarlett.

"Is your name William Scarlett?" he said, "and do you live at Mrs.
Jobling's, No. 10 Quay Street?"

"Yes," said Will, in surprise. "I'm a sailor, and my name's Will
Scarlet. I have a bedroom at Mrs. Jobling's."

"Yes, just so," replied the man. "Oh, come now, young woman--I've a
word to say to this party by himself. Just you let go your hand, young
woman, if _you_ please."

Bet seemed neither to hear nor to heed. Her disengaged arm was now
flung over Will's shoulder, and the hand which clasped his felt, in its
intense grip, as strong and firm as iron.

"I knew that it 'ud come," she whispered between her set lips.

Will looked down at her, and something in her terrible agitation
infected him strangely. He felt hot and annoyed and angry-almost angry
with Bet, for losing her presence of mind, very angry with the stranger
for intercepting him thus with ridiculous, senseless questions.

"Parson's inside," he said, jerking his thumb in the direction of the
church; "and her and me is waiting to be wed. Ef you have anything to
say to me, mate, I'll hear it later on, after we is wed.--All the same
I don't know you, nor what your business can be," he added.

"My business is plain enough, young man. You're wanted, and you must
come with me. I've a warrant here to arrest you on the charge of
stealing two five-pound notes--same being passed through the Bank of
England yesterday, with your name and address on the back. You'd better
come off quietly, for there's no help for it, and the less you say the
better, for whatever you does say I warn you will be used against you.
Come, young woman,--hands off! You'd better let parson know that his
services won't be wanting today."

Bet's head was now lying on Will's breast; her wide-open eyes were
fixed on his face. He stooped down and kissed her. He was very white
himself, and felt rather dazed, but his anger was gone.

"I can't make it out, sweetheart," he whispered. "It's an ugly mistake,
and to happen on our wedding morn. All the same it's nothing in life
but a mistake, my dear; and I don't see, if there's a scrap of justice
in England, how I can but be back with you by nightfall, darling. You
and Hester had better search up Dent, for he's the man to clear me, and
I heerd you say as he hadn't sailed in the 'Good Queen Anne.' Now I
must go with this feller; but I'll come back to you and Hester soon,
for in course I can tell how I got the notes. Here I am--at your
service, sir."

Will himself placed Bet's hand in Hester's. She had not said a word nor
sought to detain him; but when he turned the corner something seemed
all of a sudden to stop in her heart; and the strong girl fainted in
Hester's arms.




CHAPTER XVIII.


In this land of justice there is nothing more incomprehensible than the
extraordinary weight and power of merely circumstantial evidence. Never
was there a more honest young fellow than Will Scarlett. From his
babyhood he had lived by the golden rule which does to others as we
would be done by; he had never given false measure, nor false words,
nor had he been guilty of false deeds; in the true sense of the word,
he was a Christian,--very bright, and gay, and jolly, and a prime
favorite both with his captain and mates whenever he sailed abroad.

Nevertheless, this young man who bore so excellent a character was
brought up before the magistrates on the morning of his wedding-day,
charged with having stolen two Bank of England notes. As Will was being
hurried to the police station, he felt quite certain that five minutes'
conversation would set the whole matter straight; and he even wondered
if Mr. Phillips could be got to return to the church later in the day
to marry him to Bet. Bet's white, despairing face haunted him; and he
tried to shut it away from his thoughts, and to dwell on the delightful
anticipation of soon setting all her fears to rest.

But when Will appeared before the magistrates, matters did not go quite
so easily as he had imagined. In the first place, he was not allowed to
tell his own story; and in the next, the sealskin purse which was found
on his person was in the most remarkable way brought to bear witness
against him. For a young lady and her father appeared in the
witness-box who both identified the purse as hers; and this young lady
with the beautiful brown eyes looked very sorrowfully at Will, but also
said with great clearness that it was in that purse certainly that the
recovered notes had been placed by her, and it was most undoubtedly out
of that purse that twenty-six pounds in notes and gold had been stolen.

Will's anxious face cleared a little when Higgins appeared; but to his
amazement Higgins seemed to be altogether on the other side--spoke of
Will's eagerness and of Bet's trepidation, and how they both seemed in
a great hurry and anxious to be rid of the notes at any price, and how
loth Will was to write his name and address on the back. In short,
everything seemed to go quite against him: and the one longing the poor
fellow had was for Dent to be found--for, of course, Dent could and
would clear him.

Finally he was remanded for a week, until some tidings could be got of
Dent; he spent that night in jail, with all hope of a speedy
wedding-day vanishing into the dim distance. Whatever happened, he had
lost his berth in the good ship which was to sail from the Mersey on
the following Monday;--whatever happened, too, was not his character
more or less stained from this contamination with the prison?

When Bet recovered from her faint, she went straight home, but Hester
hastened to the police-court, to learn Will's fate. He saw her as he
stood in the prisoner's dock; and all that eyes could convey of
sympathy, and belief, and longing to help, she gave him. When the
magistrates uttered their judgment, and it was decided Will should
spend the next week in the lock-up, Hester did push near enough to him
to say--

"I'll take care of that lass of yours, cousin; and she and me, we won't
leave a stone unturned to find the man what 'as wronged you."

Then Hester hastened off to Paradise Row, where she had first a long
interview with Mother Bunch, and then found her way upstairs to Bet's
room. Bet was seated on the side of her bed; her hair looked rough and
untidy; her poor dress was no longer orderly; there was a flush of
defiance on her cheeks, and a hard gleam in her eyes.

"Well, ha' they done for him?" she said. "I never believed much in
goodness, and this day--well, this day's work ha' finished me. Don't
talk to me of justice, nor mercy neither. What ha? they done with Will,
Hetty? He's the only honest lad _I_ ever came across,--and there--he's
took up for thieving! Oh, don't ever talk to me about there being real
goodness in the world."

"You talk silly," said Hester. "It's badness has ruined Will Scarlett.
The bad heart of a real wicked man has spoiled the honest lad. Don't
talk about what you know nought on, Bet, but think how we can serve
him. He's locked up for a week, so that Dent may be found and brought
to confess. You and me has a power to do in a week, and we have no time
to talk silly words, what have neither sense nor meaning in 'em."

Bet's face changed while Hester was speaking. The defiant, almost
repellant, look left it: it did not regain any of that strange softness
which transfigured it when in Will's presence; but it was no longer
hopeless; the idea of work to be done had driven away the cruel demon
of despair.

"Oh, Hetty," said Bet, running up to Hester, and dragging her down to
sit beside her on the pallet bed. "I'm glad as there's summut to be
done. Mother allus said I was a hard 'un, and that the Almighty hadn't
no love for such as me. And I did feel hard arter Will were took
away--for I never had no real happiness, Hester, until arter Will and I
promised to wed each other--and I thought it must be true about the
Almighty hating such as me when He took Will from me at the very church
door. But I don't mind anything now, Hetty, if there's ought as I can
serve the lad with. I'm despert--I'm despert, as far as I think of
myself, but there's nought--_nought_--as I wouldn't do to serve Will.
I'd break a promise--I'd break a promise made to the dying,--me, who
never broke my word!--ef it would serve the lad I loves. There,
Hetty--no one can go further than that,--no one can speak more solemn
and meaningful."

"Poor Bet!" said Hester. "Your heart's wrung, my dear--your words are
wild, but their meaning's true enough. Will 'ull get a good wife in
you, Bet, and you'll forget an evil day like this by-and-bye. But now,"
she added, "we has got to plan and to contrive, and the main thing is
to find that villain Dent. I were at the police-court all day, and I
heard every word, and it seemed to me them men could twist anything,
and turn black into white, and t'other way, just as it pleased them.
And they did say things agin' Will as most took my own breath from me;
and all the time the lad stood there, with his face as honest as the
sky, only a bit puzzled like. But it seemed to me, and that's what I
come to you for, Bet, that the only chance for our poor Will is to find
that villain Dent, and get the truth out of him some way. You said,
Bet, that Dent hadn't sailed in Will's ship--oh, it's plain to be seen
as he give the lad the money just to get him into this trouble. And
Will, he's like a baby, for thinking innocent of all the world. Well,
well, I mustn't dwell on it, for my own heart burns; but ef you know
where Dent is hiding, Bet, you might get news of him, and bring me word
as quick as may be."

"I don't know where he hides," said Bet, "but all the same I might get
news of him. I think I know a way," she added, her face growing white
again and hard,--"you go home, Hetty; it ain't for you to help me again
in this matter,--you know my mind, and how I wouldn't stop at nought
when I'm torn as I am to-night. But it ain't for you to help me in
this. You go home, Hetty dear; and ef I have news I'll look you up
