hath been earned,--these are the indications of true greatness. He that
is unmoved in calamity, skilled in his own business, ever exerting
vigilance and humble, always beholdeth prosperity. The sons of Pandu
are as thy arms. Do not lop off those arms of thine. Plunge not into
internal dissensions for the sake of that wealth of thy brothers. O
king, be not jealous of the sons of Pandu. Thy wealth is equal unto
that of thy brothers in his entirety. There is great sin in quarrelling
with friends. They that are thy grandsires are theirs also. Give away
in charity on occasions of sacrifices, gratify every dear object of thy
desire, disport in the company of women freely, and enjoy thou peace.'


SECTION LIV

"Duryodhana said,--'He that is devoid of intellect but hath merely
heard of many things, can scarcely understand the real import of the
scriptures, like the spoon that hath no perception of the taste of the
soup it toucheth. Thou knowest everything, but yet confoundest me. Like
a boat fastened to another, thou and I are tied to each other. Art thou
unmindful of thy own interests? Or, dost thou entertain hostile feeling
towards me? These thy sons and allies are doomed to destruction,
inasmuch as they have thee for their ruler, for thou describest as
attainable in the future what is to be done at the present moment. He
often trippeth whose guide acts under the instructions of others. How
then can his followers expect to come across a right path? O king, thou
art of mature wisdom; thou hast the opportunity to listen to the words
of old, and thy senses also are under thy control. It behoveth thee not
to confound us who are ready to seek our own interests. Vrihaspati hath
said that the usage of kings are different from those of common people.
Therefore kings should always attend to their own interests with
vigilance. The attainment of success is the sole criterion that should
guide the conduct of a Kshatriya. Whether, therefore, the means is
virtuous or sinful, what scruples can there be in the duties of one's
own order? He that is desirous of snatching the blazing prosperity of
his foe, should, O bull of the Bharata race, bring every direction
under his subjection like the charioteer taming the steeds with his
whip. Those used to handling weapons say that, a weapon is not simply
an instrument that cuts but is a means, whether covert or overt, that
can defeat a foe. Who is to be reckoned a foe and who a friend, doth
not depend on one's figure or dimensions. He that paineth another is, O
king, to be regarded a foe by him that is pained. Discontent is the
root of prosperity. Therefore, O king, I desire to be discontented. He
that striveth after the acquisition of prosperity is, O king, a truly
politic person. Nobody should be attached to wealth and affluence, for
the wealth that hath been earned and hoarded may be plundered. The
usages of kings are even such. It was during a period of peace that
Sakra cut off the head of Namuchi after having given a pledge to the
contrary, and it was because he approved of this eternal usage towards
the enemy that he did so. Like a snake that swalloweth up frogs and
other creatures living in holes, the earth swalloweth up a king that is
peaceful and a Brahmana that stirreth not out of home. O king, none can
by nature be any person's foe. He is one's foe, and not anybody else,
who hath common pursuits with one. He that from folly neglecteth a
growing foe, hath his vitals cut off as by a disease that he cherished
without treatment. A foe, however insignificant, if suffered to grow in
prowess, swalloweth one like the white ants at the root of a tree
eating off the tree itself. O Bharata, O Ajamida, let not the
prosperity of the foe be acceptable to thee. This policy (of neglecting
the foe) should always be borne on their heads by the wise even like a
load. He that always wisheth for the increase of his wealth, ever
groweth in the midst of his relatives even like the body naturally
growing from the moment of birth. Prowess conferreth speedy growth.
Coveting as I do the prosperity of the Pandavas, I have not yet made it
my own. At present I am a prey to doubts in respect of my ability. I am
determined to resolve those doubts of mine. I will either obtain that
prosperity of theirs, or lie down having perished in battle. O king
when the state of my mind is such, what do I care now for life, for the
Pandavas are daily growing while our possessions know no increase?'


SECTION LV

"Sakuni said,--'O thou foremost of victorious persons, I will snatch
(for thee) this prosperity of Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, at the
sight of which thou grievest so. Therefore, O king, let Yudhishthira
the son of Kunti be summoned. By throwing dice a skilful man, himself
uninjured, may vanquish one that hath no skill. Know, O Bharata, that
betting is my bow, the dice are my arrows, the marks on them my
bow-string, and the dice-board my car.'

"Duryodhana said,--'This Sukuni skilled at dice, is ready, O king, to
snatch the prosperity of the son of Pandu by means of dice. It behoveth
thee to give him permission.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'I am obedient to the counsels of my brother, the
illustrious Vidura. Consulting with him, I shall tell what should be
done in this matter.'

"Duryodhana said,--'Vidura is always engaged in doing good to the sons
of Pandu. O Kaurava, his feelings towards us are otherwise. He will,
therefore, without doubt, withdraw thy heart from the proposed act. No
man should set himself to any task depending upon the counsels of
another, for, O son of Kuru's race, the minds of two persons seldom
agree in any particular act. The fool that liveth shunning all causes
of fear wasteth himself like an insect in the rainy season. Neither
sickness nor Yama waiteth till one is in prosperity. So long,
therefore, as there is life and health, one should (without waiting for
prosperity) accomplish his purpose.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'O son, hostility with those that are strong, is
what never recommendeth itself to me. Hostility bringeth about a change
of feelings, and that itself is a weapon though not made of steel. Thou
regardest, O Prince, as a great blessing what will bring in its train
the terrible consequences of war. What is really fraught with mischief.
If once it beginneth, it will create sharp swords and pointed arrows.'

"Duryodhana replied,--'Men of the most ancient times invented the use
of dice. There is no destruction in it, nor is there any striking with
weapons. Let the words of Sakuni, therefore, be acceptable to thee, and
let thy command be issued for the speedy construction of the assembly
house. The door of heaven, leading us to such happiness, will be opened
to us by gambling. Indeed, they that betake to gambling (with such aid)
deserve such good fortune. The Pandavas then will become thy equals
(instead of, as now, superiors); therefore, gamble thou with the
Pandavas.'

"Dhritarashtra said.--'The words uttered by thee do not recommend
themselves to me. Do what may be agreeable to thee, O ruler of men. But
thou shall have to repent for acting according to these words; for,
words that are fraught with such immorality can never bring prosperity
in the future. Even this was foreseen by the learned Vidura ever
treading the path of truth and wisdom. Even the great calamity,
destructive of the lives of the Kshatriyas, cometh as destined by
fate.'"

Vaisampayana continued--"Having said this, the weak-minded
Dhritarashtra regarded fate as supreme and unavoidable. And the king
deprived of reason by Fate, and obedient to the counsels of his son,
commanded his men in loud voice, saying--'Carefully construct, without
loss of time, an assembly house of the most beautiful description, to
be called the crystal-arched palace with a thousand columns, decked
with gold and lapis lazuli, furnished with a hundred gates, and full
two miles in length and in breadth the same.' Hearing those words of
his, thousands of artificers endued with intelligence and skill soon
erected the palace with the greatest alacrity, and having erected it
brought thither every kind of article. And soon after they cheerfully
represented unto the king that the palace had been finished, and that
it as delightful and handsome and furnished with every kind of gems and
covered with many-coloured carpets inlaid with gold. Then king
Dhritarashtra, possessed of learning, summoning Vidura the chief of his
ministers, said:--'Repairing, (to Khandavaprastha), bring prince
Yudhishthira here without loss of time. Let him come hither with his
brothers, and behold this handsome assembly house of mine, furnished
with countless jewels and gems, and costly beds and carpets, and let a
friendly match at dice commence here.'"


SECTION LVI

Vaisampayana said,--"King Dhritarashtra, ascertaining the inclinations
of his son and knowing that Fate is inevitable, did what I have said.
Vidura, however, that foremost of intelligent men, approved not his
brother's words and spoke thus, 'I approve not, O king, of this command
of thine. Do not act so. I fear, this will bring about the destruction
of our race. When thy sons lose their unity, dissension will certainly
ensue amongst them. This I apprehend, O king, from this match at dice.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'If Fate be not hostile, this quarrel will not
certainly grieve me. The whole universe moveth at the will of its
Creator, under the controlling influence of Fate. It is not free.
Therefore, O Vidura, going unto king Yudhishthira at my command, bring
thou soon that invincible son of Kunti.'"


SECTION LVII

Vaisampayana said,--"Vidura then, thus commanded against his will by
king Dhritarashtra, set out, with the help of horses of high mettle and
endued with great speed and strength, and quiet and patient, for the
abode of the wise sons of Pandu. Possessed of great intelligence,
Vidura proceeded by the way leading to the capital of the Pandavas. And
having arrived at the city of king Yudhishthira, he entered it and
proceeded towards the palace, worshipped by numberless Brahmanas. And
coming to the palace which was even like unto the mansion of Kuvera
himself, the virtuous Vidura approached Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma. Then the illustrious Ajamida devoted to truth and having no
enemy on earth, reverentially saluted Vidura, and asked him about
Dhritarashtra and his sons. And Yudhishthira said, 'O Kshatta, thy mind
seemeth to be cheerless. Dost thou come here in happiness and peace?
The sons of Dhritarashtra, I hope, are obedient to their old father.
The people also, I hope, are obedient to Dhritarashtra's rule.'

"Vidura said,--'The illustrious king, with his sons, is well and happy,
and surrounded by his relatives he reigneth even like Indra himself.
The king is happy with his sons who are all obedient to him and hath no
grief. The illustrious monarch is bent on his own aggrandisement. The
king of the Kurus hath commanded me to enquire after thy peace and
prosperity, and to ask thee to repair to Hastinapore with thy brothers
and to say, after beholding king Dhritarashtra's newly erected palace,
whether that one is equal to thy own. Repairing thither, O son of
Pritha, with thy brothers, enjoy ye in that mansion and sit to a
friendly match at dice. We shall be glad if thou goest, as the Kurus
have already arrived there. And thou wilt see there those gamblers and
cheats that the illustrious king Dhritarashtra hath already brought
thither. It is for this, O king, that I have come hither. Let the
king's command be approved by thee.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'O Kshatta, if we sit to a match at dice, we may
quarrel. What man is there, who knowing all this, will consent to
gamble? What dost thou think fit for us? We all are obedient to thy
counsels.'

"Vidura said,--'I know that gambling is the root of misery, and I
strove to dissuade the king from it. The king, however, hath sent me to
thee. Having known all this, O learned one, do what is beneficial.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'Besides the sons of Dhritarashtra what other
dishonest gamblers are there ready for play? Tell us, O Vidura, who
they are and with whom we shall have to play, staking hundreds upon
hundreds of our possessions.'

"Vidura said,--'O monarch, Sakuni, the king of Gandhara, an adept at
dice, having great skill of hand and desperate in stakes, Vivingati,
king Chitrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra and Jaya, these, O king, are
there.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'It would seem then that some of the most
desperate and terrible gamblers always depending upon deceit are there.
This whole universe, however, is at the will of its Maker, under the
control of fate. It is not free. O learned one, I do not desire, at the
command of king Dhritarashtra to engage myself in gambling. The father
always wisheth to benefit his son. Thou art our master, O Vidura. Tell
me what is proper for us. Unwilling as I am to gamble, I will not do
so, if the wicked Sakuni doth not summon me to it in the Sabha? If,
however, he challengeth me, I will never refuse. For that, as settled,
is my eternal vow.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"King Yudhishthira the just having said this
unto Vidura, commanded that preparations for his journey might be made
without loss of time. And the next day, the king accompanied by his
relatives and attendants and taking with him also the women of the
household with Draupadi in their midst, set out for the capital of the
Kurus. 'Like some brilliant body falling before the eyes, Fate
depriveth us of reason, and man, tied as it were with a cord,
submitteth to the sway of Providence,' saying this, king Yudhishthira,
that chastiser of the foe, set out with Kshatta, without deliberating
upon that summons from Dhritarashtra. And that slayer of hostile
heroes, the son of Pandu and Pritha, riding upon the car that had been
given him by the king of Valhika, and attired also in royal robes, set
out with his brothers. And the king, blazing as it were with royal
splendour, with Brahmanas walking before him, set out from his city,
summoned by Dhritarashtra and impelled by what hath been ordained by
Kala (Time). And arriving at Hastinapore he went to the palace of
Dhritarashtra. And going there, the son of Pandu approached the king.
And the exalted one then approached Bhishma and Drona and Karna, and
Kripa, and the son of Drona, and embraced and was embraced by them all.
And the mighty-armed one, endued with great prowess, then approached
Somadatta, and then Duryodhana and Salya, and the son of Suvala, and
those other kings also that had arrived there before him. The king then
went to the brave Dusshasana and then to all his (other) brothers and
then to Jayadratha and next to all the Kurus one after another. And the
mighty-armed one, then surrounded by all his brothers, entered the
apartment of the wise king Dhritarashtra. And then Yudhishthira beheld
the reverend Gandhari, ever obedient to her lord, and surrounded by her
daughters-in-law like Rohini by the stars. And saluting Gandhari and
blessed by her in return, the king then beheld his old uncle, that
illustrious monarch whose wisdom was his eye. King Dhritarashtra then,
O monarch, smelt his head as also the heads of those four other princes
of the Kuru race, viz., the sons of Pandu with Bhimasena as their
eldest. And, O king, beholding the handsome Pandava those tigers among
men, all the Kurus became exceedingly glad. And commanded by the king,
the Pandavas then retired to the chambers allotted to them and which
were all furnished with jewels and gems. And when they had retired into
the chambers, the women of Dhritarashtra's household with Dussala
taking the lead visited them. And the daughters-in-law of Dhritarashtra
beholding the blazing and splendid beauty and prosperity of Yajnaseni,
became cheerless and filled with jealousy. And those tigers among men,
having conversed with the ladies went through their daily physical
exercises and then performed the religious rites of the day. And having
finished their daily devotions, they decked their persons with sandal
paste of the most fragrant kind. And desiring to secure good luck and
prosperity they caused (by gifts) the Brahmanas to utter benedictions.
And then eating food that was of the best taste they retired to their
chambers for the night. And those bulls among the Kurus then were put
to sleep with music by handsome females. And obtaining from them what
came in due succession, those subjugators of hostile towns passed with
cheerful hearts that delightful night in pleasure and sport. And waked
by the bards with sweet music, they rose from their beds, and having
passed the night thus in happiness, they rose at dawn and having gone
through the usual rites, they entered into the assembly house and were
saluted by those that were ready there for gambling."


SECTION LVIII

Vaisampayana said,--"The sons of Pritha with Yudhishthira at their
head, having entered that assembly house, approached all the kings that
were present there. And worshipping all those that deserved to be
worshipped, and saluting others as each deserved according to age, they
seated themselves on seats that were clean and furnished with costly
carpets. After they had taken their seats, as also all the kings,
Sakuni the son of Suvala addressed Yudhishthira and said, 'O king, the
assembly is full. All had been waiting for thee. Let, therefore, the
dice be cast and the rules of play be fixed, O Yudhishthira.'

"Yudhishthira replied, 'Deceitful gambling is sinful. There is no
Kshatriya prowess in it. There is certainly no morality in it. Why,
then, O king, dost thou praise gambling so? The wise applaud not the
pride that gamesters feel in deceitful play. O Sakuni, vanquish us, not
like a wretch, by deceitful means.'

"Sakuni said,--'That high-souled player who knoweth the secrets of
winning and losing, who is skilled in baffling the deceitful arts of
his confrere, who is united in all the diverse operations of which
gambling consisteth, truly knoweth the play, and he suffereth all in
course of it. O son of Pritha, it is the staking at dice, which may be
lost or won that may injure us. And it is for that reason that gambling
is regarded as a fault. Let us, therefore, O king, begin the play. Fear
not. Let the stakes be fixed. Delay not!'

"Yudhishthira said,--'That best of Munis, Devala, the son of Asita, who
always instructeth us about all those acts that may lead to heaven,
hell, or the other regions, hath said, that it is sinful to play
deceitfully with a gamester. To obtain victory in battle without
cunning or stratagem is the best sport. Gambling, however, as a sport,
is not so. Those that are respectable never use the language of the
Mlechchas, nor do they adopt deceitfulness in their behaviour. War
carried on without crookedness and cunning, this is the act of men that
are honest. Do not, O Sakuni, playing desperately, win of us that
wealth with which according to our abilities, we strive to learn how to
benefit the Brahmanas. Even enemies should not be vanquished by
desperate stakes in deceitful play. I do not desire either happiness or
wealth by means of cunning. The conduct of one that is a gamester, even
if it be without deceitfulness, should not be applauded.'

"Sakuni said,--'O Yudhishthira, it is from a desire of winning, which
is not a very honest motive, that one high-born person approacheth
another (in a contest of race superiority). So also it is from a desire
of defeating, which is not a very honest motive, that one learned
person approacheth another (in a contest of learning). Such motives,
however, are scarcely regarded as really dishonest. So also, O
Yudhishthira, a person skilled at dice approacheth one that is not so
skilled from a desire of vanquishing him. One also who is conversant
with the truths of science approacheth another that is not from desire
of victory, which is scarcely an honest motive. But (as I have already
said) such a motive is not really dishonest. And, O Yudhishthira, so
also one that is skilled in weapons approacheth one that is not so
skilled; the strong approacheth the weak. This is the practice in every
contest. The motive is victory, O Yudhishthira. If, therefore, thou, in
approaching me, regardest me to be actuated by motives that are
dishonest, if thou art under any fear, desist then from play.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'Summoned, I do not withdraw. This is my
established vow. And, O king, Fate is all powerful. We all are under
the control of Destiny. With whom in this assembly am I to play? Who is
there that can stake equally with me? Let the play begin.'

"Duryodhana said,--'O monarch, I shall supply jewels and gems and every
kind of wealth. And it is for me that this Sakuni, my uncle, will play.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'Gambling for one's sake by the agency of another
seemeth to me to be contrary to rule. Thou also, O learned one, will
admit this. If, however, thou art still bent on it, let the play
begin.'"


SECTION LIX

Vaisampayana said,--"When the play commenced, all those kings with
Dhritarashtra at their head took their seats in that assembly. And, O
Bharata, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and the high-souled Vidura with
cheerless hearts sat behind. And those kings with leonine necks and
endued with great energy took their seats separately and in pairs upon
many elevated seats of beautiful make and colour. And, O king, that
mansion looked resplendent with those assembled kings like heaven
itself with a conclave of the celestials of great good fortune. And
they were all conversant with the Vedas and brave and of resplendent
countenances. And, O great king, the friendly match at dice then
commenced.

"Yudhishthira said,--'O king, this excellent wealth of pearls of great
value, procured from the ocean by churning it (of old), so beautiful
and decked with pure gold, this, O king, is my stake. What is thy
counter stake, O great king,--the wealth with which thou wishest to
play with me?'

"Duryodhana said,--'I have many jewels and much wealth. But I am not
vain of them. Win thou this stake.'"

