The Project Gutenberg EBook Last Of The Barons, by Lytton, Volume 6.
#147 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Last Of The Barons, Volume 6.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7720]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 6, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAST OF THE BARONS, V6 ***


This eBook was produced by Tapio Riikonen
and David Widger




BOOK VI

WHEREIN ARE OPENED SOME GLIMPSES OF THE FATE BELOW THAT ATTENDS THOSE
WHO ARE BETTER THAN OTHERS, AND THOSE WHO DESIRE TO MAKE OTHERS
BETTER.  LOVE, DEMAGOGY, AND SCIENCE ALL EQUALLY OFF-SPRING OF THE
SAME PROLIFIC DELUSION,--NAMELY, THAT MEAN SOULS (THE EARTH'S
MAJORITY) ARE WORTH THE HOPE AND THE AGONY OF NOBLE SOULS, THE
EVERLASTING SUFFERING AND ASPIRING FEW.




CHAPTER I.

NEW DISSENSIONS.

We must pass over some months.  Warwick and his family had returned to
London, and the meeting between Edward and the earl had been cordial
and affectionate.  Warwick was reinstated in the offices which gave
him apparently the supreme rule in England.  The Princess Margaret had
left England as the bride of Charles the Bold; and the earl had
attended the procession in honour of her nuptials.  The king,
agreeably with the martial objects he had had long at heart, had then
declared war on Louis XI., and parliament was addressed and troops
were raised for that impolitic purpose.  [Parliamentary Rolls, 623.
The fact in the text has been neglected by most historians.]  To this
war, however, Warwick was inflexibly opposed.  He pointed out the
madness of withdrawing from England all her best-affected chivalry, at
a time when the adherents of Lancaster, still powerful, would require
no happier occasion to raise the Red Rose banner.  He showed how
hollow was the hope of steady aid from the hot but reckless and
unprincipled Duke of Burgundy, and how different now was the condition
of France under a king of consummate sagacity and with an overflowing
treasury to its distracted state in the former conquests of the
English.  This opposition to the king's will gave every opportunity
for Warwick's enemies to renew their old accusation of secret and
treasonable amity with Louis.  Although the proud and hasty earl had
not only forgiven the affront put upon him by Edward, but had sought
to make amends for his own intemperate resentment, by public
attendance on the ceremonials that accompanied the betrothal of the
princess, it was impossible for Edward ever again to love the minister
who had defied his power and menaced his crown.  His humour and his
suspicions broke forth despite the restraint that policy dictated to
him: and in the disputes upon the invasion of France, a second and
more deadly breach between Edward and his minister must have yawned,
had not events suddenly and unexpectedly proved the wisdom of
Warwick's distrust of Burgundy.  Louis XI. bought off the Duke of
Bretagne, patched up a peace with Charles the Bold, and thus
frustrated all the schemes and broke all the alliances of Edward at
the very moment his military preparations were ripe.  [W. Wyr, 518.]

Still the angry feelings that the dispute had occasioned between
Edward and the earl were not removed with the cause; and under
pretence of guarding against hostilities from Louis, the king
requested Warwick to depart to his government of Calais, the most
important and honourable post, it is true, which a subject could then
hold: but Warwick considered the request as a pretext for his removal
from the court.  A yet more irritating and insulting cause of offence
was found in Edward's withholding his consent to Clarence's often-
urged demand for permission to wed with the Lady Isabel.  It is true
that this refusal was accompanied with the most courteous
protestations of respect for the earl, and placed only upon the
general ground of state policy.

"My dear George," Edward would say, "the heiress of Lord Warwick is
certainly no mal-alliance for a king's brother; but the safety of the
throne imperatively demands that my brothers should strengthen my rule
by connections with foreign potentates.  I, it is true, married a
subject, and see all the troubles that have sprung from my boyish
passion!  No, no!  Go to Bretagne.  The duke hath a fair daughter, and
we will make up for any scantiness in the dower.  Weary me no more,
George.  Fiat voluntas mea!"

But the motives assigned were not those which influenced the king's
refusal.  Reasonably enough, he dreaded that the next male heir to his
crown should wed the daughter of the subject who had given that crown,
and might at any time take it away.  He knew Clarence to be giddy,
unprincipled, and vain.  Edward's faith in Warwick was shaken by the
continual and artful representations of the queen and her family.  He
felt that the alliance between Clarence and the earl would be the
union of two interests almost irresistible if once arrayed against his
own.

But Warwick, who penetrated into the true reason for Edward's
obstinacy, was yet more resentful against the reasons than the
obstinacy itself.  The one galled him through his affections, the
other through his pride; and the first were as keen as the last was
morbid.  He was the more chafed, inasmuch as his anxiety of father
became aroused.  Isabel was really attached to Clarence, who, with all
his errors, possessed every superficial attraction that graced his
House,--gallant and handsome, gay and joyous, and with manners that
made him no less popular than Edward himself.

And if Isabel's affections were not deep, disinterested, and tender,
like those of Anne, they were strengthened by a pride which she
inherited from her father, and a vanity which she took from her sex.
It was galling in the extreme to feel that the loves between her and
Clarence were the court gossip, and the king's refusal the court jest.
Her health gave way, and pride and love both gnawed at her heart.

It happened, unfortunately for the king and for Warwick, that
Gloucester, whose premature acuteness and sagacity would have the more
served both, inasmuch as the views he had formed in regard to Anne
would have blended his interest in some degree with that of the Duke
of Clarence, and certainly with the object of conciliation between
Edward and his minister,--it happened, we say, unfortunately, that
Gloucester was still absent with the forces employed on the Scottish
frontier, whither he had repaired on quitting Middleham, and where his
extraordinary military talents found their first brilliant opening;
and he was therefore absent from London during all the disgusts he
might have removed and the intrigues he might have frustrated.

But the interests of the House of Warwick, during the earl's sullen
and indignant sojourn at his government of Calais, were not committed
to unskilful hands; and Montagu and the archbishop were well fitted to
cope with Lord Rivers and the Duchess of Bedford.

Between these able brothers, one day, at the More, an important
conference took place.

"I have sought you," said Montagu, with more than usual care upon his
brow--"I have sought you in consequence of an event that may lead to
issues of no small moment, whether for good or evil.  Clarence has
suddenly left England for Calais."

"I know it, Montagu; the duke confided to me his resolution to
proclaim himself old enough to marry,--and discreet enough to choose
for himself."

"And you approved?"

"Certes; and, sooth to say, I brought him to that modest opinion of
his own capacities.  What is more still, I propose to join him at
Calais."

"George!"

"Look not so scared, O valiant captain, who never lost a battle,--
where the Church meddles, all prospers.  Listen!" And the young
prelate gathered himself up from his listless posture, and spoke with
earnest unction.  "Thou knowest that I do not much busy myself in lay
schemes; when I do, the object must be great.  Now, Montagu, I have of
late narrowly and keenly watched that spidery web which ye call a
