"Oh, the king has his musketeers to take care of him," said Charles,
quietly; "I know that perfectly well, for I was kept dancing attendance
in his antechamber at Blois. He has M. d'Artagnan, and what better
guardian could the king have than M. d'Artagnan? I should make myself
perfectly easy with twenty storms of passion, such as Bragelonne might
display, if I had four guardians like D'Artagnan."

"But I entreat your majesty, who is so good and kind, to reflect a
little."

"Stay," said Charles II., presenting the letter to the duke, "read, and
answer yourself what you would do in my place."

Buckingham slowly took hold of Madame's letter, and, trembling with
emotion, read the following words:

     "For your own sake, for mine, for the honor and safety of every
     one, send M. de Bragelonne back to France immediately.

                        "Your devoted sister,
                              "HENRIETTA."

"Well, Villiers, what do you say?"

"Really, sire, I have nothing to say,"' replied the duke, stupefied.

"Nay, would you, of all persons," said the king, artfully, "advise me
not to listen to my sister when she writes so urgently?"

"Oh, no, no, sire; and yet--"

"You've not read the postscript, Villiers; it is under the fold of the
letter, and escaped me at first; read it." And as the duke turned down a
fold of the letter, he read. "A thousand kind remembrances to those who
love me."

The duke's head sank gradually on his breast; the paper trembled in his
fingers, as if it had been changed to lead. The king paused for a
moment, and, seeing that Buckingham did not speak, "He must follow his
destiny, as we ours," continued the king; "every man has his share of
grief in this world: I have had my own--I have had that of others who
belong to me--and have thus had a double weight of woe to endure! But
the deuce take all my cares now! Go and bring our friend here,
Villiers."

The duke opened the trellised door of the summer-house, and pointing at
Raoul and Mary, who were walking together side by side, said, "What a
cruel blow, sire, for poor Miss Grafton!"

"Nonsense; call him," said Charles II., knitting his black brows
together; "every one seems to be sentimental here. There, look at Miss
Stewart, who is wiping her eyes--now deuce take the French fellow!"

The duke called to Raoul, and taking Miss Grafton by the hand, he led
her toward the king.

"Monsieur de Bragelonne," said Charles II., "did you not ask me the day
before yesterday for permission to return to Paris?"

"Yes, sire," replied Raoul, greatly puzzled by this address.

"And I refused you, I think?"

"Yes, sire."

"Were you not angry with me for it?"

"No, sire; your majesty had no doubt excellent reasons for withholding
it; for you are so wise and so good that everything you do is well
done."

"I alleged, I believe, as a reason that the king of France had not
recalled you?"

"Yes, sire, that was the reason you assigned."

"Well, M. de Bragelonne, I have reflected over the matter since; if the
king did not, in fact, fix your return, he begged me to render your
sojourn in England as agreeable as possible; since, however, you ask my
permission to return, it is because your longer residence in England is
no longer agreeable to you."

"I do not say that, sire."

"No; but your request, at least," said the king, "signified that,
another place of residence would be more agreeable to you than this."

At this moment Raoul turned toward the door, against which Miss Grafton
was leaning, pale and sorrow-stricken; her other arm was passed through
the arm of the duke.

"You do not reply," pursued Charles; "the proverb is plain enough, that
'Silence gives consent.' Very good. Monsieur de Bragelonne: I am now in
a position to satisfy you: whenever you please, therefore, you can leave
for Paris, for which you have my authority."

"Sire!" exclaimed Raoul, while Mary stifled an exclamation of grief
which rose to her lips, unconsciously pressing Buckingham's arm.

"You can be at Dover this evening," continued the king; "the tide serves
at two o'clock in the morning."

Raoul, astounded, stammered out a few broken sentences, which equally
answered the purpose both of thanks and of excuse.

"I therefore bid you adieu, Monsieur de Bragelonne, and wish you every
sort of prosperity," said the king, rising; "you will confer a pleasure
on me by keeping this diamond in remembrance of me; I had intended it as
a marriage gift."

Miss Grafton felt her limbs almost giving way; and, as Raoul received
the diamond from the king's hand, he, too, felt his strength and courage
failing him. He addressed a few respectful words to the king, a passing
compliment to Miss Stewart, and looked for Buckingham to bid him adieu.
The king profited by this moment to disappear. Raoul found the duke
engaged in endeavoring to encourage Miss Grafton.

"Tell him to remain, I implore you!" said Buckingham to Mary.

"No; I will tell him to go," replied Miss Grafton, with returning
animation; "I am not one of those women who have more pride than heart;
if she whom he loves is in France, let him return there and bless me for
having advised him to go and seek his happiness there. If, on the
contrary, she shall have ceased to love him, let him come back here
again, I shall still love him, and his unhappiness will not have
lessened him in my regard. In the arms of my house you will find that
which Heaven has engraven on my heart--_Habenti parum, egenti cuncta_.
'To the rich is accorded little, to the poor everything.'"

"I do not believe, Bragelonne, that you will find yonder the equivalent
of what you leave behind you here."

"I think, or at least I hope," said Raoul, with a gloomy air, "that she
whom I love is worthy of my affection; but if it be true she is unworthy
of me, as you have endeavored to make me believe, I will tear her image
from my heart, duke, even were my heart broken in the attempt."

Mary Grafton gazed upon him with an expression of the most indefinable
pity, and Raoul returned her look with a sad, sorrowful smile, saying,
"Mademoiselle, the diamond which the king has given me was destined for
you--give me leave to offer it for your acceptance; if I marry in
France, you will send it me back; if I do not marry, keep it." And he
bowed and left her.

"What does he mean?" thought Buckingham, while Raoul pressed Mary's icy
hand with marks of the most reverential respect.

Mary understood the look that Buckingham fixed upon her.

"If it were a wedding-ring, I would not accept it," she said.

"And yet you were willing to ask him to return to you."

"Oh! duke," cried the young girl in heartbroken accents, "a woman such
as I am is never accepted as a consolation by a man like him."

"You do not think he will return, then?"

"Never," said Miss Grafton, in a choking voice.

"And I grieve to tell you, Mary, that he will find yonder his happiness
destroyed, his mistress lost to him. His honor even has not escaped.
What will be left him, then, Mary, equal to your affection? Do you
answer, Mary, you who know yourself so well."

Miss Grafton placed her white hand on Buckingham's arm, and, while Raoul
was hurrying away with headlong speed, she sang in dying accents the
line from "Romeo and Juliet": "I must begone and live, or stay and die."

As she finished the last word, Raoul had disappeared. Miss Grafton
returned to her own apartment, paler than death itself. Buckingham
availed himself of the arrival of the courier, who had brought the
letter to the king, to write to Madame and to the Comte de Guiche. The
king had not been mistaken, for at two in the morning the tide was at
full flood, and Raoul had embarked for France.




CHAPTER XLVI.

SAINT-AIGNAN FOLLOWS MALICORNE'S ADVICE.


The king most assiduously followed the progress which was made in La
Valliere's portrait; and did so with a care and attention arising as
much from a desire that it should resemble her as from the wish that the
painter should prolong the period of its completion as much as possible.
It was amusing to observe him following the artist's brush, awaiting the
completion of a particular plan, or the result of a combination of
colors, and suggesting various modifications to the painter, which the
latter consented to adopt with the most respectful docility of
disposition. And again, when the artist, following Malicorne's advice,
was a little late in arriving, and when Saint-Aignan had been obliged to
be absent for some time, it was interesting to observe, though no one
witnessed them, those moments of silence full of deep expression, which
united in one sigh two souls most disposed to understand each other, and
who by no means objected to the quiet and meditation they enjoyed
together.

The minutes fled rapidly by, as if on wings: and as the king drew closer
to Louise and bent his burning gaze upon her, a noise was suddenly heard
in the anteroom. It was the artist, who had just arrived: Saint-Aignan,
too, had returned, full of apologies: and the king began to talk, and La
Valliere to answer him very hurriedly, their eyes revealing to
Saint-Aignan that they had enjoyed a century of happiness during his
absence. In a word, Malicorne, philosopher that he was, though he knew
it not, had learned how to inspire the king with an appetite in the
midst of plenty, and with desire in the assurance of possession. La
Valliere's fears of interruption had never been realized, and no one
imagined she was absent from her apartment two or three hours every day.
She pretended that her health was very uncertain: those who went to her
room always knocked before entering, and Malicorne, the man of so many
ingenious inventions, had constructed an acoustic piece of mechanism, by
means of which La Valliere, when in Saint-Aignan's apartment, was always
forewarned of any visits which were paid to the room she usually
inhabited. In this manner, therefore, without leaving her own room, and
having no confidante, she was able to return to her apartment, thus
removing by her appearance, a little tardy perhaps, the suspicions of
the most determined skeptics. Malicorne having asked Saint-Aignan the
next morning what news he had to report, the latter had been obliged to
confess that the quarter of an hour's liberty had made the king in most
excellent humor.

"We must double the dose," replied Malicorne, "but insensibly so; wait
until they seem to wish it."

They were so desirous for it, however, that on the evening of the fourth
day, at the moment when the painter was packing up his painting
implements, during Saint-Aignan's continued absence, Saint-Aignan on his
return noticed upon La Valliere's face a shade of disappointment and
vexation, which she could not conceal. The king was less reserved, and
exhibited his annoyance by a very significant shrug of the shoulders, at
which La Valliere could not help blushing.

"Very good!" thought Saint-Aignan to himself; "M. Malicorne will be
delighted this evening;" as he, in fact, was when it was reported to
him.

"It is very evident," he remarked to the comte, "that Mademoiselle de la
Valliere hoped that you would be at least ten minutes later."

"And the king that I should be half an hour later, dear Monsieur
Malicorne."

"You will be but very indifferently devoted to the king," replied the
latter, "if you were to refuse his majesty that half hour's
satisfaction."

"But the painter?" objected Saint-Aignan.

"I will take care of him," said Malicorne, "only I must study faces and
circumstances a little before I act; those are my magical inventions and
contrivances: and while sorcerers are enabled by means of their
astrolabe to take the altitude of the sun, moon, and stars, I am
satisfied merely by looking into people's faces, in order to see if
their eyes are encircled with dark lines, and if the mouth describes a
convex or concave arc."

And the cunning Malicorne had every opportunity of watching narrowly
and closely, for the very same evening the king accompanied the queen to
Madame's apartments, and made himself so remarked by his serious face
and his deep sighs, and looked at La Valliere with such a languishing
expression, that Malicorne said to Montalais during the evening:
"To-morrow." And he went off to the painter's house in the street of the
Jardins Saint-Paul to beg him to postpone the next sitting for a couple
of days. Saint-Aignan was not within, when La Valliere, who was now
quite familiar with the lower story, lifted up the trap-door and
descended. The king, as usual, was waiting for her on the staircase, and
held a bouquet in his hand; as soon as he saw her, he clasped her
tenderly in his arms. La Valliere, much moved at the action, looked
around the room, but as she saw the king was alone, she did not complain
of it. They sat down, the king reclining near the cushions on which
Louise was seated, with his head supported by her knees, placed there as
in an asylum whence no one could banish him; he gazed ardently upon her,
and as if the moment had arrived when nothing could interpose between
their two hearts; she, too, gazed with similar passion upon him, and
from her eyes, so soft and pure, there emanated a flame, whose rays
first kindled and then inflamed the heart of the king, who, trembling
with happiness as Louise's hand rested on his head, grew giddy from
excess of joy, and momentarily awaited either the painter's or
Saint-Aignan's return to break the sweet illusion. But the door remained
closed, and neither Saint-Aignan nor the painter appeared, nor did the
hangings even move. A deep mysterious silence reigned in the room--a
silence which seemed to influence even the birds in their gilded prison.
The king, completely overcome, turned round his head and buried his
burning lips in La Valliere's hands, who, herself, faint with excess of
emotion, pressed her trembling hands against her lover's lips. Louis
threw himself upon his knees, and as La Valliere did not move her head,
the king's forehead being within reach of her lips, she furtively
passed her lips across the perfumed locks which caressed her cheeks. The
king seized her in his arms, and, unable to resist the temptation, they
exchanged their first kiss--that burning kiss, which changes love into a
delirium. Suddenly, a noise upon the upper floor was heard, which had,
in fact, continued, though it had remained unnoticed, for some time; it
had at last aroused La Valliere's attention, though but slowly so. As
the noise, however, continued, as it forced itself upon the attention,
and recalled the poor girl from her dreams of happiness to the sad
reality of life, she arose in a state of utter bewilderment, though
beautiful in her disorder, saying: "Some one is waiting, for
above--Louis, Louis, do you not hear?"

"Well! and am I not waiting for you, also?" said the king, with infinite
tenderness of tone. "Let others henceforth wait for you."

But she gently shook her head, as she replied, "Concealed happiness ...
concealed power ... my pride should be silent as my heart."

The noise was again resumed.

"I hear Montalais's voice," she said, and she hurried up the staircase;
the king followed her, unable to let her leave his sight, and covering
her hand with his kisses. "Yes, yes," repeated La Valliere, who had
passed half-way through the opening, "Yes, it is Montalais who is
calling me; something important must have happened."

"Go, then, dearest love," said the king, "but return quickly."

"No, no, not to-day, sire! Adieu, adieu!" she said, as she stooped down
once more to embrace her lover, and then escaped. Montalais was, in
fact, waiting for her, very pale and agitated.

"Quick, quick! he is coming!" she said.

"Who--who is coming?"

"Raoul," murmured Montalais.

"It is I--I," said a joyous voice upon the last steps of the grand
staircase.

La Valliere uttered a terrible shriek, and threw herself back.

"I am here, dear Louise," said Raoul, running toward her. "I knew but
too well that you had not ceased to love; me."

La Valliere, with a gesture, partly of extreme terror, and partly as if
invoking a curse, attempted to speak, but could not articulate one word.
"No, no!" she said, as she fell into Montalais's arms, murmuring: "Do
not touch me, do not come near me."

Montalais made a sign to Raoul, who stood almost petrified at the door,
and did not even attempt to advance another step into the room. Then,
looking toward the side of the room where the screen was, she exclaimed:
"Imprudent girl, she has not even closed the trap-door."

And she advanced toward the corner of the room to close the screen, and
also, behind the screen, the trap-door. But suddenly the king, who had
heard Louise's exclamation, darted through the opening, and hurried
forward to her assistance. He threw himself on his knees before her, as
he overwhelmed Montalais with questions, who hardly knew where she was.
At the moment, however, that the king threw himself on his knees, a cry
of utter despair rang through the corridor, accompanied by the sound of
retreating footsteps. The king wished to see who had uttered the cry,
and whose were the footsteps he had heard: and it was in vain that
Montalais sought to retain him, for Louis, quitting his hold of La
Valliere, hurried toward the door, too late, however, for Raoul was
already at a distance, and the king saw only a kind of shadow turning
the angle of the corridor.




CHAPTER XLVII.

TWO OLD FRIENDS.


While every one at court was busily engaged upon his own affairs, a man
mysteriously took up his post behind the Place de Greve, in the house
which we once saw besieged by D'Artagnan on the occasion of an _emeute_.
The principal entrance of this house was in the Place Baudoyer: it was
tolerably large, surrounded by gardens, inclosed in the street
Saint-Jean by the shops of tool-makers, which protected it from prying
looks, and was walled in by a triple rampart of stone, noise, and
verdure, like an embalmed mummy in its triple coffin. The man we have
just alluded to walked along with a firm step, although he was no longer
in his early prime. His dark cloak and long sword plainly revealed one
who seemed in search of adventures; and, judging from his curling
mustaches, his fine and smooth skin, which could be seen beneath his
sombrero, it would not have been difficult to pronounce that the
gallantry of his adventures was unquestionable. In fact, hardly had the
cavalier entered the house, when the clock struck eight; and ten minutes
afterward a lady, followed by a servant armed to the teeth, approached
and knocked at the same door, which an old woman immediately opened for
her. The lady raised her veil as she entered; though no longer beautiful
or young, she was still active, and of an imposing carriage. She
concealed, beneath a rich toilet and the most exquisite taste, an age
which Ninon de l'Enclos alone could have smiled at with impunity. Hardly
had she reached the vestibule, than the cavalier, whose features we have
only roughly sketched, advanced toward her, holding out his hand.

"Good day, my dear duchesse," he said.

"How do you do, my dear Aramis," replied the duchesse.

He led her to a most elegantly furnished apartment, on whose high
windows were reflected the expiring rays of the setting sun, which
filtered through the dark crests of some adjoining firs. They sat down
side by side. Neither of them thought of asking for additional light in
the room, and they buried themselves as it were in the shadow, as if
they wished to bury themselves in forgetfulness.

"Chevalier," said the duchesse, "you have never given me a single sign
of life since our interview at Fontainebleau, and I confess that your
presence there on the day of the Franciscan's death, and your initiation
in certain secrets, caused me the liveliest astonishment I ever
experienced in my whole life."

"I can explain my presence there to you, as well as my initiation," said
Aramis.

"But let us first of all," said the duchesse, "talk a little of
ourselves, for our friendship is by no means of recent date."

"Yes, madame; and if Heaven wills it, we shall continue to be friends, I
will not say for a long time, but forever."

"That is quite certain, chevalier, and my visit is proof of it."

"Our interests, duchesse, are no longer the same as they used to be,"
said Aramis, smiling without apprehension in the gloom in which the room
was cast, for it could not reveal that his smile was less agreeable and
less bright than formerly.

"No, chevalier, at the present day we have other interests. Every period
of life brings its own; and as we now understand each other in
conversing, as perfectly as we formerly did without saying a word, let
us talk, if you like."

"I am at your orders, duchesse. Ah! I beg your pardon, how did you
obtain my address, and what was your object?"

"You ask me why? I have told you. Curiosity in the first place. I wished
to know what you could have to do with the Franciscan, with whom I had
certain business transactions, and who died so singularly. You know that
on the occasion of our interview at Fontainebleau, in the cemetery, at
the foot of the grave so recently closed, we were both so much overcome
by our emotions that we omitted to confide to each other what we may
have had to say."

"Yes, madame."

"Well, then, I had no sooner left you than I repented, and have ever
since been most anxious to ascertain the truth. You know that Madame de
Longueville and myself are almost one, I suppose?"

"I am not aware," said Aramis, discreetly.

"I remembered, therefore," continued, the duchesse, "that neither of us
said anything to the other in the cemetery; that you did not speak of
the relationship in which you stood to the Franciscan, whose burial you
had superintended, and that I did not refer to the position in which I
stood to him; all which seemed very unworthy of two such old friends as
ourselves, and I have sought an opportunity of an interview with you in
order to give you some information that I have recently acquired, and to
assure you that Marie Michon, now no more, has left behind her one who
has preserved her recollection of events."

Aramis bowed over the duchesse's hand, and pressed his lips upon it.
"You must have had some trouble to find me again," he said.

"Yes," she answered, annoyed to find the subject taking a turn which
Aramis wished to give it: "but I knew you were a friend of M. Fouquet's,
and so I inquired in that direction."

"A friend! oh!" exclaimed the chevalier, "I can hardly pretend to be
that. A poor priest who has been favored by so generous a protector, and
whose heart is full of gratitude and devotion to him, is all that I
pretend to be to M. Fouquet."

"He made you a bishop?"

"Yes, duchesse."

"A very good retiring pension for so handsome a musketeer."

"Yes; in the same way that political intrigue is for yourself," thought
Aramis. "And so," he added, "you inquired after me at M. Fouquet's."

"Easily enough. You had been to Fontainebleau with him, and had
undertaken a voyage to your diocese, which is Belle-Isle-en-Mer, I
believe."

"No, madame," said Aramis. "My diocese is Vannes."

"I mean that. I only thought that Belle-Isle-en-Mer--"

"Is a property belonging to M. Fouquet, nothing more."

"Ah: I had been told that Belle-Isle was fortified; besides, I know how
great the military knowledge is you possess."

"I have forgotten everything of the kind since I entered the Church,"
said Aramis, annoyed.

"Suffice it to know that I learned you had returned from Vannes, and I
sent to one of our friends, M. le Comte de la Fere, who is discretion
itself, in order to ascertain it, but he answered that he was not aware
of your address."

"So like Athos," thought the bishop; "that which is actually good never
alters."

"Well, then, you know that I cannot venture to show myself here, and
that the queen-mother has always some grievance or other against me."

"Yes, indeed, and I am surprised at it."

"Oh! there are various reasons for it. But, to continue, being obliged
to conceal myself, I was fortunate enough to meet with M. d'Artagnan,
who was formerly one of your old friends, I believe?"

"A friend of mine still, duchesse."

"He gave me some information, and sent me to M. Baisemeaux, the governor
of the Bastille."

Aramis was somewhat agitated at this remark, and a light flashed from
his eyes in the darkness of the room, which he could not conceal from
his keen-sighted friend. "M. de Baisemeaux!" he said; "why did
D'Artagnan send you to M. de Baisemeaux?"

"I cannot tell you."

"What can this possibly mean?" said the bishop, summoning all the
resources of his mind to his aid, in order to carry on the combat in a
befitting manner.

"M. de Baisemeaux is greatly indebted to you, D'Artagnan told me."

"True, he is so."

"And the address of a creditor is as easily ascertained as that of a
debtor."

"Very true; and so Baisemeaux indicated to you--"

"Saint-Mande, where I forwarded a letter to you."

"Which I have in my hand, and which is most precious to me," said
Aramis, "because I am indebted to it for the pleasure of seeing you
here." The duchesse, satisfied at having successfully alluded to the
various difficulties of so delicate an explanation, began to breathe
freely again, which Aramis, however, could not succeed in doing. "We had
got as far as your visit to M. Baisemeaux, I believe?"

"Nay," she said, laughing, "farther than that."

"In that case we must have been speaking about the grudge you have
against the queen-mother."

"Further still," she returned--"further still; we were talking of the
connection--"

"Which existed between you and the Franciscan," said Aramis,
interrupting her eagerly; "well, I am listening to you very
attentively."

"It is easily explained," returned the duchesse. "You know that I am
living at Brussels with M. de Laicques?"

"I have heard so."

"You know that my children have ruined and stripped me of everything."

"How terrible, dear duchesse."

"Terrible indeed; this obliged me to resort to some means of obtaining a
livelihood, and, particularly to avoid vegetating the remainder of my
existence away, I had old hatreds to turn to account, old friendships to
serve; I no longer had either credit or protectors."

"You, too, who had extended protection toward so many persons," said
Aramis, softly.

"It is always the case, chevalier. Well, at the present time I am in the
habit of seeing the king of Spain very frequently."

"Ah!"

"Who has just nominated a general of the Jesuits, according to the usual
custom."

"Is it usual, indeed?"

"Were you not aware of it?"

"I beg your pardon; I was inattentive."

"You must be aware of that--you who were on such good terms with the
Franciscan."

"With the general of the Jesuits, you mean?"

"Exactly. Well, then, I have seen the king of Spain, who wished to do me
a service, but was unable. He gave me recommendations, however, to
Flanders, both for myself and for Laicques too; and conferred a pension
on me out of the funds belonging to the order."

"Of Jesuits?"

"Yes. The general--I mean the Franciscan--was sent to me; and, for the
purpose of conforming with the requisitions of the statutes of the
order, and of entitling me to the pension, I was reputed to be in a
position to render certain services. You are aware that that is the
rule?"

"No, I did not know it," said Aramis.

Madame de Chevreuse paused to look at Aramis, but it was perfectly dark.
"Well, such is the rule, however," she resumed. "I ought, therefore, to
seem to possess a power of usefulness of some kind or other. I proposed
to travel for the order, and I was placed on the list of affiliated
travelers. You understand it was a formality, by means of which I
received my pension, which was very convenient for me."

"Good heavens! duchesse, what you tell me is like a dagger-thrust into
me. _You_ obliged to receive a pension from the Jesuits?"

"No, chevalier; from Spain."

"Except as a conscientious scruple, duchesse, you will admit that it is
pretty nearly the same thing."

"No, not at all."

"But, surely, of your magnificent fortune there must remain--"

"Dampierre is all that remains."

"And that is handsome enough."

"Yes; but Dampierre is burdened, mortgaged, and almost fallen to ruin,
like its owner."

"And can the queen-mother know and see all that, without shedding a
tear?" said Aramis, with a penetrating look, which encountered nothing
but the darkness.

"Yes, she has forgotten everything."

"You have, I believe, attempted to get restored to favor?"

"Yes; but, most singularly, the young king inherits the antipathy that
his dear father had for me. You will, too, tell me that I am indeed a
woman to be hated, and that I am no longer one who can be loved."

"Dear duchesse, pray arrive soon at the circumstance which brought you
here; for I think we can be of service to each other."

"Such has been my own thought. I came to Fontainebleau with a double
object in view. In the first place, I was summoned there by the
Franciscan whom you knew. By-the-by, how did you know him?--for I have
told you my story, and have not yet heard yours."

"I knew him in a very natural way, duchesse. I studied theology with him
at Parma. We became fast friends; and it happened, from time to time,
that business, or travels, or war, separated us from each other."

"You were, of course, aware that he was the general of the Jesuits?"

"I suspected it."

"But by what extraordinary chance did it happen that you were at the
hotel where the affiliated travelers had met together?"

"Oh!" said Aramis, in a calm voice, "it was the merest chance in the
world. I was going to Fontainebleau to see M. Fouquet, for the purpose
of obtaining an audience of the king. I was passing by, unknown; I saw
the poor dying monk in the road, and recognized him immediately. You
know the rest--he died in my arms."

"Yes; but bequeathing to you so vast a power, that you issue your
sovereign orders and directions like a monarch."

"He certainly did leave me a few commissions to settle."

"And for me?"

"I have told you--a sum of twelve thousand livres was to be paid to you.
I thought I had given you the necessary signature to enable you to
receive it. Did you not get the money?"

"Oh! yes, yes. You give your orders, I am informed, with so much
mystery, and such a majestic presence, that it is generally believed you
are the successor of the defunct chief."

Aramis colored impatiently, and the duchesse continued: "I have obtained
my information," she said, "from the king of Spain himself; and he
cleared up some of my doubts on the point. Every general of the Jesuits
is nominated by him, and must be a Spaniard, according to the statutes
of the order. You are not a Spaniard, nor have you been nominated by
the king of Spain."

Aramis did not reply to this remark, except to say, "You see, duchesse,
how greatly you were mistaken, since the king of Spain told you that."

"Yes, my dear Aramis; but there was something else which I have been
thinking of."

"What is that?"

"You know, I believe, something about most things; and it occurred to me
that you know the Spanish language."

"Every Frenchman who has been actively engaged in the Fronde knows
Spanish."

"You have lived in Flanders?"

"Three years."

"And have stayed at Madrid?"

"Fifteen months."

"You are in a position, then, to become a naturalized Spaniard, when you
like."

"Really?" said Aramis, with a frankness which deceived the duchesse.

"Undoubtedly. Two years' residence and an acquaintance with the language
are indispensable. You have upward of four years--more than double the
time necessary."

"What are you driving at, duchesse?"

"At this--I am on good terms with the king of Spain."

"And I am not on bad terms," thought Aramis to himself.

"Shall I ask the king," continued the duchesse, "to confer the
succession to the Franciscan's post upon you?"

"Oh, duchesse!"

"You have it already, perhaps?" she said.

"No, upon my honor."

"Very well, then, I can render you that service."

"Why did you not render the same service to M. de Laicques, duchesse? He
is a very talented man, and one you love, besides."

"Yes, no doubt; but, at all events, putting Laicques aside, will you
have it?"

"No, I thank you, duchesse."

She paused. "He is nominated," she thought; and then resumed aloud, "If
you refuse me in this manner, it is not very encouraging for me,
supposing I should have something to ask of you."

"Oh! ask, pray ask."

"Ask! I cannot do so, if you have not the power to grant what I want."

"However limited my power and ability, ask all the same."

"I need a sum of money to restore Dampierre."

"Ah!" replied Aramis, coldly--"money? Well, duchesse, how much would you
require?"

"Oh! a tolerably round sum."

"So much the worse--you know I am not rich."

"No, no; but the order is--and if you had been the general--"

"You know I am not the general, I think."

"In that case, you have a friend who must be very wealthy--M. Fouquet."

"Fouquet! He is more than half ruined, madame."

"So it is said, but I would not believe it."

"Why, duchesse?"

"Because I have, or rather Laicques has, certain letters in his
possession, from Cardinal Mazarin, which establish the existence of very
strange accounts."

"What accounts?"

"Relative to various sums of money borrowed and disposed of. I cannot
very distinctly remember what they are; but they establish the fact that
the surintendant, according to these letters, which are signed by
Mazarin, had taken thirty millions of francs from the coffers of the
state. The case is a very serious one."

Aramis clenched his hands in anxiety and apprehension. "Is it possible,"
he said, "that you have such letters as you speak of, and have not
communicated them to M. Fouquet?"

"Ah!" replied the duchesse, "I keep such little matters as these in
reserve. The day may come when they may be of service; and they can then
be withdrawn from the safe custody in which they now are."

"And that day has arrived?" said Aramis.

"Yes."

"And you are going to show those letters to M. Fouquet?"

"I prefer to talk about them with you, instead."

"You must be in sad want of money, my poor friend, to think of such
things as these--you, too, who held M. de Mazarin's prose effusions in
such indifferent esteem."

"The fact is, I am in want of money."

"And then," continued Aramis, in cold accents, "it must have been very
distressing to you to be obliged to have recourse to such a means. It is
cruel."

"Oh! if I had wished to do harm instead of good," said Madame de
Chevreuse, "instead of asking the general of the order, or M. Fouquet,
for the five hundred thousand francs I require--"

"Five hundred thousand francs!"

"Yes; no more. Do you think it much? I require at least as much as that
to restore Dampierre."

"Yes, madame."

"I say, therefore, that instead of asking for this amount, I should have
gone to see my old friend the queen-mother; the letters from her
husband, the Signor Mazarin, would have served me as an introduction,
and I should have begged this mere trifle of her, saying to her, 'I
wish, madame, to have the honor of receiving you at Dampierre. Permit me
to put Dampierre in a fit state for that purpose.'"

Aramis did not reply a single word. "Well," she said, "what are you
thinking about?"

"I am making certain additions," said Aramis.

"And M. Fouquet subtractions. I, on the other hand, am trying the art of
multiplication. What excellent calculators we are! How well we could
understand one another!"

"Will you allow me to reflect?" said Aramis.

"No, for with such an opening between people like ourselves, 'yes,' or
'no,' is the only answer, and that an immediate one."

"It is a snare," thought the bishop; "it is impossible that Anne of
Austria could listen to such a woman as this."

"Well!" said the duchesse.

"Well, madame, I should be very much astonished if M. Fouquet had five
hundred thousand francs at his disposal at the present moment."

"It is no use speaking of it, then," said the duchesse, "and Dampierre
must get restored how it can."

"Oh! you are not embarrassed to such an extent as that, I suppose."

"No; I am never embarrassed."

"And the queen," continued the bishop, "will certainly do for you what
the surintendant is unable to do."

"Oh! certainly. But tell me, do you not think it would be better that I
should speak, myself, to M. Fouquet about these letters?"

"Nay, duchesse, you will do precisely whatever you please in that
respect. M. Fouquet either feels, or does not feel himself to be guilty;
if he really be so, I know he is proud enough not to confess it; if he
be not so, he will be exceedingly offended at your menace."

"As usual, you reason like an angel," said the duchesse, as she rose
from her seat.

"And so, you are now going to denounce M. Fouquet to the queen," said
Aramis.

"'Denounce!' Oh! what a disagreeable word. I shall not 'denounce,' my
dear friend; you now know matters of policy too well to be ignorant how
easily these affairs are arranged, I shall merely side against M.
Fouquet, and nothing more; and, in a war of party against party, a
weapon of attack is always a weapon."

"No doubt."

"And once on friendly terms again with the queen-mother, I may be
dangerous toward some persons."

"You are at perfect liberty to be so, duchesse."

"A liberty of which I shall avail myself."

"You are not ignorant, I suppose, duchesse, that M. Fouquet is on the
best terms with the king of Spain."

"I suppose so."

"If, therefore, you begin a party warfare against M. Fouquet, he will
reply in the same way; for he, too, is at perfect liberty to do so, is
he not?"

"Oh! certainly."

"And as he is on good terms with Spain, he will make use of that
friendship as a weapon of attack."

"You mean, that he will be on good terms with the general of the order
of the Jesuits, my dear Aramis."

"That may be the case, duchesse."

"And that, consequently, the pension I have been receiving from the
order will be stopped."

"I am greatly afraid it might be."

"Well; I must contrive to console myself in the best way I can; for
after Richelieu, after the Frondes, after exile, what is there left for
Madame de Chevreuse to be afraid of?"

"The pension, you are aware, is forty-eight thousand francs."

"Alas! I am quite aware of it."

"Moreover, in party contests, you know, the friends of the enemy do not
escape."

"Ah! you mean that poor Laicques will have to suffer."

"I am afraid it is almost inevitable, duchesse."

"Oh! he only receives twelve thousand francs pension."

"Yes, but the king of Spain has some influence left; advised by M.
Fouquet he might get M. Laicques shut up in prison for a little while."

"I am not very nervous on that point, my dear friend; because, thanks to
a reconciliation with Anne of Austria, I will undertake that France
should insist upon M. Laicques' liberation."

"True. In that case, you will have something else to apprehend."

"What can that be?" said the duchesse, pretending to be surprised and
terrified.

"You will learn; indeed, you must know it already, that having once been
an affiliated member of the order, it is not easy to leave it; for the
secrets that any particular member may have acquired are unwholesome,
and carry with them the germs of misfortune for whoever may reveal
them."

The duchesse paused and reflected for a moment, and then said, "That is
more serious, I will think over it."

And, notwithstanding the profound obscurity, Aramis seemed to feel a
burning glance, like a hot iron, escape from his friend's eyes, and
plunge into his heart.

"Let us recapitulate," said Aramis, determined to keep himself on his
guard, and gliding his hand into his breast, where he had a dagger
concealed.

"Exactly, let us recapitulate; good accounts make good friends."

"The suppression of your pension--"

"Forty-eight thousand francs, and that of Laicques twelve, make,
together, sixty thousand francs; that is what you mean, I suppose?"

"Precisely; and I was trying to find out what would be your equivalent
for that."

"Five hundred thousand francs, which I shall get from the queen."

"Or which you will not get."

"I know a means of procuring them," said the duchesse, thoughtlessly.

This remark made the chevalier prick up his ears; and from the moment
his adversary had committed this error, his mind was so thoroughly on
its guard that he seemed every moment to gain the advantage more and
more; and she, consequently, to lose it. "I will admit, for argument's
sake, that you obtain the money," he resumed; "you will lose the double
of it, having a hundred thousand francs' pension to receive instead of
sixty thousand, and that for a period of ten years."

"Not so, for I shall only be subjected to this reduction of my income
during the period of M. Fouquet's remaining in power, a period which I
estimate at two months."

"Ah!" said Aramis.

"I am frank, you see."

"I thank you for it, duchesse; but you would be wrong to suppose that
after M. Fouquet's disgrace the order would resume the payment of your
pension."

"I know a means of making the order pay, as I know a means of forcing
the queen-mother to concede what I require."

"In that case, duchesse, we are all obliged to strike our flags to you.
The victory is yours, and the triumph also is yours. Be clement, I
entreat you."

"But is it possible," resumed the duchesse, without taking notice of the
irony, "that you really draw back from a miserable sum of five hundred
thousand francs when it is a question of sparing you--I mean your
friend--I beg your pardon, I ought rather to say your protector--the
disagreeable consequences which a party contest produces?"

"Duchesse, I will tell you why; supposing the five hundred thousand
francs were to be given you, M. Laicques will require his share, which
will be another five hundred thousand francs, I presume? and then, after
M. de Laicques, and your own portions have been arranged, the portions
which your children, your poor pensioners, and various other persons
will require, will start up as fresh claims; and these letters, however
compromising they may be in their nature, are not worth from three to
four millions. Can you have forgotten the queen of France's
diamonds?--they were surely worth more than these bits of waste-paper
signed by Mazarin, and yet their recovery did not cost a fourth part of
what you ask for yourself."

"Yes, that is true; but the merchant values his goods at his own price,
and it is for the purchaser to buy or refuse."

"Stay a moment, duchesse; would you like me to tell you why I will not
buy your letters?"

"Pray tell me."

"Because the letters you say are Mazarin's are false."

"What an absurdity!"

"I have no doubt of it, for it would, to say the least, be very
singular, that after you had quarreled with the queen through M.
Mazarin's means, you should have kept up any intimate acquaintance with
the latter; it would look as if you had been acting as a spy; and upon
my word, I do not like to make use of the word."

"Oh! pray say it."

"Your great complaisance would seem very suspicious, at all events."

"That is quite true; but what is not less so is that which the letter
contains."

"I pledge you my word, duchesse, that you will not be able to make use
of it with the queen."

"Oh! yes, indeed: I can make use of everything with the queen."

"Very good," thought Aramis. "Croak on, old owl--hiss, viper that you
are!"

But the duchesse had said enough, and advanced a few steps toward the
door. Aramis, however, had reserved an exposure which she did not
expect--the imprecation of the slave behind the car of the conqueror. He
rang the bell, candles immediately appeared in the adjoining room, and
the bishop found himself completely encircled by lights, which shone
upon the worn, haggard face of the duchesse, revealing every feature but
too clearly. Aramis fixed a long and ironical look upon her pale, thin,
withered cheeks--upon her dim, dull eyes--and upon her lips, which she
kept carefully closed over her blackened and scanty teeth. He, however,
had thrown himself into a graceful attitude, with his haughty and
intelligent head thrown back; he smiled so as to reveal his teeth, which
were still brilliant and dazzling. The old coquette understood the trick
that had been played her. She was standing immediately before a large
mirror, in which her decrepitude, so carefully concealed, was only made
more manifest. And, thereupon, without even saluting Aramis, who bowed
with the ease and grace of the musketeer of early days, she hurried away
with trembling steps, which her very precipitation only the more
impeded. Aramis sprang across the room like a zephyr to lead her to the
door. Madame de Chevreuse made a sign to her servant, who resumed his
musket, and she left the house where such tender friends had not been
able to understand each other, only because they had understood each
other too well.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

WHEREIN MAY BE SEEN THAT A BARGAIN WHICH CANNOT BE MADE WITH ONE PERSON
CAN BE CARRIED OUT WITH ANOTHER.


Aramis had been perfectly correct in his supposition; for hardly had she
left the house in the Place Baudoyer, than Madame de Chevreuse proceeded
homeward. She was, doubtless, afraid of being followed, and by this
means thought she might succeed in throwing those who might be following
her off their guard; but scarcely had she arrived within the door of the
hotel, and hardly had assured herself that no one who could cause her
any uneasiness was on her track, when she opened the door of the garden,
leading into another street, and hurried toward the Rue Croix des Petits
Champs, where M. Colbert resided.

We have already said that evening, or rather night, had closed in; it
was a dark, thick night, besides; Paris had once more sunk into its
calm, quiescent state, enshrouding alike within its indulgent mantle the
high-born duchesse carrying out her political intrigue, and the simple
citizen's wife, who, having been detained late by a supper in the city,
was making her way slowly homeward, hanging on the arm of a lover, by
the shortest possible route. Madame de Chevreuse had been too well
accustomed to nocturnal political intrigues to be ignorant that a
minister never denies himself, even at his own private residence, to any
young and beautiful woman who may chance to object to the dust and
confusion of a public office, or to old women, as full of experience as
of years, who dislike the indiscreet echo of official residences. A
valet received the duchesse under the peristyle, and received her, it
must be admitted, with some indifference of manner; he intimated, after
having looked at her face, that it was hardly at such an hour that one
so advanced in years as herself could be permitted to disturb Monsieur
Colbert's important occupations.

But Madame de Chevreuse, without feeling or appearing to be annoyed,
wrote her name upon a leaf of her tablets--a name which had but too
frequently sounded so disagreeably in the ears of Louis XIII. and of the
great cardinal. She wrote her name in the large, ill-formed characters
of the higher classes of that period, folded the paper in a manner
peculiarly her own, handed it to the valet without uttering a word, but
with so haughty and imperious a gesture, that the fellow, well
accustomed to judge of people from their manners and appearance,
perceived at once the quality of the person before him, bowed his head,
and ran to M. Colbert's room. The minister could not control a sudden
exclamation as he opened the paper; and the valet, gathering from it the
interest with which his master regarded the mysterious visitor, returned
as fast as he could to beg the duchesse to follow him. She ascended to
the first floor of the beautiful new house very slowly, rested herself
on the landing-place, in order not to enter the apartment out of breath,
and appeared before M. Colbert, who, with his own hands, held both the
folding doors open. The duchesse paused at the threshold, for the
purpose of well-studying the character of the man with whom she was
about to converse. At the first glance, the round, large, heavy head,
thick brows, and ill-favored features of Colbert, who wore, thrust low
down on his head, a cap like a priest's _calotte_, seemed to indicate
that but little difficulty was likely to be met with in her negotiations
with him, but also that she was to expect as little interest in the
discussion of particulars; for there was scarcely any indication that
the rough and uncouth nature of the man was susceptible to the impulses
of a refined revenge, or of an exalted ambition. But when, on closer
inspection, the duchesse perceived the small piercingly black eyes, the
longitudinal wrinkles of his high and massive forehead, the
imperceptible twitching of the lips, on which were apparent traces of
rough good humor, Madame de Chevreuse altered her opinion of him, and
felt she could say to herself: "I have found the man I want."

"What is the subject, madame, which procures me the honor of a visit
from you?" he inquired.

"The need I have of you, monsieur," returned the duchesse, "as well as
that which you have of me."

"I am delighted, madame, with the first portion of your sentence; but,
as far as the second portion is concerned--"

Madame de Chevreuse sat down in the armchair which M. Colbert advanced
toward her. "Monsieur Colbert, you are the intendant of finances, and
are ambitious of becoming the surintendant?"

"Madame!"

"Nay, do not deny it; that would only unnecessarily prolong our
conversation, and that is useless."

"And yet, madame, however well disposed and inclined to show politeness
I may be toward a lady of your position and merit, nothing will make me
confess that I have ever entertained the idea of supplanting my
superior."

"I said nothing about supplanting, Monsieur Colbert. Could I
accidentally have made use of that word? I hardly think that likely. The
word 'replace' is less aggressive in its signification, and more
grammatically suitable, as M. de Voiture would say. I presume,
therefore, that you are ambitious of replacing M. Fouquet."

"M. Fouquet's fortune, madame, enables him to withstand all attempts.
The surintendant in this age plays the part of the Colossus of Rhodes;
the vessels pass beneath him and do not overthrow him."

"I ought to have availed myself precisely of that very comparison. It is
true. M. Fouquet plays the part of the Colossus of Rhodes; but I
remember to have heard it said by M. Conrart, a member of the Academy, I
believe, that when the Colossus of Rhodes fell from its lofty position,
the merchant who had cast it down--a merchant, nothing more, M.
Colbert--loaded four hundred camels with the ruins. A merchant! and that
is considerably less than an intendant of finances."

"Madame, I can assure you that I shall never overthrow Monsieur
Fouquet."

"Very good, Monsieur Colbert, since you persist in showing so much
sensitiveness with me, as if you were ignorant that I am Madame de
Chevreuse, and also that I am somewhat advanced in years; in other
words, that you have to do with a woman who has had political dealings
with the Cardinal de Richelieu, and who has no time to lose; as, I
repeat, you do not hesitate to commit such an imprudence, I shall go and
find others who are more intelligent and more desirous of making their
fortunes."

"How, madame, how?"

"You give me a very poor idea of negotiators of the present day. I
assure you that if, in my earlier days, a woman had gone to M. de
Cinq-Mars, who was not, moreover, a man of very high order of intellect,
and had said to him about the cardinal what I have just now said to you
of M. Fouquet, M. de Cinq-Mars would by this time have already set
actively to work."

"Nay, madame, show a little indulgence, I entreat you."

"Well, then, you do really consent to replace M. Fouquet?"

"Certainly, I do, if the king dismisses M. Fouquet."

"Again a word too much; it is quite evident that if you have not yet
succeeded in driving M. Fouquet from his post, it is because you have
not been able to do so. Therefore, I should be the greatest simpleton
possible if, in coming to you, I did not bring you the very thing you
require."

"I am distressed to be obliged to persist, madame," said Colbert, after
a silence which enabled the duchesse to sound the depth of his
dissimulation, "but I must warn you that for the last six years
denunciation after denunciation has been made against M. Fouquet, and he
has remained unshaken and unaffected by them."

"There is a time for everything, Monsieur Colbert; those who were the
authors of those denunciations were not called Madame de Chevreuse, and
they had no proofs equal to the six letters from M. de Mazarin which
establish the offense in question."

"The offense!"

"The crime, if you like it better."

"The crime! committed by M. Fouquet!"

"Nothing less. It is rather strange, M. Colbert, but your face, which
just now was cold and indifferent, is now positively the very reverse."

"A crime!"

"I am delighted to see it makes an impression upon you."

"It is because that word, madame, embraces so many things."

"It embraces the post of surintendant of finance for yourself, and a
letter of exile, or the Bastille, for M. Fouquet."

"Forgive me, Madame la Duchesse, but it is almost impossible that M.
Fouquet can be exiled; to be imprisoned or disgraced, that is already a
great deal."

"Oh, I am perfectly aware of what I am saying," returned Madame de
Chevreuse, coldly. "I do not live at such a distance from Paris as not
to know what takes place there. The king does not like M. Fouquet, and
he would willingly sacrifice M. Fouquet if an opportunity were only
given him."

"It must be a good one, though."

"Good enough, and one I estimate to be worth five hundred thousand
francs."

"In what way?" said Colbert.

"I mean, monsieur, that holding this opportunity in my own hands, I will
not allow it to be transferred to yours except for a sum of five hundred
thousand francs."

"I understand you perfectly, madame. But since you have fixed a price
for the sale, let me now see the value of the articles to be sold."

"Oh, a mere trifle; six letters, as I have already told you, from M. de
Mazarin; and the autographs will most assuredly not be regarded as too
highly priced, if they establish, in an irrefutable manner, that M.
Fouquet has embezzled large sums of money from the treasury and
appropriated them to his own purposes."

"In an irrefutable manner, do you say?" observed Colbert, whose eyes
sparkled with delight.

"Perfectly so; would you like to read the letters?"

"With all my heart! Copies, of course?"

"Of course, the copies," said the duchesse, as she drew from her bosom a
small packet of papers, flattened by her velvet bodice. "Read," she
said.

Colbert eagerly snatched the papers and devoured them.

"Excellent!" he said.

"It is clear enough, is it not?"

"Yes, madame, yes; M. Mazarin must have handed the money to M. Fouquet,
who must have kept it for his own purposes; but the question is, what
money?"

"Exactly--what money; if we come to terms, I will join to these six
letters a seventh, which will supply you with the fullest particulars."

Colbert reflected. "And the originals of these letters?"

"A useless question to ask; exactly as if I were to ask you, Monsieur
Colbert, whether the money-bags you will give me will be full or empty."

"Very good, madame."

"Is it concluded?"

"No; for there is one circumstance to which neither of us has given any
attention."

"Name it?"

"M. Fouquet can be utterly ruined, under the circumstances you have
detailed, only by means of legal proceedings."

"Well?"

"A public scandal, for instance; and yet neither the legal proceedings
nor the scandal can be commenced against him."

"Why not?"

"Because he is procureur-general of the parliament; because, too, in
France, all public administrations, the army, justice itself, and
commerce, are intimately connected by ties of good fellowship, which
people call _esprit de corps_. In such a case, madame, the parliament
will never permit its chief to be dragged before a public tribunal; and
never, even if he be dragged there by royal authority, never, I say,
will he be condemned."

"Well, Monsieur Colbert, I do not see what I have to do with that."

"I am aware of that, madame; but I have to do with it, and it
consequently diminishes the value of what you have brought to show me.
What good can a proof of crime be to me, without the possibility of
obtaining a condemnation?"

"Even if he be only suspected, M. Fouquet will lose his post of
surintendant."

"Is that all!" exclaimed Colbert, whose dark, gloomy features were
momentarily lighted up by an expression of hate and vengeance.

"Ah, ah! Monsieur Colbert," said the duchesse, "forgive me, but I did
not think you were so impressionable. Very good; in that case, since you
need more than I have to give you, there is no occasion to speak of the
matter at all."

"Yes, madame, we will go on talking of it; only as the value of your
commodities has decreased, you must lower your pretensions."

"You are bargaining, then?"

"Every man who wishes to deal loyally is obliged to do so."

"How much will you offer me?"

"Two hundred thousand francs," said Colbert.

The duchesse laughed in his face, and then said suddenly, "Wait a
moment, I have another arrangement to propose: will you give me three
hundred thousand francs?"

"No, no."

"Oh, you can either accept or refuse my terms; besides, that is not
all."

"More still! you are becoming too impracticable to deal with, madame."

"Less so than you think, perhaps, for it is not money I am going to ask
you for."

"What is it, then?"

"A service; you know that I have always been most affectionately
attached to the queen, and I am desirous of having an interview with her
majesty."

"With the queen?"

"Yes, Monsieur Colbert, with the queen, who is, I admit, no longer my
friend, and who has ceased to be so for a long time past, but who may
again become so if the opportunity be only given her."

"Her majesty has ceased to receive any one, madame. She is a great
sufferer, and you may be aware that the paroxysms of her disease occur
with greater frequency than ever."

"That is the very reason why I wish to have an interview with her
majesty; for in Flanders there is a great variety of these kind of
complaints."

"What, cancers--a fearful, incurable disorder?"

"Do not believe that, Monsieur Colbert. The Flemish peasant is somewhat
a man of nature, and his companion for life is not alone a wife, but a
female laborer also; for while he is smoking his pipe, the woman works:
it is she who draws the water from the well; she who loads the mule or
the ass, and even bears herself a portion of the burden. Taking but
little care of herself, she gets knocked about, first in one direction,
and then in another, and very often is beaten by her husband, and
cancers frequently arise from contusions."

"True, true," said Colbert.

"The Flemish women do not die the sooner on that account. When they are
great sufferers from this disease they go in search of remedies, and the
Beguines of Bruges are excellent doctors for every kind of disease. They
have precious waters of one sort or another; specifics of various kinds;
and they give a bottle of it and a wax candle to the sufferer, whereby
the priests are gainers, and Heaven is served by the disposal of both
their wares. I will take the queen some of this holy water, which I will
procure from the Beguines of Bruges; her majesty will recover, and will
burn as many wax candles as she may think fit. You see, Monsieur
Colbert, to prevent my seeing the queen is almost as bad as committing
the crime of regicide."

"You are, undoubtedly, Madame la Duchesse, a woman of exceedingly great
abilities, and I am more than astounded at their display; still I cannot
but suppose that this charitable consideration toward the queen in some
measure covers a slight personal interest for yourself."

"I have not given myself the trouble to conceal it, that I am aware of,
Monsieur Colbert. You said, I believe, that I had a slight personal
interest? On the contrary, it is a very great interest, and I will prove
it to you, by resuming what I was saying. If you procure me a personal
interview with her majesty, I will be satisfied with the three hundred
thousand francs I have claimed: if not, I shall keep my letters, unless,
indeed, you give me, on the spot, five hundred thousand francs for
them."

And, rising from her seat with this decisive remark, the old duchesse
plunged M. Colbert into a disagreeable perplexity. To bargain any
further was out of the question; and not to bargain was to pay a great
deal too dearly for them. "Madame," he said, "I shall have the pleasure
of handing you over a hundred thousand crowns; but how shall I get the
actual letters themselves?"

"In the simplest manner in the world, my dear Monsieur Colbert--whom
will you trust?"

The financier began to laugh silently, so that his large eyebrows went
up and down like the wings of a bat, upon the deep lines of his yellow
forehead. "No one," he said.

"You surely will make an exception in your own favor, Monsieur Colbert?"

"In what way, madame?"

"I mean that if you would take the trouble to accompany me to the place
where the letters are, they would be delivered into your own hands, and
you would be able to verify and check them."

"Quite true."

"You would bring the hundred thousand crowns with you at the same time,
for I, too, do not trust any one?"

Colbert colored to the tips of his ears. Like all eminent men in the art
of figures, he was of an insolent and mathematical probity. "I will take
with me, madame," he said, "two orders for the amount agreed upon,
payable at my treasury. Will that satisfy you?"

"Would that the orders on your treasury were for two millions, Monsieur
l'Intendant! I shall have the pleasure of showing you the way, then?"

"Allow me to order my carriage."

"I have a carriage below, monsieur."

Colbert coughed like an irresolute man. He imagined, for a moment, that
the proposition of the duchesse was a snare; that perhaps some one was
waiting at the door; and that she, whose secret had just been sold to
Colbert for a hundred thousand crowns, had already offered it to Fouquet
for the same sum. As he still hesitated a good deal, the duchesse looked
at him full in the face.

"You prefer your own carriage?" she said.

"I admit that I do."

"You suppose that I am going to lead you into a snare or trap of some
sort or other?"

"Madame la Duchesse, you have the character of being somewhat
inconsiderate at times, and, as I am clothed in a sober, solemn
character, a jest or practical joke might compromise me."

"Yes; the fact is, you are afraid. Well, then, take your own carriage,
as many servants as you like, only think well of what I am going to say.
What we two may arrange between us, we are the only persons who know it;
if a third had witnessed, we might as well have told the whole world of
it. After all, I do not make a point of it; my carriage shall follow
yours, and I shall be satisfied to accompany you in your own carriage to
the queen."

"To the queen!"

"Have you forgotten that already? Is it possible that one of the clauses
of the agreement of so much importance to me, can have escaped you
already? How trifling it seems to you, indeed; if I had known it I
should have asked double what I have done."

"I have reflected, madame, and I shall not accompany you."

"Really--and why not?"

"Because I have the most perfect confidence in you."

"You overpower me. But provided I receive the hundred thousand crowns?"

"Here they are, madame," said Colbert, scribbling a few lines on a piece
of paper, which he handed to the duchesse, adding, "You are paid."

"The trait is a fine one, Monsieur Colbert, and I will reward you for
it," she said, beginning to laugh.

Madame de Chevreuse's laugh was a very sinister sound; every man who
feels youth, faith, love, life itself, throbbing in his heart, would
prefer tears to such a lamentable laugh. The duchesse opened the front
of her dress and drew forth from her bosom, somewhat less white than it
once had been, a small packet of papers, tied with a flame-colored
ribbon, and, still laughing, she said, "There, Monsieur Colbert, are the
originals of Cardinal Mazarin's letters; they are now your own
property," she added, re-fastening the body of her dress; "your fortune
is secured, and now accompany me to the queen."

"No, madame; if you are again about to run the chance of her majesty's
displeasure, and it were known at the Palais Royal that I had been the
means of introducing you there, the queen would never forgive me while
she lived. No; there are certain persons at the palace who are devoted
to me, who will procure you an admission without my being compromised."

"Just as you please, provided I enter."

"What do you term those religious women at Bruges who cure disorders?"

"Beguines."

"Good; you are one."

"As you please, but I must soon cease to be one."

"That is your affair."

"Excuse me, but I do not wish to be exposed to a refusal."

"That is again your own affair, madame. I am going to give directions to
the head valet of the gentlemen in waiting on her majesty to allow
admission to a Beguine, who brings an effectual remedy for her majesty's
sufferings. You are the bearer of my letter, you will undertake to be
provided with the remedy, and will give every explanation on the
subject. I admit a knowledge of a Beguine, but I deny all knowledge of
Madame de Chevreuse. Here, madame, then, is your letter of
introduction."




CHAPTER XLIX.

THE SKIN OF THE BEAR.


Colbert handed the duchesse the letter, and gently drew aside the chair
behind which she was standing; Madame de Chevreuse, with a very slight
bow, immediately left the room. Colbert, who had recognized Mazarin's
handwriting and had counted the letters, rang to summon his secretary,
whom he enjoined to go in immediate search of M. Vanel, a counselor of
the parliament. The secretary replied that, according to his usual
practice, M. Vanel had just that moment entered the house, in order to
render to the intendant an account of the principal details of the
business which had been transacted during the day in the sitting of the
parliament. Colbert approached one of the lamps, read the letters of the
deceased cardinal over again, smiled repeatedly as he recognized the
great value of the papers Madame de Chevreuse had just delivered to him,
and burying his head in his hands for a few minutes, reflected
profoundly. In the meantime, a tall, large-made man entered the room;
his spare, thin face, steady look, and hooked nose, as he entered
Colbert's cabinet, with a modest assurance of manner, revealed a
character at once supple and decided--supple toward the master who could
throw him the prey, firm toward the dogs who might possibly be disposed
to dispute it with him. M. Vanel carried a voluminous bundle of papers
under his arm, and placed it on the desk on which Colbert was leaning
both his elbows, as he supported his head.

"Good-day, M. Vanel," said the latter, rousing himself from his
meditation.

"Good-day, monseigneur," said Vanel, naturally.

"You should say monsieur, and not monseigneur," replied Colbert, gently.

"We give the title of monseigneur to ministers," returned Vanel, with
extreme self-possession, "and you are a minister."

"Not yet."

"You are so in point of fact, and I call you monseigneur accordingly;
besides, you are my seigneur for me, and that is sufficient; if you
dislike my calling you monseigneur before others, allow me, at least, to
