the religious sanction of a kind of zoolatry) is in force and has worked
to the same result, in Africa, Asia, America, and Australia, while a host
of minute facts make it a reasonable conclusion that it prevailed in
Europe.  Among these facts certain peculiarities of Greek and Roman and
Hindoo marriage law, Greek, Latin, and English tribal names, and a crowd
of legends are the most prominent. {236}  Mr. Max Muller's doctrine of
the development of Indian religion (while admitting the existence of
Snake or Naga tribes) takes no account of the action of this universal
zoolatry on religion and society.

After marriage and after tribal institutions, look at _rank_.  Is it not
obvious that the religious elements (magic and necromancy) left out of
his reckoning by Mr. Muller are most powerful in developing rank?  Even
among those democratic paupers, the Fuegians, 'the doctor-wizard of each
party has much influence over his companions.'  Among those other
democrats, the Eskimo, a class of wizards, called Angakuts, become 'a
kind of civil magistrates,' because they can cause fine weather, and can
magically detect people who commit offences.  Thus the germs of rank, in
these cases, are sown by the magic which is fetichism in action.  Try the
Zulus: 'the heaven is the chief's,' he can call up clouds and storms,
hence the sanction of his authority.  In New Zealand, every Rangatira has
a supernatural power.  If he touches an article, no one else dares to
appropriate it, for fear of terrible supernatural consequences.  A head
chief is 'tapued an inch thick, and perfectly unapproachable.'  Magical
power abides in and emanates from him.  By this superstition, an
aristocracy is formed, and property (the property, at least, of the
aristocracy) is secured.  Among the Red Indians, as Schoolcraft says,
'priests and jugglers are the persons that make war and have a voice in
the sale of the land.'  Mr. E. W. Robertson says much the same thing
about early Scotland.  If Odin was not a god with the gifts of a medicine-
man, and did not owe his chiefship to his talent for dealing with magic,
he is greatly maligned.  The Irish Brehons also sanctioned legal
decisions by magical devices, afterwards condemned by the Church.  Among
the Zulus, 'the Itongo (spirit) dwells with the great man; he who dreams
is the chief of the village.'  The chief alone can 'read in the vessel of
divination.'  The Kaneka chiefs are medicine-men.

Here then, in widely distant regions, in early European, American,
Melanesian, African societies, we find those factors in religion which
the primitive Aryans are said to have dispensed with, helping to
construct society, rank, property.  Is it necessary to add that the
ancestral spirits still 'rule the present from the past,' and demand
sacrifice, and speak to 'him who dreams,' who, therefore, is a strong
force in society, if not a chief?  Mr. Herbert Spencer, Mr. Tylor, M.
Fustel de Coulanges, a dozen others, have made all this matter of common
notoriety.  As Hearne the traveller says about the Copper River Indians,
'it is almost necessary that they who rule them should profess something
a little supernatural to enable them to deal with the people.'  The few
examples we have given show how widely, and among what untutored races,
the need is felt.  The rudimentary government of early peoples requires,
and, by aid of dreams, necromancy, 'medicine' (i.e. fetiches), tapu, and
so forth, obtains, a supernatural sanction.

Where is the supernatural sanction that consecrated the chiefs of a race
which woke to the sense of the existence of infinite beings, in face of
trees, rivers, the dawn, the sun, and had none of the so-called late and
corrupt fetichism that does such useful social work?

To the student of other early societies, Mr. Muller's theory of the
growth of Aryan religion seems to leave society without cement, and
without the most necessary sanctions.  One man is as good as another,
before a tree, a river, a hill.  The savage organisers of other societies
found out fetiches and ghosts that were 'respecters of persons.'  Zoolatry
is intertwisted with the earliest and most widespread law of prohibited
degrees.  How did the Hindoos dispense with the aid of these
superstitions?  Well, they did not quite dispense with them.  Mr. Max
Muller remarks, almost on his last page (376), that 'in India also . . .
the thoughts and feelings about those whom death had separated from us
for a time, supplied some of the earliest and most important elements of
religion.'  If this was the case, surely the presence of those elements
and their influence should have been indicated along with the remarks
about the awfulness of trees and the suggestiveness of rivers.  Is
nothing said about the spirits of the dead and their cult in the Vedas?
Much is said, of course.  But, were it otherwise, then other elements of
savage religion may also have been neglected there, and it will be
impossible to argue that fetichism did not exist because it is not
mentioned.  It will also be impossible to admit that the 'Hibbert
Lectures' give more than a one-sided account of the Origin of Indian
Religion.

The perusal of Mr. Max Muller's book deeply impresses one with the
necessity of studying early religions and early societies simultaneously.
If it be true that early Indian religion lacked precisely those
superstitions, so childish, so grotesque, and yet so useful, which we
find at work in contemporary tribes, and which we read of in history, the
discovery is even more remarkable and important than the author of the
'Hibbert Lectures' seems to suppose.  It is scarcely necessary to repeat
that the negative evidence of the Vedas, the religious utterances of
sages, made in a time of what we might call 'heroic culture,' can never
disprove the existence of superstitions which, if current in the former
experience of the race, the hymnists, as Barth observes, would
intentionally ignore.  Our object has been to defend the 'primitiveness
of fetichism.'  By this we do not mean to express any opinion as to
whether fetichism (in the strictest sense of the word) was or was not
earlier than totemism, than the worship of the dead, or than the
involuntary sense of awe and terror with which certain vast phenomena may
have affected the earliest men.  We only claim for the powerful and
ubiquitous practices of fetichism a place _among_ the early elements of
religion, and insist that what is so universal has not yet been shown to
be 'a corruption' of something older and purer.

One remark of Mr. Max Muller's fortifies these opinions.  If fetichism be
indeed one of the earliest factors of faith in the supernatural; if it
be, in its rudest forms, most powerful in proportion to other elements of
faith among the least cultivated races (and _that_ Mr. Muller will
probably allow)--among what class of cultivated peoples will it longest
hold its ground?  Clearly, among the least cultivated, among the
fishermen, the shepherds of lonely districts, the peasants of outlying
lands--in short, among the _people_.  Neglected by sacred poets in the
culminating period of purity in religion, it will linger among the
superstitions of the rustics.  There is no real break in the continuity
of peasant life; the modern folklore is (in many points) the savage
ritual.  Now Mr. Muller, when he was minimising the existence of
fetichism in the Rig Veda (the oldest collection of hymns), admitted its
existence in the Atharvana (p. 60). {241}  On p. 151, we read 'the
Atharva-veda-Sanhita is a later collection, containing, besides a large
number of Rig Veda verses, _some curious relics of popular poetry
connected with charms, imprecations, and other superstitious usages_.'
The italics are mine, and are meant to emphasise this fact:--When we
leave the sages, the Rishis, and look at what is _popular_, look at what
that class believed which of savage practice has everywhere retained so
much, we are at once among the charms and the fetiches!  This is
precisely what one would have expected.  If the history of religion and
of mythology is to be unravelled, we must examine what the unprogressive
classes in Europe have in common with Australians, and Bushmen, and
Andaman Islanders.  It is the function of the people to retain in
folklore these elements of religion, which it is the high duty of the
sage and the poet to purify away in the fire of refining thought.  It is
for this very reason that _ritual_ has (though Mr. Max Muller curiously
says that it seems not to possess) an immense scientific interest.  Ritual
holds on, with the tenacity of superstition, to all that has ever been
practised.  Yet, when Mr. Muller wants to know about _origins_, about
actual ancient _practice_, he deliberately turns to that 'great
collection of ancient poetry' (the Rig Veda) 'which has no special
reference to sacrificial acts,' not to the Brahmanas which are full of
ritual.

To sum up briefly:--(1) Mr. Muller's arguments against the evidence for,
and the primitiveness of, fetichism seem to demonstrate the opposite of
that which he intends them to prove.  (2) His own evidence for
_primitive_ practice is chosen from the documents of a _cultivated_
society.  (3) His theory deprives that society of the very influences
which have elsewhere helped the Tribe, the Family, Rank, and Priesthoods
to grow up, and to form the backbone of social existence.




THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE FAMILY.


What are the original forms of the human family?  Did man begin by being
monogamous or polygamous, but, in either case, the master of his own home
and the assured central point of his family relations?  Or were the
unions of the sexes originally shifting and precarious, so that the
wisest child was not expected to know his own father, and family ties
were reckoned through the mother alone?  Again (setting aside the
question of what was 'primitive' and 'original'), did the needs and
barbarous habits of early men lead to a scarcity of women, and hence to
polyandry (that is, the marriage of one woman to several men), with the
consequent uncertainty about male parentage?  Once more, admitting that
these loose and strange relations of the sexes do prevail, or have
prevailed, among savages, is there any reason to suppose that the
stronger races, the Aryan and Semitic stocks, ever passed through this
stage of savage customs?  These are the main questions debated between
what we may call the 'historical' and the 'anthropological' students of
ancient customs.

When Sir Henry Maine observed, in 1861, that it was difficult to say what
society of men had _not been_, originally, based on the patriarchal
family, he went, of course, outside the domain of history.  What occurred
in the very origin of human society is a question perhaps quite
inscrutable.  Certainly, history cannot furnish the answer.  Here the
anthropologist and physiologist come in with their methods, and even
those, we think, can throw but an uncertain light on the very 'origin' of
institutions, and on strictly primitive man.

For the purposes of this discussion, we shall here re-state the chief
points at issue between the adherents of Sir Henry Maine and of Mr.
M'Lennan, between historical and anthropological inquirers.

1.  Did man _originally_ live in the patriarchal family, or did he live
in more or less modified promiscuity, with uncertainty of blood-ties, and
especially of male parentage?

2.  Did circumstances and customs at some time compel or induce man
(whatever his _original_ condition) to resort to practices which made
paternity uncertain, and so caused kinship to be reckoned through women?

3.  Granting that some races have been thus reduced to matriarchal forms
of the family--that is, to forms in which the woman is the permanent
recognised centre--is there any reason to suppose that the stronger
peoples, like the Aryans and the Semites, ever passed through a stage of
culture in which female, not male, kinship was chiefly recognised,
probably as a result of polyandry, of many husbands to one wife?

On this third question, it will be necessary to produce much evidence of
very different sorts: evidence which, at best, can perhaps only warrant
an inference, or presumption, in favour of one or the other opinion.  For
the moment, the impartial examination of testimony is more important and
practicable than the establishment of any theory.

(1.)  Did man _originally_ live in the patriarchal family, the male being
master of his female mate or mates, and of his children?  On this first
point Sir Henry Maine, in his new volume, {247a} may be said to come as
near proving his case as the nature and matter of the question will
permit.  Bachofen, M'Lennan, and Morgan, all started from a hypothetical
state of more or less modified sexual promiscuity.  Bachofen's evidence
(which may be referred to later) was based on a great mass of legends,
myths, and travellers' tales, chiefly about early Aryan practices.  He
discovered Hetarismus, as he called it, or promiscuity, among Lydians,
Etruscans, Persians, Thracians, Cyrenian nomads, Egyptians, Scythians,
Troglodytes, Nasamones, and so forth.  Mr. M'Lennan's view is, perhaps,
less absolutely stated than Sir Henry Maine supposes.  M'Lennan says
{247b} 'that there has been a stage in the development of the human
races, when there was no such appropriation of women to particular men;
when, in short, marriage, _as it exists among civilised nations_, was not
practised.  Marriage, _in this sense_, was yet undreamt of.'  Mr.
M'Lennan adds (pp. 130, 131), 'as among other gregarious animals, the
unions of the sexes were probably, in the earliest times, loose,
transitory, and, _in some degree_, promiscuous.'

Sir Henry Maine opposes to Mr. M'Lennan's theory the statement of Mr.
Darwin: 'From all we know of the passions of all male quadrupeds,
promiscuous intercourse in a state of Nature is highly improbable.' {248}
On this first question, let us grant to Sir Henry Maine, to Mr. Darwin,
and to common sense that if the very earliest men were extremely animal
in character, their unions while they lasted were probably monogamous or
polygamous.  The sexual jealousy of the male would secure that result, as
it does among many other animals.  Let the first point, then, be scored
to Sir Henry Maine: let it be granted that if man was created perfect, he
lived in the monogamous family before the Fall: and that, if he was
evolved as an animal, the unchecked animal instincts would make for
monogamy or patriarchal polygamy in the strictly primitive family.

(2.)  Did circumstances and customs ever or anywhere compel or induce man
(whatever his original condition) to resort to practices which made
paternity uncertain, and so caused the absence of the patriarchal family,
kinship being reckoned through women?  If this question be answered in
the affirmative, and if the sphere of action of the various causes be
made wide enough, it will not matter much to Mr. M'Lennan's theory
whether the strictly primitive family was patriarchal or not.  If there
occurred a fall from the primitive family, and if that fall was extremely
general, affecting even the Aryan race, Mr. M'Lennan's adherents will be
amply satisfied.  Their object is to show that the family, even in the
Aryan race, was developed through a stage of loose savage connections.  If
that can be shown, they do not care much about primitive man properly so
called.  Sir Henry Maine admits, as a matter of fact, that among certain
races, in certain districts, circumstances have overridden the sexual
jealousy which secures the recognition of male parentage.  Where women
have been few, and where poverty has been great, jealousy has been
suppressed, even in the Venice of the eighteenth century.  Sir H. Maine
says, 'The usage' (that of polyandry--many husbands to a single wife)
'seems to me one which circumstances overpowering morality and decency
might at any time call into existence.  It is known to have arisen in the
native Indian army.'  The question now is, what are the circumstances
that overpower morality and decency, and so produce polyandry, with its
necessary consequences, when it is a recognised institution--the absence
of the patriarchal family, and the recognition of kinship through women?
Any circumstances which cause great scarcity of women will conduce to
those results.  Mr. M'Lennan's opinion was, that the chief cause of
scarcity of women has been the custom of female infanticide--of killing
little girls as bouches inutiles.  Sir Henry Maine admits that 'the cause
assigned by M'Lennan is a vera causa--it is capable of producing the
effects.' {249}  Mr. M'Lennan collected a very large mass of testimony to
prove the wide existence of this cause of paucity of women.  Till that
evidence is published, I can only say that it was sufficient, in Mr.
M'Lennan's opinion, to demonstrate the wide prevalence of the factor
which is the mainspring of his whole system. {250a}  How frightfully
female infanticide has prevailed in India, everyone may read in the
official reports of Col. M'Pherson, and other English authorities.  Mr.
Fison's 'Kamilaroi and Kurnai' contains some notable, though not to my
mind convincing, arguments on the other side.  Sir Henry Maine adduces
another cause of paucity of women: the wanderings of our race, and
expeditions across sea. {250b}  This cause would not, however, be
important enough to alter forms of kinship, where the invaders (like the
early English in Britain) found a population which they could conquer and
whose women they could appropriate.

Apart from any probable inferences that may be drawn from the presumed
practice of female infanticide, actual ascertained facts prove that many
races do not now live, or that recently they did not live, in the
patriarchal or modern family.  They live, or did live, in polyandrous
associations.  The Thibetans, the Nairs, the early inhabitants of Britain
(according to Caesar), and many other races, {251} as well as the
inhabitants of the Marquesas Islands, and the Iroquois (according to
Lafitau), practise, or have practised, polyandry.

We now approach the third and really important problem--(3.)  Is there
any reason to suppose that the stronger peoples, like the Aryans and the
Semites, ever passed through a stage of culture in which female, not
male, kinship was chiefly recognised, probably as a result of polyandry?

Now the nature of the evidence which affords a presumption that Aryans
have all passed through Australian institutions such as polyandry, is of
extremely varied character.  Much of it may undoubtedly be explained
away.  But such strength as the evidence has (which we do not wish to
exaggerate) is derived from its convergence to one point--namely, the
anterior existence of polyandry and the matriarchal family among Aryans
before and after the dawn of real history.

For the sake of distinctness we may here number the heads of the evidence
bearing on this question.  We have--

1.  The evidence of inference from the form of capture in bridal
ceremonies.

2.  The evidence from exogamy: the law which forbids marriage between
persons of the same family name.

3.  The evidence from totemism--that is, the derivation of the family
name and crest or badge, from some natural object, plant or animal. {252}
Persons bearing the name may not intermarry, nor, as a rule, may they eat
the object from which they derive their family name and from which they
claim to be descended.

4.  The evidence from the gens of Rome, or [Greek] of ancient Greece, in
connection with Totemism.

5.  The evidence from myth and legend.

6.  The evidence from direct historical statements as to the prevalence
of the matriarchal family, and inheritance through the maternal line.

To take these various testimonies in their order, let us begin with

(1.)  The form of capture in bridal ceremonies.  That this form survived
in Sparta, Crete, in Hindoo law, in the traditions of Ireland, in the
popular rustic customs of Wales, is not denied.

If we hold, with Mr. M'Lennan, that scarcity of women (produced by female
infanticide or otherwise) is the cause of the habit of capturing wives,
we may see, in survivals of this ceremony of capture among Aryans, a
proof of early scarcity of women, and of probable polyandry.  But an
opponent may argue, like Mr. J. A. Farrer in 'Primitive Manners,' that
the ceremony of capture is mainly a concession to maiden modesty among
early races.  Here one may observe that the girls of savage tribes are
notoriously profligate and immodest about illicit connections.  Only
honourable marriage brings a blush to the cheek of these young persons.
This is odd, but, in the present state of the question, we cannot lean on
the evidence of the ceremony of capture.  We cannot demonstrate that it
is derived from a time when paucity of women made capture of brides
necessary.  Thus 'honours are easy' in this first deal.

(2.)  The next indication is very curious, and requires much more
prolonged discussion.  The custom of Exogamy was first noted and named by
Mr. M'Lennan.  Exogamy is the prohibition of marriage within the supposed
blood-kinship, as denoted by the family name.  Such marriage, among many
backward races, is reckoned incestuous, and is punishable by death.
Certain peculiarities in connection with the family name have to be noted
later.  Now, Sir Henry Maine admits that exogamy, as thus defined, exists
among the Hindoos.  'A Hindoo may not marry a woman belonging to the same
gotra, all members of the gotra being theoretically supposed to have
descended from the same ancestor.'  The same rule prevails in China.
'There are in China large bodies of related clansmen, each generally
bearing the same clan-name.  They are exogamous; no man will marry a
woman having the same clan-name with himself.'  It is admitted by Sir
Henry Maine that this wide prohibition of marriage was the early Aryan
rule, while advancing civilisation has gradually permitted marriage
within limits once forbidden.  The Greek Church now (according to Mr.
M'Lennan), and the Catholic Church in the past, forbade intermarriages
'as far as relationship could be known.'  The Hindoo rule appears to go
still farther, and to prohibit marriage as far as the common gotra name
seems merely to indicate relationship.

As to the ancient Romans, Plutarch says: Formerly they did not marry
women connected with them by blood, any more than they now marry aunts or
sisters.  It was long before they would even intermarry with cousins.'
Plutarch also remarks that, in times past, Romans did not marry [Greek],
and if we may render this 'women of the same gens,' the exogamous
prohibition in Rome was as complete as among the Hindoos.  I do not quite
gather from Sir Henry Maine's account of the Slavonic house communities
(pp. 254, 255) whether they dislike _all_ kindred marriages, or only
marriage within the 'greater blood'--that is, within the kinship on the
male side.  He says: 'The South Slavonians bring their wives into the
group, in which they are socially organised, from a considerable distance
outside. . . .  Every marriage which requires an ecclesiastical
dispensation is regarded as disreputable.'

On the whole, wide prohibitions of marriage are archaic: the widest are
savage; the narrowest are modern and civilised.  Thus the Hindoo
prohibition is old, barbarous, and wide.  'The barbarous Aryan,' says Sir
Henry Maine, 'is generally exogamous.  He has a most extensive table of
prohibited degrees.'  Thus exogamy seems to be a survival of barbarism.
The question for us is, Can we call exogamy a survival from a period when
(owing to scarcity of women and polyandry) clear ideas of kinship were
impossible?  If this can be proved, exogamous Aryans either passed
through polyandrous institutions, or borrowed a savage custom derived
from a period when ideas of kinship were obscure.

If we only knew the origin of the prohibition to marry within the family
name all would be plain sailing.  At present several theories of the
origin of exogamy are before the world.  Mr. Morgan, the author of
'Ancient Society,' inclines to trace the prohibition to a great early
physiological discovery, acted on by primitive men by virtue of a contrat
social.  Early man discovered that children of unsound constitutions were
born of nearly related parents.  Mr. Morgan says: 'Primitive men very
early discovered the evils of close interbreeding.'  Elsewhere Mr. Morgan
writes: 'Intermarriage in the gens was prohibited, to secure the benefits
of marrying out with unrelated persons.'  This arrangement was 'a product
of high intelligence,' and Mr. Morgan calls it a 'reform.'

Let us examine this very curious theory.  First: Mr. Morgan supposes
early man to have made a discovery (the evils of the marriage of near
kin) which evades modern physiological science.  Modern science has not
