
It was smoothed out, and upon it, were the words, "General Washington."

"Where I go, sar, I show dem dis, and dey know den dat de message can be
believed."

"But how do you get the message? How do you see your master?"

"Master's orders were dat me and two oders were to meet him ebery night,
after it got dark, at a tree a mile from de place where de soldiers are.
Sometimes he no come. When he come he gibs each of us a piece of money
and tell us to carry a message across the river. We start by different
ways, swim across de water in different places, take de message, and
come back to de plantation."

"A pretty business!" Peter said. "Now you must come back with us to the
post and tell your story to the commanding officer. Then we must see if
we can't lay hands on this rascally master of yours."

Upon the news being told, the general in command sent a party out, who,
after searching the house and out-buildings of the plantation in vain,
set fire to them and burned them to the ground. The negroes were all
carried away and employed to labor for the army. The town and all the
surrounding villages were searched, but no trace could be obtained of
the missing man. One of the men of Gregory's corps of scouts
disappeared. He had recently joined, but his appearance, as a man with
beard and whiskers, in no way agreed with that of the planter. He might,
however, have been disguised, and his disappearance was in itself no
proof against him, for the scouts were under no great discipline, and
when tired of the service often left without giving notice of their
intention of doing so. It was, moreover, possible that he might have
fallen by an enemy's bullet.

The strongest proof in favor of the deserter being Chermside was that,
henceforth, the scouts were again as successful as before, often
surprising the enemy successfully.

Now that the ford nearest Mr. Jackson's was strongly guarded, the young
men had no apprehension of any surprise, although such an event was just
possible, as the cavalry on both sides often made great circuits in
their raids upon each other's country. That Chermside was somewhere in
the neighborhood they believed; having, indeed, strong reason for doing
so, as a rifle was one evening fired at them from the wood as they rode
over, the ball passing between their heads. Pursuit, at the time, was
impossible. But the next day a number of scouts searched the woods
without success. Soon after they heard that Chermside had joined the
Americans and obtained a commission in a body of their irregular horse.

Harvey was now formally engaged to Isabelle Jackson, and it was settled
that the wedding should take place in the early spring at New York. When
not on duty he naturally spent a good deal of his time there, and Harold
was frequently with him. Since he had been fired at in the woods
Isabelle had been in the highest state of nervous anxiety lest her
lover's enemy should again try to assassinate him, and she begged Harold
always to come over with him, if possible, as the thought of his riding
alone through the wood filled her with anxiety.

Although he had no order to do so, Jake, whenever he saw Harold and his
friend canter off toward the Jacksons, shouldered his rifle and went out
after them to the house, where, so long as they stayed, he scouted round
and round with the utmost vigilance. Very often Harold was ignorant of
his presence there; but when, after his return, he found, by questioning
him, how he had been employed, he remonstrated with him on such
excessive precaution.

"Can't be too cautious, massa," Jake said. "You see dat fellow come one
of dese days."

Jake's presentiment turned out correct. One evening when, with several
friends, the young men were at Mr. Jackson's the sound of the report of
a rifle was heard at a short distance.

"That must be Jake's rifle!" Harold exclaimed.

"Quick, Harvey, to your horse!"

It was too late. As they reached the door a strong party of American
cavalry dashed up to it.

"Surround the house!" an officer shouted. "Do not let a soul escape!"

The young men ran upstairs again.

"We are caught," Harvey said. "Escape is cut off. The Yankee cavalry are
all round the house. Good-by, Isabelle. We shall meet one of these days
again, dear." The girl threw herself into his arms.

"Be calm, love!" he said. "Do not let this scoundrel have the
satisfaction of triumphing over you."

A moment later Chermside, accompanied by several soldiers,
entered the room.

"I am sorry to disturb so pleasant a party," he said in a sneering
voice, "but if Americans choose to entertain the enemies of their
country they must expect these little disagreeables."

Mr. Jackson abruptly turned his back upon him, and no one else spoke,
although he was personally well known to all.

"These are the two men," he said to the soldiers--"two of the most
notorious scouts and spies on the frontier. We will take them to
headquarters, where a short shrift and two strong ropes will be
their lot."

"The less the word spy is in the mouth of such a pitiful traitor as
yourself the better, I should say," Harvey said quietly; and, walking
forward with Harold, he placed himself in the hands of the soldiers.

No one else spoke. Isabelle had fainted when she heard the threat of
execution against her lover. Ada stood before her with a look of
such anger and contempt on her young face that Chermside fairly
winced under it.

"To horse!" he said sullenly, and, turning, followed his men and
prisoners downstairs.

The troop, Harold saw, numbered some 200 sabers. They had with them a
number of riderless horses, whose accouterments showed that they
belonged to an English regiment; most of the men, too, had sacks of
plunder upon their horses. They had evidently made a successful raid,
and had probably attacked a post and surprised and driven off the
horses of a squadron of cavalry, and were now on their return toward
their lines.

"This is an awkward business, Harold," Harvey said as, in the midst
of their captors, they galloped off from the Jacksons'. "Of course
it's all nonsense about our being hung. Still, I have no wish to see
the inside of a prison, where we may pass years before we are
exchanged. Once handed over to the authorities we shall be safe; but
I shall not feel that we are out of danger so long as we are in this
scoundrel's hands. Fortunately there are officers of superior rank to
himself with the squadron, otherwise I have no doubt at all that he
would hang us at once."

Such was indeed the case, and Chermside was, at that moment, fuming
intensely at the chance which had thrown his rival in his hands at a
time when he was powerless to carry out his vengeance. He had, indeed,
ventured to suggest that it would be less trouble to hang the prisoners
at once, but the major in command had so strongly rebuked him for the
suggestion that he had at once been silenced.

"I blush that I should have heard such words from the mouth of an
American officer. It is by such deeds, sir, that our cause is too often
disgraced. We are soldiers fighting for the independence of our
country--not lawless marauders. Had these men been taken in their
civilian dress over on our side of the river they would have been tried
and hung as spies; but they were on neutral ground, and, in fact, in the
rear of their own posts. There is no shadow of defense for such an
accusation. Should I ever hear a similar suggestion I shall at once
report your conduct to General Washington, who will know how to deal
with you."

"I wonder what has become of Jake," Harold said to his comrade. "I trust
he was not shot down."

"Not he," Harvey said. "He made off after firing his rifle, you may be
sure, when he saw that there was nothing to be done. The fellow can run
like a hare, and I have no doubt that, by this time, he has either got
back to the village and given the alarm there or has made for the ford.
There are 100 cavalry there now as well as the infantry. Jake will be
there in an hour from the time he started. The dragoons will be in the
saddle five minutes later, and it is just possible they may cut off our
retreat before we have crossed the river. Peter is on duty there, and,
if he happens to be at the post when Jake arrives, he will hurry up with
all the scouts he can collect."

Jake had taken flight as Harvey supposed. He had, after firing his
rifle, taken to the wood, and had remained near the house long enough to
see which way the cavalry rode when they started. Then he made for the
post at the ford at the top of his speed. It was less than an hour from
starting when he arrived there, and three minutes later the cavalry
trumpets were blowing "To horse!" After giving his message to the
officer in command Jake went into the village, where the sounds of the
trumpet brought all the soldiers into the street.

"Hullo, Jake! is that you?" a familiar voice asked. "What the tarnal
is up now?"

Jake hastily related what had taken place.

"Tarnation!" Peter exclaimed. "This is a bad job. They're making, no
doubt, for Finchley's Ford, fifteen mile down the river. With an hour's
start they're sure to be there before us."

"What are you going to do, Peter? Are you thinking of running wid
de cavalry?"

"Thinking of running to the moon!" the scout said contemptuously. "You
can run well, I don't deny, Jake, but you couldn't run fifteen mile with
the dragoons; and, if you could, you'd get there too late. Yer bellows
are going pretty fast already. Now don't stand staring there, but hurry
through the camp and get all our boys together. Tell them to meet by the
water side. Get Gregory and Vincent's men as well as our own. There's
twenty or thirty altogether in the place."

Without asking a question Jake ran off to carry out the orders, and, in
a few minutes, twenty-four men were collected together on the bank.

"Now, you fellows," Peter said, "we've got to rescue these two chaps out
of the hands of the Yankees. Them who don't want to jine--and mind you
the venture is a risky one--had better say so at once and stop behind."

No one moved.

"What I propose is this: we'll take the ferryboat, which aint no good
to no one, seeing as how the Yankees are on one side of the river and
we the other, and we'll drop down the stream about ten mile. Then we'll
land on their side of the river and strike inland, hiding the boat
under the bushes somewhere. They'll halt for the night when they're
safe across the river. There's five or six hundred of their infantry
camped on the ford. There's two hundred on our side, but the Yankees'll
ride through in the dark and get across before the redcoats are awake.
Now, I propose that, after we've landed, we make a sweep round until we
get near the Yanks' camp. Then the rest'll wait and two or three of
us'll go in and see if we can't get the young fellows out of wherever
they've put 'em. Then we'll jine you and make a running fight of it
back to the boat."

The others assented. The boat was amply large enough for all, and,
pulling her out into the stream, they dropped down, keeping under
shelter of the trees on the British side. Half an hour after they had
started they heard the faint sound of distant musketry.

"There," Peter said, "the Yanks are riding through the British camp,
close to the ford."

A few more shots were heard, and then all was silent. The stream was
swift, for it was swollen by recent rains, and at three in the morning
the boat touched the bank about a mile above the ford. The party
disembarked noiselessly and, fastening the boat to a tree, moved along
toward the camp.

When they were within four or five hundred yards of the village Peter
chose Jake and two others of his band, and, telling the rest to remain
where they were, ready for action, he struck inland. He made a _detour_
and came in at the back of the camp.

Here there were no sentries, as the only danger to be apprehended was
upon the side of the river. Peter therefore entered boldly. In front of
the principal house a sentry was walking up and down, and he, in the
free-and-easy manner usual in the American army, gladly entered into
conversation with the newcomers.

"All pretty quiet about here?" Peter asked. "We're from the West, and
have jest come down to do a little fighting with the Britishers. I
reckon they aint far off now?"

"They are just across the river," the sentry said. "Have you come far?"

"We've made something like two hundred mile this week, and mean to have
a day or two's rest before we begin. We've done some Injun fighting, my
mates and me, in our time, and we says to ourselves it was about time we
burned a little powder against the redcoats. Things seem quiet enough
about here. Nothing doing, eh?"

"Not much," the sentry said; "just skirmishes. Some of our cavalry came
across through the redcoats late to-night. I hear they have got a
quantity of plunder and some fine horses, and they have brought in a
couple of the British scouts."

"And what have they done with 'em?" Peter asked. "Strung 'em up,
I suppose."

"No, no; we aint fighting Indians now; we don't hang our prisoners. No,
they are safe under guard over there in the cavalry camp, and will be
taken to headquarters to-morrow."

"Waal," Peter said, stretching himself, "I feel mighty tired and shall
jest look for a soft place for an hour's sleep before morning."

So saying he sauntered away, and the sentry resumed his walk.

Peter and his three companions now moved off toward the spot where, as
the sentry had indicated, the cavalry were encamped. They were not in
tents, but were sleeping wrapped up in their blankets. Two tents had
been erected, lent probably by the infantry on the spot. One was much
larger than the other, and sentries were placed before each. They had
some difficulty in making their way, for the night was dark, and the
cavalry had picketed their horses without order or regularity. In their
search they had to use great caution to avoid stumbling over the
sleeping men, but at last they saw the tents faintly against the sky.
They crawled cautiously up. There were two sentries on the smaller tent.

"Now, Jake," Peter whispered, "you're the blackest and so had better do
the trick. Don't cut a hole in the tent, for they'd be safe to hear the
canvas tear. Crawl under. It's been put up in haste and aint likely to
be pinned down very tight. They're safe to be bound, and when you've cut
the cords and given them time to get the use of their feet, then crawl
along and jine us."

Jake did as he was instructed. One of the sentries was pacing up and
down before the entrance, the other making a circuit round the tent. The
circle was a somewhat large one to avoid stumbling over the tent ropes.
Jake, watching his opportunity, had no difficulty in crawling up and
squeezing himself under the canvas before the sentry returned.

"Hush!" he whispered, as he let the canvas fall behind him. "It's Jake."

Both the captives were fast asleep. Jake, feeling about in the darkness,
found them, one after the other, and, putting his hands on their mouths
to prevent them making an exclamation, he woke them, and soon cut the
cords with which they were bound hand and foot. Then in whispers he told
them what had happened. They chafed their limbs to produce circulation,
for they had been tightly tied, and then, one by one, they crawled out
of the tent.

Harvey went first and was safely across before the sentry returned.
Harold followed; but, as he went, in his hurry he struck a tent rope.

"What's that?" the sentry in front asked sharply. "Bill, was that you?"

"No," his comrade replied. "Something's up. Look into the tent."

And, so saying, he ran round behind, while the sentry in front rushed
into the tent and, kicking about with his feet, soon found that it
was empty.

Jake, on hearing the exclamation, at once crawled from the tent; but, as
he did so, the sentry, running round, saw him and leveled his rifle.
Before he could fire a shot was heard and the man fell dead.

Jake started to his feet and joined his friends. The other sentry also
discharged his rifle, and the whole camp awoke and sprang to their feet.
The horses, alarmed at the sudden tumult, plunged and kicked; men
shouted and swore, everyone asking what was the matter. Then loud cries
were heard that the sentry was shot and the prisoners had escaped.

Running closely together and knocking down all who stood in their way,
the fugitives hurried in the darkness until at the edge of the camp, and
then started at full speed.

The trumpets were now sounding to horse, and several shots were fired
after them. Many of the horses had not been unsaddled, and mounted men
at once dashed off. Several had seen the little party rush away, and the
horsemen were speedily on their track. The six men ran at the top of
their speed and were soon close to their hidden friends.

"This way! this way! I see them!" shouted a voice, which Harold and
Harvey recognized as that of their enemy, who, a minute later, galloped
up with half a dozen troopers. It was not until he was within a few
yards that his figure was clearly discernible; then Peter Lambton's
rifle flashed out, and the planter fell from his horse with a bullet in
his brain.

Jake and the other two men also fired, and the horsemen, astonished at
their number, reined in their horses to await the coming up of more of
their comrades.

In another minute the fugitives were with their friends, and, at a rapid
trot, the whole ran up the river bank toward the spot where they had
hidden their boat.

The country was covered with brushwood and forest and, as the cavalry,
now swollen to a considerable force, advanced, they were greeted by so
heavy a fire that, astonished at this strong force of foes upon their
side of the river, and not knowing how numerous they might be, they
halted and waited for the infantry to come up. Long before the enemy
were prepared to advance against the unknown foe the scouts reached
their boat and crossed safely to the other side.

Shortly after this adventure Mr. Jackson and his family moved for the
winter to New York, where, soon after their arrival, the wedding
between Harvey and Isabella took place, the former retiring from the
corps of scouts.




CHAPTER XI.


THE CAPTURE OF PHILADELPHIA.

During the course of the spring of 1777 a large number of loyal
colonists had volunteered their services. They had been embodied into
battalions, and when the army prepared to take the field they were
placed in garrisons in New York and other places, thus permitting the
employment of the whole of the British force in the field. The Americans
had occupied themselves in strongly fortifying the more defensible
positions, especially those in a mountain tract of country called the
Manor of Courland. This was converted into a sort of citadel, where
large quantities of provisions, forage, and stores of all kinds were
collected. About fifty miles from New York, up the North River, was a
place called Peekskill, which served as a port to the Manor of Courland.
The country was so difficult and mountainous that General Howe shrank
from engaging his army in it. He determined, however, to attack and
destroy Peekskill, and a party of 500 men, under the command of Colonel
Bird of the Fifteenth Regiment, were sent up the river in two transports
