box! Was any wretched girl ever in such a fix? Oh! Gwen Gascoyne,
you've got yourself into an atrocious mess altogether, and I don't see
how you're ever going to climb out of it."

Gwen's one sheet anchor of hope, to which she clung in a kind of
desperation, was the thought of the postal orders that Grannie and
Aunt Violet almost invariably sent at Christmas. If these did not
arrive, she could not pay Netta, and then--well, any kind of
catastrophe might be expected to follow. She went about with a load of
lead on her heart, and a consequent shortness of temper highly trying
to the rest of the family. She was grumpy with the little boys,
impatient with Lesbia, and so unaccommodating over doing the
decorations in church that Beatrice finally begged her to go home,
saying she and Winnie could finish alone.

"You two always want to get rid of me!" flared out Gwen as she stumped
defiantly away.

It was not a very happy preparation for Christmas, and Gwen stood
rather forlornly in the church porch, her hands in her pockets,
watching a few snowflakes that were beginning to fall silently from
the heavy grey sky and to whiten the tops of the gravestones and the
outlines of the crooked yew trees near the gate. The peace and
goodwill that ought to have been present everywhere to-day seemed to
have vanished.

"Beatrice was just horrid," thought Gwen, quite oblivious of the fact
that the quarrel was of her own making. We are so apt to forget that
the world is like a mirror, and if we insist upon frowning into it, it
will probably frown back. We sometimes expect other people to do all
the forbearing, and then are astonished if our much-tried friends fail
in the very point in which we ourselves are so deficient.

"Why, Gwen, what a woebegone face!" exclaimed Father, who hurried in
for a moment to speak to the parish clerk. "You'd make a grand model
for an artist who wanted to paint a picture of 'Misery'. Are the
decorations finished?"

"Almost; at least my part of them."

"Then go home and open that parcel of Parish Magazines you'll find on
my study table, and deliver those that belong to the village. You know
where to find the list. Be sure to tick the names off. And don't go
farther down the road than Marriott's farm; it's getting dark."

Gwen cheered visibly. She was always glad to do something for Father,
if it were only distributing Parish Magazines, so she strode off with
a swinging step, humming the carol that the school children had been
practising with Winnie that afternoon.

    "Show us, dear Christ-Child, Thy Christmas light,
    Teach us the song of the Angels bright,
    And the love of the Mother blest.
    And help us this Christmas to learn of Thee
    All we should do, and all we should be,
    And how we can please Thee best."

Fortunately the Gascoynes were a forgiving family, and when they all
met at tea-time nobody seemed to remember Gwen's ill humour. The
evening was a busy one, for there were holly and ivy to be put up in
the Parsonage now the church was finished, and the usual mirth over a
bough of mistletoe which old Mr. Hodson, who owned the big farm by the
mill, always cut off every year from an apple tree in his orchard and
brought to them with his own hands. Gwen forgot her troubles and
romped with the rest, accepting Martin's sticky kisses in the spirit
in which they were intended. The Gascoynes did not hang up their
stockings, but laid their presents on the breakfast-table, so that
they could have the gratification of opening all their parcels
together. It was a point of honour not to take the tiniest peep inside
even the most tempting-looking package until the whole family was
assembled. Gwen had tried to make up for the poverty of her offerings
by the warmth of the greetings she wrote outside, but she did not
feel proud of her collection as she carried it downstairs. She was the
last, so she hastily made her distribution, and turned to her own
plate. She had been well remembered: a book from Father; a nightdress
case, beautifully embroidered, from Beatrice; a new purse from Winnie;
a big bottle of scent from dear little Lesbia, who to buy it must
certainly have gone without the blue-handled penknife she had coveted
so much in Bayne's window; some pencils from Giles and Basil; and a
piece of indiarubber from Martin, who had compassed seven presents on
a capital of eightpence-halfpenny. Gwen looked rather anxiously as the
others opened the packets she had addressed to them; but whatever they
thought, they all had the niceness to hide their feelings, and thanked
her as if she had given them the most expensive objects obtainable.

Father's humour, however, could not help twinkling out at the cake of
soap: "To Darling Dad, with dearest and best love, from Gwen".

"I hope it isn't a hint I need washing," he said with mock
seriousness.

"I thought you liked oatmeal soap!" protested Gwen, nearly crying.

"So I do, my dear; and I haven't had any for a long time. Like the man
in Pears's advertisement, I shall now use no other."

"Here's the postman!" shouted Giles, rushing excitedly to the door,
where that much-burdened official, with an extra man to help him, was
sorting out what belonged to the Parsonage.

"Six letters for you, Gwen, and two parcels," said Beatrice, assuming
command of the correspondence, and distributing it among the eager
family.

Gwen snatched her share nervously. Would any of the letters contain
the longed-for postal orders? No, they all had halfpenny stamps, and
were clearly only Christmas cards.

Then she fell upon the parcels. The first contained a handsome knitted
coat, and cap to match, "with love from Grannie", and the second, a
beautiful little set of Wordsworth's poems in a cloth case, "with Aunt
Violet's best wishes".

Gwen sat down on the sofa, feeling as if she had received a rude
shock. That both Grannie and Aunt Violet should have sent presents
instead of money was worse than she had calculated upon. She tried to
pull herself together, and not show her disappointment too plainly,
but the thought of what she owed was paramount. It only made it worse
that the gifts were really acceptable, and that the rest of the family
persisted in considering her extremely lucky.

"It was kind of Grannie to send that lovely coat: dark green will just
suit you. Try it on, and the cap too," said Winnie.

"It looks swank!" declared the boys.

"They'll go with your dark green skirt," affirmed Beatrice.

"The Wordsworths are scrumptious!" said Lesbia. "You've done awfully
well this Christmas!"

"Yes, but how am I going to pay my debts?" thought Gwen, as she ran
upstairs to get ready for church.




CHAPTER X

A Prodigal


As the next term seemed likely to bring its own crop of troubles,
Gwen, with a kind of grim philosophy, determined to enjoy herself
while she could, and make the most of the holidays. She helped
vigorously at the schools, where tea parties for children and
grownups, concerts and other entertainments were in full swing, and
she even wrung a few words of appreciation from Beatrice for her
active services in the way of slicing up cake, cutting ham sandwiches,
and pouring out innumerable cups of tea. Gwen liked the village
festivities, she knew everybody in the place, and found it all fun,
from listening to the comic songs of the local grocer, to playing
Oranges and Lemons with the babies in the Infant School.

"We've three real parties too," she said on December 30th, "as well as
going to the Chambers' this afternoon."

"I hardly think Mrs. Chambers will expect you," declared Beatrice,
looking out of the window at the dark sky. "It's beginning to snow
already, and I believe we shall have a heavy fall."

"Then it must keep off till to-morrow, for we've got to get to North
Ditton somehow!" announced Gwen.

Dick's mother had asked the younger Gascoynes to tea, and amongst
their various invitations it was to this that Gwen looked forward the
most. She wanted to see Dick's home, and the collection of birds' eggs
and butterflies which he had promised to show her, and his magic
lantern, and his microscope, and all the Natural History books of
which he had so often spoken. She watched the weather impatiently, and
when the snow fell faster and faster, and Beatrice decided
emphatically that the visit was impossible, she broke into open
mutiny.

"It's too bad! We shouldn't take any harm. What an old mollycoddle you
are, Beatrice!"

"I've a little more sense in my head than you have! With this wind the
roads will be deep in drifts. It's quite unfit to go out, especially
for you with that nasty cough. I should have you laid up with
bronchitis."

"My cold's better," affirmed Gwen, trying not to sound hoarse; "snow
doesn't hurt people. Father's gone out in it!"

"Father was obliged to go--it's quite a different thing for him. I'm
sorry you're disappointed, but really, Gwen, don't be so childish!
Look at Lesbia, she isn't making such a dreadful fuss!"

"Lesbia never worries about anything, so it's no virtue at all!"
snarled Gwen, knowing perfectly well that she was unfair, for Lesbia
undoubtedly added self-control to her naturally sweet disposition.
"You always hold up Lesbia! You've no right to say we must stop at
home, just because you're the eldest!"

Beatrice sighed. Sometimes she thought this turbulent cuckoo of a
younger sister was the cross of her life.

"It's no use talking in this way, Gwen! Somebody must be in authority,
and you'll have to do as you're told."

"I shan't! I don't care! You're only six years older than I am!"

And Gwen flounced out of the room in a rage. She ran upstairs, her
eyes smarting with hot tears of temper. She was disgusted with the
others for not taking the matter more to heart. How could Lesbia sit
reading so calmly, or the boys amuse themselves with their absurd
engine?

"They don't care like I do! I wish I could go without them!" she said
aloud.

The idea was an excellent one. What fun it would be to go alone, and
have Dick all to herself--no tiresome youngsters to claim his
attention, finger his books, and perhaps break his birds' eggs; not
even Lesbia to ask stupid questions about things any ordinary person
ought to know. She could easily tell Mrs. Chambers that her sister had
thought it too stormy for the little ones to venture, and probably Dr.
Chambers would drive her back in the gig.

"After all, Father never told me not to go!" she thought, "and
Beatrice is getting a perfect tyrant; I can't be expected to obey her
as if I were an infant. A girl in the Fifth is quite old enough to
decide things for herself, especially when she's as tall as I am!"

Gwen changed her dress, put on her best hair ribbon, her brooch, and
her locket, then peeped cautiously down the stairs. Although she felt
full of self-assertion, she had no wish to risk a further encounter
with Beatrice. All seemed quiet, so, donning hat and coat, she crept
to the cupboard where mackintoshes and galoshes were kept, and armed
herself to defy the weather. It was quite an easy matter to slip out
by the back door, and in less than ten seconds she was hurrying
through the village, chuckling at her own daring and cleverness. Thick
flakes were whirling everywhere: when she looked upwards they showed
as little dark patches against the neutral-tinted sky, but when they
passed the line of vision, each soft lump of crystals gleamed purest
white as it joined the ever-deepening mass below. Every gate and stump
and rubbish heap was a thing of beauty, glorified by the ethereal
covering of the snow; the dead clumps of ragwort by the road side, the
withered branches of oak, the shrivelled trails of bramble all seemed
transformed by the feathery particles into a species of fairyland.

As Gwen left the village, and took the path that led across the moor,
she seemed to walk into a cloud of whiteness that enclosed her and
shut her out from all before or behind. She stood still for a moment,
and drew in her breath with a sense of intense exhilaration. She was
all by herself in the midst of this new-found world of snow, and the
very solitude had a fascination. It is good sometimes for the spirit
to be alone; strange vague thoughts, half memories, half imaginings,
fill the brain like a full high tide; strong impressions, unfelt and
unknowable in the distraction of human company, force themselves
silently yet persistently upon us; the corporal and the tangible lose
their hard outlines and begin to merge into the in visible--in such
moments the soul grows. It is perhaps one of the disadvantages of a
large family that the members are apt to lack what one might call
spiritual elbow room, the constant close companionship, the fridging
and rubbing of the continual, daily, hourly intercourse, though an
excellent discipline for the temper, leaves scant opportunity for the
development of the individuality. Gwen could not have explained this
in the least, but as she stood in the still quiet of the falling snow,
she felt as if all the little fretting cares and worries and squabbles
and anxieties dropped away into a subordinate place, and she were
viewing life with another range of vision, where the proportions of
things were quite changed.

She walked on, almost as if she were in a dream, without even the
sound of a footstep to break the intense silence. She was now on the
open wold, where there were neither hedges nor walls, but only a few
stones to mark the road from the sedgy, heathery expanse of moor that
stretched on either side. Gwen knew the way so thoroughly that she
thought she could have followed it blindfold. Every rock and boulder
and bush were familiar, and as a rule were so many points along the
daily path to school. Now, however, all the well-known landmarks
seemed to have a strange similarity, and to be merging into one great
white waste, in which tree stump was indistinguishable from stone or
gorse clump. The light was fading rapidly, for the clouds went on
gathering, and the flakes came down ever thicker and faster. So far
Gwen had gone on with the utmost confidence, but now she stopped and
entertained a doubt. She did not recognize the boulder on her right,
and the juniper bush on her left was surely strange.

"I verily believe I've come wrong somehow," she muttered. "There's
nothing for it but to turn back."

She could see her own footsteps in the snow behind, and for some
hundreds of yards she traced them; then they began to get fainter and
fainter, and presently they were hidden entirely by the new-fallen
flakes. The road was completely obliterated, there was nothing round
her but shapeless indefinite whiteness. Then it dawned upon Gwen's
soul that she was lost, lost hopelessly on the bare wold, where she
might wander for miles without seeing the gleam of a farmhouse window
or hearing even the bark of a shepherd's dog. The solitude that before
had seemed so inspiring, suddenly became oppressive loneliness. What
was she to do? Tramp on and on, perhaps in a circle, till she could go
no farther? Already it was heavy walking, and under the rocks and
bushes the drifts were deepening. Yet it would never do to sit down in
the snow. Tired as she was, she must keep moving, and while the
faintest gleam of daylight lasted she must try and find some
guide-post to civilization.

"I wish I'd brought Jingles. I never thought of him," she sighed,
longing regretfully for the shaggy Irish terrier that acted watchdog
at the Parsonage. "I wonder how soon they'll miss me at home? Not till
tea-time, I expect, and then they'll probably think I'm at the
Chambers'. Beatrice would guess where I'd gone. How furiously angry
she'll be!"

For the first time a little awkward uncomfortable inward suggestion
began to croak that elder sisters are occasionally right, and may
