once down, three times across, and twice into the air.  At the same time
the fisher had hurried up and down the bank, had tripped over two stumps
and a root, had dropped his wideawake, and had very nearly gone head
foremost into the pool; for his tackle was fine and his fish large.  The
fisher-boy gasped.

"Tonal'," said Junkie, in very low tones, "if ye don't behave better,
I'll send ye away."

"It iss not easy, but I'll try," said he.

Donald could say no more.  The best of men or boys could do no more than
try.  We may as well say here at once, however, that his efforts at
self-control were crowned with success.  He proved himself to be a great
man in embryo by ruling his own spirit that day.

In a few minutes the trout was landed by means of a miniature gaff,
which the fisher carried in his basket, for the purpose of securing fish
that were too heavy to be pulled out by the line.  It was afterwards
found to be a two-and-a-half pounder, which, being an unusually good
fish for that stream, was the occasion of much rejoicing on the part of
the old gentleman, as he stood wiping his forehead and commenting on it.

"Capital!  Not had such a fellow as that for more than a week.  There's
more where that came from; but you must give the pool a rest, Dick.  Try
the run higher up."

In obedience to his own orders, MacRummle went up to a part of the
stream where a high cliff on one side and a steepish bank on the other
caused it to flow in a deep channel, not much more than a couple of
yards wide.  At the head of the run was a ledge where fish were
invariably captured.  Towards this spot the old man hurried eagerly.

The two boys lay still in the heather, allowed him to pass, and then
softly followed, bending low, and keeping as much as possible behind
bushes and in hollows, until they were again close upon him.  Ensconcing
themselves in a convenient mass of heather, they raised their heads and
saw the fisher stepping carefully from rock to rock, as he approached
the run.

Rounded boulders, large or small, are never safe to walk on, even for
the young and active.  MacRummle found it so.  His foot slipped, and he
sat down, with undignified haste, in a small pool of water.

Down went the boys' heads, that they might explode their laughter as
softly as possible among the roots of the heather.

"Wass it not funny?" whispered Donald.

"I hope he's not hurt," replied Junkie, raising his head cautiously.

He saw that MacRummle had risen, and, with a rueful expression of face,
was making insane and futile efforts to look at himself behind.  A
beaming smile overspread the boy's face as he glanced at his companion,
for he knew well that the old gentleman cared little or nothing for
water.  And this was obviously the case, for, after squeezing as much
water out of his nether garments as chose to come, he proceeded to the
head of the runs and resumed fishing.

"I'm beginnin' to see through't," murmured Junkie, after watching for
some time.  "See! he has hooked another.  Ye see, Tonal', it must be
lettin' the hook drift away down under the ledges that does it.  Look!
He's got 'im!"

"I'm thinking ye are right, Junkie.  An' the creat thing to know iss
where the ledges lie.  He keeps well back from the watter also.  There
maun be somethin' in that, what-e-ver.  Ye wull be tryin' it yoursel'
the morn, maype."

To this Junkie vouchsafed no reply, for the fisher, having secured his
fish, was proceeding further up stream.  When he was sufficiently far in
advance, the boys rose to their feet, and again followed him.

Thus the trio occupied themselves all the forenoon--MacRummle gradually
filling his basket with fine sea-trout, Junkie storing his inquisitive
mind with piscatorial knowledge and "dodges," and Donald enjoying
himself in the mere act of wallowing about in heather and sunshine.

About noon MacRummle suddenly ceased to gaze intently on the water, and
placed his hand upon his waistcoat.

"Time, Dick?" he murmured, pulling out his watch.  "I knew it.  Commend
me to nature.  It's the best time-keeper, after all--needs no
regulating."

He was wrong, as was frequently the case, but it mattered little, for
there was no one to contradict him.

"Let me see," he muttered, taking off his basket, and drawing a
newspaper parcel from the pocket of his coat--in which operation he was
induced by memory to make a last futile attempt to see himself
behind--"what have they put up for me?"

The parcel, when opened, disclosed a tempting pile of meat sandwiches.
The old gentleman spread them out on a flattish boulder, which served as
an admirable table.

Having leaned his rod against a tree, he emptied the basket on a grassy
spot, and arranged the silver bars in a row.  Then he sat down on his
basket beside the table, and gave himself up to food and contemplation.

"A goodly row," he muttered, as well as the ham sandwich would let him.
"Not a bad beginning; and such a splendid dish.  There's comfort in
that, for I hate useless work of any kind.  A sort of an illustration,
this, of the fitness of things!"

Apparently the peculiar unfitness of simultaneous mastication and speech
struck him, for he paused a few moments, then continued,--"Yes, fitness.
Supplies for the table absolutely needed.  Healthy exercise a
consequence.  Result, felicity!"

The supplies checking speech again, MacRummle looked around him, with
benignant good-will to man and beast expressed on his countenance.

Craning their necks over a bank, and seeing the old gentleman thus
pleasantly engaged, the two boys sank into the heather, and disappeared
from view as completely as did "Clan Alpine's warriors true," after they
had been shown to Fitz James by Roderick Dhu.  Like two sparrows in a
purple nest they proceeded to enjoy themselves.

"Now, Tonal', we will grub," said Junkie.  "Why, what's the matter with
you?" he asked, on observing a sudden fall in his companion's
countenance.

"The matter?" repeated the boy.  "It iss the crub that's the matter, for
I hev not a crumb with me."

"Now, isn't that awful?" said Junkie, with a hypocritically woeful look.
"We will just have to starve.  But there's plenty of water," he added,
in a consoling tone.  "Here, Tonal', take this leather cup an' fill it.
Ye can git down to the river by the back o' the bluff without bein'
noticed.  See that ye make no noise, now.  Mind what I said to ye."

While Donald went at a slow, sad pace to fetch water, Junkie spread his
handkerchief on the ground, and on this tablecloth laid out the
following articles, which he took from a small bag that he had carried,
slung on his shoulder,--a very large piece of loaf bread, a thick slice
of cheese, two hard biscuits, an apple, a bit of liquorice, a mass of
home-made toffee, inseparably attached to a dirty bit of newspaper,
three peppermint lozenges, and a gully knife with a broken blade.

When Donald returned and beheld this feast, he opened his eyes wide.
Then, opening his mouth, he was on the point of giving vent to a cheer,
when Junkie stopped him with a glance and an ominous shake of the fist.

It is to this day an undecided question which of those feasters enjoyed
himself most.

"I always bring with me more than I can eat, Tonal', so you're welcome
to the half.  `Fair play,' as daddy says, although he sometimes keeps
the fairest play to himself;" with which dutiful remark the urchin
proceeded to divide the viands very justly.

It did not take long to consume the whole.  But MacRummle was quicker
even than they, possibly because he had enticing work still before him.
The consequence was, that he had resumed his rod unnoticed by the boys,
and in the process of his amusement, had reached that part of the bank
on the top of which they lay concealed.  Their devotion to lunch had
prevented his approach being perceived, and the first intimation they
had of his near presence was the clatter of pebbles as he made a false
step, and the swish of his flies above their heads as he made a cast.

The boys gazed at each other for one moment in silence, then hastily
stuffed the remnant of their feast into their pockets.

Suddenly the glengarry bonnet of Junkie leaped mysteriously off his
head, and dropped on the heather behind him.

"Hanked again!" growled MacRummle from the river-bed below.

Every fisher knows the difficulty of casting a long line with a steep
bank behind him.  Once already the old gentleman had hanked on the bank
a little lower down, but so slightly that a twitch brought the flies
away.  Now, however, the hank was too complicated to give way to a
twitch, for the glengarry held hard on to the heather.  In desperate
haste, Junkie, bending low, tried to extract the hook.  It need scarcely
be said that a hook refuses to be extracted in haste.  Before he could
free it, the voice of MacRummle was heard in sighs and gasps of mild
exasperation as he scrambled up the bank to disentangle his line.  There
was no time for consideration.  Junkie dropped his cap, and, rolling
behind a mass of rock, squeezed himself into a crevice which was pretty
well covered with pendent bracken.  Donald vanished in a somewhat
similar fashion, and both, remaining perfectly still, listened with
palpitating hearts to MacRummle's approach.

"Well, well!" exclaimed the fisher in surprise; "it's not every day I
hook a fish like this.  A glengarry!  And Junkie's glengarry!  The small
rascal!  Crumbs, too! ha! that accounts for it.  He must have been
having his lunch here yesterday, and was so taken up with victuals that
he forgot his cap when he went away.  Foolish boy!  It is like his
carelessness; but he's not a bad little fellow, for all that."

He chuckled audibly at this point.  Junkie did the same inaudibly as he
watched his old friend carefully disengage the hook; but the expression
of his face changed a little when he saw his cap consigned to the
fisher's pocket, as he turned and descended to the stream.  Having given
the fisher sufficient time to get away from the spot, Junkie emerged
from his hiding-place.

"Tonal'," he said, in a low voice, looking round, "ye may come oot noo,
man.  He's safe away."

The ragged head, in a broad grin, emerged from a clump of bracken.

"It wass awful amusin', Junkie, wass it not?"

"Yes, Tonal', it was; but it won't be very amusin' for me to go all the
rest of the day bareheaded."

Donald sympathised with his friend on this point, and assured him that
he would have divided his cap with him, as Junkie had divided his lunch,
but for the fact that he never wore a cap at all, and the ragged hair
would neither divide nor come off.  After this they resumed their work
of dogging the fisher's steps.

It would require a volume to relate all that was said and done on that
lovely afternoon, if all were faithfully detailed; but our space and the
reader's patience render it advisable to touch only on two points of
interest.

As the day advanced the heat became overpowering, and, to escape from
the glare of the sun for a little, the fisher took shelter under some
very tall bracken on the bank near a deep pool.  In order to secure a
slight feeling of pleasurable expectation while resting, he put on a
bait-cast, dropped the worm into the deepest part of the pool, propped
up his rod with several stones, and then lay down to watch.  The turf
happened to be soft and level.  As a natural consequence the tired man
fell sound asleep.

"What's to be done noo, Junkie?"

"I don't know, Tonal'."

To make matters more exasperating, at that moment the rod began to bend
and the reel to spin jerkily.

"A fush!" exclaimed Donald.

"Looks like it," returned his friend drily.

"I better gee a yell an' wauken him," suggested Donald.

"Ye'd better no'," said Junkie, shaking his fist.

"Yonder iss the end o' yer bonnet stickin' oot o' his pooch,
what-e-ver," said Donald.

"You'd better lie low an' keep still," said Junkie; and, without further
explanation of his intentions, he went softly down the bank and crept
towards the sleeper, taking advantage of every stone and root and bush
as he went along.  Really, for a first attempt, it was worthy of the
child of a Pawnee brave.

MacRummle was a heavy sleeper, so Junkie had no difficulty in recovering
his cap.  Putting it on, he returned the way he had come.

"That wass cliver, man," said the admiring Donald, when his friend
rejoined him.

Junkie accepted the compliment with a dignified smile, and then sat down
to wait; but it was a severe trial of patience to both of them, for the
old man slept steadily on, and even snored.  He seemed, in short, to
have fairly gone to bed for the night.

"What say ye to bomb stanes at 'um?" suggested Donald.

"An' kill 'im, maybe," returned Junkie, with sarcasm in his eye.

"Heave divits at 'um, then."

"Ay; that's better."

Accordingly, the two urchins tore up a mass of turf which was much too
heavy to heave.

"Let's row'd," suggested the active-minded Donald.

As this also met the approval of Junkie, they carried the "divit," or
mass of turf, to the bank just above the sleeper, and, taking a careful
aim, let it go.  The bank was not regular.  A lump diverted the divit
from its course, and it plunged into the pool, to the obvious
discomposure of the fish, which was still at intervals tugging at the
line.  Another divit was tried, but with similar result.  A third clod
went still further astray.  The bombardment then became exciting, as
every kind of effort does when one begins to realise the beneficial
effect of practice.

"I can see how it is," whispered Junkie, as he carefully "laid" the next
gun.  "If we keep more to the right, it'll hit that lump o' grass,
glance into the hollow, and--"

He stopped abruptly, and both boys stood in crab-like attitudes of
expectation, ready to fly, for the divit took the exact course thus
indicated, and bounding down the bank, hit MacRummle fair on his broad
back.

The guilty ones dived like rabbits into the bracken.

"Bless me!" exclaimed the old gentleman, jumping up and shaking the dry
earth off.  "This is most remarkable.  I do believe I've been asleep.
But why the bank should take to crumbling down upon me is more than I
can understand.  Hallo!  A fish!  You don't deserve such luck, Dick, my
boy."

Winding in the line in a way which proved that the divit had done him no
harm, he gave utterance to an exclamation of huge disgust as he drew an
eel to the bank, with the line entangled hopelessly about its shiny
body.  This was too much for MacRummle.  Unable to face the misery of
disentanglement, he cut the line, despatched the eel, attached a new
hook, and continued his occupation.

At the head of the pool in question the bank was so precipitous and high
that the boys could see only the top of the rod swinging gracefully to
and fro as the patient man pursued his sport.  Suddenly the top of the
rod described a wild figure in the air and disappeared.  At the same
moment a heavy plunge was heard.

"Hech! he's tum'led in the pool," gasped Donald.

They rushed to the overhanging edge of the cliff and looked down.  Sure
enough MacRummle was in the water.  They expected to see him swim, for
Junkie knew he was an expert swimmer; but the poor man was floating
quietly down with the current, his head under water.

"Banged his heed, what-e-ver!" cried Donald, jumping up and bounding
down the bank to the lower and shallow end of the pool.  Quick though he
was, Junkie outran him; but the unfortunate MacRummle was
unintentionally quicker than either, for they found him stranded when
they got there.

Running into the water, they seized him by the hair and the collar of
his coat, and dragged him into the shallow part easily enough, but they
had not strength to haul him ashore.

"Fetch a divit, Tonal'--a big one, an' I'll keep up his head."

One of the masses of recent artillery was fetched, and the fisher's head
was gently pillowed on it, so as to be well out of the water.

"There's no cut that I can see," said Junkie, inspecting the head
critically; "he's only stunned, I think.  Noo, Tonal', cut away to the
hoose.  Run as ye never ran before and tell them.  I'll stop beside him
for fear his heed slips in again."

Donald went off like a shot.  Junkie went a few steps with him,
intending to fetch another divit.  Looking back, he saw what made him
sink into the heather, and give a low whistle.  Donald heard it,
stopped, and also hid himself, for MacRummle was seen trying to rise.
He succeeded, and staggered to dry land, when, sitting down on a stone,
he felt himself all over with an anxious expression.  Then he felt a
lump on the back of his head, and smiled intelligently.  After that he
squeezed as much water out of his garments as he could, quietly took
down his rod, ascertained that the fish in his basket were all right,
then looked with some perplexity at the big divit lying in the shallow
close to where he stood, and finally, with a highly contented expression
of countenance, wended his way homeward.

The two boys gave him time to get well out of sight in advance, and then
followed his example, commenting sagely as they went, on the
desirability of possessing pluck in old age, and on the value of the
various lessons they had learned that day.



CHAPTER TEN.

A WILDISH CHAPTER.

It was the habit of our three friends--Bob Mabberly, John Barret, and
Giles Jackman--during their residence at Kinlossie, to take a stroll
together every morning before breakfast by the margin of the sea, for
they were fond of each other's company, and Mabberly, as a yachtsman,
had acquired the habit of early rising.  He had also learned to
appreciate the early morning hours as being those which present Nature
in her sweetest, as well as her freshest, aspect--when everything seems,
more than at other periods of the day, to be under the direct influence
of a benignant Creator.

It was also the habit of Captain McPherson and his man, James McGregor,
to indulge daily in similar exercise at about the same hour, but, owing
probably to their lives having been spent chiefly on the sea, they were
wont to ramble up a neighbouring glen in preference to sauntering on the
shore.

One bright calm morning, however, when the sky was all blue and the loch
was like a mirror, the two seamen took it into their heads to desert the
glen and ramble along the shore.  Thus it came to pass that, on
returning homeward, they encountered our three friends.

"It iss fery strange that we should foregather this mornin', Mr
Mabberly," said the skipper, after greeting the young men; "for Shames
an' me was jist speakin' aboot ye.  We will be thinkin' that it iss
foolishness for hum an' me to be stoppin' here wastin' our time when we
ought to be at oor work."

"Nonsense, Captain," said Mabberly; "surely you don't think that taking
a holiday in a pleasant place like this is wasting time.  Besides, I
don't consider you free from your engagement to me.  You were hired for
the trip, and that includes land as well as water, so I won't give you
your discharge till you have had a long rest, and recruited yourselves
after the shock to your nervous systems occasioned by the wreck and the
swim to shore!"

A grim smile played on the skipper's iron features when reference was
made to his nerves, and a flicker of some sort illumined the wooden
visage of McGregor.

"You are fery kind, sir," returned the skipper; "but we don't like to be
receivin' pay for doin' nothin'.  You see, neither Shames nor me cares
much for fushin' in the burns, or goin' after the deer, an' there's no
chance o' raisin' the yat from the pottom o' the sea, so, if you hev no
objection, sir, we will be goin' by the steamer that arrives to-morrow.
I thought I would speak to you to-day, for we will hev to start early in
the mornin', before you're up, for it iss a long way we'll hev to go.
Iss it not so, Shames?"

"Oo, ay," replied the seaman, with more than ever of the nasal twang;
"it iss a coot many miles to where the poat comes in--so the poy Tonal'
wass tellin' me, what-e-ver."

Mabberly tried to persuade the men to remain a little longer, but they
were obdurate, so he let them go, knowing well that his father, who was
a wealthy merchant and shipowner, would see to the interests of the men
who had suffered in his son's service.

As they retraced their steps to the house the skipper gave Giles Jackman
some significant glances, which induced him to fall behind the others.

"You want to speak with me privately, I think, skipper?"
