show it. One of the Sisters, full of solicitude, feared I should
awake you, and tried to take the keys from me. I told her as
politely as I could, that I was quite as anxious as she was there
should be no noise, and added that it was my right to return them.
I see now that it would have been more perfect simply to yield,
but I did not see it then, and so I followed her into the room.
Very soon what she feared came to pass: the noise did awaken you.
All the blame fell upon me; the Sister I had argued with began a
long discourse, of which the point was: Soeur Therese made all the
noise. I was burning to defend myself, but a happy inspiration of
grace came to me. I thought that if I began to justify myself I
should certainly lose my peace of mind, and as I had too little
virtue to let myself be unjustly accused without answering, my
last chance of safety lay in flight. No sooner thought than done.
I hurried away, but my heart beat so violently, I could not go
far, and I was obliged to sit down on the stairs to enjoy in quiet
the fruit of my victory. This is an odd kind of courage,
undoubtedly, but I think it is best not to expose oneself in the
face of certain defeat.

When I recall these days of my noviciate I understand how far I
was from perfection, and the memory of certain things makes me
laugh. How good God has been, to have trained my soul and given it
wings All the snares of the hunter can no longer frighten me, for
"A net is spread in vain before the eyes of them that have
wings."[32]

It may be that some day my present state will appear to me full of
defects, but nothing now surprises me, and I do not even distress
myself because I am so weak. On the contrary I glory therein, and
expect each day to find fresh imperfections. Nay, I must confess,
these lights on my own nothingness are of more good to my soul
than lights on matters of Faith. Remembering that "Charity
covereth a multitude of sins,"[33] I draw from this rich mine,
which Our Saviour has opened to us in the Gospels. I search the
depths of His adorable words, and cry out with david: "I have run
in the way of Thy commandments since Thou hast enlarged my
heart."[34] And charity alone can make wide the heart. O Jesus!
Since its sweet flame consumes my heart, I run with delight in the
way of Thy New Commandment, and I desire to run therein until that
blessed day when, with Thy company of Virgins, I shall follow Thee
through Thy boundless Realm, singing Thy New Canticle--The
Canticle of Love.
______________________________

[1] 1 Kings 16:7.

[2] Tobias 12:7.

[3] Cf. Isaias 3:10.

[4] Prov. 9:4.

[5] Isa. 66:12, 13.

[6] Cf. Ps. 70[71]:17, 18.

[7] Soeur Therese had charge of the novices without being given
the title of Novice Mistress.

[8] Ps. 118[119]:141.

[9] Ps. 118[119]:100, 105, 106.

[10] Luke 1:49.

[11] Cf. John 1:5.

[12] Cf. Luke 18:13.

[13] Ps. 91[92]:5.

[14] Ps. 143[144]:1, 2.

[15] Ps. 132[133]:1.

[16] Matt. 22:39.

[17] Cf. Matt. 7:21.

[18] Cf. John 13:34.

[19] John 15:12.

[20] Luke 11:33.

[21] John 15:12.

[22] 1 Cor. 4:3,4.

[23] Luke 6:37.

[24] Matt. 5:43, 44.

[25] Luke 6:32.

[26] Luke 6:30.

[27] Matt. 11:30.

[28] Matt. 5:40.

[29] Matt. 5:41.

[30] Matt. 5:42.

[31] Luke 6:34, 35.

[32] Prov. 1:27.

[33] Prov. 10:12.

[34] Ps. 118[119]:32.

______________________________


CHAPTER X
THE NEW COMMANDMENT

Dear Mother, God in His infinite goodness has given me a clear
insight into the deep mysteries of Charity. If I could but express
what I know, you would hear a heavenly music; but alas! I can only
stammer like a child, and if God's own words were not my support,
I should be tempted to beg leave to hold my peace. When the Divine
Master tells me to give to whosoever asks of me, and to let what
is mine be taken without asking it again, it seems to me that He
speaks not only of the goods of earth, but also of the goods of
Heaven. Besides, neither one nor the other are really mine; I
renounced the former by the vow of poverty, and the latter gifts
are simply lent. If God withdraw them, I have no right to complain.

But our very own ideas, the fruit of our mind and heart, form a
treasury on which none dare lay hands. For instance, if I reveal
to a Sister some light given me in prayer, and she repeats it
later on as though it were her own, it seems as though she
appropriates what is mine. Or, if during recreation someone makes
an apt and witty remark, which her neighbour repeats to the
Community, without acknowledging whence it came, it is a sort of
theft; and the person who originated the remark is naturally
inclined to seize the first opportunity of delicately insinuating
that her thoughts have been borrowed.

I could not so well explain all these weaknesses of human nature
had I not experienced them. I should have preferred to indulge in
the illusion that I was the only one who suffered thus, had you
not bidden me advise the novices in their difficulties. I have
learnt much in the discharge of this duty, and especially I feel
bound to put in practice what I teach.

I can say with truth that by God's grace I am no more attached to
the gifts of the intellect than to material things. If it happens
that a thought of mine should please my Sisters, I find it quite
easy to let them regard it as their own. My thoughts belong to the
Holy Ghost. They are not mine. St. Paul assures us that _without
the Spirit of Love, we cannot call God our Father._[1]

And besides, though far from depreciating those beautiful thoughts
which bring us nearer to God, I have long been of opinion that we
must be careful not to over-estimate their worth. The highest
inspirations are of no value without good works. It is true that
others may derive much profit therefrom, if they are duly grateful
to our Lord for allowing them to share in the abundance of one of
His privileged souls; but should this privileged soul take pride
in spiritual wealth, and imitate the Pharisee, she becomes like to
a hostess dying of starvation at a well-spread table, while her
guests enjoy the richest fare, and perhaps case envious glances at
the possessor of so many treasures.

Verily it is true that God alone can sound the heart. How
short-sighted are His creatures! When they see a soul whose lights
surpass their own, they conclude that the Divine Master loves them
less. Since when has He lost the right to make use of one of His
children, in order to supply the others with the nourishment they
need? That right was not lost in the days of Pharaoh, for God said
unto him: "And therefore have I raised thee, that I may show My
power in thee, and My name may be spoken of throughout all the
earth."[2]

Generations have passed away since the Most High spoke these
words, and His ways have not changed. He has ever chosen human
instruments for the accomplishment of His work.

If an artist's canvas could but think and speak, surely it would
never complain of being touched and re-touched by the brush, nor
would it feel envious thereof, knowing that all its beauty is due
to the artist alone. So, too, the brush itself could not boast of
the masterpiece it had helped to produce, for it must know that an
artist is never at a loss; that difficulties do but stimulate him;
and that at times it pleases him to make use of instruments the
most unlikely and defective.

Dear Mother, I am the little brush that Jesus has chosen to paint
His likeness in the souls you have confided to my care. Now an
artist has several brushes--two at the least: the first, which is
more useful, gives the ground tints and rapidly covers the whole
canvas; the other, and smaller one, puts in the lesser touches.
Mother, you represent the big brush which our Lord holds lovingly
in His Hand when He wishes to do some great work in the souls of
your children; and I am the little one He deigns to use
afterwards, to fill in the minor details.

The first time the Divine Master took up His little brush was
about December 8, 1892. I shall always remember that time as one
of special grace.

When I entered the Carmel, I found in the noviciate a companion
about eight years older than I was. In spite of this difference of
age, we became the closest friends, and to encourage an affection
which gave promise of fostering virtue we were allowed to converse
together on spiritual subjects. My companion charmed me by her
innocence and by her open and frank disposition, though I was
surprised to find how her love for you differed from mine; and
besides, I regretted many things in her behaviour. But God had
already given me to understand that there are souls for whom in
His Mercy He waits unweariedly, and to whom He gives His light by
degrees; so I was very careful not to forestall Him.

One day when I was thinking over the permission we had to talk
together, so that we might--as our holy constitutions tells
us--incite ourselves more ardently to the love of our Divine
Spouse, it came home to me sadly that our conversations did not
attain the desired end; and I understood that either I must no
longer fear to speak out, or else I must put an end to what was
degenerating into mere worldly talk. I begged our Lord to inspire
me with words, kind and convincing; or better still, to speak
Himself for me. He heard my prayer, for those _who look upon Him
shall be enlightened,_[3] and "to the upright a light is risen in
the darkness."[4] The first of these texts I apply to myself, the
other to my companion, who was truly upright in heart.

The next time we met, the poor little Sister saw at once that my
manner had changed, and, blushing deeply, she sat down beside me.
I pressed her to my heart, and told her gently what was in my
mind; then I pointed out to her in what true love consists, and
proved that in loving her Prioress with such natural affection she
was in reality loving herself. I confided to her the sacrifices of
this kind which I had been obliged to make at the beginning of my
religious life, and before long her tears were mingled with mine.
She admitted very humbly that she was in the wrong and that I was
right, and, begging me as a favour always to point out her faults,
she promised to begin a new life. From this time our love for one
another became truly spiritual; in us were fulfilled these words
of the Holy Ghost: "A brother that is helped by his brother is
like a strong city."[5]

Dear Mother, you know very well that it was not my wish to turn my
companion away from you, I only wanted her to grasp that true love
feeds on sacrifice, and that in proportion as our souls renounce
natural enjoyments our affections become stronger and more
detached.

I remember that when I was a postulant I was sometimes so
violently tempted to seek my own satisfaction by having a word
with you, that I was obliged to hurry past your cell and hold on
to the banisters to keep myself from turning back. Numerous
permissions I wanted to ask, and a hundred pretexts for yielding
to my desires suggested themselves, but now I am truly glad that I
did not listen. I already enjoy the reward promised to those who
fight bravely. I no longer feel the need of refusing myself these
consolations, for my heart is fixed on God. Because it has loved
Him only, it has grown, little by little, and now it can give to
those who are dear to Him a far deeper and truer love than if it
were centred in a barren and selfish affection.

I have told you of the first piece of work which you accomplished
together with Our Lord by means of the little brush, but that was
only the prelude to the masterpiece which was afterwards to be
painted. From the moment I entered the sanctuary of souls, I saw
at a glance that the task was beyond my strength. Throwing myself
without delay into Our Lord's Arms, I imitated those tiny
children, who, when they are frightened, hide their faces on their
father's shoulder, and I said:

"Dear Lord, Thou seest that I am too small to feed these little
ones, but if through me Thou wilt give to each what is suitable,
then fill my hands, and without leaving the shelter of Thine Arms,
or even turning away, I will distribute Thy treasures to the souls
who come to me asking for food. Should they find it to their
taste, I shall know that this is due not to me, but to Thee; and
if, on the contrary, they find fault with its bitterness, I shall
not be cast down, but try to persuade them that it cometh from
Thee, while taking good care to make no change in it."

The knowledge that it was impossible to do anything of myself
rendered my task easier. My one interior occupation was to unite
myself more and more closely to God, knowing that the rest would
be given to me over and above. And indeed my hope has never been
deceived; I have always found my hands filled when sustenance was
needed for the souls of my Sisters. But had I done otherwise, and
relied on my own strength, I should very soon have been forced to
abandon my task.

From afar it seems so easy to do good to souls, to teach them to
love God more, and to model them according to one's own ideas.
But, when we draw nearer, we quickly feel that without God's help
this is quite as impossible as to bring back the sun when once it
has set. We must forget ourselves, and put aside our tastes and
ideas, and guide souls not by our own way, but along the path
which Our Lord points out. Even this is not the most difficult
part; what costs me more than all is having to observe their
faults, their slightest imperfections, and wage war against them.

Unhappily for me--I was going to say, but that would be cowardly,
so I will say--happily for my Sisters, ever since I placed myself
in the Arms of Jesus I have been like a watchman on the look-out
for the enemy from the highest turret of a fortified castle.
Nothing escapes my vigilance; indeed, I am sometimes surprised at
my own clear-sightedness, and I think it was quite excusable in
the prophet Jonas to fly before the face of the Lord, that he
might not have to announce the ruin of Ninive. Rather than make
one single reproach, I would prefer to receive a thousand, yet I
feel it is necessary that the task should cause me pain, for if I
spoke only through natural impulse, then the soul in fault would
not understand its defects and would simply think: "This Sister is
displeased, and her displeasure falls on me although I am full of
the best intentions."

But in this, as in all else, I must practise sacrifice and
self-denial. Even in the matter of writing a letter, I feel that
it will produce no fruit, unless I am disinclined to write, and
only do so from obedience.

When conversing with a novice I am on the watch to mortify myself,
and I avoid asking questions which would satisfy my curiosity. If
she begins to speak on an interesting subject, and, leaving it
unfinished, passes on to another that wearies me, I take care not
to remind her of the interruption, for it seems to me that no good
can come of self-seeking.

I know, dear Mother, that your little lambs find me severe; if
they were to read these lines, they would say that, so far as they
can see, it does not distress me to run after them, and show them
how they have soiled their beautiful white fleece, or torn it in
the brambles. Well, the little lambs may say what they like--in
their hearts they know I love them dearly; there is no fear of my
imitating "the hireling . . . who seeth the wolf coming and
leaveth the sheep, and flieth."[6]

I am ready to lay down my life for them, and my affection is so
disinterested that I would not have my novices know this. By God's
help, I have never tried to draw their hearts to myself, for I
have always understood that my mission was to lead them to Him and
to you, dear Mother, who on this earth hold His place in their
regard, and whom, therefore, they must love and respect.

I said before, that I have learnt much by guiding others. In the
first place I see that all souls have more or less the same
battles to fight, and on the other hand, that one soul differs
widely from another, so each must be dealt with differently. With
some I must humble myself, and not shrink from acknowledging my
own struggles and defeats; then they confess more readily the
faults into which they fall, and are pleased that I know by
experience what they suffer. With others, my only means of success
is to be firm, and never go back on what I have once said;
self-abasement would be taken for weakness.

Our Lord has granted me the grace never to fear the conflict; at
all costs I must do my duty. I have more than once been told: "If
you want me to obey, you must be gentle and not severe, otherwise
you will gain nothing." But no one is a good judge in his own
case. During a painful operation a child will be sure to cry out
and say that the remedy is worse than the disease; but if after a
few days he is cured, then he is greatly delighted that he can run
about and play. And it is the same with souls: they soon recognise
that a little bitter is better than too much sweet, and they are
not afraid to make the acknowledgment. Sometimes the change which
takes place from one day to another seems almost magical.

A novice will say to me: "You did well to be severe yesterday; at
first I was indignant, but when I thought it all over, I saw that
you were quite right. I left your cell thinking: 'This ends it. I
will tell Our Mother that I shall never go to Soeur Therese
again'; but I knew this was the devil's suggestion, and then I
felt you were praying for me, and I grew calm. I began to see
things more clearly, and now I come to you for further guidance."

I am only too happy to follow the dictates of my heart and hasten
to console with a little sweetness, but I see that one must not
press forward too quickly--a word might undo the work that cost so
many tears. If I say the least thing which seems to tone down the
hard truths of the previous day, I see my little Sister trying to
take advantage of the opening thus given her. At once I have
recourse to prayer, I turn to Our Blessed Lady, and Jesus always
triumphs. Verily in prayer and sacrifice lies all my strength,
they are my invincible arms; experience has taught me that they
touch hearts far more easily than words.

Two years ago, during Lent, a novice came to me smiling, and said:
"You would never imagine what I dreamt last night--I thought I was
with my sister, who is so worldly, and I wanted to withdraw her
from all vain things; to this end I explained the words of your
hymn:

'They richly lose who love Thee, dearest Lord; Thine are my
perfumes, Thine for evermore.'

I felt that my words sank deep into her soul, and I was overjoyed.
This morning it seems to me that perhaps Our Lord would like me to
gain Him this soul. How would it do if I wrote at Easter and
described my dream, telling her that Jesus desires to have her for
His Spouse?" I answered that she might certainly ask permission.

As Lent was not nearly over, you were surprised, dear Mother, at
