

Chapter 9: The Treachery Of Edric Streone.


When Olaf had gone I sought out Father Ailwin, for the danger that
I had seen for Hertha lay heavily on my mind, and now also I would
tell him of the certainty of coming warfare, asking him what he and
Gunnhild would do. So I went to the place where one might be sure
to find him during the last two days, and that was in the
churchyard, where our people and Olaf's men were working together
to raise for him a little wattled chapel among the ruins, that
should serve at least until I could return and build the church
anew.

It was a sore grief to me that the old one was gone, for in it had
been crowned Eadmund the Holy, and it was rich with his gifts. And
our hall had been the first house in which he had feasted as
crowned king, so that we call the lane from church to hilltop St.
Eadmund's Lane since he rode along it in all the pomp of that high
festival after he left the altar. Only the ruins of God's house and
man's abode were there now, but the lane was bright with the
flowers that the good king loved, and the nightingale sang in the
wooded banks even as when he listened to it in the old days. We had
always these things to mind us of the martyr.

But Ailwin was not with the men, though he had been foremost in
working and planning with them. Nor had any of them seen him that
day.

So I waited for a little while and watched the work, wondering if I
should live now to do all that I would in making new the place. And
then as I walked to look across the bridge I passed a heap of earth
that the men had thrown out for the place of a post, and I saw
somewhat glittering in it, and stooped and took it up.

It was a silver penny, and when I rubbed the earth from it, I knew
that it was one of Eadmund's, mint new and fresh as on the day when
he stood in his robes and crown, even where I stood in the place of
the old porch, while the people shouted and scrambled and fought in
glee for the largess he threw among them. Doubtless this had been
so thrown and had been trodden under foot and lost.

Now it came into my hands even when my thoughts were most troubled,
and to me it seemed as a sign that I should surely return to the
place that the saint had loved. I was greatly cheered thereat, for
as I waited for Olaf to return I saw as it were the long hope of
home and peace dashed from me, and the pain of the coming war grew
plainer than I had known it in Ethelred's court. The old love of
home had waked in me as I wandered in the places of my boyhood, and
for the first time I learned the aching of the hearts of those who
had known more of home than I, and would lose it.

But I was young, and it needed but a little thing to turn my
thoughts, so this token as I say helped me to banish them. What
might not Eadmund the Saint, who slew Swein to save his shrine from
heathen hands, be able to do for me?

I would tell Ailwin presently, and ask him what vow I should make
in return for this remembrance.

But Ailwin came not, and I grew impatient, and went to the cottage
where he dwelt as the leech, at the head of the little street
towards our hall. Maybe he would be there.

The door was open, and the little black cat that had been the
leech's in the old days, and would not leave its house, sat in the
sun on the step. I went inside and called, but there was no man.
And then a footstep came from the road and in at the wicket, and a
strange priest, younger than Ailwin, and frocked and cowled came
in.

He saluted me gravely, and I bowed to him, and then he asked me
where Redwald the thane might be found.

"I am he, father," I said.

"Then I have a message to you from Ailwin, your priest, whose place
I am sent to take for a time."

"This is his house, father," I answered. "Let us come in and hear
what he would tell me."

So we sat down inside the one room on the bench across the wall,
and I wondered what I should hear.

"I will give my message first," the priest said, "and afterwards
you shall tell me Ailwin's ways with your people, and I will try to
be as himself with them."

I laughed a little, though I was pleased, and answered:

"You cannot do that, father--for he has christened everyone in the
parish that is thirty years younger than he.

"Aye, I forgot that," the priest said gravely. "They will miss him
sorely. Therefore I will say that he will return ere long, but that
my ways must be borne with until he comes."

"Now I think that if you steer between those two sayings of yours
you will do well," I answered.

"Ailwin's ways wrought in my manner, therefore. I thank you,
thane," the priest said. "I am cloister bred, and know nought much
of secular work. Now, that is enough about myself. This morning,
very early, came Ailwin and asked for one to take his place, and I
am a Dane of the old settlement, and so I came, as running less
risk if Cnut returns, as they say he will. Then Ailwin bade me seek
you and say this. That because of the wandering Danes he would take
his charges into some more quiet place for a time at least. Truly,
he bade me tell you, they have a last refuge where none would find
them, but it is ill fitted for a long stay, and it is likely that
once there it might now be months before they could leave it. So he
and Gunnhild think best to go far off. They will return with peace,
and then he bids me tell you that, if the Lord will, all shall be
well."

"Where will he go?" I asked.

"I know not. He gave me the message, and I know no more. Not even
of whom he speaks."

Now for a moment I grew angry with Ailwin again, for it seemed to
me that I should have been told more than this. Then I thought that
perhaps Ailwin himself knew not yet where he would go.

"Does Ailwin know that there is news from Denmark?" I asked.

"Our abbot told him, but he knew already, having had word from
Colchester in some way. He had heard before we as it seems."

That was doubtless Gunnhild's work, for I came to know afterwards
that in the long years of trouble she had made a chain of friends
who would pass word to her from every point whence trouble would
come. It seems to me that much of the dame's knowledge of coming
events was gained in ways like this rather than by witchcraft.

Then I was glad that the danger that I had learned had been
foreseen by her and Ailwin; and as I sat without speaking for a few
minutes I felt that now I was free to follow Olaf where he would
lead his men to meet the Danes, for Hertha was not here, and her I
could follow no longer.

There was no more to be learned from the priest, and so we rose up
and went down to the churchyard, and saw the work, and I told him
what I could of Ailwin and his ways, and thought that he had found
one who was like him in thought and gentleness.

So presently I took Eadmund's penny from my pouch and gave it to
him, telling him about it, even as I would have told Ailwin.

"Give me this back when I return, father," I said, "and it shall
remind me of some vow which I will make at your advice."

"Make no vows, my son, save this one," he said. "What will befall
you we know not, and therefore there is but one vow which we know
certainly that you may be able to keep. I will have you put the
penny where you may see it often, and so you shall remember, and
vow if you will, that when your eyes fall on it you shall say a
prayer to Him who gave power to Eadmund to conquer in dying, for
this home of yours and this church, that out of ruin may come
beauty, and after war, peace."

"I will make that vow, father," I said gladly.

"Forget not me at times in the prayer," he said very humbly; and I
promised that I would not, taking the penny back.

Then he went and began to work on the church, being plainly skilful
in the matter, and I went up to our hall's ruins and looked out
over the land, and planned again what I would do in the days to
come.

It was long dark when Olaf rode back, and he had learnt but little.
But he had sent messengers to Ulfkytel at Thetford to warn him to
watch his coasts, for he must go back to London with the ships to
guard the Thames.

"And you, Redwald, my cousin, must go to Ethelred or Eadmund and
warn them, and make them rouse, and raise and have ready the
mightiest levy that they have ever led, for I think that all
Denmark and Norway have sent their best to follow Cnut. We will
ride together to Maldon, for the men shall follow me and find the
ships with their cables up-and-down waiting for them, and you must
hasten, for no time must be lost."

So it came to pass that my dream of finding Hertha passed from me,
and the thought of war filled my mind again, for next morning we
rode away southward along the Roman road, and the cheers of the
villagers died away behind me and were forgotten.

Then I left Olaf where the road turns off to Maldon, to meet him
again in London before many days, and I and my fifty men rode on.
For Olaf would have me go as befitted his kinsman, and a word to
the Colchester elders had found me the well-armed and mounted
Anglian warriors who joined us after we reached the great road.

But when I came to London my journey was not at an end. Ethelred
the king was at Corsham, in Wiltshire, and sorely sick as was said,
and Eadmund was at Stamford. Now when I heard that I wondered, and
asked the Sheriff, at whose house I was made most welcome, how this
was.

Eadmund had been with his father, and had gone to Malmsbury, and
there had seen the Lady Algitha, the widow of Earl Sigeferth whom
Edric Streone slew, and had married her, and now had gone to take
over the Five Boroughs for himself. That was good hearing, maybe,
for Olaf had feared that Streone would have taken them.

But next I found that this marriage was sorely against the king's
will, and that he and Eadmund had parted in anger therefore. I
seemed then to see the hand of Streone in this quarrel, for all men
knew that he slew the earls to gain the Five Boroughs for his own.

Then I thought that to go so far into Wessex to seek the sick king
would be but lost time. I had better go to Stamford and seek the
Atheling, and maybe it would be as well that he was free to act by
himself, seeing that need was urgent. So I lay but one night in
London, and then rode away to Stamford along the great Ermin
Street, and there I found Eadmund and told him all that Olaf had
bidden me.

And when he had heard all, he said:

"Let me send for Edric Streone, my foster father, and we will take
counsel with him."

"Send round the war arrow first, my prince," I urged, "then when
the earl comes no time will be lost. He cannot but counsel you to
raise men instantly."

"Why," he said, "Cnut can but fall on the east coast. Utred is in
Northumbria to guard the Humber, and Ulfkytel guards the Wash, and
Olaf is in the Thames. They will drive away the Danes before they
set foot on the beach."

"They are still fighting the thingmen in the towns," I said.
"Northumbria and Anglia are Danish at heart yet."

Aye, and I might have added "Mercia also," but I knew not that yet.
Eadmund should have known it, though. It was but a few weeks before
it was plain that Wessex alone and London stood fast for Ethelred.

I chafed, but Eadmund would not be hurried. I cannot tell what
strange blindness, save it was his trust in Streone, had fallen on
him at this time.

Then the earl came from Nottingham, and at the very first he sent
for me. Eadmund had told him my news when he sent for him.

I found him alone in a chamber of Eadmund's house--that which had
been Sigeferth's, and it seemed that no memory of the murdered earl
haunted him. His great form was as square and strong as ever, and
his grizzled brown beard was as bushy and well cared for as when I
used to see him and speak with him before the flight into Normandy.
And he still had the same pleasant voice and ways, even to the
little chuckle--as to himself--when he spoke, and the way he had of
gazing on the rafters rather than at the man to whom he was
talking.

"So, Redwald, my friend," he laughed, "you have turned viking as it
seems! How have you fared in East Anglia with Olaf the Thick?"

"Well enough, lord earl," I said, "but there is work to be done
there yet."

"Aha! those thingmen are no babes," he said. "Where is your earl
now?"

"At Thetford, as they say."

"Well, what is this tale that you bring about Cnut?"

I told him, and he laughed in his way.

"Cnut is but a boy. No such great following would gather to him,"
he said. "It is not possible."

"Eirik and Ulf and Thorkel the jarls may gather them for Cnut," I
answered. "And he is Swein's son."

"Those men are Cnut as yet, as one may say," answered Edric
chuckling. "One has to deal with them therefore. What says Olaf?"

"He says the same, lord earl."

Then he turned sharply towards me, though he did not look at me,
and said:

"The king does not trust Olaf, I fear. He thinks that he might be
won over to Cnut's side."

"Ethelred our king should have no mistrust of the man who brought
him home," I said coldly, having no doubt who made the first
jealousy of Olaf.

"He should not, in truth," Edric answered. "But what if Cnut
offered Olaf the under-kingship of Norway, or Northumbria say, if
he would go over to his side?"

"He would not take it," I said.

"Have you ever heard him say as much?" asked Edric in a careless
way.

I was growing angry now, for this seemed beside the point.

"Such a thing has never been spoken of between us," I said.

"So. Then ask him the question one day, and see what his answer
is."

"I can answer it now," I said hotly; "he would refuse. Nor will the
offer ever be made."

"I am not so sure of that," said Edric. "Cnut needs help, and will
bid high for it. Nay, I know that it will be made. We have our
spies in Cnut's court, Redwald, and know more than you may think.
Tell him, therefore, only what I have said to you, and let me know
his answer by someone whom you can trust."

Then I rose up in my anger, and said:

"You ask me to spy on the king, lord earl, and I will not do it."

"Nay, nay," he said. "I do but want to set our king's mind at rest.
I know what the honest viking's answer would be; he would be as
wroth as you. Only I would have sure word to send to Ethelred."

Then I said, while Edric watched me sidelong:

"Olaf's force is small, and our levies, lord earl, should be enough
without his help, if they are raised in time. Our king may be sure
that Olaf has not sent me to raise England thus against himself."

"Aye, I will tell Ethelred so. Our king is very sick, and a sick
man's fancies are many. So Olaf thinks that we should raise a great
levy at once."

Then he spoke of nought but that, and so earnestly that I believed
that the summons to the sheriffs would surely go out that night.
And he spoke of the help of the ships that Olaf had gathered,
praising him honestly, and not over much or too little, so that I
forgot his doubtful speeches, and thought that all was well, and
that his own levies were now gathering.

And so after an hour or more's talk he rose up and held out his
hand.

"Many thanks, Redwald, for your pains," he said taking mine. "I
think that Cnut and his jarls will have lost their journey through
your coming hither. The king shall not forget you when all is safe
again."

Who would not have been pleased with this? I went from Streone's
presence with a light heart, until I came to the great hall, and
there sat in the high place the Lady Algitha herself and her
maidens. Very beautiful she was, but very sad looking. And when I
crossed the floor before her I bowed, and she beckoned to me.

So I came near, and knelt on one knee before her.

"You are Redwald, Olaf's kinsman and messenger?" she asked.

"Yes, lady," I answered.

"I have heard of your coming. Have you spoken with the
earl--Streone?" she said, while a wrinkle crossed her fair forehead
as she named him.

"I have but just left him, lady."

She sunk her voice very low, and bent a little towards me.

"Were his words pleasant and fair spoken?" she said.

"They could not have been more so--at the last," I replied, the
memory of my anger coming back to me of a sudden.

"You crossed him once, then?"

"But a little; he crossed me rather," I said plainly.

"Wear your mail, Redwald," she said whisperingly. "Farewell."

Then she was once more herself again, the lady whose hand I might
kiss reverently and look at afar. But in those few moments she had
