that they lived upon land upon which the Iroquois themselves had once
lived, no man knew how long.

Robert saw that the looks were growing more menacing, although the good
Monsieur Berryer glided among his guests, and counseled caution.

"Take no notice," said Willet in a low tone. "The French are polite,
and although they may not like us they will not molest us."

Robert followed his advice. Apparently he had no thought except for his
food, which was delicate, but his ears did not miss any sound that could
reach them. He understood French well, and he caught several whispers
that made the red come to his cheeks. Doubtless they thought he could
not speak their language or they would have been more careful.

Half way through the dinner and the door was thrown open, admitting a
gorgeous figure and a great gust of words. It was a young man in a
brilliant uniform, his hair long, perfumed, powdered and curled, and his
face flushed. Robert recognized him at once as that same Count Jean de
Mezy who had passed them in the flying carriage. Behind came two
officers of about the same age, but of lower rank, seeking his favor and
giving him adulation.

His roving eye traveled around the room, and, resting upon the three
guests, became inflamed.

"Ah, Nemours, and you, Le Moyne," he said, "look there and behold the
two Bostonnais and the Iroquois of whom we have heard, sitting here in
our own Inn of the Eagle!"

"But there is no war, not as yet," said Nemours, although he spoke in an
obsequious tone.

"But it will come," said de Mezy loudly, "and then, gentlemen, this
lordly Quebec of ours, which has known many English captives, will hold
multitudes of them."

There were cries of "Silence!" "Not so loud!"

"Don't insult guests!" but de Mezy merely laughed and said: "They don't
understand! The slow-witted English never know any tongue but their
own."

The red flush in Robert's face deepened and he moved angrily.

"Quiet, boy! Quiet!" whispered the hunter. "He wants a quarrel, and he
is surrounded by his friends, while we're strangers in a strange land
and a hostile city. Take a trifle of the light white wine that Monsieur
Berryer is pouring for you. It won't hurt you."

Robert steadied himself and sipped a little. De Mezy and his satellites,
Nemours and Le Moyne, sat down noisily at a table and ordered claret. De
Mezy gave the cue. They talked of the Bostonnais, not only of the two
Bostonnais who were present, but of the Bostonnais in all the English
colonies, applying the word to them whether they came from Massachusetts
or New York or Virginia. Robert felt his pulses leaping and the hunter
whispered his warning once more.

De Mezy evidently was sincere in his belief that the three understood no
French, as he continued to talk freely about the English colonies, the
prospect of war, and the superiority of French troops to British or
American. Meanwhile he and his two satellites drank freely of the claret
and their faces grew more flushed. Robert could stand it no longer.

"Tayoga," he said clearly and in perfect French, "it seems that in
Quebec there are people of loose speech, even as there are in Albany and
New York."

"Our sachems tell us that such is the way of man," said the Onondaga,
also in pure French. "Vain boasters dwell too in our own villages. For
reasons that I do not know, Manitou has put the foolish as well as the
wise into the world."

"To travel, Tayoga, is to find wisdom. We learn what other people know,
and we learn to value also the good that we have at home."

"It is so, my friend Lennox. It is only when we go into strange
countries and listen to the tongues of the idle and the foolish that we
learn the full worth of our own."


"It is not wise, Tayoga, to give a full rein to a loose tongue in a
public place."

"Our mothers teach us so, Lennox, as soon as we leave our birch bark
cradles."

Willet had raised his hand in warning, but he saw that it was too late.
The young blood in the veins of both Tayoga and Robert was hot, and the
Iroquois was stirred not less deeply than the white man.

"The sachems tell us," he said, "that sometimes a man speaks foolish
words because he is born foolish, again he says them at times because
his temper or drink makes him foolish, or he may say them because it is
his wish to be foolish and he has cultivated foolish ways all his life.
This last class is the worst of all, Lennox, my friend, but there is a
certain number of them in all lands, as one finds when one travels."

The Onondaga spoke with great clearness and precision in his measured
school French and a moment of dead silence followed. Then Robert said:

"It is true, Tayoga. The chiefs of the Hodenosaunee are great and wise
men. They have lived and seen much, and seeing they have remembered.
They know that speech was given to man in order that he might convey his
thoughts to another, and not that he might make a fool of himself."

An angry exclamation came from the table at which de Mezy sat, and his
satellites, Nemours and Le Moyne, swept the three with looks meant to be
contemptuous. Monsieur Berryer raised deprecating hands and was about to
speak, but, probably seeing that both hands and words would be of no
avail, moved quietly to one side. He did not like to have quarrels in
his excellent Inn of the Eagle, but they were no new thing there, for
the gilded youth of Quebec was hot and intemperate.

"But when a man is foolish in our village," resumed Tayoga, "and the
words issue from his mouth in a stream like the cackling of a jay bird,
the chiefs do not send warriors to punish him, but give him into the
hands of the old women, who bind him and beat him with sticks until they
can beat sense back into him."

"A good way, Tayoga, a most excellent way," said Robert. "People who
have reached the years of maturity pay no attention to the vaporings and
madness of the foolish."

He did not look around, but he heard a gusty exclamation, the scrape of
a chair on the floor, and a hasty step. Then he felt a hot breath, and,
although he did not look up, he knew that de Mezy, flushed with drink
and anger, was standing over him. The temperament that nature had given
to him, the full strength of which he was only discovering, asserted
itself. He too felt wrath inside, but he retained all the presence of
mind for which he afterward became famous.

"Shall we go out and see more of the city, Tayoga?" he asked.

"Not until I have had a word with you, young sprig of a Bostonnais,"
said de Mezy, his florid face now almost a flaming red.

"Your pardon, sir," said Robert, with his uncommon fluency of speech, "I
have not the advantage of your acquaintance, which, no doubt, is my
loss, as I admit that there are many good and brave men whom I do not
know."

"I am Jean de Mezy, a count of France, a captain in the army of King
Louis, and one of the most valued friends of our able Intendant,
Francois Bigot."

"I have heard of France, of course, I have heard, equally of course, of
His Majesty, King Louis, I have even heard of the Intendant, Francois
Bigot, but, and sorry I am to say it, I have never heard of the Count
Jean de Mezy."

A low laugh came from a distant corner of the room, and the red of de
Mezy's face turned to purple. His hand dropped to the hilt of his sword,
but Le Moyne whispered to him and he became more collected.

"In Quebec," he said, throwing back his shoulders and raising his chin,
"an officer of His Majesty, King Louis, does not accept an insult. We
preserve our honor with the edge of our swords, and for that reason I
intend to let a good quantity of the hot blood out of you with mine.
There is a good place near the St. Louis gate, and the hour may be as
early as you wish."

"He is but a boy," interposed Willet.

"But I know the sword," said Robert, who had made up his mind, and who
was measuring his antagonist. "I will meet you tomorrow morning just
after sunrise with the small sword, and my seconds will confer with
yours tonight."

He stood up that they might see his size. Although only a boy in years,
he was as large and strong as de Mezy, and his eyes were clearer and his
muscles much firmer. A hum of approval came from the spectators, who now
numbered more than a score, but the approval was given for different
reasons. Some, and they belonged to the _honnetes gens_, were glad to
see de Mezy rebuked and hoped that he would be punished; others, the
following of Bigot, Cadet, Pean and their corrupt crowd, were eager to
see the Bostonnais suffer for his insolence to one of their number. But
most of them, both the French of old France and the French of Canada,
chivalric of heart, were resolved to see fair play.

Monsieur Berryer shrugged his shoulders, but made no protest. The affair
to his mind managed itself very well. There had been none of the
violence that he had apprehended. The quarrel evidently was one of
gentlemen, carried out in due fashion, and the shedding of blood would
occur in the proper place and not in his inn. And yet it would be an
advertisement. Men would come to point out where de Mezy had sat, and
where the young Bostonnais had sat, and to recount the words that each
had said. And then the red wine and the white wine would flow freely.
Oh, yes, the affair was managing itself very well indeed, and the
thrifty Monsieur Berryer rubbed his hands together with satisfaction.

"We have beds here at the Inn of the Eagle," said Robert coolly--he was
growing more and more the master of speech; "you can send your seconds
this evening to see mine, and they will arrange everything, although I
tell you now that I choose small swords. I hope my choice suits you."

"It is what I would have selected myself," said de Mezy, giving his
antagonist a stare of curiosity. Such coolness, such effrontery, as he
would have called it, was not customary in one so young, and in an
American too, because Americans did not give much attention to the study
of the sword. New thoughts raced through his head. Could it be possible
that here, where one least expected it, was some marvelous swordsman, a
phenomenon? Did that account for his indifference? A slight shudder
passed over the frame of Jean de Mezy, who loved his dissolute life. But
such thoughts vanished quickly. It could not be possible. The confidence
of the young Bostonnais came from ignorance.

Robert had seen de Mezy's face fall, and he was confirmed in the course
that he had chosen already.

"_Gusgaesata_," he said to Tayoga in Iroquois.

"Ah, the deer buttons!" the Onondaga said in English, then repeating it
in French.

"You will pardon us," said Robert carelessly to de Mezy, "but Tayoga,
who by the way is of the most ancient blood of the Onondagas, and I
often play a game of ours after dinner."

His manner was that of dismissal, and the red in de Mezy's cheeks again
turned to purple. Worst of all, the little dart of terror stabbed once
more at his heart. The youth might really be the dreaded marvel with the
sword. Such coolness in one so young at such a time could come only from
abnormal causes. Although he felt himself dismissed he refused to go
away and his satellites remained with him. They would see what the two
youths meant to do.

Tayoga took from a pocket in his deerskin tunic eight buttons about
three quarters of an inch in diameter and made of polished and shining
elk's horn, except one side which had been burned to a darker color.
From another pocket he drew a handful of beans and laid them in one
heap. Then he shook the buttons in the palm of his hand, and put them
down in the center of the table. Six white sides were turned up and
taking two beans from the common heap he started a pile of his own. He
threw again and obtained seven whites. Then he took four beans. A third
throw and all coming up white twenty beans were subtracted from the heap
and added to his own pile. But on the next throw only five of the whites
appeared, and as at least six of the buttons had to be matched in order
to continue his right of throwing he resigned his place to Robert, who
threw with varying fortune until he lost in his turn to Tayoga.

"A crude Indian game," said de Mezy in a sneering tone, and the two
satellites, Nemours and Le Moyne, laughed once more. Robert and Tayoga
did not pay the slightest attention to them, concentrating their whole
attention upon the sport, but Willet said quietly:

"I've seen wise chiefs play it for hours, and the great men of the
Hodenosaunee would be great men anywhere."

Angry words gathered on the lips of de Mezy, but they were not spoken.
He saw that he was at a disadvantage, and that he would lose prestige if
he kept himself in a position to be snubbed before his own people by two
strange youths. At length he said: "Farewell until morning," and stalked
out, followed by his satellites. Others soon followed but Robert and
Tayoga went on with their game of the deer buttons. They were not
interrupted until Monsieur Berryer bowed before them and asked if they
would have any more refreshment.

"No, thank you," said Robert, and then he added, as if by afterthought,
although he did not take his eyes from the buttons: "What sort of a man
at sword play is this de Mezy?"

"Very good! Very good, sir," replied the innkeeper, "that is if his eyes
and head are clear."

"Then if he is in good condition it looks as if I ought to be careful."

"Careful, sir! Careful! One ought always to be careful in a duel!"

"In a way I suppose so. Monsieur Berryer. But I fancy it depends a good
deal upon one's opponent. There are some who are not worth much
trouble."

Monsieur Berryer's eyes stood out. Robert had spoken with calculated
effect. He knew that his words uttered now would soon reach the ears of
Jean de Mezy, and it was worth while to be considered a miraculous
swordsman. He had read the count's mind when he stood at his elbow,
shuddering a little at the thought that a prodigy with the blade might
be sitting there, and he was resolved to make the thought return once
more and stay.

"And, sir, you distinguish between swordsmen, and find it necessary to
make preparation only for the very best? And you so young too!" said the
wondering innkeeper.

"Youth in such times as ours does not mean inexperience, Monsieur
Berryer," said Willet.

"It is true, alas!" said the innkeeper, soberly. "The world grows old,
and there are seas of trouble. I wish no annoyance to any guests of
mine. I know the courtesy due to visitors in our Quebec, and I would
have stopped the quarrel had I been able, but the Count Jean de Mezy is
a powerful man, the friend and associate of the Intendant, Monsieur
Bigot."

"I understand, Monsieur Berryer," said Robert, with calculated
lightness; "your courtesy is, in truth, great, but don't trouble
yourself on our account. We are fully able to take care of ourselves.
Come, Tayoga, we're both tired of the game and so let's to bed."

Tayoga carefully put away the deer buttons and the beans, and the three
rose.




CHAPTER X

THE MEETING


Only four or five men, besides themselves, were left in the great room
of the Inn of the Eagle. The looks they gave the three were not hostile,
and Robert judged that they belonged to the party known in Quebec as
honnetes gens and described to him already by de Galisonniere. He
thought once of speaking to them, but he decided not to put any strain
upon their friendliness. They might have very bitter feelings against
Bigot and his corrupt following, but the fact would not of necessity
induce them to help the Bostonnais.

"I thought it would be best to go to bed," he said, "but I've changed my
mind. A little walk first in the open air would be good for all of us.
Besides we must stay up long enough to receive the seconds of de Mezy."

"A walk would be a good thing for you," said Willet--it was noteworthy
that despite his great affection for the lad, he did not show any
anxiety about him.

"Your wrist feels as strong as ever, doesn't it, Robert?" he asked.

Young Lennox took his right wrist in his left hand and looked at it
thoughtfully. He was a tall youth, built powerfully, but his wrists were
of uncommon size and strength.

"I suppose that paddling canoes during one's formative period over our
lakes and rivers develops the wrists and arms better than anything else
can," he said.

"It makes them strong and supple, too," said the hunter. "It gives to
you a wonderful knack which with training can be applied with equal
ability to something else."

"As we know."

"As we know."

They went out and walked a little while in the streets, curious eyes
still following them, a fact of which they were well aware, although
they apparently took no notice of it. Willet observed Robert closely,
but he could not see any sign of unsteadiness or excitement. Young
Lennox himself seemed to have forgotten the serious business that would
be on hand in the morning. His heart again beat a response to Quebec
which in the dusk was magnificent and glorified. The stone buildings
rose to the size of castles, the great river showed like silver through
the darkness and on the far shore a single light burned.

A figure appeared before them. It was de Galisonniere, his ruddy face
anxious.
