17, 18, Of the face and neck. 19, 20, Large veins. 21, The thoracic duct.
26, The lymphatics of the heart.]


HYGIENE OF THE LYMPHATIC VESSELS.

404. By the action of the lymphatics, substances of an injurious, as
well as of a beneficial, character may be conveyed into the system.
These vessels, under certain conditions, are more active in their
office than at other periods; and it is of practical utility to know
what influences their action.

405. _The function of these vessels is increased by moisture, and
lessened by an active state of the lacteals._ Observation shows that
the ill-fed, and those persons that live in marshy districts, contract
contagious diseases more readily than those individuals who are well
fed, and breathe a dry and pure air.

406. _The air of the sick-room should be dry._ If due attention is not
given to ventilation, the clothing of the nurse and patient, together
with the air of the room, will be moistened by the exhalations from
the skin and lungs. This exhalation may contain a poison of greater or
less power, according to its quantity and degree of concentration, and
may be absorbed and reconveyed into the system, causing inflammatory
diseases, and not unfrequently death.

_Observations._ 1st. When we are attending a sick person a current of
air that has passed over the patient should be avoided. We may
approach with safety very near a person who has an infectious disease,
provided care is taken to keep on the side from which the currents of
air are admitted into the room.

2d. When we have been visiting or attending on a sick person, it is
judicious to change the apparel worn in the sick-room, and also give
the skin a thorough bathing. The outside garments, also, should be
aired, as poisonous matter may have penetrated the meshes of the
clothing.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

404-413. _Give the hygiene of the lymphatic vessels._ 404. What is
said respecting the action of the lymphatic vessels? 405. What
influences the function of these vessels? What does observation show?
406. Why should the air of the sick-room be dry? What suggestion when
we have been visiting or attending on the sick?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

407. _The stomach should be supplied with food of a nutrient and
digestible character, in proper quantities, and at stated periods._
The chyle formed from the food stimulates the lacteals to activity,
which activity is attended with an inactive state of the lymphatics of
the skin and lungs. Thus due attention should be given to the food of
the attendants on the sick, and the members of the family. Before
visiting a sick person it is judicious to take a moderate amount of
nutritious food.

_Observation._ Many individuals, to prevent contracting disease that
may be communicated from one person to another, use tobacco, either
chewed or smoked; and sometimes alcohol, with decoctions of bitter
herbs. These substances do not diminish, but tend to increase, the
activity of the lymphatics. Thus they make use of the means by which
the poisonous matter formed in the system of the diseased person, may
be more readily conveyed into their own.

408. _The skin and clothing, as well as the bed-linen, should be
frequently cleansed._ This will remove the poisonous matter that may
be deposited upon the skin and garments, which, if suffered to remain,
might be conveyed into the system by the action of the lymphatics.
This points also to a frequent change of the wearing apparel, as well
as the coverings of the bed. In visiting the unhealthy districts of
the South and West, the liability of contracting disease is much
lessened by taking a supply of food at proper periods, keeping the
skin and clothing in a clean state, the room well ventilated, and
avoiding the damp chills of evening.

409. _Absorption by the skin is most vigorous when the cuticle is
removed by vesication, or blistering._ Then external applications are
brought into immediate contact with the orifices of the lymphatics of
the skin, and by them rapidly imbibed and circulated through the
system. Thus arsenic applied to the cutaneous vessels, and strong
solutions of opium to extensive burns, have been absorbed in
quantities sufficient to poison the patient.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

407. Why should the stomach be supplied with food of a nutrient and
digestible character? What is said of the use of alcohol, or tobacco,
in preventing the introduction of the poisonous matter of contagious
diseases? 408. Why should the clothing and bed-linen be frequently
washed? What suggestion to persons in visiting the unhealthy districts
of the South and West? 409. When is cutaneous absorption most
vigorous? Why?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

410. _When the cuticle is only punctured or abraded, poisonous matter
may be introduced into the system._ The highly respected Dr. W., of
Boston, lost his life by poisonous matter from the body of a patient
subjected to a post mortem examination. He had removed from his
finger, previous to the examination, a "hang-nail," and the poison
from the dead body was brought in contact with the denuded part, and
through the agency of the lymphatics it was conveyed into the system.

411. Puncture any part of the cuticle with the finest instrument that
has upon its point the smallest conceivable quantity of the _vaccine
virus_, or small-pox matter, and it will be brought into contact with
the lymphatic vessels, and through their agency conveyed into the
system. The result is, that persons thus operated upon have the
small-pox, or the vaccine disease.

412. When we expose ourselves to any poisonous vapors, or handle
diseased animals or sick persons, safety and health require that the
cuticle be not broken or otherwise injured. In many instances, the
poisonous animal matter upon hides has been introduced into the
systems of tanners, through small ulcers upon their fingers or hands.
From these sores there would be seen small red lines extending up the
arm. These swelled tracts indicate an inflammation of the large
lymphatic trunks, that have been irritated and diseased by the
passage of poisonous matter through them into the system.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

410. Do the same results follow, if the cuticle is only punctured?
Relate an instance of death by the absorption of poisonous matter.
411. By what means is the vaccine matter introduced into the system?
412. What caution is necessary when we expose ourselves to poisonous
vapors?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ A distressing illustration of the absorption of
deleterious substances from the surface of a sore, is seen in the
favorite experiments of that class of "quacks," who style themselves
"cancer doctors." With them, every trifling and temporary enlargement,
or tumor, is a cancer. Their general remedy is arsenic; and happy is
the unfortunate sufferer who escapes destruction in their hands, for
too frequently their speedy cure is death.

413. In case of an accidental wound, it is best immediately to bathe
the part thoroughly in pure water, and to avoid all irritating
applications. In some instances, it would be well to apply _lunar
caustic_ immediately. When handling or shrouding dead bodies, or
removing the skin from animals that have died of disease, it would
be well to lubricate the hands with olive-oil or lard. This affords
protection to the minute portions of the skin, from which the cuticle
may be removed. In all cases where there is an ulcer or sore, the
part should be covered with something impervious to fluids, as
court-plaster, before exposing the system to any animal, vegetable,
or mineral poison.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

413. What direction is given when the cuticle is broken? What
suggestion is given when shrouding dead bodies?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXI.

SECRETION.


414. In the human body are found many fluids and solids of dissimilar
appearance and character. These are produced by the action of organs,
some of which are of simple structure, while others are very complicated
in their arrangement. These organs are called _Se-cre'to-ry_.


ANATOMY OF THE SECRETORY ORGANS.

415. The SECRETORY ORGANS are the _Ex-ha'lants_, _Fol'li-cles_, and
the _Glands_.

416. The EXHALANTS were supposed to be terminations of arteries or
capillaries. The external exhalants terminate on the skin and mucous
membranes; the internal in the cellular and medullary tissues.
(Appendix I.)

[Illustration: Fig. 86. A secretory follicle. An artery is seen, which
supplies the material for its secretion. Follicles are also supplied with
veins and organic nerves.]

417. The FOLLICLES are small bags, or sacs, situated in the true skin,
and mucous membrane. The pores seen on the skin are the outlets of
these bodies.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

414. How are the fluids and solids of the body produced? 415-419.
_Give the anatomy of the secretory organs._ 415. Name the secretory
organs. 416. Describe the exhalants. What is represented by fig. 86?
417. Define follicles.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

418. The GLANDS are soft, fleshy organs, and as various in their
structure, as the secretions which it is their function to produce.
Each gland is composed of many small lobules united in a compact mass,
and each lobule communicates by a small duct with the principal
outlet, or duct of the organ. Every gland is supplied with arteries,
veins, lymphatics, and nerves. These, with the ducts, are arranged in
a peculiar manner, and connected by cellular membrane.

419. There are two classes of glands, one for the modification of the
fluids which pass through them, as the mesenteric and lymphatic
glands; and the other for the secretion of fluids which are either
useful in the animal economy, or require to be rejected from the
body.

[Illustration: Fig. 87. 1, 1, A secretory gland. 2, 2, Minute ducts that
are spread through the glands. These coalesce to form the main duct, 3.]


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SECRETORY ORGANS.

420. SECRETION is one of the most obscure and mysterious functions of
the animal economy. "It is that process by which various substances
are separated from the blood, either with or without experiencing any
change during their separation." Not only is the process by which
substances are separated from the blood, called secretion, but the
same term is also applied to substances thus separated. Thus
physiologists say, that by the process of secretion, bile is formed by
the liver; and also, that bile is the secretion of this organ.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

418. Give the structure of the glands. 419. How are the glands
arranged? 420-431. _Give the physiology of the secretory organs._ 420.
What is secretion?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

421. The secreted fluids do not exist in that form in the blood,
but most of the elements of which they are made do exist in this
fluid, and the "vessels by which it is accomplished may well be called
the architects and chemists of the system; for out of the same
material--the blood--they construct a variety of wonderful fabrics
and chemical compounds. We see the same wonderful power possessed,
also, by vegetables; for out of the same materials the olive prepares
its oil, the cocoa-nut its milk, the cane its sugar, the poppy its
narcotic, the oak its green pulpy leaves, and its dense woody fibre.
All are composed of the same few, simple elements, arranged in
different order and proportions."

422. "In like manner we find the vessels, in animated bodies, capable
of forming all the various textures and substances which compose the
frame; the cellular tissue, the membranes, the ligaments, the
cartilages, the bones, the marrow, the muscles with their tendons, the
lubricating fluid of the joints, the pulp of the brain, the
transparent jelly of the eye; in short, all the textures of the
various organs of which the body is composed, consist of similar
ultimate elements, and are manufactured from the blood."

423. Of the agents that produce or direct the different secretions, we
have no very accurate knowledge. Some have supposed this function to
be mechanical, others a chemical process, but experiments prove that
it is dependent on nervous influence. If the nerves are divided which
are distributed to any organ, the process of secretion is suspended.
It is no uncommon occurrence, that the nature of milk will be so
changed from the influence of anger in the mother, as to cause
vomiting, colic, and even convulsions, in the infant that swallows it.
Unexpected intelligence either of a pleasant or unpleasant character,
by its influence on the nervous system, will frequently destroy the
appetite. Sometimes mental agitation, as fear, will cause a cold sweat
to pervade the surface of the body.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

421. What is said respecting secreted substances? Do vegetables
possess the property of secretion? 422. From what are the various
textures formed? 423. Have we accurate knowledge of the agents that
produce secretion?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

424. Secretions are constantly maintained, during life, from the
serous membrane, by the action of the internal exhalants. The fluid
which is exhaled bears some resemblance to the serum of the blood. Its
use is to furnish the organs, which are surrounded by this membrane,
with a proper degree of moisture, and thus enables them to move easily
on each other, as those within the chest and abdomen.

425. The cellular tissue exhales a serous fluid, and when it becomes
excessive in quantity, general dropsy is produced. Fat is another
secretion, which is thrown out, in a fluid state, from the cellular
membrane. It is deposited in little cells, and exists in the greatest
abundance between the skin and the muscles. Its use seems to be, to
form a cushion around the body for its protection; to furnish
nutriment for the system when food cannot be taken; to supply the
carbon and hydrogen necessary to sustain the generation of heat, when
these articles of combustion are not otherwise furnished. The
_med'ul-la-ry_ substance, (marrow,) in the cavities of the long bones,
is very much like fat.

_Observation._ During sickness, if there is not emaciation or
absorption of this secretion, it is considered an unfavorable symptom,
because it indicates a want of power in the absorbing system, which is
among the last to be affected.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is it proved that secretion depends on nervous influence? 424.
What is said of the secretions from the serous membrane? 425. From
what tissue is a serous fluid exhaled? What is the effect when this
fluid becomes excessive in quantity? What is fat? Its use? What is
marrow?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

426. The mucous secretion is a transparent, viscid fluid which is
secreted by those membranes that line the cavities of the body, which
have an external communication, as the trachea and alimentary canal.
This secretion serves to protect these parts from the influence of the
air, and concurs, by means of its peculiar properties, in the
performance of their functions. 427. There are two external
secretions, namely, one from the skin, called perspiration, and the
other from the lungs. The cutaneous exhalation, or transpiration[14]
exists in two forms, called sensible perspiration (sweat) and
insensible perspiration. The pulmonary exhalation is the most
important and universal, and closely resembles that of the skin.

  [14] _Transpiration_ is a term often used generically, to signify the
       passage of fluids or gases through membranes, internally or
       externally; but _perspiration_ is a specific term, signifying
       transpiration on to the external surface.

428. The follicles are found only in the skin and mucous membrane.
They secrete an oily, unctuous substance, which mixes with the
transpiration, and lubricates the skin. At the root of each hair there
is a minute follicle, which secretes the fluid that oils the hair. The
wax in the passage of the ear is secreted from these bodies.

429. All the blood distributed to the different glands is similar in
composition and character; but the fluids secreted by them, vary in
appearance in a remarkable degree. The office of the glands appears to
be principally to form different secretions. Thus the salivary glands
secrete the insipid saliva; the lachrymal glands, the saline tears;
the liver, the yellow, ropy bile; and the kidneys, the acrid urine.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

426. What is said relative to the mucous secretion? 427. Name the
external secretions. 428. Give the office of the follicles. 429. What
appears to be the principal office of the glands? 430. Mention a
secretion produced in a particular emergency.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

430. Some secretions are evidently produced only in particular
emergencies, as is seen in the increased secretion of bony matter when
a limb is broken.

431. When any substance which is not demanded for nutrition, or does
not give nourishment to the system, is imbibed by the lymphatic
vessels, and conveyed into the blood, it is eliminated in the
secretions.

_Illustration._ A few years since, a poor inebriate was carried to a
London hospital in a state of intoxication. He lived but a few hours.
On examining his brain, nearly half a gill of fluid, strongly
impregnated with gin, was found in the cavities of this organ. This
was secreted from the vessels of the brain.


HYGIENE OF THE SECRETORY ORGANS.

432. _Unless the secretions are regularly maintained, disease will be
the ultimate result._ Let the secretions from the skin be suppressed,
and fever or some internal inflammation will follow. If the bile is
impeded, digestion will be impaired. If any other secretion is
suppressed, it will cause a derangement of the various internal
organs.

_Observation._ Ardent spirits derange the secretions, and change the
structure of the brain. This is one reason why inebriates do not
generally live to advanced age.

433. _The quantity of blood influences the character of the
secretions._ If it is lessened to any great extent, the secretions
will be lessened as well as changed in character.

_Illustration._ When a person has lost a considerable quantity of
blood, there is a sensation of thirst in the fauces, attended with a
cold, pale, dry skin. When reaction comes on, the perspiration is
cold, attended with nausea, and sometimes vomiting.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

431. What becomes of those substances imbibed by the lymphatics that
do not give nourishment to the body. 432-437. _Give the hygiene of the
secretory organs._ 432. What effect on the system when the secretions
are not regularly maintained? 433. Does the quantity of blood
influence the secretions? Give an illustration.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

434. _The secretory organs require the stimulus of pure blood._ If
this fluid is vitiated, the action of the secretory organs will be
more or less modified. Either the quantity will be affected or the
quality will be altered.

_Observation._ The impurity of the blood arising from the inhalation
of the vitiated air of sleeping rooms, diminishes and changes the
character of the secretions of the mouth and stomach. This accounts
for the thirst, coated tongue, and disagreeable taste of the mouth
when impure air is breathed during sleep. The disease it induces, is
indigestion or dyspepsia.

435. _The amount of action modifies the condition of the secretory
organs._ When a secretory organ is excessively stimulated, its vigor
and energy are reduced. The subsequent debility may be so great as to
suppress or destroy its functional power.

_Illustrations._ 1st. In those sections of the country where flax is
spun on a "foot-wheel," it is not unfrequent that the spinners moisten
the thread with the secretions of the mouth. This seems to operate
economically for a time, but debility of the salivary organs soon
follows, which incapacitates them from supplying saliva sufficient to
moisten the food, producing in a short time disease of the digestive
organs.

2d. The habit of continual spitting, which attends the chewing of
tobacco and gums, and other substances, between meals, induces
debility, not only of the salivary glands, but of the system
generally.

436. _One secretory organ may do the office of another._ This
increased action of a secretory organ may be sustained for a limited
time without permanent injury, but, if long continued, a diseased
action of the organ will follow. Of morbid secretions we have examples
in the ossification of the valves of the heart, cancerous and other
tumors.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

434. What is the effect of impure blood on the secretory organs? 435.
What results from stimulating excessively a secretory organ? How is
this illustrated? 436. What is the effect when one secretory organ
performs the office of another?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ In the evenings of the warm season, a chill upon the
impressible skin, that suppresses the perspiration, is frequently
followed by a diarrhoea, dysentery, or cholera morbus. These can be
prevented by avoiding the chill. An efficient means of relief, is
immediately to restore the skin to its proper action.

437. _The secretions are much influenced by the mind._ How this is
effected, it is difficult to explain; but many facts corroborate it.
Every one has felt an increased action of the tear-glands from
distressing feelings. Cheerfulness of disposition and serenity of the
passions are peculiarly favorable to the proper performance of the
secretory function. From this we may learn how important it is to
avoid such things as distract, agitate, or harass us.

_Observation._ In fevers and other diseases, when the skin, mouth, and
throat are dry from a suppression of the secretions, let the mind of
the patient be changed from despondency to hope, and the skin and the
membrane that lines the mouth and throat will exhibit a more moist
condition, together with a general improvement of the vital organs of
the system. Consequently, all just encouragement of the restoration to
health should be given to a sick person.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give examples of morbid secretions. What is one cause of dysentery and
cholera morbus? How can these affections he relieved? 437. Show the
influence of the mind on the secretions. Mention instances of its
influence.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXII.

NUTRITION.


438. NUTRITION is the vital act by which the different parts of the
body renew the materials of which they are composed. Digestion,
circulation, absorption, and respiration, are but separate links in
the chain of nutrition, which would be destroyed by the absence of any
one of them.

439. The nutritive process is also a kind of secretion, by which
particles of matter are separated from the blood and conveyed with
wonderful accuracy to the appropriate textures. The function of the
nutrient vessels antagonizes those of absorption: while one system is
constructing, with beautiful precision, the animal frame, the other is
diligently employed in pulling down this complicated structure.

440. This ever-changing state of the body is shown by giving animals
colored matter, mixed with their food, which in a short time tinges
their bones with the same color as the matter introduced. Let it be
withdrawn, and in a few days the bones will assume their former
color--evidently from the effects of absorption. The changeful state
of the body is further shown by the losses to which it is subjected;
by the necessity of aliment; by the emaciation which follows
abstinence from food.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

438-454. _What remarks respecting nutrition?_ 438. What is nutrition?
439. What is said of the nutritive process? The function of the
nutrient vessels? 440. Give a proof of the ever-changing state of the
body. Give other instances illustrative of the changeful state of the
body.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

441. Every part of the body is subject to this continual change of
material, yet it is effected with such regularity, that the size,
shape, and appearance, of every organ is preserved; and after an
interval of a few years, there may not remain a particle of matter
which existed in the system at a former period. Notwithstanding this
entire change, the personal identity is never lost.

442. Many calculations have been made to determine in what length of
time the whole body is renewed. Some have supposed that it is
accomplished in four years; others have fixed the period at seven
years; but the time of the change is not definite, as was supposed by
a genuine son of the Emerald Isle, who had been in America _seven
years and three months_, and consequently maintained that he was a
native American.

_Observation._ India ink, when introduced into the skin, is not
removed; hence some assert that this tissue is an exception to the
alternate deposition and removal of its atoms. The ink remains because
its particles are too large to be absorbed, and when in the skin it is
insoluble.

443. "Those animals which are most complicated in their structure, and
are distinguished by the greatest variety of vital manifestations, are
subject to the most rapid changes of matter. Such animals require more
frequent and more abundant supplies of food; and, in proportion as
they are exposed to the greater number of external impressions, will
be the rapidity of this change of matter."

444. "Animals may be situated so that they lose nothing by secretion;
consequently, they will require no nutriment. Frogs have been taken
from fissures in solid lime rock, which were imbedded many feet below
the surface of the earth, and, on being exposed to the air, exhibited
signs of life."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

441. Why is the personal identity never lost in the change of
materials, which is unceasing in the system? 442. Give the opinion of
physiologists respecting the time required for the renewal of the
whole body. What exception to the changing state Of the different
textures? 443. What animals are subject to the most rapid changes of
material? 444. May animals be situated so that they require no
nutriment? What is related of frogs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

445. The renovation of the bone, muscle, ligament, tendon, cartilage,
fat, nerve, hair, &c., is not perfected merely by the general
circulation of the fluid which is expelled from the left side of the
heart, but through the agency of a system of minute vessels, which,
under ordinary circumstances, cannot be seen by the eye, even when
aided by the microscope; still, minute as they are, the function of
these agents is necessary to the continuance of life. They are the
smallest capillary vessels.

446. "As the blood goes the round of the circulation, the nutrient
capillary vessels select and secrete those parts which are similar to
the nature of the structure, and the other portions pass on; so that
every tissue imbibes and converts to its own use the very principles
which it requires for its growth; or, in other words, as the vital
current approaches each organ, the particles appropriate to it feel
its attractive force,--obey it,--quit the stream,--mingle with the
substance of its tissue,--and are changed into its own true and proper
nature."

447. Thus, if a bone is broken, a muscle or a nerve wounded, and, if
the system is in a proper state of health, the vital economy
immediately sets about healing the rupture. The blood, which flows
from the wounded vessels, coagulates in the incision, for the double
purpose of stanching the wound, and of forming a matrix for the
regeneration of the parts. Very soon, minute vessels shoot out from
the living parts into the coagulum of the blood, and immediately
commence their operations, and deposit bony matter, where it is
required to unite fractured bones, and nervous substance to heal the
wounded nerve, &c.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

445. Show how the renovation of the bones, muscles, &c., is perfected.
446. What is said of the office of the nutrient capillary vessels?
447. When a bone is fractured, by what process is it healed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

448. But the vital economy seems not to possess the power of
reproducing the muscles and true skin, and therefore, when these parts
are wounded, the rupture is repaired by a gelatinous substance, which
gradually becomes hard, and sometimes assumes something of a fibrous
appearance. It so perfectly unites the divided muscle, however, as to
restore its functional power. When the cuticle is removed, it is
reproduced and no scar remains; but, when the true skin is destroyed,
a scar is formed.

449. It is not uncommon that the nutrient arteries have their action
so much increased in some parts, as to produce preternatural growth.
Sometimes the vessels whose function it is to deposit fat, are
increased in action, and wens of no inferior size are formed. Again,
there may be a deposition of substances unlike any known to exist in
the body. Occasionally, these nutrient arteries of a part take on a
new action, and not only deposit their ordinary substance, but others,
which they have not heretofore secreted, but which are formed by
vessels of other parts of the body. It is in this way that we account
for the bony matter deposited in the valves of the heart and brain,
also the chalky deposits around the finger-joints.

450. In infancy and childhood, the function of nutrition is very
active; a large amount of food is taken, to supply the place of what
is lost by the action of the absorbents, and also to contribute to the
growth of the body. In middle age, nutrition and absorption are more
equal; but in old age, the absorbents are more active than the
nutrient vessels. The size, consequently, diminishes, the parts become
weaker, the bones more brittle, the body bends forward, and every
function exhibits marks of decay and dissolution.

451. A striking instance of active absorption in middle age was
exhibited in the person of Calvin Edson, of Vermont, who was exhibited
in the large towns of New England, as the "living skeleton." In early
manhood he was athletic, and weighed one hundred and sixty pounds; but
the excessive action of the absorbents over the nutrient vessels,
reduced his weight, in the interval of eighteen years, to sixty
pounds.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

448. What occurs when a muscle is divided? 449. State some of the
results of an increased action of the nutrient arteries. 450. When is
nutrition most active? How in middle age? How in old age? 451. Relate
a striking instance of active absorption in middle age.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

452. Instances, on the other hand, have occurred, of the action of the
nutrient vessels exceeding, in an extreme degree, those of absorption;
as in the person of a colored girl, thirteen years of age, who was
exhibited in New York in the summer of 1840. She was of the height of
misses at that age, but weighed five hundred pounds. Several cases are
on record of persons weighing eight hundred pounds.

453. As already mentioned, the blood is the nutritive fluid of
animals. When this fluid is coagulated, a thick, jelly-like mass
