Brumaire."

"Did I write the 16th or the 17th?"

"Oh! the 16th, general. The 17th would have been too late."

"Why too late?"

"Why, hang it, Bourrienne says there are to be great doings here on the
18th."

"Capital," muttered Bourrienne; "the scatter-brain will earn me a
wigging."

"Ah! So he told you I had planned great doings for the 18th?"
Then, approaching Bourrienne, Bonaparte pinched his ear, and said,
"Tell-tale!" Then to Roland he added: "Well, it is so, my dear fellow,
we have made great plans for the 18th. My wife and I dine with President
Gohier; an excellent man, who was very polite to Josephine during my
absence. You are to dine with us, Roland."

Roland looked at Bonaparte. "Was it for that you brought me here,
general?" he asked, laughing.

"For that, and something else, too, perhaps. Bourrienne, write--"

Bourrienne hastily seized his pen.

"Are you ready?"

"Yes, general."

"'My dear President, I write to let you know that my wife and I, with
one of my aides-de-camp, will dine with you the day after to-morrow.
This is merely to say that we shall be quite satisfied with a family
dinner.'"

"What next?"

"How do you mean?"

"Shall I put, 'Liberty, equality, fraternity'?"

"Or death," added Roland.

"No," said Bonaparte; "give me the pen."

He took the pen from Bourrienne's hands and wrote, "Ever yours,
Bonaparte." Then, pushing away the paper, he added: "Address it,
Bourrienne, and send an orderly with it."

Bourrienne wrote the address, sealed it, and rang the bell. An officer
on duty entered.

"Send an orderly with that," said Bourrienne.

"There is an answer," added Bonaparte.

The officer closed the door.

"Bourrienne," said Bonaparte, pointing to Roland, "look at your friend."

"Well, general, I am looking at him."

"Do you know what he did at Avignon?"

"I hope he didn't make a pope."

"No, he threw a plate at a man's head."

"Oh, that was hasty!"

"That's not all."

"That I can well imagine."

"He fought a duel with that man."

"And, most naturally, he killed him."

"Exactly. Do you know why he did it?"

"No."

The general shrugged his shoulders, and said: "Because the man said that
I was a thief." Then looking at Roland with an indefinable expression of
raillery and affection, he added: "Ninny!" Then suddenly he burst out:
"Oh! by the way, and the Englishman?"

"Exactly, the Englishman, general. I was just going to speak to you
about him."

"Is he still in France?"

"Yes, and for awhile even I thought he would remain here till the last
trumpet blew its blast through the valley of Jehosaphat."

"Did you miss killing him?"

"Oh! no, not I. We are the best friends in the world. General, he is a
capital fellow, and so original to boot that I'm going to ask a bit of a
favor for him."

"The devil! For an Englishman?" said Bonaparte, shaking his head. "I
don't like the English."

"Good! As a people, but individually--"

"Well, what happened to your friend?"

"He was tried, condemned, and executed."

"What the devil are you telling us?"

"God's truth, general."

"What do you mean when you say, 'He was tried, condemned, and
guillotined'?"

"Oh! not exactly that. Tried and condemned, but not guillotined. If he
had been guillotined he would be more dangerously ill than he is now."

"Now, what are you gabbling about? What court tried and condemned him?"

"That of the Companions of Jehu!"

"And who are the Companions of Jehu?"

"Goodness! Have you forgotten our friend Morgan already, the masked man
who brought back the wine-merchant's two hundred louis?"

"No," replied Bonaparte, "I have not forgotten him. I told you about the
scamp's audacity, didn't I, Bourrienne?"

"Yes, general," said Bourrienne, "and I answered that, had I been in
your place, I should have tried to find out who he was."

"And the general would know, had he left me alone. I was just going to
spring at his throat and tear off his mask, when the general said, in
that tone you know so well: 'Friend Roland!'"

"Come back to your Englishman, chatterbox!" cried the general. "Did
Morgan murder him?"

"No, not he himself, but his Companions."

"But you were speaking of a court and a trial just now."

"General, you are always the same," said Roland, with their old school
familiarity; "you want to know, and you don't give me time to tell you."

"Get elected to the Five Hundred, and you can talk as much as you like."

"Good! In the Five Hundred I should have four hundred and ninety-nine
colleagues who would want to talk as much as I, and who would take
the words out of my mouth. I'd rather be interrupted by you than by a
lawyer."

"Will you go on?"

"I ask nothing better. Now imagine, general, there is a Chartreuse near
Bourg--"

"The Chartreuse of Seillon; I know it."

"What! You know the Chartreuse of Seillon?" demanded Roland.

"Doesn't the general know everything?" cried Bourrienne.

"Well, about the Chartreuse; are there any monks there now?"

"No; only ghosts--"

"Are you, perchance, going to tell me a ghost-story?"

"And a famous one at that!"

"The devil! Bourrienne knows I love them. Go on."

"Well, we were told at home that the Chartreuse was haunted by ghosts.
Of course, you understand that Sir John and I, or rather I and Sir John,
wanted to clear our minds about it. So we each spent a night there."

"Where?"

"Why, at the Chartreuse."

Bonaparte made an imperceptible sign of the cross with his thumb, a
Corsican habit which he never lost.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "did you see any ghosts?"

"One."

"And what did you do to it?"

"Shot at it."

"And then?"

"It walked away."

"And you allowed yourself to be baffled?"

"Good! How well you know me! I followed it, and fired again. But as he
knew his way among the ruins better than I, he escaped me."

"The devil!"

"The next day it was Sir John's turn; I mean our Englishman."

"Did he see your ghost?"

"He saw something better. He saw twelve monks enter the church, who
tried him for trying to find out their secrets, condemned him to death,
and who, on my word of honor, stabbed him."

"Didn't he defend himself?"

"Like a lion. He killed two."

"Is he dead?"

"Almost, but I hope he will recover. Just imagine, general; he was found
by the road, and brought home with a dagger in his breast, like a prop
in a vineyard."

"Why, it's like a scene of the Sainte-Vehme, neither more nor less."

"And on the blade of the dagger, that there might be no doubt as to who
did the deed, were graven the words: 'Companions of Jehu.'"

"Why, it isn't possible that such things can happen in France, in the
last year of the eighteenth century. It might do for Germany in the
Middle Ages, in the days of the Henrys and the Ottos."

"Not possible, general? But here is the dagger. What do you say to that?
Attractive, isn't it?"

And the young man drew from under his coat a dagger made entirely of
steel, blade and handle. The handle was shaped like a cross, and on the
blade, sure enough, were engraved the words, "Companions of Jehu."

Bonaparte examined the weapon carefully.

"And you say they planted that plaything in your Englishman's breast?"

"Up to the hilt."

"And he's not dead?"

"Not yet, at any rate."

"Have you been listening, Bourrienne?"

"With the greatest interest."

"You must remind me of this, Roland."

"When, general?"

"When?--when I am master. Come and say good-day to Josephine. Come,
Bourrienne, you will dine with us, and be careful what you say, you
two, for Moreau is coming to dinner. Ah! I will keep the dagger as a
curiosity."

He went out first, followed by Roland, who was, soon after, followed by
Bourrienne. On the stairs they met the orderly who had taken the note to
Gohier.

"Well?" asked the general.

"Here is the President's answer."

"Give it to me."

Bonaparte broke the seal, and read:

  The President Gohier is enchanted the good fortune promised him
  by General Bonaparte. He will expect him to dinner the day after
  to-morrow, the 18th Brumaire, with his charming wife, and the
  aide-de-camp, whoever he may be. Dinner will be served at five
  o'clock.

  If the hour does not suit General Bonaparte, will he kindly make
  known the one he would prefer.

  The President, GOHIER.
  16th Brumaire, year VII.

With an indescribable smile, Bonaparte put the letter in his pocket.
Then turning to Roland, he asked: "Do you know President Gohier?"

"No, general."

"Ah! you'll see; he's an excellent man."

These words were pronounced in a tone no less indescribable than the
smile.




CHAPTER XX. THE GUESTS OF GENERAL BONAPARTE

Josephine, in spite of her thirty-four years, or possibly because of
them (that enchanting age when woman hovers between her passing youth
and her corning age), Josephine, always beautiful, more graceful than
ever, was still the charming woman we all know. An imprudent remark
of Junot's, at the time of her husband's return, had produced a slight
coolness between them. But three days had sufficed to restore to the
enchantress her full power over the victor of Rivoli and the Pyramids.

She was doing the honors of her salon, when Roland entered the room.
Always incapable, like the true Creole she was, of controlling her
emotions, she gave a cry of joy, and held out her hand to him. She knew
that Roland was devoted to her husband; she knew his reckless bravery,
knew that if the young man had twenty lives he would willingly have
given them all for Bonaparte. Roland eagerly took the hand she offered
him, and kissed it respectfully. Josephine had known Roland's mother in
Martinique; and she never failed, whenever she saw Roland, to speak
to him of his maternal grandfather, M. de la Clemenciere, in whose
magnificent garden as a child she was wont to gather those wonderful
fruits which are unknown in our colder climates.

A subject of conversation was therefore ready at hand. She inquired
tenderly after Madame de Montrevel's health, and that of her daughter
and little Edouard. Then, the information given, she said: "My dear
Roland, I must now pay attention to my other guests; but try to remain
after the other guests, or else let me see you alone to-morrow. I want
to talk to you about _him_" (she glanced at Bonaparte) "and have a
thousand things to tell you." Then, pressing the young man's hand with a
sigh, she added, "No matter what happens, you will never leave him, will
you?"

"What do you mean?" asked Roland, amazed.

"I know what I mean," said Josephine, "and when you have talked ten
minutes with Bonaparte you will, I am sure, understand me. In the
meantime watch, and listen, and keep silence."

Roland bowed and drew aside, resolved, as Josephine had advised, to play
the part of observer.

But what was there to observe? Three principal groups occupied the
salon. The first, gathered around Madame Bonaparte, the only woman
present, was more a flux and reflux than a group. The second,
surrounding Talma, was composed of Arnault, Parseval-Grandmaison, Monge,
Berthollet, and two or three other members of the Institute. The third,
which Bonaparte had just joined, counted in its circle Talleyrand,
Barras, Lucien, Admiral Bruix, [Footnote: AUTHOR'S NOTE.--Not to be
confounded with Rear-Admiral de Brueys, who was killed at Aboukir,
August 1, 1798. Admiral Bruix, the negotiator with Talleyrand of
the 18th Brumaire, did not die until 1805.] Roederer, Regnaud de
Saint-Jean-d'Angely, Fouche, Real, and two or three generals, among whom
was Lefebvre.

In the first group they talked of fashions, music, the theatre; in the
second, literature, science, dramatic art; in the third, they talked
of everything except that which was uppermost in their minds. Doubtless
this reserve was not in keeping with Bonaparte's own feeling at the
moment; for after sharing in this commonplace conversation for a short
time, he took the former bishop of Autun by the arm and led him into the
embrasure of the window.

"Well?" he asked.

Talleyrand looked at Bonaparte with that air which belonged to no one
but him.

"What did I tell you of Sieyes, general?"

"You told me to secure the support of those who regarded the friends of
the Republic as Jacobins, and to rely, upon it that Sieyes was at their
head."

"I was not mistaken."

"Then he will yield?"

"Better, he has yielded."

"The man who wanted to shoot me at Frejus for having landed without
being quarantined!"

"Oh, no; not for that."

"But what then?"

"For not having looked at him or spoken to him at Gohier's dinner."

"I must confess that I did it on purpose. I cannot endure that unfrocked
monk."

Bonaparte perceived, too late, that the speech he had just made was
like the sword of the archangel, double-edged; if Sieyes was unfrocked,
Talleyrand was unmitred. He cast a rapid glance at his companion's face;
the ex-bishop of Autun was smiling his sweetest smile.

"Then I can count upon him?"

"I will answer for him."

"And Cambaceres and Lebrun, have you seen them?"

"I took Sieyes in hand as the most recalcitrant. Bruix saw the other
two."

The admiral, from the midst of the group, had never taken his eyes off
of the general and the diplomatist. He suspected that their conversation
had a special importance. Bonaparte made him a sign to join them. A less
able man would have done so at once, but Bruix avoided such a mistake.
He walked about the room with affected indifference, and then, as if he
had just perceived Talleyrand and Bonaparte talking together, he went up
to them.

"Bruix is a very able man!" said Bonaparte, who judged men as much by
little as by great things.

"And above all very cautious, general!" said Talleyrand.

"Yes. We will need a corkscrew to pull anything out of him."

"Oh, no; on the contrary, now that he has joined us, he, will broach the
question frankly."

And, indeed, no sooner had Bruix joined them than he began in words as
clear as they were concise: "I have seen them; they waver!"

"They waver! Cambaceres and Lebrun waver? Lebrun I can understand--a
sort of man of letters, a moderate, a Puritan; but Cambaceres--"

"But it is so."

"But didn't you tell them that I intended to make them each a consul?"

"I didn't get as far as that," replied Bruix, laughing.

"And why not?" inquired Bonaparte.

"Because this is the first word you have told me about your intentions,
Citizen General."

"True," said Bonaparte, biting his lips.

"Am I to repair the omission?" asked Bruix.

"No, no," exclaimed Bonaparte hastily; "they might think I needed them.
I won't have any quibbling. They must decide to-day without any other
conditions than those you have offered them; to-morrow it will be too
late. I feel strong enough to stand alone; and I now have Sieyes and
Barras."

"Barras?" repeated the two negotiators astonished.

"Yes, Barras, who treated me like a little corporal, and wouldn't send
me back to Italy, because, he said, I had made my fortune there, and it
was useless to return. Well, Barras--"

"Barras?"

"Nothing." Then, changing his mind, "Faith! I may as well tell you. Do
you know what Barras said at dinner yesterday before me? That it was
impossible to go on any longer with the Constitution of the year III. He
admitted the necessity of a dictatorship; said he had decided to abandon
the reins of government, and retire; adding that he himself was looked
upon as worn-out, and that the Republic needed new men. Now, guess to
whom he thinks of transferring his power. I give it you, as Madame
de Sevigne says, in a hundred, thousand, ten thousand. No other than
General Hedouville, a worthy man, but I have only to look him in the
face to make him lower his eyes. My glance must have been blasting!
As the result, Barras came to my bedside at eight o'clock, to excuse
himself as best he could for the nonsense he talked the night before,
and admitted that I alone could save the Republic, and placed himself
at my disposal, to do what I wished, assume any role I might assign him,
begging me to promise that if I had any plan in my head I would count on
him--yes, on him; and he would be true to the crack of doom."

"And yet," said Talleyrand, unable to resist a play upon words, "doom is
not a word with which to conjure liberty."

Bonaparte glanced at the ex-bishop.

"Yes, I know that Barras is your friend, the friend of Fouche and Real;
but he is not mine, and I shall prove it to him. Go back to Lebrun and
Cambaceres, Bruix, and let them make their own bargain." Then, looking
at his watch and frowning, he added: "It seems to me that Moreau keeps
us waiting."

So saying, he turned to the group which surrounded Talma. The two
diplomatists watched him. Then Admiral Bruix asked in a low voice:
"What do you say, my dear Maurice, to such sentiments toward the man who
picked him out, a mere lieutenant, at the siege of Toulon, who trusted
him to defend the Convention on the 13th Vendemiaire, and who named him,
when only twenty-six, General-in-Chief of the Army in Italy?"

"I say, my dear admiral," replied M. de Talleyrand, with his pallid
mocking smile, "that some services are so great that ingratitude alone
can repay them."

At that moment the door opened and General Moreau was announced. At this
announcement, which was more than a piece of news--it was a surprise
to most of those present--every eye was turned toward the door. Moreau
appeared.

At this period three men were in the eyes of France. Moreau was one of
these three men. The two others were Bonaparte and Pichegru. Each had
become a sort of symbol. Since the 18th Fructidor, Pichegru had become
the symbol of monarchy; Moreau, since he had been christened Fabius,
was the symbol of the Republic; Bonaparte, symbol of war, dominated them
both by the adventurous aspect of his genius.

Moreau was at that time in the full strength of his age; we would
say the full strength of his genius, if decision were not one of the
characteristics of genius. But no one was ever more undecided than the
famous cunctator. He was thirty-six years old, tall, with a sweet, calm,
firm countenance, and must have resembled Xenophon.

Bonaparte had never seen him, nor had he, on his side, ever seen
Bonaparte. While the one was battling on the Adige and the Mincio, the
other fought beside the Danube and the Rhine. Bonaparte came forward to
greet him, saying: "You are welcome, general!"

"General," replied Moreau, smiling courteously, while all present made a
circle around them to see how this new Caesar would meet the new Pompey,
"you come from Egypt, victorious, while I come, defeated, from Italy."

"A defeat which was not yours, and for which you are not responsible,
general. It was Joubert's fault. If he had rejoined the Army of Italy
as soon as he had been made commander-in-chief, it is more than probable
that the Russians and Austrians, with the troops they then had, could
not have resisted him. But he remained in Paris for his honeymoon! Poor
Joubert paid with his life for that fatal month which gave the enemy
time to gather its reinforcements. The surrender of Mantua gave them
fifteen thousand men on the eve of the battle. It was impossible that
our poor army should not have been overwhelmed by such united forces."

"Alas! yes," said Moreau; "it is always the greater number which defeats
the smaller."

"A great truth, general," exclaimed Bonaparte; "an indisputable truth."

"And yet," said Arnault, joining in the conversation, "you yourself,
general, have defeated large armies with little ones."

"If you were Marius, instead of the author of 'Marius,' you would
not say that, my dear poet. Even when I beat great armies with little
ones--listen to this, you young men who obey to-day, and will command
to-morrow--it was always the larger number which defeated the lesser."

"I don't understand," said Arnault and Lefebvre together.

But Moreau made a sign with his head to show that he understood.
Bonaparte continued: "Follow my theory, for it contains the whole art
of war. When with lesser forces I faced a large army, I gathered mine
together, with great rapidity, fell like a thunderbolt on a wing of the
great army, and overthrew it; then I profited by the disorder into which
this manoeuvre never failed to throw the enemy to attack again, always
with my whole army, on the other side. I beat them, in this way, in
detail; and the victory which resulted was always, as you see, the
triumph of the many over the few."

As the able general concluded his definition of his own genius, the door
opened and the servant announced that dinner was served.

"General," said Bonaparte, leading Moreau to Josephine, "take in my
wife. Gentlemen, follow them."

On this invitation all present moved from the salon to the dining-room.

After dinner, on pretence of showing him a magnificent sabre he had
brought from Egypt, Bonaparte took Moreau into his study. There the two
rivals remained closeted more than an hour. What passed between them?
What compact was signed? What promises were made? No one has ever known.
Only, when Bonaparte returned to the salon alone, and Lucien asked him:
"Well, what of Moreau?" he answered: "Just as I foresaw; he prefers
military power to political power. I have promised him the command of
an army." Bonaparte smiled as he pronounced these words; then added, "In
the meantime--"

"In the meantime?" questioned Lucien.

"He will have that of the Luxembourg. I am not sorry to make him
the jailer of the Directors, before I make him the conqueror of the
Austrians."

The next day the following appeared in the "Moniteur":

  PARIS, 17th Brumaire. Bonaparte has presented Moreau with a
  magnificent Damascus sword set with precious stones which he
  brought from Egypt, the value of which is estimated at twelve
  thousand francs.




CHAPTER XXI. THE SCHEDULE OF THE DIRECTORY

We have said that Moreau, furnished no doubt with instructions, left the
little house in the Rue de la Victoire, while Bonaparte returned alone
to the salon. Everything furnished an object of comment in such a
company as was there assembled; the absence of Moreau, the return of
Bonaparte unaccompanied, and the visible good humor which animated his
countenance, were all remarked upon.

The eyes which fastened upon him most ardently were those of Josephine
and Roland. Moreau for Bonaparte added twenty chances to the success of
the plot; Moreau against Bonaparte robbed him of fifty. Josephine's
eyes were so supplicating that, on leaving Lucien, Bonaparte pushed his
brother toward his wife. Lucien understood, and approached Josephine,
saying: "All is well."

"Moreau?"

"With us."

"I thought he was a Republican."

"He has been made to see that we are acting for the good of the
Republic."

"I should have thought him ambitious," said Roland.

Lucien started and looked at the young man.

"You are right," said he.

"Then," remarked Josephine, "if he is ambitious he will not let
Bonaparte seize the power."

"Why not?"

"Because he will want it himself."

"Yes; but he will wait till it comes to him ready-made, inasmuch as he
doesn't know how to create it, and is afraid to seize it."

During this time Bonaparte had joined the group which had formed around
Talma after dinner, as well as before. Remarkable men are always the
centre of attraction.

"What are you saying, Talma?" demanded Bonaparte. "It seems to me they
are listening to you very attentively."

"Yes, but my reign is over," replied the artist.

"Why so?"

"I do as citizen Barras has done; I abdicate?"

"So citizen Barras has abdicated?"

"So rumor says."

"Is it known who will take his place?"

"It is surmised."

"Is it one of your friends, Talma?"

"Time was," said Talma, bowing, "when he did me the honor to say I was
his."

"Well, in that case, Talma, I shall ask for your influence."

"Granted," said Talma, laughing; "it only remains to ask how it can
serve you."

"Get me sent back to Italy; Barras would not let me go."

"The deuce!" said Talma; "don't you know the song, general, 'We won't go
back to the woods when the laurels are clipped'?"

"Oh! Roscius, Roscius!" said Bonaparte, smiling, "have you grown a
flatterer during my absence?"

"Roscius was the friend of Caesar, general, and when the conqueror
returned from Gaul he probably said to him about the same thing I have
said to you."

Bonaparte laid his band on Talma's shoulder.

"Would he have said the same words after crossing the Rubicon?"

Talma looked Bonaparte straight in the face.

"No," he replied; "he would have said, like the augur, 'Caesar, beware of
the Ides of March!'"

Bonaparte slipped his hand into his breast as if in search of
something; finding the dagger of the Companions of Jehu, he grasped
it convulsively. Had he a presentiment of the conspiracies of Arena,
Saint-Regent, and Cadoudal?

Just then the door opened and a servant announced: "General Bernadotte!"

"Bernadotte," muttered Bonaparte, involuntarily. "What does he want
here?"

Since Bonaparte's return, Bernadotte had held aloof from him, refusing
all the advances which the general-in-chief and his friends had made
him. The fact is, Bernadotte had long since discerned the politician
beneath the soldier's greatcoat, the dictator beneath the general, and
Bernadotte, for all that he became king in later years, was at that time
a very different Republican from Moreau. Moreover, Bernadotte believed
he had reason to complain of Bonaparte. His military career had not
been less brilliant than that of the young general; his fortunes were
destined to run parallel with his to the end, only, more fortunate than
that other--Bernadotte was to die on his throne. It is true, he did not
conquer that throne; he was called to it.

Son of a lawyer at Pau, Bernadotte, born in 1764--that is to say, five
years before Bonaparte--was in the ranks as a private soldier when only
eighteen. In 1789 he was only a sergeant-major. But those were the days
of rapid promotion. In 1794, Kleber created him brigadier-general on the
field of battle, where he had decided the fortunes of the day. Becoming
a general of division, he played a brilliant part at Fleurus and
Juliers, forced Maestricht to capitulate, took Altdorf, and protected,
against an army twice as numerous as his own, the retreat of Joubert.
In 1797 the Directory ordered him to take seventeen thousand men to
Bonaparte. These seventeen thousand men were his old soldiers, veterans
of Kleber, Marceau and Hoche, soldiers of the Sambre-et-Meuse; and yet
Bernadotte forgot all rivalry and seconded Bonaparte with all his might,
taking part in the passage of the Tagliamento, capturing Gradiska,
Trieste, Laybach, Idria, bringing back to the Directory, after
the campaign, the flags of the enemy, and accepting, possibly with
reluctance, an embassy to Vienna, while Bonaparte secured the command of
the army of Egypt.

At Vienna, a riot, excited by the tri-color flag hoisted above the
French embassy, for which the ambassador was unable to obtain redress,
forced him to demand his passports. On his return to Paris, the
Directory appointed him Minister of War. An underhand proceeding of
Sieyes, who was offended by Bernadotte's republicanism, induced the
latter to send in his resignation. It was accepted, and when Bonaparte
landed at Frejus the late minister had been three months out of office.
Since Bonaparte's return, some of Bernadotte's friends had sought to
bring about his reinstatement; but Bonaparte had opposed it. The result
was a hostility between the two generals, none the less real because not
openly avowed.

Bernadotte's appearance in Bonaparte's salon was therefore an event
almost as extraordinary as the presence of Moreau. And the entrance of
the conqueror of Maestricht caused as many heads to turn as had that of
the conqueror of Rastadt. Only, instead of going forward to meet him, as
he had Moreau, Bonaparte merely turned round and awaited him.

Bernadotte, from the threshold of the door, cast a rapid glance around
the salon. He divided and analyzed the groups, and although he must have
perceived Bonaparte in the midst of the principal one, he went up to
Josephine, who was reclining on a couch at the corner of the fireplace,
like the statue of Agrippina in the Pitti, and, addressing her with
chivalric courtesy, inquired for her health; then only did he raise his
head as if to look for Bonaparte. At such a time everything was of too
much importance for those present not to remark this affectation of
courtesy on Bernadotte's part.

Bonaparte, with his rapid, comprehensive intellect, was not the last
to notice this; he was seized with impatience, and, instead of awaiting
Bernadotte in the midst of the group where he happened to be, he
turned abruptly to the embrasure of a window, as if to challenge the
ex-minister of war to follow him. Bernadotte bowed graciously to right
and left, and controlling his usually mobile face to an expression
of perfect calmness, he walked toward Bonaparte, who awaited him as
a wrestler awaits his antagonist, the right foot forward and his lips
compressed. The two men bowed, but Bonaparte made no movement to extend
his hand to Bernadotte, nor did the latter offer to take it.

"Is it you?" asked Bonaparte. "I am glad to see you."

"Thank you, general," replied Bernadotte. "I have come because I wish to
give you a few explanations."

"I did not recognize you at first."

"Yet I think, general, that my name was announced by your servant in a
voice loud enough to prevent any doubt as to my identity."

"Yes, but he announced General Bernadotte."

"Well?"

"Well, I saw a man in civilian's dress, and though I recognized you, I
doubted if it were really you."

For some time past Bernadotte had affected to wear civilian's dress in
preference to his uniform.

"You know," said he, laughing, "that I am only half a soldier now. I was
retired by citizen Sieyes."

"It seems that it was lucky for me that you were no longer minister of
war when I landed at Frejus."

"How so?"

"You said, so I was told, that had you received the order to arrest me
for violating quarantine you would have done so."

"I said it, and I repeat it, general. As a soldier I was always a
faithful observer of discipline. As a minister I was a slave to law."

Bonaparte bit his lips. "And will you say, after that, that you have not
a personal enmity to me?"

"A personal enmity to you, general?" replied Bernadotte. "Why should
I have? We have always gone together, almost in the same stride; I was
even made general before you. While my campaigns on the Rhine were less
brilliant than yours on the Adige, they were not less profitable for the
Republic; and when I had the honor to serve under you, you found in
me, I hope, a subordinate devoted, if not to the man, at least to the
country which he served. It is true that since your departure, general,
I have been more fortunate than you in not having the responsibility of
a great army, which, if one may believe Kleber's despatches, you have
left in a disastrous position."

"What do you mean? Kleber's last despatches? Has Kleber written?"

"Are you ignorant of that, general? Has the Directory not informed you
of the complaints of your successor? That would be a great weakness on
their part, and I congratulate myself to have come here, not only to
correct in your mind what has been said of me, but to tell you what is
being said of you."

Bonaparte fixed an eye, darkling as an eagle's, on Bernadotte. "And what
are they saying of me?" he asked.

"They say that, as you must come back, you should have brought the army
with you."

"Had I a fleet? Are you unaware that De Brueys allowed his to be
burned?"

"They also say, general, that, being unable to bring back the army, it
would have been better for your renown had you remained with it."

"That is what I should have done, monsieur, if events had not recalled
me to France."

"What events, general?"

"Your defeats."

"Pardon me, general; you mean to say Scherer's defeats.

"Yours as well."

"I was not answerable for the generals commanding our armies on the
Rhine and in Italy until I was minister of war. If you will enumerate
