Project Gutenberg's Beyond the Vanishing Point, by Raymond King Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Beyond the Vanishing Point

Author: Raymond King Cummings

Release Date: September 6, 2007 [EBook #22527]
Last updated: January 22, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THEY OPENED THE PANDORA'S BOX
                            OF ATOMIC TRAVEL


When George Randolph first caught sight of Orena, he was astounded by
its gleaming perfection. Here were hills and valleys, lakes and streams,
glowing with the light of the most precious of metals. And, more
astonishing than that, it was a world of _miniature_ perfection--an
infinitely tiny universe within a golden atom!

But for Randolph it was also a world aglow with danger. Somewhere in its
tiny vastness were the friends he had to rescue. Captives of a madman,
they had been reduced to native Orena size; to return to Earth they
needed the growth capsules Randolph was bringing them. It was up to
Randolph to find them--and quickly--for the longer they stayed tiny, the
closer they came to passing BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT!




CAST OF CHARACTERS


 FRANZ POLTER
 He found a gold mine in a land where there was no gold.

 DR. KENT
 His scientific studies could mean life or death to an entire universe!

 GEORGE RANDOLPH
 He crossed the border into Canada, and found himself in another world.

 ALAN KENT
 Twenty feet tall, or two inches high--which should he be?

 GLORA
 She was only as large as a thumbnail, but she carried a gigantic secret.

 BABS KENT
 Did she live in a golden cage or a magnificent palace?




           BEYOND THE
              VANISHING POINT


                   by
              RAY CUMMINGS


             ACE BOOKS, INC.
 23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y.




 BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT
 Copyright (C), 1958, by Ace Books, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved

 Printed in U.S.A.




CHAPTER I


It was shortly after noon of December 31, 1970, when the series of weird
and startling events began which took me into the tiny world of an atom
of gold, beyond the vanishing point, beyond the range of even the
highest-powered electric-microscope. My name is George Randolph. I was,
that momentous afternoon, assistant chemist for the Ajax International
Dye Company, with main offices in New York City.

It was twelve-twenty when the local exchange call-sorter announced
Alan's connection from Quebec.

"Hello, George? Look here, you've got to come up here at once. Chateau
Frontenac, Quebec. Will you come?"

I could see his face imaged in the little mirror on my desk; the
anxiety, tenseness in his voice, was duplicated in his expression.

"Well--" I began.

"You must, George. Babs and I need you. See here...."

He tried at first to make it sound like an invitation for a New Year's
Eve holiday. But I knew it was not that. Alan and Barbara were my best
friends. They were twins, eighteen years old. I felt that Alan would
always be my best friend; but for Babs, my hopes, longings, went far
deeper, though as yet I had never brought myself to the point of telling
her so.

"I'd like to come, Alan. But--"

"You've got to George! I can't tell you everything over the public air.
But I've seen _him_: He's diabolical. I know it now!"

_Him_! It could only mean, of all the world, one person!

"He's here!" he went on. "Near here. We saw him today! I didn't want to
tell you, but that's why we came. It seemed a long chance, but it's he,
I'm positive!"

I was staring at the image of Alan's eyes; there was horror in them. And
his voice too. "God, George, it's weird! Weird, I tell you. His
looks--he--oh I can't tell you now! Only, come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I was busy at the office in spite of the holiday season, but I dropped
everything and went. By one o'clock that afternoon I was wheeling my
little sport Midge from its cage on the roof of the Metropole building,
and went into the air.

It was a cold gray afternoon with the feel of coming snow. I made a good
two hundred and fifty miles at first, taking the northbound
through-traffic lane which today the meteorological conditions had
placed at an altitude of 6,200 feet.

Flying is largely automatic. There was not enough traffic to bother me.
The details of leaving the office so hastily had been too engrossing for
thought of Alan and Babs. But now, in my little pit at the controls, my
mind flung ahead. They had located him. That meant Franz Polter, for
whom we had been searching nearly four years. And my memory went back
into the past with vivid vision....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kents, four years ago, were living on Long Island. Alan and Babs
were fourteen at the time, and I was seventeen. Even then Babs was
something kind of special to me. I lived in a neighboring house that
summer and saw them every day.

To my adolescent mind a thrilling mystery hung upon the Kent family. The
mother was dead. Dr. Kent, father of Alan and Babs, maintained a
luxurious home, with only a housekeeper and no other servant. Dr. Kent
was a retired chemist. He had, in his home, a laboratory in which he was
working upon some mysterious problem. His children did not know what it
was, nor, of course, did I. And none of us had ever been in the
laboratory, except that when occasion offered we stole surreptitious
peeps.

I recall Dr. Kent as a kindly, iron-gray haired gentleman. He was stern
with the discipline of his children; but he loved them, and was
indulgent in many ways. They loved him; and I, an orphan, began looking
upon him almost as a father. I was interested in chemistry. He knew it,
and did his best to help and encourage me in my studies.

There came an afternoon in the summer of 1966, when arriving at the Kent
home, I ran upon a startling scene. The only other member of the
household was a young fellow of twenty-five, named Franz Polter. He was
a foreigner, born, I understood, in one of the Balkan Protectorates; he
was here, employed by Dr. Kent as laboratory assistant.

He had been with the Kents, at this time, two years. Alan and Babs
didn't like him, nor did I. He must have been a clever, skillful
chemist. No doubt he was. But he was, to us, repulsive. A hunchback,
with a short, thick body; dangling arms that suggested a gorilla; barrel
chest; a lump set askew on his left shoulder, and his massive head
planted down with almost no neck. His face was rugged in feature; a wide
mouth, a high-bridged heavy nose; and above the face a great shock of
wavy black hair. It was an intelligent face; in itself, not repulsive.

But I think we all three feared Franz Polter. There was always something
sinister about him, that had nothing to do with his deformity.

When I came, that afternoon, Babs and Polter were under a tree on the
Kent lawn. Babs, at fourteen, with long black braids down her back,
bare-legged and short-skirted in a summer sport costume, was standing
against the tree with Polter facing her. They were about the same
height. To my youthful imaginative mind rose the fleeting picture of a
young girl in a forest menaced by a gorilla.

I came upon them suddenly. I heard Polter say:

"But I lof you. And you are almos' a woman. Some day you lof me."

He put out his thick hand and gripped her shoulder. She tried to twist
away. She was frightened, but she laughed.

"You--you're crazy!"

He was suddenly holding her in his arms, and she was fighting him. I
dashed forward. Babs was always a spunky sort of girl. In spite of her
fear now, she kept on struggling, and she shouted:

"You--let me go, you--you hunchback!"

He did let her go; but in a frenzy of rage he hauled back his hand and
struck her in the face. I was upon him the next second. I had him down
on the lawn, punching him; but though at seventeen I was a reasonably
husky lad, the hunchback with his thick, hairy gorilla arms proved much
stronger. He heaved me off. The commotion had brought Alan and without
waiting to find out what the trouble was, he jumped on Polter. Between
us, I think we would have beaten him pretty badly. But the housekeeper
summoned Dr. Kent and the fight was over.

Polter left for good within an hour. He did not speak to any of us. But
I saw him as he put his luggage into the taxi which Dr. Kent had
summoned. I was standing silently nearby with Babs and Alan. The look he
flung us as he drove away carried an unmistakable menace--the promise of
vengeance. And I think now that in his warped and twisted mind he was
telling himself that he would some day make Babs regret that she had
repulsed his love.

What happened that night none of us ever knew. Dr. Kent worked late in
his laboratory; he was there when Alan and Babs and the housekeeper went
to bed. He had written a note to Alan; it was found on his desk in a
corner of the laboratory next morning, addressed in care of the family
lawyer to be given Alan in the event of his death. It said very little.
Described a tiny fragment of gold quartz rock the size of a walnut which
would be found under the giant microscope in the laboratory; and told
Alan to give it to the American Scientific Society to be guarded and
watched very carefully.

This note was found, but Dr. Kent had vanished! There had been a
midnight marauder. The laboratory was on the lower floor of the house.
Through one of its open windows, so the police said, an intruder had
entered. There was evidence of a struggle, but it must have been short,
because neither Babs, Alan, the housekeeper, nor any of the neighbors
had heard anything. And the fragment of golden quartz was gone!

The police investigation came to nothing. Polter was found in New York.
He withstood the police questions. There was nothing except suspicion
upon which he could be held, and he was finally released. Immediately
thereafter, he disappeared.

Neither Alan, Babs nor I saw Polter again. Dr. Kent had never been heard
from to this day, four years later when I flew to join the twins in
Quebec. And now Alan told me that Polter was up there! We had never
ceased to believe that Dr. Kent was alive, and that Polter was the
midnight marauder. As we grew older, we began to search for Polter. It
seemed to us, that if we could once get our hands on him, we could drag
from him the truth which the police had failed to get.

The call of a traffic director in mid-Vermont brought me back from these
memories. My buzzer was clanging; a peremptory halting signal day-beam
came darting up at me from below. It caught me and clung. I shouted down
at it.

"What's the matter?" I gave my name and number and all the details in
one breath. Above everything I had no wish to be halted now. "What's the
matter? I haven't done anything wrong."

"The hell you haven't," the director roared. "Come down to three
thousand. That lane's barred."

I dove obediently and his beam followed me. "Once more, like that, young
fellow--" But he went busy with somebody else and I didn't hear the end
of his threat.

I crossed into Maine in mid-afternoon. It was already twilight. The sky
was solid lead and the landscape all up through here was gray-white with
snow in the gathering darkness. I passed the City of Jackman, crossing
full over it to take no chances of annoying the border officials; and a
few miles further, I dropped to the glaring lights of International
Inspection Field. The formalities were soon finished. I was ready to
take-off when Alan rushed at me.

"George! I thought I could connect here." He gripped me. He was
wild-eyed, incoherent. He waved his taxiplane away. "I'm going with you,
George. I'm almost out of my mind. I can't--I don't know what's happened
to her. She's gone, now--"

"Who's gone? Babs?"

"Yes." He pushed me into my plane and climbed in after me. "Don't talk.
Get us up! I'll tell you then. I shouldn't have left."

When we were up in the air, I swung on him. "What are you talking about?
Babs gone?"

I could feel myself shuddering with a nameless horror.

"I don't know what I'm talking about, George. I'm about crazy. The
Quebec police think I am, anyway. I've been raising hell with them for
an hour. Babs is gone! I can't find her. I don't know where she is."

He finally calmed down enough to tell me what happened. Shortly after
his radiophone to me in New York, he had missed Babs. They had had lunch
in the huge hotel and then walked on the Dufferin Terrace--the famous
promenade outside looking down over the Lower City, the great sweep of
the St. Lawrence River and the gray-white distant Laurentian mountains.

"I was to meet her inside. I went in ahead of her. But she didn't come.
I went back to the Terrace but she was gone. She wasn't in our rooms.
Nor the library, the lobby--anywhere."

But it was afternoon, in the public place of a civilized city. In the
daylight of the Dufferin Terrace, beside the long ice toboggan slide,
under the gaze of skaters on the ice-rink and several hundred holiday
merrymakers, a young girl could hardly be murdered, or kidnapped,
without attracting attention! The Quebec police thought the young
American unduly excited about his sister, who was missing only an hour.
They would do what they could, if by dark she had not rejoined him. They
suggested that doubtless the young lady had gone shopping.

"Maybe she did," I agreed. But in my heart, I felt differently. "She'll
be waiting for us in the Hotel when we get there, Alan."

"But I'm telling you we saw Polter this morning. He lives here--not
thirty miles from Quebec. We saw him on the Terrace after breakfast.
Recognized him immediately of course."

"Did he see you?"

"I don't know. He was lost in the crowd in a minute. But I asked a
young French fellow if he knew him. He did know him, as Frank Rascor.
That must be the name he wears now. He's a famous man up here--well
known, immensely rich. I didn't know if he saw us or not. What a fool I
was to leave Babs alone, even for a minute."

We were speeding over a white-clad valley with a little frozen river
winding down its middle. Night had almost come. The leaden sky was low
above us. It began snowing. The lights of the small villages along the
river were barely visible.

"Can you land us, Alan?"

"Yes, surely. At the Municipal Field just beyond the Citadel. We can get
to the Hotel in five minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a flight of only half an hour. During it, Alan told me about
Polter. The hunchback, known now as Frank Rascor, owned a mine in the
Laurentians, some thirty miles from Quebec City--a fabulously productive
mine of gold. It was an anomaly that gold should be produced in this
region. No vein of gold-bearing rock had been found, except the one on
Polter's property. Alan had seen a newspaper account of the strangeness
of it; and on a hunch had come to Quebec, being intrigued by the
description of the mine owner. He had seen Frank Rascor on the Dufferin
Terrace, and recognized him as Polter.

Again my thoughts went back into the past. Had Polter stolen that
missing fragment of golden quartz the size of a walnut which had been
beneath Dr. Kent's microscope? We always thought so. Dr. Kent had some
secret, some great problem upon which he was working. Polter, his
assistant, had evidently known, or partially known, its details. And
now, four years later, Polter was immensely rich, with a "gold mine" in
mountains where there was no other evidence of gold!

I seemed to see some connection. Alan, I knew, was groping with a dim
idea, so strange he hardly dared voice it.
