Kilkenny, and Waterford, all of which places surrendered, the garrisons
being allowed to march out, with their arms and baggage, to join their
main army on the Shannon.

At Waterford, the king received such serious news as to the state of
things in England, that he determined to return home. On arriving at
Dublin, he was overwhelmed with petitions from the inhabitants, as to the
shameful conduct of the troops left in garrison there, especially those
of Trelawney's, Schomberg's, and some other regiments of horse, who, the
people complained, treated them, although Protestants, far worse than
James's Catholic soldiers had done. Inquiry showed these complaints to be
well founded, and, finding it impossible to restore order and discipline
among them, the king at once sent these regiments back to England.

Then, receiving better news from home, he again started to rejoin his
army, and marched towards Limerick, being joined on his way by the
division under Douglas, which had driven along with them all the cattle
and horses of the country through which they had passed.

Limerick was, at that time, the second city in Ireland. The country, for
a long distance along the mouth of the Shannon, was much wooded, but in
the immediate vicinity of the town it was surrounded by thick inclosures,
houses, orchards, gardens, and plantations. The cultivated land was
everywhere divided into small fields, inclosed by hedges and intersected
by lanes. To the east of the town the Shannon divides itself, forming an
island on which part of the city is situated.

This was called the English town, and was connected by a bridge, called
Thomond Bridge, with the Clare side of the river on the north; and on the
south, by another bridge, with the Irish town on the county of Limerick
side. The Thomond Bridge was defended by a strong fort and some field
works on the Clare side, and on the city side by a drawbridge, flanked by
towers and the city walls. The bridge was very long and narrow.

The position of the English town was, indeed, almost impregnable. It was
built upon a rock of considerable extent, and the land outside the walls
was low and marshy, and could at any time be flooded. The Shannon was
broad and rapid. The Irish town on the Limerick shore was not strong,
being defended only by ordinary walls. If this were captured, however,
the English town could still hold out.

The king made his approaches to the city slowly, being obliged to level
the numerous inclosures as he moved on. These were occupied by the Irish
infantry, who, lining every hedge, kept up a galling fire, falling back
gradually as heavy bodies of troops were brought up against them, until
they reached the cover of the guns of the city and fort. Upon these
opening fire, William's army halted and encamped before the Irish town.

Here, as at the Boyne, the king had a narrow escape, a cannonball from
the walls striking the ground at his foot as he was passing through a gap
in a hedge.

The king had learned that great dissensions existed between the Irish and
French, and relied upon this, as much as upon the strength of his arms,
to obtain possession of the city. His information was, indeed, correct.
King James, in his flight, had left no orders as to who should assume the
supreme command. The Duke of Berwick had considerable claims. Lauzun and
the French officers declined altogether to receive orders from
Tyrconnell, and the Irish officers equally objected to act under the
command of a Frenchman. Consequently, during the whole siege, the main
Irish army, which, by acting upon William's rear, could speedily have
made his position untenable, remained inactive. Monsieur Boileau, a
French officer, was governor of the town, but Lauzun, having examined the
fortifications, pronounced the place wholly incapable of defence,
declaring that the walls could be knocked down with roasted apples, and
so ordered the entire French division to march to Galway, and there await
an opportunity for embarking for France, leaving the Irish to defend the
city if they chose.

Lauzun, in fact, was a courtier, not a soldier. He desired to get back to
Versailles at any hazard, and had so inspired his officers and men with
his own sentiments that there was a general cry among them to be recalled
to France. They had, indeed, no interest in the cause in which they
fought. They looked with contempt at their half-armed and half-trained
allies, and they grumbled continually at the hardships which they had to
undergo. It was indeed an evil day, for King James's cause, when he
exchanged Mountcashel's fine division for these useless allies, who,
throughout the war, not only did no service, but were the cause of
endless dissension and disaster.

As soon as King William had taken up his position in front of Limerick,
he sent a summons to Boileau to surrender. The latter consulted with
Tyrconnell, Sarsfield, and some other officers, for, even to the last
moment, it was a question whether the place should be defended.

At last, however, a decision was made. The reply was addressed to
William's secretary, Sir Robert Roultwell, as Boileau could not
acknowledge the prince as king, and was too polite to hurt his feelings
by a denial of the royal title. He expressed great surprise at the
summons he had received, and said that he hoped to merit the good opinion
of the Prince of Orange better by a vigorous defence, than by a shameful
surrender, of the fortress which had been committed to his charge by his
master King James the Second.

The king's camp was now formed in regular order; he himself taking his
place on its right, having near him the Horse Guards, and the Blue Dutch
Guards, who were always his main reliance. To the left of these were the
English and Dutch regiments, further on the French and Danes, while the
Brandenburghers and other German regiments formed the extreme left of the
line. To their great satisfaction, the post assigned to the Danes was one
of the rude circular redoubts called, in Ireland, Danish forts, and
probably constructed by their own far-off ancestors.



Chapter 9: Pleasant Quarters.


After the termination of the short siege of Athlone, the troop of Captain
Davenant were despatched to join the army near Limerick, and, on their
arrival there, were ordered to take up their quarters at the house of a
Protestant gentleman named Conyers, four miles from the town on the
Limerick side of the river.

It was a mansion of considerable size, standing in large grounds, for its
proprietor was one of the largest landowners in the county of Limerick,
his grandfather having been a colonel in one of Cromwell's regiments. Mr.
Conyers himself had gone to Dublin, upon the passing of the act
sequestrating the property of all the Protestants by James's parliament,
to endeavour to obtain a remission of the decree, so far as it concerned
his house and adjoining grounds. As he had influential friends there, he
had remained, urging his petition, until the battle of the Boyne and the
entry of King William into Dublin entirely changed the position. But he
then, owing to the disturbance of the country, and the fact that the
Irish army had retired to Limerick, found it impossible to return home.
He had, however, travelled with William's army, to which he was able to
give much useful information regarding the defences, and details of the
country round the town.

As Captain Davenant's troop rode up to the house, a lady, with a girl of
some sixteen years old, appeared at the door. Both looked very pale, for
they feared that the brutal conduct of which they had heard, of William's
army, would be followed by reprisals on the part of the Irish. They were
somewhat reassured, however, by Captain Davenant's manner as that officer
dismounted, raised his hat, and said:

"Madam, I have received orders to quarter my troop in the house, but I am
anxious, I can assure you, to cause as little inconvenience and annoyance
as possible, under the circumstances."

"We are only women here, sir," Mrs. Conyers said. "The house is at your
disposal. I myself and my daughter will move to the gardener's cottage,
and I trust that you will give orders to your men that we shall be free
from molestation there."

"I could not think of disturbing you in that manner," Captain Davenant
said. "I myself have a wife and mother alone at home, and will gladly
treat you with the same courtesy which I trust they will receive. Allow
me, in the first place, to introduce to you my lieutenant, Mr. O'Moore,
and my cornet, who is also my son, Walter. I see that you have extensive
stables and outbuildings. I am sure that my men, who are all good
fellows, and many of them the sons of farmers, will make themselves very
comfortable in these. I myself, and my two officers, will quarter
ourselves in the gardener's cottage you speak of."

"You are good, indeed, sir," Mrs. Conyers said gratefully; "but I could
not think of allowing you to do that, and shall indeed be pleased, if you
and your officers will take up your residence here as my guests."

"I thank you kindly; but that I could not do. My men will be well content
with the outhouses, if they see that we are content with the cottage; but
they might not be so, if they saw that we took up our quarters in the
house. Therefore, if you will allow me, I will carry out my own plan; but
I need not say that we shall be very pleased to visit you in the house,
at such times as may be agreeable to you."

After expressing their grateful thanks, Mrs. Conyers and her daughter
withdrew into the house. Captain Davenant then addressed a few words to
his men.

"The house will not hold you all, lads, and there are only ladies here,
and I am sure you would not wish to disturb and annoy them by crowding
their house. Therefore, I have arranged that you shall take up your
quarters in the outhouses, and that we shall occupy a little cottage on
the grounds. I hope, lads, that, for the honour of the country and the
cause, all will behave as peacefully and quietly as if in our own homes.
It would be a poor excuse that, because William's soldiers are behaving
like wild beasts, we should forget the respect due to lonely women."

A fortnight was spent here pleasantly for all. The first alarm past, Mrs.
Conyers felt safer than she had done for months. Ever since the troubles
had began, she had felt the loneliness of her position as a Protestant,
and she would have, long before, made her way with her daughter to
Dublin, had it not been that she thought that, so long as she continued
in the house, it might be respected by the Catholic peasantry, while,
were she to desert it, it would probably be plundered, perhaps burned to
the ground. Still, the position was a very trying one, especially since
the Jacobite army began to gather in force round Limerick.

She now felt that her troubles were comparatively over. The troops caused
no annoyance, and she heard but little of them, while she found in
Captain Davenant and his officers pleasant guests. The troops, on their
part, were well satisfied. Mrs. Conyers gave instructions that they were
to be supplied with all they needed, and their rations of bread and meat
were supplemented with many little comforts and luxuries from the house.

While Mrs. Conyers entertained the two elder officers, Walter naturally
fell to the share of her daughter, and the two soon became great friends,
wandering in the grounds, and sometimes riding together when Walter was
not engaged with the troop. The news came daily of the movements of
William's army, and when it approached, Captain Davenant's troop went far
out to observe its movements, and obtain an accurate idea of its
strength.

It was late in the evening when they returned, and Captain Davenant said
at supper:

"This is our last meal with you, Mrs. Conyers. We leave at daybreak, and
a few hours afterwards William's army will arrive before Limerick. We
shall be the losers, but you will be the gainer if, as you suppose, Mr.
Conyers is with them."

"I shall be really sorry for your going, Captain Davenant. It seemed a
terrible thing having a troop of hostile horse quartered upon one; but in
reality it has been a pleasant operation, rather than not, and I have
felt safer than I have done for months. I do hope that when these
troubles are over we shall renew our acquaintance, and that you will give
my husband an opportunity of thanking you for the kindness with which you
have treated us."

"The thanks should be on my side," Captain Davenant said. "You have made
what promised to be an unpleasant duty a most pleasant one. Our stay here
has been like a visit at a friend's, and I regret deeply that it has to
come to an end, a regret which I am sure Lieutenant O'Moore and my son
share."

"We do, indeed," the lieutenant said.

Walter and Claire Conyers said nothing. They had talked it over early
that morning before the troop started, and Walter had expressed his deep
regret that their pleasant time was at an end; and, although the girl had
said little, she was far less bright and happy than might have been
expected, considering that upon the following day she should probably see
her father.

Captain Davenant's troop rode off at daybreak, kept down the Shannon to
Limerick, and, crossing the bridge, entered the city, and received orders
there to take up their quarters in a village some four miles up the
river. Thus, they were less than a mile distant from Mrs. Conyers' house,
although separated from it by the Shannon; and from an eminence near the
village, the roof and chimneys of the mansion could be seen rising above
the trees by which it was surrounded.

During the day, the sound of the firing before Limerick could be plainly
heard; but little attention was paid to it, for it was certain that no
attack could be made in earnest upon the town, until the battering
artillery came up, and there was but little hope that the cavalry would
be called up for any active service at present.

After dinner, Walter strolled out to the eminence, and looked across
towards the house where he had spent so happy a time, and wondered
whether Mr. Conyers had by this time arrived, and whether, in the
pleasure of his coming, all thought of the late visitors had been
forgotten. Presently Larry sauntered up, and took a seat on a wall a few
paces away. Larry was a general favourite in the troop. He did not ride
in its ranks, but accompanied it in the capacity of special servant of
Walter, and as general attendant to the three officers.

"We had a good time of it, yer honour," he said presently.

Walter turned round sharply, for he had not heard him approach.

"We had, Larry," he said, with a smile. "We shall find it rougher work
now."

"We shall, yer honour.

"I was thinking to myself," he said, confidentially, "that if you might
be wanting to send a bit of a letter, it's meself could easily make a
boat, with some osiers and the skin of that bullock we had given us for
the rations of the troops today."

"Send a letter, Larry! Who should I be sending a letter to?"

"Sure yer honour knows better than me. I thought maybe you would be
liking to let the young lady know how we're getting on now, and to find
out whether her father has come home, and how things are going. Yer
honour will excuse me, but it just seemed natural that you should be
wishing to send a line; and a sweeter young lady never trod the sod."

Walter could not help laughing at the gleam of quiet humour in Larry's
face.

"I don't know, lad. You have pretty well guessed my thoughts; but it
can't be. The opposite bank will be swarming with William's men--it would
be a most dangerous business. No, it's not to be thought of."

"Very well, yer honour, it's just as you like; but you have only got to
hand me a bit of paper, and give me a wink of your eye, and I will do it.
As to William's sodgers, it's little I fear them; and if all one hears of
their doings be true, and I had a pretty young creature a mile away from
me, with those blackguards round about her, it's anxious I should be for
a line from her hand;" and Larry got down from his seat, and began to
walk away towards the village.

Walter stood silent for a moment.

"Wait, Larry," he said.

Larry turned, with a look of surprise upon his face.

"Come here," Walter said impatiently. "Of course I am anxious--though I
don't know how you could have guessed it."

"Sure yer honour," Larry said with an innocent look, "when a gentleman
like yourself is for ever walking and riding with a purty colleen, it
don't need much guessing to suppose that you would be worrying after her,
with such creatures as the Northerners and the furreners in her
neighbourhood."

"And you seriously think you could take a letter across to her, Larry?"

"Sure and I could, yer honour. The nights are dark, and I could get
across the river widout a sowl being the wiser, and make my way to the
stables, and give it to one of the boys, who will put it in the hands of
Bridget, Miss Claire's own maid; and I could go back, next night, for the
answer."

"But if you can do it, I can," Walter said.

"What would be the good, yer honour? It's only the outside of the house
you would see, and not the young lady. Besides, there's a lot more risk
in your doing it than there is with me. You are an officer of the king's,
and if you were caught on that side of the river, it's mighty little
trial they'd give you before they run you up to the bough of a tree, or
put a bullet into you. With me, it's different. I am just a country boy
going to see my cousin Pat Ryan, who works in the stables at the house.
Pat would give me a character, no fear."

"Well, I will think of it," Walter said.

"And I will get the boat ready at once, your honour. A few sticks and a
green hide will make a boat fit for Dublin Bay, to say nothing of
crossing a smooth bit of water like this."

After Larry had left him, Walter walked up and down for some time. He had
