Project Gutenberg's A Little Journey to Puerto Rico, by Marian M. George

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Little Journey to Puerto Rico
       For Intermediate and Upper Grades

Author: Marian M. George

Posting Date: December 7, 2011 [EBook #9995]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: November 6, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE JOURNEY TO PUERTO RICO ***




Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders









_THE PLAN BOOK SERIES_

A LITTLE JOURNEY TO PUERTO RICO
for intermediate and upper grades


BY MARIAN M. GEORGE


A LITTLE JOURNEY TO PUERTO RICO

Do you know what people mean when they speak of "Our New Possessions"?
What are they? Where are they? Why are men, in the streets, in the
shops, everywhere, talking about them? Why are the newspapers full of
articles in regard to them? Why are our lawmakers at the capital
devoting so much time and attention to them? Can you tell?

Some of these things you can easily ascertain for yourselves. Others we
will speak of here.

The new territory which has lately come into the possession of the
United States, consists of the islands of Puerto Rico, Hawaii and the
Philippines. Cuba is not included in this list; it is soon to be an
independent country.

Since Puerto Rico and these other islands have come to be parts of the
United States, everyone is anxious to learn something more of them.

The best way to learn the geography of a country and the customs of the
people is to visit the country and see with your own eyes.

That would be a difficult thing for most of us. The next best way is to
make the journey in imagination, and that all of us can do.

The island nearest us is Puerto Rico, the most eastern island of the
Greater Antilles. Let us visit that first and the other islands later
on.

We must find out something of the climate, however, before we start on
this journey. This may not be the right season of the year to go. We
must know, too, what kind of clothing to take with us.

In order to plan our route wisely, we must know something of the
geography of the island. We should also know the past history of Puerto
Rico, in order to understand the customs of the people and the
conditions that exist there.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOCATION, SIZE, SURFACE.


If you will find a map of the West Indies in your atlas or geography,
you will also find Puerto Rico. It is one of the four Greater Antilles
Islands, and lies east of Haiti and farthest out in the Atlantic Ocean.

It is over four hundred miles from the east coast of Cuba, one thousand
miles from Havana, and about one thousand four hundred and fifty miles
from New York.

In size it is the smallest of the group. Its area is about three
thousand five hundred and fifty square miles. Its average length is
about ninety-five miles; its average breadth about thirty-five miles.

In shape it resembles the State of Connecticut, though it is only
three-fourths the size of that State.

[Illustration: THE ISLAND OF PUERTO RICO.]

Puerto Rico, in English, means Rich Harbor. But Puerto Rico is not rich
in harbors. There are not more than six good harbors, but it has less
than three hundred and fifty miles of coast line.

The surface of Puerto Rico is mountainous. A range of hills traverses
the island from east to west. The hills are low and their sides are
covered with vegetation. The hills are not rocky and barren, but are
cultivated to their very tops.

[Illustration: AN AFTERNOON SIESTA.]

The lower valleys are rich pasture lands or cultivated plantations. The
knolls have orchards of cocoanuts and other trees. Coffee, protected by
the shade of other trees, grows to the summits of the green hills. The
ground is covered everywhere with a thick carpeting of grass.

The soil is remarkably fertile. This is due partly to the fine climate,
partly to abundant moisture. The island has many fast flowing rivers.
There are over twelve hundred of these. In the mountains are numerous
springs and water falls, but these are hidden by the overhanging giant
ferns and plants.

       *       *       *       *       *


BRIEF HISTORY OF PUERTO RICO.


Puerto Rico was discovered by Christopher Columbus November 17, 1493. He
made a landing at a bay, where he found springs of pure water, which was
much needed on his ships. This place he named Aguadilla, which means
"the watering place."

[Illustration: PONCE DE LEON.]

In 1508 Ponce de Leon, a Spanish navigator, visited the island, and was
much pleased with its beautiful scenery and with the hospitality of the
natives. A year or two later he returned, and founded the town of
Caparra. In 1509 he founded the city of San Juan on the island that
guards the entrance on the east.

When Ponce de Leon came to the island, he found it inhabited by a happy,
harmless people who received him with delight. They brought gifts to
him, and showed him and his soldiers gold, which was found in the river
beds.

The kindness of the natives was rewarded by cruelty on the part of the
Spaniards. They were ruthlessly murdered or reduced to slavery, and
compelled to work in the mines. A revolution followed in which the
greater number of the natives were killed.

The severe work required of those remaining so shortened their lives
that very soon all had disappeared. Not a descendant of this race is now
living, but many curious and interesting relics, left by them, may be
found.

One of these is a stone collar, shaped like a horse collar, and
skillfully carved. This was placed upon the breast of the native after
his death, and was supposed to keep him from harm.

Ponce de Leon built for himself a castle on the point of land above the
mouth of the harbor of San Juan, and here he lived until he sailed on
the voyage which resulted in the discovery of Florida.

After his departure, Puerto Rico was left alone for a long time. After
some years, Spain sent peasants to colonize the island, and slaves were
introduced to cultivate the plantations.

In 1870 the island was made a province of Spain, instead of a colony. In
1873 slavery was abolished.

Puerto Rico came into the possession of the United States as the result
of the recent war with Spain. It was ceded to the United States Sept. 6,
1898.

Gen. George R. Davis is now Military Governor of the island. The form of
government for Puerto Rico has not yet been decided upon. It is one of
the problems that Congress is now working out.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLIMATE--PERPETUAL JUNE.


Puerto Rico is a very beautiful island. Its climate and scenery attract
many visitors, and erelong it will be a popular winter resort for
people from many countries.

It has been called the land of perpetual June. Flowers bloom and plants
and trees yield fruit the year round. There is no winter; but during
the season which is our winter, their skies are beautifully clear and
blue.

The air is neither dry nor moist, but perfect. The nights are always
cool, and the trade winds keep the hottest days from being unpleasant.
The average temperature is only 80 deg. It is the coolest and the
healthiest place in the West Indies.

[Illustration: GATHERING COFFEE IN PUERTO RICO.]

There are two seasons, the rainy and the dry. The rainy season lasts
from July to December; the dry, from January to June. From November to
June the climate is more than usually delightful and healthful. In the
summer months it is somewhat warm, and the heat and dampness are
oppressive in August and September.

In September and October the rain comes in torrents, but it rains in the
mountains almost every day in the year. The daily showers of the rainy
season usually come late in the afternoon, but the sky clears up with
the setting sun.

The people pay little attention to drainage or to securing a supply of
good water. As a result, fevers are common during the summer months
among the people who live in crowded quarters in the city or in the
marshes.

Hurricanes occasionally occur between the months of July and October.
These are sometimes accompanied by earthquake shocks. People may be
injured or killed and their homes destroyed during these violent storms.
Puerto Rico, however, is freer from them than other islands of the West
Indies.

A HURRICANE.

It is easy to tell when a hurricane is approaching. The wind dies away
and a deathly stillness falls over everything. Not a breath of air
moves. The leaves droop on the trees and the heat almost smothers one.

The sky becomes copper-colored, and tints everything with a ghastly hue.
The cattle and other animals seem to know that danger is near, and rush
about in a terrified way.

Far out in the ocean the water is calm and smooth; but near the shore
the waves rush furiously upon the beach with a mighty roar.

By and by the wind begins to rise, just a little; first from one
direction, and then from another. This is a sign that the storm is near
at hand. Very soon a fearful roar is heard, and all at once the
hurricane descends upon the island.

The work of destruction begins. Trees are uprooted, growing crops are
laid waste, and houses are torn down and scattered in every direction.
Sometimes whole villages are destroyed and many people killed or
wounded.

When the barometer tells of the approach of a storm, the people prepare
for it. They hunt some hole, cave, or cellar into which to crawl. They
take with them, when there is time to do so, a supply of cane juice and
food, to last until the storm subsides.

"The people guard as much as possible from the hurricanes by building
their houses of stone with massive walls. They provide strong bars for
doors and windows. When the barometer gives notice of the approach of a
storm, these bars are brought out, and everything is at once made fast.

"Doors and window-shutters are closed, barred, and double locked, and
the town looks as if it were deserted by all human beings. The state of
suspense, while the hurricane lasts, is dreadful, for no one knows when
the house may fall and bury all beneath its ruins.

"Add to this the howling of the blasts, the crash of falling trees, the
piercing cries for help from the wounded and dying, and one may faintly
picture the terrible scene. To venture out is almost certain death, the
air is so filled with flying missiles, such as boards, bricks, tiles,
stones, and branches of trees."

It is indeed fortunate that the people of Puerto Rico are largely free
from these desolating storms. Some idea of their power for destruction
may be gathered from the pictures in our papers of Galveston, Texas,
after the recent hurricane there.

PREPARATIONS FOR THE TRIP.

The best time for us to visit Puerto Rico, then, is after the hurricane
season, in the winter. January, February, and March are the favorite
months of travelers.

But if we wish to celebrate the four hundred and seventh anniversary of
the discovery of the island, we must go in November. It was the 17th day
of this month that Columbus first visited Puerto Rico.

We will need to take our thinnest clothing for use on the island, but we
should have light wraps for the cool evenings.

We should also go well provided with umbrellas, rubber overshoes, and
rain coats, if we do not wish to spend many afternoons indoors.

Now the best way to reach Puerto Rico is not, as many people think, from
Cuba. San Juan, the capital, is nearly as far from Havana as from New
York.

We will take the steamer from New York that goes directly to San Juan.
If the weather is good, we may expect to make the voyage in four days.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE VOYAGE.


What a busy crowd it is through which we pass to the New York wharf!
Dozens of large ships and hundreds of small vessels and sailboats crowd
the harbor.

There is a large steamer just going out. It is loaded with hardware,
kerosene, pine lumber, and codfish, and is probably bound for South
America.

Crowds of people are going on deck with departing friends. Many of the
friends have brought or sent flowers and steamer-letters, to be enjoyed
