it to. I have not ventured to submit it to Miss Egerton, for she is so
dreadfully severe, and I don't think much of her taste. She will never
praise anything I do unless it is so simple as to be almost babyish.
Now 'The Uses of Adversity' is as far as possible formed on the model
of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'--it is strong, but gloomy. Shall I read it
to you after supper, Primrose?"

"If you like, dear," answered Primrose; "but why do you try to write
such very sad things, Jasmine?"

"Oh, I don't know; they suit me. Primrose, do you know of a very, very
melancholy periodical?"

"Several of the periodicals seem to me rather melancholy," answered
Primrose; "there is one I sometimes see on Mrs. Dove's table--it is
called _The Watch_. I glanced at it one day, and I thought it seemed
very morbid."

"Oh, I know," answered Jasmine; "but there is a worse one than
that--Mrs. Dove showed it to me. Mrs. Dove is very fond of reading,
and she told me that she would not give a farthing for any literature
that could not draw forth the salt and bitter tear; she says the
magazine she likes best at present is a new one called _The Downfall_.
She says it is very little known, but its melancholy is profound.
Shall I send my verses to _The Downfall_, Primrose?"

"If you like, dear; but I don't at all admire the name, and I really
do not think Mrs. Dove ought to be your guide in such matters,
Jasmine."

"Oh, she has very good taste," answered Jasmine; "she says that only
real talent is admitted on the staff of _The Downfall_. Of course I'd
rather write for one of the shilling magazines. Well, if you like,
I'll send my poem to one of them first."

Before Primrose could answer Jasmine on this weighty point there came
a knock on the sitting-room door, and Mrs. Dove, with her face wrapped
up in a thick woollen shawl, entered the room.

"Very sorry to disturb you, young ladies," she said, "but could you
oblige me with the loan of three and tenpence-halfpenny. Dove has put
in no appearance, and unless I can pay three and tenpence-halfpenny on
account to the baker he refuses positive to allow me sufficient bread
to see Sunday through."

When Mrs. Dove made this request Primrose's face became intensely
pale. She was silent for half a minute, then she said--

"I will lend you the money this time, Mrs. Dove, but please don't ask
me again; you know that at this present moment you owe me very nearly
two pounds."

"Thank you, my dear Miss Mainwaring," answered Mrs. Dove, in a very
suave voice, as she hastily pocketed poor Primrose's few shillings.
"You are always obliging, and this, with the other trifle due, shall
be returned the moment Dove comes in--Dove is on a very good piece of
work just at present, and the money is as safe as safe. Oh, Miss
Jasmine, I have brought you this week's copy of _The Downfall_--the
serial in it is really of the most powerful order. I have shed a
deluge of tears over it. The lowest person of rank in the pages is a
marquess; but the story mostly deals in ducal families. It was a
terrible blow to come down to the baker from the duke's ancestral
halls--you read it, Miss Jasmine; you'll be very much overcome."




CHAPTER XXIV.

DOVE'S JOKE.


Primrose had always been considered a very good manager. Her talents
for contriving, for buying, and, in short, for making a shilling do
the utmost that a shilling was capable of, had been observable from
her earliest days. In the last years of her mother's life Primrose had
been entrusted with the family purse, and the shopkeepers at Rosebury
had known better than not to offer this bright-looking young lady the
best that they had at the lowest price. Primrose, therefore, when she
came to London, had felt pretty confident that the talents which she
knew she possessed would stand her in good stead. She still hoped to
find the cheapest shops and to get the best for her money. She laid
her plans with accuracy and common sense, she divided the little sum
which the three had to live on into weekly instalments--she resolved
not to go beyond these. But, alas! Primrose had never reckoned on a
certain grave difficulty which here confronted her. Hitherto her
dealings had been with honest tradespeople; now it was her
misfortune, and her sisters', to get into a house where honesty was
far from practised. In a thousand little ways Mrs. Dove could pilfer
from the girls--she would not for the world have acknowledged to
herself that she would really steal; oh, no--but she did not consider
it stealing to use their coal instead of her own--of course, by
mistake; she by no means considered it stealing when she baked a
little joint for them in her oven on Sunday to boil it first, and in
this way secure a very good soup for various hungry young Doves; she
did not consider it stealing to so confuse the baker's account that
some of the loaves consumed by her children were paid for by Primrose;
nor did she consider it stealing to add water to the milk with which
she supplied the Mainwarings; above all things, and on this point she
was most emphatic, she thought it the reverse of stealing to borrow.
Primrose had not been a fortnight in her house before she began to ask
first for the loan of an odd sixpence, then for half-a-crown, for a
shilling here, and two shillings there. When she returned the
half-crown it was generally done in this fashion--

"Oh, if you please, miss, I want to settle my little account. Oh,
dear, dear! I was certain I had half-a-crown in my purse. Well, to be
sure, I forgot that Dove took it with him when he went out to his
work this morning. Please, Miss Mainwaring, will you accept one and
sixpence on account, and we'll settle the rest in an hour or two.
There, miss, that's quite comfortable."

Yes, the arrangement was certainly quite comfortable for Mrs. Dove,
who could score out the half-crown debt from her slate, and quite
stare when Primrose ventured to ask her for the odd shilling still
owing.

Still, incredible as it may sound, Mrs. Dove considered herself a
strictly honest woman. Perhaps, had the girls only to deal with her
they might have struggled on, badly, it is true, but still after a
fashion. But, alas and alas! if Mrs. Dove considered herself honest,
Mr. Dove did not pretend to lay claim to this very excellent quality.
Poor Primrose little guessed that that lost five-pound note, which had
given her such trouble, and which had almost brought gray hairs to her
bright yellow head, had been really taken by Dove, who had come up to
the attics when the girls were away, had quietly taken the hinges off
Primrose's trunk at the back, had lifted the lid, and had helped
himself neatly and deftly to that solitary note!

When the girls discovered their loss no one had been more indignant
than Dove. He had come up himself to speak to them about it, had
examined the trunk in their presence, had told them that he had a
cousin of his own in the detective business whom he would put on the
scent of the thief, and in the meantime he'd be very pleased, although
he was a remarkably poor man, to lend the young ladies ten shillings.

Although they would not think of accepting his loan, the girls thought
that Dove had behaved rather kindly on this occasion, and they
certainly never in the least suspected it was into his pocket their
money had gone.

Without being at all, therefore, to blame, poor Primrose found
herself, as Christmas approached, and the days grew short and cold,
with very little money in her possession; of course, her quarter's
allowance would soon be due, but some days before it came she had
broken into her last sovereign. Still, she had a resource which her
sisters had forgotten, and which, luckily for her, Dove knew nothing
at all about--she still had that letter of Mr. Danesfield's. She had
never opened it, but she always kept it safely locked up in her trunk.
Not for worlds would she yet break the seal--no, no, this letter was
meant for an hour of great need. Primrose fondly and proudly hoped
that that dark and dreadful hour would never approach and that, having
won success, she and her sisters might yet return the letter unopened
to its kind donor. In these dark days before Christmas she kept up her
heart, and worked hard at her china-painting, achieving sufficient
success and power over her art to enable her to produce some pretty,
but, alas! as yet unsaleable articles. Mr. Jones, her master, assured
her, however, that her goods must ere long find a market, and she
struggled on bravely.

Perhaps, on the whole, Jasmine was more tried by her present life than
her sister. Jasmine's was a more highly-strung temperament; she could
be more easily depressed and more easily elated--hers was the kind of
nature which pours forth its sweetest and best in sunshine; did the
cold blasts of adversity blow too keenly on this rather tropical
little flower, then no expansion would come to the beautiful blossoms,
and the young life would fail to fulfil its promise. Jasmine was never
meant by nature to be poor; she had been born in Italy, and something
of the languor and the love of ease and beauty of her birthplace
seemed always to linger round her. She had talents--under certain
conditions she might even have developed genius, but in no sense of
the word was she hardy; where Primrose could endure, and even conquer,
Jasmine might die.

The little sister, who was too young to acutely feel any change which
did not part her from Primrose and Jasmine, was, perhaps, the only one
of the three whose spirits were on a par with what they were in the
old Rosebury days; but although Daisy's little mind remained tranquil,
and she did not trouble herself about ways and means, nor greatly fret
over the fact that the skies were leaden, and the attic room foggy,
still Daisy also suffered in her rather delicate little body. She
caught cold in the London fogs, and the cold brought on a cough, and
the cough produced loss of appetite. The two elder sisters, however,
were scarcely as yet uneasy about her, and it was only Miss Egerton
who saw the likeness to little Constance growing and growing in
Daisy's sweet face. Thus Christmas drew near, and the girls had not
yet found their mission in life; they were by no means crushed,
however, nor was Primrose tired of repeating what she firmly believed,
that with the New Year some of the sunshine of London life would be
theirs.

The quarterly allowance from Mr. Danesfield always arrived on the
first of the month. On the first of December this year the welcome
letter, with its still more welcome enclosure, was duly received. The
girls celebrated the event with a little breakfast feast--they ate
water-cresses, and Primrose and Jasmine had a sardine each to add
flavor to their bread and butter. Whatever happened, Daisy always had
her fresh egg, which she shared with the Pink, for the Pink had been
brought up daintily, and appreciated the tops of fresh eggs. On this
occasion Mrs. Dove herself brought up Primrose's letter. Letters came
so seldom to the girls that Mrs. Dove felt it quite excusable to gaze
very hard at the inscription, to study the name of the post town which
had left its mark on the envelope, and lingering a little in the room,
under cover of talking to Jasmine, to watch Primrose's face as she
opened the cover.

"It is from Mr. Danesfield, is it not, Primrose?" exclaimed
Jasmine--"Oh, I beg your pardon, Mrs. Dove; no I didn't much care for
that new story which is begun in _The Downfall_."

Mrs. Dove had a habit of dropping little curtseys when she meant to be
particularly deferential--she now dropped three in succession, and
said in a high-pitched, and rather biting voice--

"It isn't to be expected that the opinions of young ladies and of
women who have gone through their world of experience, and therefore
know what's what, should coincide. I leave you ladies three to read
your refreshing news from absent friends."

Mrs. Dove then turned her back, and meekly shutting the door behind
her, left the girls to themselves.

"Them attics have become rather too uppish for my taste," she said to
Dove when she got downstairs. "I took them a letter just now, and, my
word! they had not eyes nor ears for me, though I toiled up all the
weary stairs, which my shortness of breath don't agree to. It wasn't
even 'Thank you very much, Mrs. Dove,' but all three of them, their
eyes was fixed on the letter as if they'd eat it. It's my belief,
Dove, that they're short of funds, for when I went yesterday to ask
for the trifling loan of tenpence three-farthings to pay the cobbler
for Tommy's boots, Miss Mainwaring said, as pretty as you please, but
very prim and firm--'I haven't really got the money, Mrs. Dove.' Well,
well, I've done a deal for those girls--elbow grease I've given them,
and thought I've given them, and books for the improving of their
intellecs I've lent them, and that's all the return I get, that when I
bring up a letter it isn't even 'Thank you, Mrs. Dove.' What I say is
this, Dove, shall I give the attics notice to quit?"

"By no manner of means," answered Dove--"you mark my words, Mrs. Dove,
my only love, that why they were so flurried over the letter just
received was because there was money in it. Don't you turn away nice,
genteel, quiet-spoken young ladies from this house. There's most
likely a postal order in that letter, and my name ain't Dove if I
don't get my gleanings from it."

"Oh, fie, Dove! you will have your joke," answered his wife; but she
said nothing further about giving the Mainwarings notice to quit.




CHAPTER XXV.

DAISY'S PROMISE.


Mr. Danesfield always forwarded the girls' allowance in such a way
that Primrose could easily obtain it--he did not trouble her with
cheques or bank notes, but sent a money-order, which she could cash at
the nearest post-office.

The three went out gleefully that day, and obtained their much needed
money--then Primrose bought a new pair of boots for Daisy, and allowed
Jasmine to spend sixpence on scribbling paper. Having obtained this
delightful possession, Jasmine determined to begin her great work of
fiction without a moment's delay; she felt that she had listened quite
long enough to Miss Egerton's gentle warnings--that she had been
discouraged sufficiently, and that what she had really to do was to
prove the stuff which was in her, and to take the world by storm. She
hesitated a little as to whether her great work was to appear before
the world in the form of a novel or a poem. She thought that to
produce a second "Evangeline" would be a matter of but slight
difficulty, but on the whole she was inclined to give the world her
experience in the fiery and untrammelled words of prose.

"My theme burns within me," she said to herself. "I won't be kept back
by metres or rhymes, or numbers of feet, or any of those tiresome
rules which Miss Egerton tries to instil into me. Oh, I shall be happy
over my work! I will forget that we are poor, and forget that we live
in attics. I will work with Miss Egerton in the daytime, and I will
help Primrose in her house-keeping, and take Daisy for a walk, but
morning and evening I will get into my Palace Beautiful, and write
away, and forget the sordid cares of life."

The little maid had really a certain amount of genius to guide her,
and although all her ideas were crude and unpractised, she managed to
be happy in the castle which she built, and her dark eyes grew bright
once more, and her pretty face resumed its animated and contented
expression.

Primrose, who worked very steadily at her china-painting, was much
cheered at this time with one or two small, but _bona-fide_ orders for
work. They came not through Mr. Jones, who pocketed her money and
exhibited her wares in a dusty and uncertain fashion, but through Miss
Egerton, who was proving herself a real friend to the girls. Primrose
was immensely cheered by these little orders, and, in consequence,
Christmas Day--the girls' first Christmas Day without a home and a
mother--passed not uncheerfully. Things might have gone well with the
three but for an incident which occurred just at the beginning of the
New Year.

One morning Daisy awoke shivering, and complaining of fresh cold. She
refused, however, to stay at home by herself, and begged of Jasmine to
wrap her up, and take her across to Miss Egerton's, but when the two
girls reached the kind mistress's door they were informed that she had
been suddenly sent for to the country, and would not be back until the
following day.

"You must go back now, my pet," said Jasmine. "I'll take you back
myself, and I'll build up such a nice fire for you, and you shall look
at the dear old scrap-book which we made when we were all happy at
Rosebury."

"I wish we were back at Rosebury," said little Daisy, in a very sad
and plaintive voice. "I don't think London is at all a cheerful place.
We made a great mistake about it, didn't we, Jasmine? Oh, Jasmine,
darling, you are not going to leave me by myself, for I really don't
feel well this morning."

"I'll come back ever so quickly, Eyebright, but I really think I must
do Primrose's shopping for her, now that I am not going to Miss
Egerton. Primrose is working very hard at her china-painting order,
and it is not fair she should be interrupted. You won't be selfish,
will you, Eyebright? You know we arranged long ago that the way you
were to help matters forward was not to hinder us older girls in our
work."

"I know," answered Daisy, with a patient sigh. "I won't be selfish,
Jasmine. Just kiss me before you go."

Jasmine went away, and Daisy, taking the Pink into her arms, sat down
close to the fire. She was not exactly nervous, but she scarcely liked
to be left in the attics by herself. She wished Mrs. Dove would come
up, or even that Tommy Dove, who was a rude boy, and whom, as a rule,
she particularly disliked, would pay her a visit. Any company, however
she reflected, would be better than none, for she was feeling heavy
and depressed with her cold. The warm feel of the Pink's furry little
body, elapsed tightly in her arms, comforted her not a little. She
remembered with some satisfaction that Jasmine had locked the door,
and she began already to count the moments for her sister's return.

An hour passed, and still Daisy listened for Jasmine's light and
springing step on the attic stairs.

She was very tired now, and her head ached. She thought she would go
into the bedroom and, lying down on her little white bed, sleep away
the weary moments. Taking the Pink with her, she did so, wrapping the
counterpane well up over them both.

In a very few moments the child was in a heavy slumber.

She awoke, after what seemed to herself a very short nap, to hear
sounds in the bedroom. She stirred sleepily, and, opening her eyes,
said--

"Oh, Jasmine, what a time you've been away!"

No answer from Jasmine, but a smothered exclamation from some one
else; a heavy tread on the uncarpeted boards, and Dove, his face red,
his shoes off, and something which looked like a screw-driver in his
hands, came up and bent over the child.

"Oh! what are you doing here, Mr. Dove?" exclaimed little Daisy. The
man bent down over her, and stared hard into her wide open blue eyes.

[Illustration: THE MAN BENT DOWN OVER HER. Palace B]

"I didn't know you was here, missie; it was very cunning of you to
feign sleep like that--it was very cunning and over sharp, but it
don't come round me. No, no; you has got to speak up now, and say what
you has seen, and what you hasn't seen. I allow of no nonsense with
little girls, and I can always see through them when they mean to tell
a lie. You know where the children who tell lies go to, so you'd
better speak up, and the whole truth, missie." Dove spoke in a very
rough voice, and poor Daisy felt terribly frightened.

"I didn't see anything," she began, in her innocent way. "I was fast,
fast asleep. I thought you were Jasmine--Jasmine should have been back
