

CHAPTER XXII.

ARIEL THE BEAUTIFUL.

It will be understood that during the interview described, the three
white men stood near the front entrance to the royal apartment with
their faces turned toward King Haffgo.

In this position each made good use of his eyes and Fred Ashman's, from
some cause or other, continually wandered to the draped curtains at the
right of the ruler, between which he must pass when entering or leaving
that part of his residence.

It was while his gaze was used on these curtains that he saw them
gently agitated in a way which left no doubt that some person on the
other side was the cause.

By and by he discerned part of a dainty hand, and the next minute
became aware that a pair of the most beautifully lustrous eyes on which
he had ever gazed was peering into the apartment.

"_It is Ariel_," was his instant thought, "and she as listening to the
words that we are speaking."

The thought had hardly found shape, when one eye, a part of a lovely
face and the top of the head were discerned, as the owner, giving rein
to her curiosity, ventured upon a little further view of the visitors.

Then, as if conscious of her breach of etiquette, she withdrew, like a
flash, from view altogether.

But he knew it was only for a brief interval, and sure enough, the eyes
speedily appeared at another portion of the curtains, where the
beauteous princess must have believed she was not observed, for she
looked steadily at the faces of the visitors, with a depth of interest
that it was vain for her to attempt to conceal.

The heart of Fred Ashman gave a flutter, when he realized that the
midnight orbs were fastened upon _him_, and, evidently studying his
countenance with more interest than those of his companions.

Feeling a peculiar boldness, because of the strange situation in which
he was placed, he deliberately smiled at the unknown one.

She could not have vanished more suddenly had she been snatched away by
the hand of some ogre.

A pang shot through Fred's heart, as he felt that he had driven away
the enchantress by his own forwardness.  He reproached himself bitterly
for having overreached himself.

But while he was lamenting, he once more discovered the eyes, rivalling
the diamonds in the crown of her royal father, slyly viewing him from
the other side of the curtain.  This time the fair one took care that
no part of her countenance was visible, and the young man was equally
guarded for the time, not to betray his sweet knowledge of the other's
scrutiny.

It was at this juncture, that King Haffgo addressed some pointed
questions to Ashman who was forced to withdraw his gaze from the
marvellously attractive sight, and fasten it upon the rugged and
wrinkled countenance of the king of the Murhapas.

But those eyes were in his field of vision, and, even while speaking to
the potentate, his glance continually wandered to the orbs which
attracted him as the lodestone draws the magnet.

But alas! the American forgot a fact of the first importance: the eyes
of the father were as observant as those of his only child.  He saw the
furtive glances at the curtains, and a slight rustling at his right
hand told him that his beloved Ariel, with the curiosity of her sex,
was playing the eavesdropper.

The indulgent father would have cared nothing for this, had he not
discovered the extraordinary interest which one of his three callers
manifested in his child.  In that moment, the distrust which he felt of
the strange race was turned to violent hatred toward one of its
members, because of his unpardonable insolence in daring to return the
gaze with a smile.

The king suddenly leaned the javelin in his hand against the chair in
which he was sitting, and partly rose from his seat as if about to
descend from the throne.  Instead of doing so, he leaned slightly to
one side, and, with a quick movement, seized one of the curtains and
snatched it aside.

The act, which was like the flitting of a bird's wing, caused Ariel,
his daughter, to stand forth fully revealed!

If the white men had been dazzled by the amazing collection of diamonds
on the brow of the king, it may be said that they were now blinded for
the moment by the vision of loveliness which burst upon them, like the
unexpected emergence of the sun from behind a dark cloud.

Before the princess could rally from her bewilderment, her father
sharply commanded her to advance.  She knew that that affectionate
parent could be stern and cruel as well as loving and affectionate, and
with her eyes bent modestly on the floor she stepped forward and stood
beside him.

Her hair, instead of being auburn like her parent's, was as black as
the raven's wing.  It hung in luxuriant wavy masses below her waist,
being gathered by a white clasp of burnished silver at the back of the
neck, without which it would have enveloped all the upper part of her
body in its fleecy veil.

Her gown of spotless white, composed of native cloth, as fine as satin,
was without any ornament.  It was encircled at the waist by a golden
girdle, falling in folds which concealed the rest of the figure,
leaving only one Cinderella-like foot to twinkle from the front, like a
jewel of rare beauty.

But no eye could fail to see that the slight girlish figure was of
ravishing perfection.  The waist was slender, the partly revealed arms
were as delicate as lilies, the tiny hands with their tapering fingers
were like those of a fairy, while the countenance was one of the
fairest that ever sun shone on.

The contour was such as Rubens delighted to place on canvas, and that
Michael Angelo loved to carve from the snowy marble.  The Grecian nose,
the small mouth, the white teeth, unstained like those of her
countrymen and countrywomen, the wealth of hair, the lustrous, soulful
eyes, the sea-shell-like tint of the cheeks, all these fell upon the
startled vision of the explorers with such overpowering suddenness that
for the moment they believed they were dreaming, or that some trick of
magic revealed to them a picture which had no reality.

"Look upon the white men!" commanded the king speaking in English, and
with a sternness which left disobedience out of the question; "look, I
say, for never will come the opportunity to see them again."

It was then that Ariel raised her eyes, and turned them toward the
trio, gazing at no one in particular--for she knew her parent was
closely studying her--but seeming to fix them upon some one miles
behind them.

Grimcke, Long and Ashman again bowed their heads almost to the ground,
and, feeling that the interview was over, began withdrawing.

Like the vassals leaving the presence of their sovereign, they did so
walking backward, with their faces toward the throne, and making a low
obeisance with each step.

The king looked steadily at them, without inclining his head or making
the slightest acknowledgment of the salutation.  Had not Fred Ashman
been mad with the intoxication of his new, overwhelming passion, he
would have observed that which was noticed by Grimcke and Long: the
King was watching him.

The young American hardly raised his gaze from the floor, until in his
retreat, he found himself at the entrance, by which all three had come
in to the apartment.  His companions had made their final obeisance and
disappeared, while he was left with Ziffak standing near the middle of
the apartment, his pose such that he could glance at his royal relative
or at him without shifting his body.

It now became Fred's duty to assume the perpendicular, in order to
effect a graceful withdrawal.

As he came upright once more, he looked straight into the countenance
of the scowling king.  Then--he could not help it---his eyes flashed in
the face of the blushing Ariel, who was gazing fixedly at him, and he
smiled and saluted her.

It was a daring thing to do, with the eyes of the king and the head
chieftain upon him.  He never understood how it was that it was done.
The salutation might have been forgiven, but that smile was an offense
like smiting King Haffgo's countenance with the back of the open hand.

But wonder of wonders! the ruby lips of the radiant beauty parted for
an instant in the faintest possible smile which lit up her countenance
like a burst of sunshine.  Ashman noticed not the diamond bracelet and
necklace, which flashed in all their prismatic beauty, but knew only
that she had returned the smile of recognition.  For that boon he would
have risked life a thousand times over.

Both Ziffak and the king were looking at the white man at the moment;
but, as if suspicion had entered the brain of the infuriated monarch,
he quickly shifted his head and glared at his daughter.

The movement was like the dart of a serpent, but that shadowy smile on
the face of Ariel had passed, as the lightning flash cleaves the
midnight, leaving the darkness deeper than before.

The king saw it not, and well for his child that so it was; for, much
as he cherished her, he would have smitten her to the earth had he
dreamed that she ventured on such a response to the impudence of the
white man, whose very life was his own only through the sufferance of
King Haffgo.

Not until Fred Ashman found himself in the air on the outside of the
place did he realize what he had done.  He feared that he had committed
a fatal indiscretion, but when he asked, himself whether he would
recall it if he could, his heart said "No."

The afternoon was drawing to a close, and there was a sensible coolness
in the air.  The natives who had remained standing round the front of
the palace, when the explorers first went inside, had grown tired of
waiting and, scattered in different directions.  The Murhapa village
wore its usual appearance, so in contrast with what met the eyes of our
friends when they first saw it.

The Professor and the New Englander were waiting near the door for
Ashman to join them.  As he came out, the former shook his head, with a
laugh, as an intimation that the young man in the ardor of his interest
had made a mistake.

Fred admitted that possibly he had forgotten himself, but added that it
was now too late to recall what had been done, and he was not sure that
he would do so, if the opportunity were given.

"At any rate," said he, "we are promised safe treatment for a couple of
days, provided we don't stray off or misbehave ourselves.  Our visit
can't amount to anything after all, since we must start for home
whenever King Haffgo gives his command."

"A good deal may take place in two days," said the Professor
significantly.

"And a good deal _after_ five days," was the more significant remark of
Jared Long.

It was evident from these declarations that Grimcke and Long had in
mind the same thought; which came to Ashman himself, when the ruler of
the Murhapas made known to his guests that they must take their
departure within such a brief period.

While no one of the three would have dared to signify dissent, yet they
were not the men to come so many hundred miles, forcing their way
through endless dangers to turn about and retrace their steps at the
command of a savage who looked upon himself as king, simply because he
was able to lord it over a horde of barbarians.

It was no place to discuss their plans, in front of the "palace,"
especially as the natives were beginning to gather around them again,
and among them it was certain was more than one who understood the
English tongue "as she is spoke."

They were waiting for the coming of Ziffak, who was still within.  He
was their chaperon, and without his guidance, they did not dare to move
from the spot.

"Hark!" suddenly exclaimed the Professor, raising his hand as a signal
for the whispering to cease.

The sound of voices was heard inside.  They recognized the tones of
Ziffak, to which they had become accustomed since the previous night.
Those of King Haffgo were also distinguishable, and there could be no
doubt to whom the low silvery accents heard only occasionally belonged.

The alarming feature of it all was, that the king was in an
unmistakably angry mood.  He not only talked fast but he talked loud,
sure evidence of his excited feelings.  It sounded as if Ziffak was
striving to placate him, but his royal brother grew more savage each
moment.

The words of all were uttered in the Murhapa tongue, so that the
listeners could form no idea of their meaning.  Had they been able to
do so, it is safe to say that they would have been in anything but a
comfortable frame of mind.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE SHADOW OF DANGER.

A few minutes later, Ziffak came through the door of the king's
residence and greeted the explorers.

His dusky countenance showed unmistakable traces of emotion, but like a
true warrior, he knew how to govern his feelings.  When he spoke, there
was no agitation perceptible in his voice.

He motioned to his friends to enter the adjoining hut, where Bippo and
Pedros had been left.  The Professor showing a natural timidity, he
stepped forward and led the way.

Immediately, the party found themselves within a structure, which while
no larger than the others, still, in view of the royal prerogatives of
the occupant perhaps, possessed more conveniences.  The lower
apartment, or rather floor, was separated into three divisions, the
front being that in which the cooking was done, while serving also for
a sitting and general reception room.

The mother of Ziffak and King Haffgo was a tall, muscular widow of
threescore and ten, much wrinkled, but strong and active on her feet.
Her countenance was darker if possible than that of the head chieftain,
making it the more wonderful that Haffgo should be the reverse in that
respect of both.

The royal mother paid little heed to her visitors, probably believing
they were able to take care of themselves without help from her.
Indeed, shortly after the white men entered, she took her departure,
and was not seen again until dark, when she came in to help provide
them with their evening meal.

Bippo and Pedros finding themselves safe at last were doing what they
could to make up for the sleepless nights and hard labor they had
undergone on their way thither.  They were stretched upon some skins in
one corner, sleeping heavily and refreshingly.

Ziffak sat on the floor with the whites.  It was apparent from his
manner that he was on the point of making a communication of
importance, but he seemed to change his mind suddenly, and, for a time,
spoke upon matters of such trivial account that his listeners were
surprised.

The next astonishing thing which he did was to declare that the stories
he gave to Ashman the night before, when made a prisoner by him were
fables.  There was no enchanted lake in the neighborhood, and his
account of the burning mountain was a myth, as were his yarns about the
diamonds obtained from the same mountain.

The Professor nodded his head, laughed and said he was glad to be told
that; for, while he wished to believe their good friend, when he was in
earnest, he found it hard to swallow those marvellous narratives which
exceeded anything that had ever come to their ears.

Long and Ashman also expressed great relief at the naive confession of
the head chieftain.  All the same, however, not one of them was
deceived by the fellow's subterfuge.

They knew that the stories which Ziffak related on the shore of the
Xingu were true.  Seized at that time by a burst of confidence, he had
unburdened himself to the young man for whom he formed such deep
admiration.

Since that time, and especially since his angry interview with his
royal brother, he appreciated the grievous mistake he made and was now
anxious to recall it.  He, therefore, declared the accounts to be of
the Munchausen order.  His listeners read his purpose and it suited
them to let him think they accepted every word of his remarkable
recantation.

He impressed upon them that the king was angry because of their coming
to his village.  Indeed Ziffak was afraid that he would recall his
permission to allow them to stay the two days, and might compel them to
leave that night.

This was startling news, and, when Ziffak was pressed, he admitted that
during his absence on the Xingu to meet them, Waggaman and Burkhardt
had returned and secured an audience with His Majesty.  This explained
the new phase of matters and was anything but welcome information, but
there was no help for it.

The Professor asked Ziffak whether he could not bring the two white men
to his home, in order that an interview might be had.  If that could be
done, Grimcke was hopeful that a better understanding could be
established, but the head chieftain replied that he had not seen either
of the white men since he returned, nor did he know where to find them.
They occupied a building on the opposite side of the king's home, but
he was told they were not there.  No doubt they were purposely keeping
out of the way of the new-comers.

Suddenly Ashman asked their friend whether there was any objection to
his taking a stroll around the village and whether he was likely to be
molested.  Ziffak promptly replied that there could be no earthly
objection to anything of that nature, and springing to his feet, gun in
hand, he bade his friends good-bye, saying he expected to be back with
them at the end of an hour or so.

It cannot be said that Ashman had any special errand in view, when he
formed this resolution, which was explainable upon the well known laws
governing the human mind.

He was tired of idleness.  The prospect of sitting for hours in the
darkening apartment, talking with Ziffak, who, instead of being willing
to give information, was doing his most to withhold it, was not
inviting, but beyond this, he was restless because he was haunted by
those marvellous eyes, peeping from behind the curtain in the king's
room, and that smile of recognition when the gaze of the two met,
thrilled him with a new and strange emotion.

It was this feeling which drove him forth.  He wanted to escape the
prying scrutiny of his friends, who, he fancied, suspected his secret.
He wanted to walk in the open air and think and revel in the bliss of
his new delight.

It was growing dark, when he stepped outside of the building.  There
was no light visible in any direction, though there would be plenty of
it later on.  The natives appeared to be moving aimlessly about, and
one or two near at hand scrutinized him curiously, but they neither
spoke nor made any movement to annoy him.  They had not yet forgotten
the lesson given by Ziffak some hours before.

To escape attention, he walked toward the river, passing down the long
sloping bank, until he reached the open, cleared space which has been
referred to as caused by the overflow of the water.  Here the walking
was easy, and, turning his face up stream, he walked slowly as a man
does who is in deep thought.

A man who is revelling in the first dream of love is not the one to pay
close attention to his surroundings.  He is so apt to be rapt in his
own sweet meditations, that he fails in the most ordinary observation.

Reaching the bottom of the slope, Ashman glanced behind and on his
right.  He caught glimpses of several figures moving about like
