There was no trajectory needed. We were almost over Archimedes now. I
could drop us with a visible, instrumental course. My mind was
whirling with a confusion of thoughts. What could we do? I met Snap's
gaze.

"Ring us down, Gregg," he said quietly.

I nodded. I pushed Moa's weapon away. "You don't need that--"

We went to the turret. Moa watched me and Snap, a grim, cold Amazon.
She avoided looking at Anita, whom Miko helped down the ladders with
a strange mixture of courtierlike grace and amused irony. Coniston
stared at Anita.

"I say, not George Prince? The girl--"

"No time for explanations," Miko commanded. "It's the girl,
masquerading as her brother. Get below, Coniston. Haljan takes us
down."

The astounded Englishman continued to gaze at Anita. But he said, "I
mean to say, where to on the Moon? Not to encounter Grantline at once,
Miko? Our equipment is not ready."

"Of course not. We will land well away--"

The reluctant Coniston left us. I took the controls. Miko, still
holding Anita as though she were a child, sat beside me. "We will
watch him, Anita. A skilled fellow at this sort of work."

I rang my signals for the shifting of the gravity plates. The answer
should have come from below within a second or two. But it did not.
Miko regarded me with his great bushy eyebrows upraised.

"Ring again, Haljan."

I duplicated. No answer. The silence was ominous.

Miko muttered, "That accursed Hahn. Ring again!"

I sent the imperative emergency demand.

No answer. A second or two. Then all of us in the turret were
startled. Transfixed. From below came a sudden hiss. It sounded in the
turret; it came from the shifting room call grid. The hissing of the
pneumatic valves of the plate shifters in the lower control room. The
valves were opening; the plates automatically shifting into neutral,
and disconnecting!

An instant of startled silence. Miko may have realized the
significance of what had happened. Certainly Snap and I did. The
hissing ceased. I gripped the emergency plate shifter switch which
hung over my head. Its disc was dead! The plates were dead in neutral:
in the position they were placed only in port! And their shifting
mechanisms were imperative!

I was on my feet. "We're in neutral!"

The Moon disc moved visibly as the _Planetara_ lurched. The vault of
the heavens was slowly swinging.

Miko ripped out a heavy oath. "Haljan! What is this?"

The heavens turned with a giant swoop. The Moon was over us. It swung
in a dizzying arc. Overhead, then back past our stern; under us, then
appearing over our bow.

The _Planetara_ had turned over. Upending. Rotating, end over end.

For a moment I think all of us in the turret stood and clung. The Moon
disc, the Earth, Sun and all the stars were swinging past our windows.
So horribly dizzying. The _Planetara_ seemed lurching and tumbling.
But it was an optical effect only. I stared with grim determination at
my feet. The turret seemed to steady.

Then I looked again. That horrible swoop of all the heavens! And the
Moon, as it went past seemed expanded. We were falling! Out of
control, with the Moon gravity pulling us down!

"That accursed Hahn--"

A moment only had passed. My fancy that the Moon disc was enlarged was
merely the horror of my imagination. We had not fallen far enough for
that.

But we were falling. Unless I could do something, we would crash upon
the Lunar surface.

Anita, killed in this turret: the end of everything--every hope.

Action came to me. I gasped, "Miko, you stay here! The controls are
dead! You stay here and hold Anita--"

I ignored Moa's weapon. Snap thrust her away.

"We're falling, you fool--let us alone!"

Miko gasped, "Can you--check us? What happened?"

"I don't know--"

I stood clinging. This dizzying whirl. From the audiphone grid
Coniston's voice sounded.

"I say, Haljan, something's wrong. Hahn doesn't signal."

The lookout in the forward tower was clinging to our window. On the
deck below our turret a member of the crew appeared, stood lurching
for a moment, then shouted and ran, swaying, aimless. From the lower
hull corridors our grids sounded with the tramping of running steps.
Panic among the crew was spreading over the ship. A chaos below deck.

I pulled at the emergency switch again. Dead....

"Snap, we must get down. The signals."

Coniston's voice came like a scream from the grid. "Hahn is dead. The
controls are broken!"

I shouted, "Miko, hold Anita! Come on, Snap!"

We clung to the ladders. Snap was behind me. "Careful, Gregg! Good
God!"

This dizzying whirl. I tried not to look. The deck under me was now a
blurred kaleidoscope of swinging patches of moonlight and shadow.

We reached the deck. It seemed that from the turret Anita's voice
followed us. "Be careful!"

Once inside the ship, our senses steadied. With the rotating, reeling
heavens shut out, there were only the shouts and tramping steps of the
panic-stricken crew to mark that there was anything amiss. That, and a
pseudo sensation of lurching caused by the pulsing of gravity--a pull
when the Moon was beneath our hull to combine its forces with our
magnetizers; a lightening, when it was overhead. A throbbing, pendulum
lurch!

We ran down to the corridor incline. A white-faced member of the crew
came running up.

"What's happened, Haljan? What's happened?"

"We're falling!" I gripped him. "Get below. Come with us."

But he jerked away from me. "Falling?"

A steward came running. "Falling? My God!"

Snap swung at them. "Get ahead of us! The manual controls--our only
chance--we need all you men at the compressor pumps!"

But it was instinct to try and get on deck, as though here below we
were rats caught in a trap. The men tore away from us and ran. Their
shouts of panic resounded through the dim, blue lit corridors.

Coniston came lurching from the control room. "I say--falling! Haljan,
my God, look!"

Hahn was sprawled at the gravity plate switchboard. Sprawled, head
down. Dead. Killed? Or a suicide?

I bent over him. His hands gripped the main switch. He had ripped it
loose. And his left hand had reached and broken the fragile line of
tubes that intensified the current of the pneumatic plate-shifters. A
suicide? With his last frenzy, determined to kill us all? Why?

Then I saw that Hahn had been killed! Not a suicide! In his hand he
gripped a small segment of black fabric, a piece torn from an
invisible cloak!

Snap was rigging the hand compressors. If he could get the pressure
back in the tanks....

I swung on Coniston. "You armed?"

"Yes." He was white-faced and confused, but not in a panic. He showed
me his heat ray cylinder. "What do you want me to do?"

"Round up the crew. Get all you can. Bring them here to man the
pumps."

He dashed away. Snap called after him, "Kill them if they argue!"

Miko's voice sounded from the turret call grid: "Falling! Haljan, you
can see it now! Check us!"

Desperate moments. Or was it an hour? Coniston brought the men. He
stood over them with menacing weapon.

We had all the pumps going. The pressure rose a little in the tanks.
Enough to shift a bow plate. I tried it. The plate slowly clicked into
a new combination. A gravity repulsion just in the bow-tip.

I signaled Miko. "Have we stopped swinging?"

"No. But slower."

I could feel it, that lurch of the gravity. But not steady now. A
limp. The tendency of our bow was to stay up.

"More pressure, Snap."

One of the crew rebelled, tried to bolt from the room.

Coniston shot him down.

I shifted another bow plate. Then two in the stern. The stern plates
seemed to move more readily than the others.

"Run all the stern plates," Snap advised.

I tried it. The lurching stopped. Miko called, "We're bow down.
Falling!"

But not falling free. The Moon gravity pull on us was more than half
neutralized.

"I'll go up, Snap, and try the engines. You don't mind staying down
here? Executing my signals?"

"You idiot!" He gripped my shoulders. His eyes were gleaming, his face
haggard, but his pale lips twitched with a smile.

"Maybe it's good-bye, Gregg. We'll fall--fighting."

"Yes. Fighting. Coniston, you keep the pressure up."

With the broken tubes it took nearly all the pressure to maintain the
few plates I had shifted. One slipped back to neutral. Then the pumps
gained on it, and it shifted again.

I dashed up to the deck. Oh, the Moon was so close now! So horribly
close! The deck shadows were still. Through the forward bow windows
the Moon surface glared up at us.

Those last horrible minutes were a blur. And there was always Anita's
face. She left Miko. Faced with death, he sat clinging. Moa too, sat
apart--staring.

And Anita crept to me. "Gregg, dear one. The end...."

I tried the electronic engines from the stern, setting them in
reverse. The streams of their light glowed from the stern, forward
along our hull, and flared down from our bow toward the Lunar surface.
But no atmosphere was here to give resistance. Perhaps the electronic
streams checked our fall a little. The pumps gave us pressure just in
the last minutes, to slide a few of the hull plates. But our bow
stayed down. We slid, like a spent rocket falling.

I recall the horror of that expanding Lunar surface. The maw of
Archimedes yawning. A blob. Widening to a great pit. Then I saw it was
to one side, rushing upward.

"Gregg, dear one--good-bye."

Her gentle arms about me. The end of everything for us. I recall
murmuring, "Not falling free, Anita. Some hull plates are set."

My dials showed another plate shifting, checking us a little further.
Good old Snap!

I calculated the next best plate to shift. I tried it. Slid it over.

Then everything faded but the feeling of Anita's arms around me.

"Gregg, dear one--"

The end of everything for us....

There was an up-rush of gray-black rock.




XXII


I opened my eyes to a dark blur of confusion. My shoulder hurt--a pain
shooting through it. Something lay like a weight on me. I could not
seem to move my left arm. Then I moved it and it hurt. I was lying
twisted. I sat up. And with a rush, memory came. The crash was over. I
was not dead. Anita--

She was lying beside me. There was a little light here in the silent
blur--a soft mellow Earthlight filtering in the window. The weight on
me was Anita. She lay sprawled, her head and shoulders half way across
my lap.

Not dead! Thank God, not dead! She moved. Her arms went around me, and
I lifted her. The Earthlight glowed on her pale face.

"It's past, Anita! We've struck, and we're still alive."

I held her as though all of life's turgid dangers were powerless to
touch us.

But in the silence my floating senses were brought back to reality by
a faint sound forcing itself upon me. A little hiss. The faintest
murmuring breath like a hiss. Escaping air!

I cast off Anita's clinging arms. "Anita, this is madness!"

For minutes we must have been lying there in the heaven of our
embrace. But air was escaping! The _Planetara's_ dome was broken and
our precious air was hissing out.

Full reality came to me. I was not seriously injured. I found I could
move freely. I could stand. A twisted shoulder, a limp left arm, but
they were better in a moment.

And Anita did not seem to be hurt. Blood was upon her. But not her
own.

Beside Anita, stretched face down on the turret grid, was the giant
figure of Miko. The blood lay in a small pool against his face. A
widening pool.

Moa was here. I thought her body twitched; then was still. This
soundless wreckage! In the dim glow of the wrecked turret with its two
motionless, broken human figures, it seemed as though Anita and I were
ghouls prowling. I saw that the turret had fallen over to the
_Planetara's_ deck. It lay dashed against the dome side.

The deck was aslant. A litter of wreckage! A broken human figure
showed--one of the crew who, at the last, must have come running up.
The forward observation tower was down on the chart room roof: in its
metal tangle I thought I could see the legs of the tower lookout.

So this was the end of the brigands' adventure. The _Planetara's_ last
voyage! How small and futile are humans' struggles. Miko's daring
enterprise--so villainous--brought all in a few moments to this silent
tragedy. The _Planetara_ had fallen thirty thousand miles. But why?
What had happened to Hahn? And where was Coniston, down in this broken
hull?

And Snap! I thought suddenly of Snap.

I clutched at my wandering wits. This inactivity was death. The
escaping air hissed in my ears. Our precious air, escaping away into
