The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Apostasy, by James E. Talmage

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Apostasy
       Considered in the Light of Scriptural and Secular History

Author: James E. Talmage

Release Date: March 7, 2011 [EBook #35514]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT APOSTASY ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project,
http://bencrowder.net/books/mtp. Volunteers: Benjamin
Bytheway, Jean-Michel Carter, Byron Clark, Ben Crowder,
Meridith Crowder, Tom DeForest, Eric Heaps.





THE
GREAT APOSTASY

CONSIDERED IN THE LIGHT OF
SCRIPTURAL AND SECULAR
HISTORY


By JAMES E. TALMAGE
D. Sc. D., Ph. D., F. R. S. E.


Press of Zion's Printing and Publishing Company
Independence, Jackson County, Missouri.




Published by the Missions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints in America

BUREAU OF INFORMATION--Temple Block, Salt Lake City, Utah.
CALIFORNIA MISSION--153 W. Adams St., Los Angeles, Calif.
CANADIAN MISSION--36 Ferndale Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
CENTRAL STATES MISSION--302 S. Pleasant St., Independence, Mo.
EASTERN STATES MISSION--273 Gates Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
HAWAIIAN MISSION--P. O. Box 3228, Honolulu, Hawaii.
MEXICAN MISSION--3531 Fort Blvd., El Paso, Texas, U. S. A.
NORTHERN STATES MISSION--2555 N. Sawyer Ave., Chicago, Ill.
NORTHCENTRAL STATES MISSION--2725 3d Ave.S., Minneapolis, Minn.
NORTHWESTERN STATES MISSION--264 East 25th St., Portland, Ore.
SOUTHERN STATES MISSION--371 E. North Ave., Atlanta. Ga.
WESTERN STATES MISSION--538 East 7th Ave., Denver, Colo.




PREFACE.


The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims the
restoration of the Gospel and the re-establishment of the Church as of
old, in this, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Such
restoration and re-establishment, with the modern bestowal of the Holy
Priesthood, would be unnecessary and indeed impossible had the Church
of Christ continued among men with unbroken succession of Priesthood
and power, since the "meridian of time."

The restored Church affirms that a general apostasy developed during
and after the apostolic period, and that the primitive Church lost its
power, authority, and graces as a divine institution, and degenerated
into an earthly organization only. The significance and importance of
the great apostasy, as a condition precedent to the re-establishment
of the Church in modern times, is obvious. If the alleged apostasy of
the primitive Church was not a reality, the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is not the divine institution its name proclaims.

The evidence of the decline and final extinction of the primitive
Church among men is found in scriptural record and in secular history.
In the following pages the author has undertaken to present a summary
of the most important of these evidences. In so doing he has drawn
liberally from many sources of information, with due acknowledgment of
all citations. This little work has been written in the hope that it
may prove of service to our missionary elders in the field, to classes
and quorum organizations engaged in the study of theological subjects
at home, and to earnest investigators of the teachings and claims of
the restored Church of Jesus Christ.

Salt Lake City, Utah,                     JAMES E. TALMAGE.
    November 1, 1909.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


The first edition of "The Great Apostasy" was issued by the Deseret
News, Salt Lake City, in November, 1909, and comprised ten thousand
copies. The author has learned, with a pleasure that is perhaps
pardonable, of the favorable reception accorded the little work by the
missionary elders of the Church, and by the people among whom these
devoted servants are called to labor. The present issue of twenty
thousand copies constitutes the second edition, and is published
primarily for use in the missionary field. The text of the second
edition is practically identical with that of the first.

Salt Lake City, Utah,                     JAMES E. TALMAGE.
    February, 1910.




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

  _Introduction: The Establishment of the Church of Christ_.

  Conditions at beginning of Christian era.--Religious systems,
  Jewish, Pagan, and Samaritan.--Jewish sects and parties.--Law of
  Moses fulfilled and superseded.--Apostles chosen and ordained.--
  Apostolic administration.--The Church established on the western
  hemisphere.--The "meridian of time."

CHAPTER II.

  _The Apostasy Predicted_.

  The Church has not continued in unbroken succession.--Divine
  fore-knowledge.--The divine purposes not thwarted.--Apostasy from
  the Church compared with the apostasy of the Church.--Specific
  predictions concerning the apostasy.--The Law of Moses a temporary
  measure.--Isaiah's fateful prophecy.--Predictions by Jesus
  Christ.--By Paul.--By Peter.--By Jude.--By John the Revelator.--
  Apostasy on the western hemisphere predicted.

CHAPTER III.

  _Early Stages of the Apostasy_.

  The apostasy recognized in apostolic age.--Testimony of
  Paul.--"Mystery of iniquity."--Summary of Paul's utterances
  concerning early apostasy.--Testimony of Jude.--Of John the
  Revelator.--Messages to the churches of Asia.--Nicolaitanes
  denounced.--Testimonies of Hegesippus.--Early schisms in the
  Church.--Declension of the Church before close of first
  century.--Apostasy on the western hemisphere.--Destruction of
  Nephite nation by the Lamanites.

CHAPTER IV.

  _Causes of the Apostasy.--External Causes Considered_.

  Causes of the apostasy, external and internal.--Persecution as an
  external cause.--Judaism and Paganism arrayed against the
  Church.--Judaistic persecution.--Predictions of Judaistic
  opposition.--Fulfillment of the same.--Destruction of Jerusalem.

CHAPTER V.

  _Causes of the Apostasy.--External Causes, Continued_.

  Pagan persecution.--Roman opposition to Christianity, explanation
  of.--Number of persecutions by the Romans.--Persecution under
  Nero.--Under Domitian.--Under Trajan.--Under Marcus Aurelius.--Later
  persecutions.--Persecutions under Diocletian.--Extent of the
  Diocletian persecution.--Diocletian boast that Christianity was
  extinct.--The Church taken under state protection by Constantine the
  Great.

CHAPTER VI.

  _Causes of the Apostasy.--Internal Causes_.

  Diverse effect of persecution.--Imprudent zeal of some.--Return to
  idolatry by others.--"Libels" attesting individual apostasy.--Sad
  condition of the Church in third century.--Testimony as to
  conditions of apostasy at this period.--Decline of the Church
  antedates the conversion of Constantine.--Departure from
  Christianity.--Specific causes of the growing apostasy.

CHAPTER VII.

  _Internal Causes.--Continued_.

  First specific cause: "The corrupting of the simple principles of
  the gospel by the admixture of the so-called philosophic systems of
  the times."--Judaistic perversions.--Admixture of Gnosticism with
  Christianity.--Gnosticism unsatisfying.--New platonics.--Doctrine of
  the Logos.--"The World."--Sibellianism.--Arianism.--The Council of
  Nice and its denunciation of Arianism.--The Nicene Creed.--The Creed
  of Athanasius.--Perverted view of life.--Disregard for truth.

CHAPTER VIII.

  _Internal Causes.--Continued_.

  Second specific cause: "Unauthorized additions to the ceremonies of
  the Church, and the introduction of vital changes in essential
  ordinances."--Simplicity of early form of worship ridiculed.--
  Formalism and superstition increase.--Adoration of images, etc.--
  Changes in baptismal ordinance.--Time of its administration
  restricted.--Ministrations of the exorcist introduced.--Immersion
  substituted by sprinkling.--Infant baptism introduced.--Changes in
  the sacrament of the Lord's Supper.--Fallacy of
  transubstantiation.--Adoration of the "host."--Proof of apostate
  condition of the Church.

CHAPTER IX.

  _Internal Causes.--Continued_.

  Third specific cause: "Unauthorized changes in church organization
  and government."--Early form of church government.--Equality of the
  bishops.--Origin of synods or church councils.--Bishops of Rome
  claimed supremacy.--Title of Pope assumed.--Secular authority
  asserted by the Pope.--Indulgences or pardons.--Infamous doctrine of
  supererogation.--The traffic in indulgences.--Tetzel the papal
  agent.--Copy of an indulgence.--The sin of blasphemy.--
  Scripture-reading forbidden to the people.--Draper's arraignment of
  the papacy.

CHAPTER X.

  _Results of the Apostasy.--Its Sequel_.

  Revolts against the Church of Rome.--John Wickliffe in England.--
  John Huss and Jerome of Prague.--The Reformation inaugurated.--
  Martin Luther, his revolt; his excommunication; his defense at
  Worms.--The Protestants.--Zwingle and Calvin.--The Inquisition.--
  Zeal of the reformers.--Rise of the Church of England.--Divine
  over-ruling in the events of the Reformation.--The "Mother Church"
  apostate.--Fallacy of assuming human origin of divine authority.--
  Priestly orders of Church of England declared invalid by "Mother
  Church."--The apostasy admitted and affirmed.--Wesley's
  testimony.--Declaration by Church of England.--Divine declaration of
  the apostasy.--The sequel.--The Revelator's vision of the
  Restoration.--The Church re-established in the nineteenth century.

COPYRIGHT
by
JAMES E. TALMAGE.
1909.




The Great Apostasy.


CHAPTER I.

**Introduction: The Establishment of the Church of Christ**.


1. A belief common to all sects and churches professing Christianity
is that Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the human race,
established His Church upon the earth by personal ministration in the
meridian of time. Ecclesiastical history, as distinguished from
secular history, deals with the experiences of the Church from the
time of its establishment. The conditions under which the Church was
founded first claim our attention.

2. At the beginning of the Christian era, the Jews, in common with
most other nations, were subjects of the Roman empire.--(See Note 1,
end of chapter.) They were allowed a considerable degree of liberty in
maintaining their religious observances and national customs
generally, but their status was far from that of a free and
independent people.

3. The period was one of comparative peace,--a time marked by fewer
wars and less dissension than the empire had known for many years.
These conditions were favorable for the mission of the Christ, and for
the founding of His Church on earth.

4. The religious systems extant at the time of Christ's earthly
ministry may be classified in a general way as Jewish and Pagan, with
a minor system--the Samaritan--which was essentially a mixture of the
other two. The children of Israel alone proclaimed the existence of
the true and living God; they alone looked forward to the advent of
the Messiah, whom mistakenly they awaited as a prospective conqueror
coming to crush the enemies of their nation. All other nations,
tongues, and peoples bowed to pagan deities, and their worship
comprised naught but the sensual rites of heathen idolatry.
Paganism--(See Note 2, end of chapter.) was a religion of form and
ceremony, based on polytheism--a belief in the existence of a
multitude of gods, which deities were subject to all the vices and
passions of humanity, while distinguished by immunity from death.
Morality and virtue were unknown as elements of heathen service; and
the dominant idea in pagan worship was that of propitiating the gods,
in the hope of averting their anger and purchasing their favor.

5. The Israelites, or Jews, as they were collectively known, thus
stood apart among the nations as proud possessors of superior
knowledge, with a lineage and a literature, with a priestly
organization and a system of laws, that separated and distinguished
them as a people at once peculiar and exclusive. While the Jews
regarded their idolatrous neighbors with abhorrence and contempt, they
in turn were treated with derision as fanatics and inferiors.

6. But the Jews, while thus distinguished as a people from the rest of
the world, were by no means a united people; on the contrary, they
were divided among themselves on matters of religious profession and
practice. In the first place, there was a deadly enmity between the
Jews proper and the Samaritans. These latter were a mixed people
inhabiting a distinct province mostly between Judea and Galilee,
largely made up of Assyrian colonists who had intermarried with the
Jews. While affirming their belief in the Jehovah of the Old
Testament, they practiced many rites belonging to the paganism they
claimed to have forsaken, and were regarded by the Jews proper as
unorthodox and reprobate.

7. Then the Jews themselves were divided into many contending sects
and parties, among which the principal were the Pharisees and the
Sadducees; and beside these we read of Essenes, Galileans, Herodians,
etc.

8. The Jews were living under the Law of Moses, the outward observance
of which was enforced by priestly rule, while the spirit of the law
was very generally ignored by priest and people alike. That the Mosaic
law was given as a preparation for something greater was afterward
affirmed by Paul, in his epistle to the saints at Galatia: "Wherefore
the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ."--(Galatians
3:24.) And the fact that a higher law was to supersede the lower is
abundantly shown in the Savior's own teachings: "Ye have heard that it
was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall
kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger
of the judgment: * * * Ye have heard that it was said by them of old
time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you that
whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery
with her already in his heart. * * * Again, ye have heard that it hath
been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but
shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths: But I say unto you, swear not
at all. * * * Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil.
* * * Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despitefully use you and persecute you."--(Matthew 5:21-44;
read the entire chapter.)

9. These teachings, based on love, so different from the spirit of
retaliation to which they had been accustomed under the law, caused
great surprise among the people; yet in affirmation of the fact that
the law was not to be ignored, and could only be superseded by its
fulfillment, the Master said: "Think not that I am come to destroy the
law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. For
verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled."--
(Matt. 5:17, 18.)

10. It is very evident the Master had come with a greater doctrine
than was then known, and that the teachings of the day were
insufficient. "For I say unto you, that except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven."--(Verse 20.)

11. Jesus Himself was strict in complying with all rightful
requirements under the law; but He refused to recognize an observance
of the letter alone, however rigidly required, as a substitute for
compliance with the spirit of the Mosaic injunction.

12. The excellent teachings and precepts of true morality inculcated
by the Christ prepared the minds of those who believed His words for
the introduction of the gospel in its purity, and for the
establishment of the Church of Christ as an earthly organization.

13. From among the disciples who followed Him, some of whom had been
honored by preliminary calls, He chose twelve men, whom He ordained to
the apostleship:--"And He ordained twelve, that they should be with
Him, and that He might send them forth to preach."--(Mark 3:14.)
Again: "And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve whom also he named apostles."--(Luke 6:13;
compare Matt. 10:1, 2.) The twelve special witnesses of Him and His
work were sent out to preach in the several cities of the Jews. On
this, their first mission, they were instructed to confine their
ministrations to the house of Israel, and the burden of their message
was "The kingdom of heaven is at hand."--(Matt. 10:7; study the entire
chapter.) They were told to use the power with which they had been
invested by ordination, in preaching, in healing the sick, in raising
the dead even, and in subduing evil spirits; the Master's admonition
was, "Freely ye have received, freely give." They were to travel
without money or provisions, relying upon a higher power to supply
their needs through the agency of those to whom they would offer the
message of truth; and they were warned of the possible hardships
awaiting them and of the persecution which sooner or later would
surely befall them.

14. At a later date Christ called others to the work of the ministry,
and sent them out in pairs to precede Him and prepare the people for
His coming. Thus we read of "the seventy" who were instructed in terms
almost identical with those of the apostolic commission.--(Luke 10;
compare with Matt. 10.) That their investiture was one of authority
and power and no mere form is shown by the success attending their
administrations; for, when they returned they reported triumphantly,
"Lord, even the devils are subject to us through thy name."--(Luke
10:17.)

15. The specific commission given unto the apostles at the time of
their ordination was afterward emphasized. They were the subjects of
the particularly solemn ordinance spoken of as the washing of feet, so
necessary that in reply to Peter's objection the Lord said: "If I wash
thee not, thou hast no part with me."--(John 13:4-9.) And unto the
eleven who had remained faithful, the Risen Lord delivered His parting
instructions, immediately before the ascension: "Go ye into all the
world, and preach the gospel to every creature." After our Lord's
departure the apostles entered upon the ministry with vigor: "And they
went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and
confirming the word with signs following."--(Mark 16:14-10; compare
Matt. 28:19, 20.)

16. These scriptures indicate the authority of the apostles to
administer the affairs of the Church after the ascension of the
Resurrected Messiah. That Peter, the senior member of the apostolic
council, was given a position of presidency, appears from the Savior's
special admonition and charge on the shores of the Tiberian sea.--
(John 21:15-17.)

17. That the apostles realized that though the Master had gone He had
left with them authority and command to build up the Church as an
established organization, is abundantly proved by scripture. They
first proceeded to fill the vacancy in the presiding council or
"quorum" of twelve, a vacancy occasioned by the apostasy and death of
Judas Iscariot; and the mode of procedure in this official act is
instructive. The installation of a new apostle was not determined by
the eleven alone; we read that the disciples (or members of the
Church) were gathered together--about a hundred and twenty in number.
To them Peter presented the matter requiring action, and emphasized
the fact that the man to be chosen must be one who had personal
knowledge and testimony of the Lord's ministry, and who was therefore
qualified to speak as a special witness of the Christ, which
qualification is the distinguishing feature of the apostleship.
"Wherefore," said Peter, "of these men which have companied with us
all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning
from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from
us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his
resurrection."--(Acts 1:21, 22; read verses 15-26 inclusive.) We are
further informed that two men were nominated, and that the divine
power was invoked to show whether either, and if so, which, was the
Lord's choice. Then the votes were cast "and the lot fell upon
Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles."

18. It is evident that the apostles considered their council or quorum
as definitely organized with a membership limit of twelve; and that
the work of the Church required that the organization be made
complete. Nevertheless, we read of none others subsequently chosen to
fill vacancies in the council of twelve. Paul, who previous to his
conversion was known as Saul of Tarsus, received a special
manifestation, in which he heard the voice of the Risen Lord declaring
"I am Jesus whom thou persecutest,"--(Acts 9:5; read verses 1-22) and
thereby he became a special witness of the Lord Jesus, and as such was
in truth an apostle, though we have no definite scriptural record that
he was ever made a member of the council of twelve. As showing the
importance of ordination to office under the hands of duly constituted
authorities, we have the instance of Paul's ordination. Though he had
conversed with the Resurrected Jesus, though he had been the subject
of a special manifestation of divine power in the restoration of his
sight, he had nevertheless to be baptized; and later he was
commissioned for the work of the ministry by the authoritative
imposition of hands.--(Acts 13:1-3.)

19. Another instance of official action in choosing and setting apart
men to special office in the Church arose soon after the ordination of
Matthias. It appears that one feature of the Church organization in
early apostolic days was a common ownership of material things,
distribution being made according to need. As the members increased,
it was found impracticable for the apostles to devote the necessary
attention and time to these temporal matters, so they called upon the
members to select seven men of honest report, whom the apostles would
appoint to take special charge of these affairs. These men were set
apart by prayer and by the laying on of hands.--(Acts 6:1-7.) The
instance is instructive as showing that the apostles realized their
possession of authority to direct in the affairs of the Church and
that they observed with strict fidelity the principle of common
consent in the administration of their high office. They exercised
their priestly powers in the spirit of love, and with due regard to
the rights of the people over whom they were placed to preside.

20. Under the administration of the apostles, and others who labored
by their direction in positions of lesser authority, the Church grew
in numbers and in influence.--(See Note 3, end of chapter.) For ten or
twelve years after the ascension of Christ, Jerusalem remained the
headquarters of the Church, but branches, or, as designated in the
scriptural record, separate "churches," were established in the
outlying provinces. As such branches were organized, bishops, deacons,
and other officers were chosen, and doubtless ordained by authority,
to minister in local affairs.--(See Philip. 1:1; compare I Tim.
3:1,2,8,10.)

21. That the commission of the Lord Jesus to the apostles, instructing
them to preach the gospel widely, was executed with promptness and
zeal, is evident from the rapid growth of the Church in the early
apostolic times.--(Acts 6:7; 12:24; 19:20.) Paul, writing about A. D.
64--approximately thirty years after the ascension--declares that the
gospel had already been carried to every nation--"preached to every
creature under heaven,"--(Col. 1:23; compare verse 6) by which
expression the apostle doubtless means that the gospel message had
been so generally proclaimed, that all who would might learn of it.

22. Details as to the organization of the Church in apostolic days are
not given with great fulness. As already shown, the presiding
authority was vested in the twelve apostles; and furthermore, the
special calling of the seventies has received attention; but beside
these there were evangelists, pastors, and teachers;--(Eph. 4:11) and
in addition, high priests,--(Heb. 5:1-5) elders,--(Acts 14:23; 25:6;
I Peter 5:1) bishops,--(I Tim. 3:1; Titus 1:7) etc. The purpose of
these several offices is explained by Paul to be:--"For the perfecting
of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ."--(Eph. 4:12; read also verses 13-16.) The Church with
its graded offices and its spiritual gifts has been aptly compared to
a perfect body with its separate organs and its individual members,
each necessary to the welfare of the whole, yet none independent of
the rest. As in the human organism so in the Church of Christ, no one
with propriety can say to another, "I have no need of thee."--(See I
Cor. 12. See note 4, end of chapter.)

**The Church of Christ on the Western Hemisphere**.

23. We have seen, on the evidence of the Jewish scriptures, how the
Church was established and made strong in Asia and Europe in and
immediately following the meridian of time. The scriptures cited are
such as appeal to all earnest Christians; the authority is that of the
New Testament. We have now to consider the establishment of the Church
amongst those who constituted another division of the house of
Israel--a people inhabiting what is now known as the American
continent.

24. For the benefit of those who are unfamiliar with the Nephite
scriptures published to the world as the Book of Mormon, a brief
historical summary is here presented.--(See Note 5, end of chapter.)
In the year 600 B. C., in the reign of King Zedekiah, a small colony
was led from Jerusalem by an inspired prophet named Lehi. These people
were brought by divine assistance to the shores of the Arabian Sea,
where they constructed a vessel in which they crossed the great waters
to the western coast of South America. They landed 590 B. C. The
people were soon divided into two parties, led respectively by Nephi
and Laman, sons of Lehi; and these factions grew into the opposing
nations known in history as Nephites and Lamanites. The former
developed while the latter retrograded in the arts of civilization.
Nephite prophets predicted the earthly advent of the Messiah, and
foretold His ministry, crucifixion, and resurrection.

25. The record states that the Messiah appeared in person among the
Nephites on the western continent. This was subsequent to His
ascension from the Mount of Olives. A foreshadowing of this great
event was given by Christ in a declaration made while yet He lived on
earth. Comparing Himself to the good shepherd who giveth his life for
the sheep, He said: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this
fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold, and one shepherd."--(John 10:16; read verses 1-18
inclusive. Compare III Nephi 15:21.)

26. According to the Nephite record, certain predicted signs of the
Savior's death had come to pass. Destructive earthquakes and other
dread convulsions of nature had taken place in the west, while the
supreme tragedy was being enacted on Calvary. The people of the land
Bountiful, comprising the northern portion of South America, were
still marveling over the great convulsions that had terrified them a
few weeks earlier, and on a certain occasion, were gathered together
discussing the matter, when they heard a voice as from the heavens
saying: "Behold my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I
have glorified my name: hear ye him."--(III Nephi 11:7; read the
