The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Door into Infinity, by Edmond Hamilton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Door into Infinity

Author: Edmond Hamilton

Release Date: June 17, 2010 [EBook #32847]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOOR INTO INFINITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       The Door Into Infinity

                         By EDMOND HAMILTON

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales
August-September 1936. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _An amazing weird mystery story, packed with thrills, danger
and startling events._]




_1. The Brotherhood of the Door_


"Where leads the Door?"

"_It leads outside our world._"

"Who taught our forefathers to open the Door?"

"_They Beyond the Door taught them._"

"To whom do we bring these sacrifices?"

"_We bring them to Those Beyond the Door._"

"Shall the Door be opened that They may take them?"

"_Let the Door be opened!_"

Paul Ennis had listened thus far, his haggard face uncomprehending in
expression, but now he interrupted the speaker.

"But what does it all mean, inspector? Why are you repeating this to
me?"

"Did you ever hear anyone speak words like that?" asked Inspector Pierce
Campbell, leaning tautly forward for the answer.

"Of course not--it just sounds like gibberish to me," Ennis exclaimed.
"What connection can it have with my wife?"

He had risen to his feet, a tall, blond young American whose
good-looking face was drawn and worn by inward agony, whose crisp yellow
hair was brushed back from his forehead in disorder, and whose blue eyes
were haunted with an anguished dread.

He kicked back his chair and strode across the gloomy little office,
whose single window looked out on the thickening, foggy twilight of
London. He bent across the dingy desk, gripping its edges with his hands
as he spoke tensely to the man sitting behind it.

"Why are we wasting time talking here?" Ennis cried. "Sitting here
talking, when anything may be happening to Ruth!

"It's been hours since she was kidnapped. They may have taken her
anywhere, even outside of London by now. And instead of searching for
her, you sit here and talk gibberish about Doors!"

Inspector Campbell seemed unmoved by Ennis' passion. A bulky, almost
bald man, he looked up with his colorless, sagging face, in which his
eyes gleamed like two crumbs of bright brown glass.

"You're not helping me much by giving way to your emotions, Mr. Ennis,"
he said in his flat voice.

"Give way? Who wouldn't give way?" cried Ennis. "Don't you understand,
man, it's Ruth that's gone--my wife! Why, we were married only last week
in New York. And on our second day here in London, I see her whisked
into a limousine and carried away before my eyes! I thought you men at
Scotland Yard here would surely act, do something. Instead you talk
crazy gibberish to me!"

"Those words are _not_ gibberish," said Pierce Campbell quietly. "And I
think they're related to the abduction of your wife."

"What do you mean? How could they be related?"

The inspector's bright little brown eyes held Ennis'. "Did you ever hear
of an organization called the Brotherhood of the Door?"

Ennis shook his head, and Campbell continued, "Well, I am certain your
wife was kidnapped by members of the Brotherhood."

"What kind of an organization is it?" the young American demanded. "A
band of criminals?"

"No, it is no ordinary criminal organization," the detective said. His
sagging face set strangely. "Unless I am mistaken, the Brotherhood of
the Door is the most unholy and blackly evil organization that has ever
existed on this earth. Almost nothing is known of it outside its circle.
I myself in twenty years have learned little except its existence and
name. That ritual I just repeated to you, I heard from the lips of a
dying member of the Brotherhood, who repeated the words in his
delirium."

Campbell leaned forward. "But I know that every year about this time the
Brotherhood come from all over the world and gather at some secret
center here in England. And every year, before that gathering, scores of
people are kidnapped and never heard of again. I believe that all those
people are kidnapped by this mysterious Brotherhood."

"But what becomes of the people they kidnap?" cried the pale young
American. "What do they do with them?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Inspector Campbell's bright brown eyes showed a hint of hooded horror,
yet he shook his head. "I know no more than you. But whatever they do to
the victims, they are never heard of again."

"But you must know something more!" Ennis protested. "What is this
Door?"

Campbell again shook his head. "That too I don't know, but whatever it
is, the Door is utterly sacred to the members of the Brotherhood, and
whomever they mean by They Beyond the Door, they dread and venerate to
the utmost."

"Where leads the Door? _It leads outside our world_," repeated Ennis.
"What can that mean?"

"It might have a symbolic meaning, referring to some secluded fastness
of the order which is away from the rest of the world," the inspector
said. "Or it might----"

He stopped. "Or it might what?" pressed Ennis, his pale face thrust
forward.

"It might mean, literally, that the Door leads outside our world and
universe," finished the inspector.

Ennis' haunted eyes stared. "You mean that this Door might somehow lead
into another universe? But that's impossible!"

"Perhaps unlikely," Campbell said quietly, "but not impossible. Modern
science has taught us that there are other universes than the one we
live in, universes congruent and coincident with our own in space and
time, yet separated from our own by the impassable barrier of totally
different dimensions. It is not entirely impossible that a greater
science than ours might find a way to pierce that barrier between our
universe and one of those outside ones, that a Door should be opened
from ours into one of those others in the infinite outside."

"A door into the infinite outside," repeated Ennis broodingly, looking
past the inspector. Then he made a sudden movement of wild impatience,
the dread leaping back strong in his eyes again.

"Oh, what good is all this talk about Doors and infinite universes doing
in finding Ruth? I want to _do_ something! If you think this mysterious
Brotherhood has taken her, you must surely have some idea of how we can
get her back from them? You must know something more about them than
you've told."

"I don't know anything more certainly, but I've certain suspicions that
amount to convictions," Inspector Campbell said. "I've been working on
this Brotherhood for many years, and block after block I've narrowed
down to the place I think the order's local center, the London
headquarters of the Brotherhood of the Door."

"Where is the place?" asked Ennis tensely.

"It is the waterfront cafe of one Chandra Dass, a Hindoo, down by East
India Docks," said the detective officer. "I've been there in disguise
more than once, watching the place. This Chandra Dass I've found to be
immensely feared by everyone in the quarter, which strengthens my belief
that he's one of the high officers of the Brotherhood. He's too
exceptional a man to be really running such a place."

"Then if the Brotherhood took Ruth, she may be at that place now!" cried
the young American, electrified.

