body, leveled the pistol and fired at a mark midway between the red
eyes.

There was a tremendous roar and the animal leaped. Ned sprang to one
side. The huge beast with blood pouring from his head turned and would
have been upon him at the second leap, but a long barrel and then an arm
was projected over Ned's shoulder. A pistol was fired almost in his ear.
The monster's spring was checked in mid-flight, and he fell to the
earth, dead. Ned too, fell, but in a faint.




CHAPTER IX

THE RUINED TEMPLES


Ned revived and sat up. Cold water which Obed had brought in his hat
from the river was dripping from his face. At his feet lay a huge black
animal, terrible even in death. There was one wound in his head, where
Ned's bullet had gone in, and another through the right eye, where
Obed's had entered, reaching the brain. Ned's strength now returned
fully and the color came back to his face. He stood up, but he shuddered
nevertheless.

"Obed," he said gratefully, "you came just in time."

"I surely did," said that cheerful artisan. "A bullet in time saved a
life like thine. But you had already given him a bad wound."

"What is he, Obed?"

"About the biggest and finest specimen of a black jaguar that ever
ravaged a Mexican jungle. I always thought the black kind was found only
in Paraguay and the regions down there, but I'm quite sure now that at
least one of them has been roaming up here, and he is bound to have kin,
too. Ned, isn't he a terror? If he'd got at you he'd have ripped you in
pieces in half a minute."

Ned shuddered again. Even in death the great black jaguar was capable of
inspiring terror. He had never before seen such a picture of magnificent
and sinister strength. He was heavier and more powerful than a tiger,
and he knew that the jaguar often became a man-eater.

"I'd like to have that skin to lay upon the parlor of my palatial home,
if I ever have one," said Obed, "and I reckon that you and I had better
stick pretty close together while we are in this jungle. Our pistols are
not loaded now, and we have no more ammunition."

They did not dare to sleep again in the same place, fearing that the
jaguar might have a mate which would seek revenge upon them, but, a
couple of hundred yards further down, they found in the river a little
island, twelve or fifteen feet square. Here they felt that the water
would somehow give them security, and they lay down once more.

Ned was awakened a second time by that terrifying pu-pu-pu. It
approached through the forest but it stopped at the point where the dead
body of the black giant lay. He knew that it was the voice of the mate.
He listened a long time, but he did not hear it again, and he concluded
that the second jaguar, after the brief mourning of animals, had gone
away. He fell asleep again, and did not awaken until day.

They were now practically unarmed, but they kept the pistols, for the
sake of show in case any peons of the jungle should offer trouble, and
pressed forward, with all the speed possible in so dense a tangle of
forest. In the deep shade of trees and bushes Ned continually saw the
shadows of immense black jaguars. He knew that it was only nerves and
imagination, but he did not like to be in a condition that enabled fancy
to play him such tricks. He longed more than ever for the open plains,
even with dust and thirst.

Already they saw the mountains rising before them, terrace after
terrace, and, three days after the encounter with the jaguar, they
began to ascend the middle slopes between the tierra caliente and the
lofty sierras. The whole character of the country changed. The tropical
jungle ceased. They now entered magnificent forests of oak, pine, plane
tree, mimosas, chestnut and many other varieties. They also saw the
bamboo, the palm and the cactus. The water was fresher and colder, and
they felt as if they had come into a new world.

But the question of food supply returned. They had used the wild fruits
in abundance, always economizing strictly with their tortillas and
frijoles. Now they had eaten the last of these and a diet of fruit alone
would not do.

"We'll have to sell a pistol in the way that we sold the musket," said
Ned.

"I hate to do it," said Obed, "but I don't see anything else that we can
do. We might seize our food at the first hut we find, but whatever may
be the quarrels between the Mexicans and Texans, I'm not willing to rob
any of these poor peons."

"Nor I," said Ned with emphasis. "My pistol goes first."

They found the usual adobe hut in a pleasant valley, and the noble
senor, the proprietor, was at home playing a mandolin. He did not
suspect them to be Gringos, but he was quite sure that they were
brigands and he made the exchange swiftly and gladly. Two days later the
other pistol went in the same way, and they began to think how they
could acquire new weapons and plenty of ammunition for them. They sat in
the shade of a great oak while they discussed the question. It was
certainly a vital one. Dangerous enough at any time, the long journey
through Mexico would become impossible without arms.

"If we could loot them from the soldiers I wouldn't mind at all," said
Obed. "The soldiers are to act against Texas, according to the tale you
tell, and the tale is true. All's fair in flight and war, and if such a
chance comes our way I'm going to take it."

"So am I," said Ned.

But such a chance was in no hurry to present itself. They went on for a
number of days and came now to the region, bordering the high sierras,
passing through vast forests of oak and pine, and seeing scarcely any
habitation. Here, as they walked toward twilight along one of the narrow
paths, a voice from the bushes cried: "Halt!"

Ned saw several gun barrels protruding from the foliage, and was
obedient to the command. He also threw up his hands and Obed White was
no slower than he. Ned judged from the nature of the ambush that they
had fallen among brigands, then so prevalent in Mexico, and the thought
gave him relief. Soldiers would carry him back to Santa Anna, but surely
brigands would not trouble long those who had nothing to lose.

"It is well, friends, that you obey so quickly," said a man in gaudy
costume as he stepped from the bushes followed by a half dozen others,
evil looking fellows, all carrying guns and pistols. Ned noticed that
two of the guns were rifles of long and slender barrel, undoubtedly of
American make.

"Good-evening, Captain," said Obed White in his smoothest tones. "We
were expecting to meet you, as we learned that we are in the territory
which you rule so well."

The man frowned and then smiled.

"I see that you are a man of humor, amigo," he said, "and it is well.
Your information is correct. I rule this territory. I am Captain Juan
Carossa and these are my men. We collect tribute from all who pass this
way."

"A worthy task and, I have no doubt, a profitable one."

"Always worthy but not always profitable. However, I trust that you can
make it worth our while."

A look of sadness passed over the expressive features of Obed White.

"You look like a brave and generous man, Senor Juan Carossa," he said
sorrowfully, "and it grieves both my young friend and myself to the very
center of our hearts to disappoint you. We have nothing. There is not a
cent of either gold or silver upon us. Jewels we admire, but we have
them not. You may search."

He held wide his arms and Ned did likewise. Carossa gave an order to one
of his men, a tall fellow, swathed in a red serape, to make the search,
and he did so in such a rapid and skillful manner that Ned marveled. He
felt hands touching him here and there, as light as the fall of a leaf.
Obed was treated in the same fashion, and then the man in the red serape
turned two empty and expressive palms to his chief.

Carossa swore fluently, and bent a look of deep reproach upon Ned and
Obed.

"Senors," he said, "this is an injustice, nay more, it is a crime. You
come upon the territory over which we range. You put us to the trouble
of stopping you, and you have nothing. All our risk and work are
wasted."

Obed shook his head in apology.

"It is not our fault," he said. "We had a little money, but we spent it
for food. We had some arms also, but they went for food too, so you see,
good kind Captain Carossa, we had nothing left for you."

"But you have two good serapes," said the Captain. "Had you money we
would not take them from you, but it must not be said of Captain Carossa
and his men that they went away with nothing. I trust, senor, that you
do not think me unreasonable."

Obed White considered. Captain Carossa was a polite man. So was he.

"We can ill afford to part with these cloaks or serapes," he said, "but
since it must be we cannot prevent it. Meanwhile, we ask you to offer us
your hospitality. We are on the mountains now, and the nights are cold.
We would be chilled without our cloaks. Take us with you, and, in the
morning, when the warm sunshine comes we will proceed."

Carossa laughed and pulled his long black mustaches. "Santiago, but you
have a spirit," he said, "and I like it. You shall have your request and
you may come with us but to-morrow you go forth stripped and shorn. My
men cannot work for nothing. Spanish or Mexican, English or Gringo you
must pay. Gringo you are, but for that I do not care. It is in truth the
reason why I yield to your little request, because you can never bring
the soldiers of Santa Anna down upon us."

Obed While smiled. The look upon his face obviously paid tribute to the
craft and courage of Juan Carossa, the great, and Carossa therefore was
pleased. The brigand captain did not abate one whit from his resolution
to have their serapes and their coats too, but he would show them first
that he was a gentleman. He spoke to his men, and the fellow with the
red serape led the way along a narrow path through a forest of myrtle
oaks. They went in single file, the Captain about the middle, and just
behind him Obed, with Ned following. Ned as usual was silent, but Obed
talked nearly all the time and Carossa seemed to like it. Ned saw that
the brigand leader was vain, eager to show his power and resource, but
he was sure that, at bottom, he was cruel, and that he would turn them
forth stripped and helpless in the forest.

Night came down suddenly, but the man in front lighted a small lantern
that he took from under his serape, and they continued the march with
unabated speed. The forest thinned, and about nine o'clock they came
into an open space. The moon was now out and Ned saw a group of four
rectangular buildings, elevated on mounds. The buildings, besides being
rectangles themselves, were so placed that the group made a rectangle.
The structures of stone were partly ruined, and of great age. They
followed the uniform plan of those vast and mysterious ruins found so
often in Southern and Central Mexico. The same race that erected the
pyramids on the Teotihuacan might have raised these buildings.

"My home! The quarters of myself and my men," said Carossa,
dramatically, pointing to the largest of the buildings. "We do not know
who built it. It goes far beyond the time of Cortez, but it serves us
now. The peon will not approach it, because Carossa is there and maybe
ghosts too."

"I'm not afraid of ghosts," said Obed White. "Lead on, most noble
captain. We appreciate your hospitality. We did not know that you were
taking us to a palace."

Captain Carossa deigned to be pleased again with himself, and, taking
the lantern from the man in the red serape, he led the way. He entered
the large building by means of a narrow passageway in one of the angles,
passed through an unroofed room, and then came to a door at which both
Ned and Obed gazed with the most intense curiosity. The doorway was made
of only three stones, two huge monolithic door jambs, each seven feet
high, nearly as wide and more than two feet thick. Upon them rested a
lintel also monolithic, but at least twenty feet in length, with a width
of five feet and a thickness of three feet. It was evident to Ned that
mighty workmen had once toiled here.

"Is not that an entrance fit for a king?" said the brigand captain,
again making a dramatic gesture.

"It is fit for Captain Juan Carossa, which is more," said Obed White
with suave courtesy.

Captain Carossa bowed. Once more he deigned to be pleased with himself.
Then he led through the doorway and Ned uttered a little cry of
admiration. They stood in a great room with a magnificent row of
monolithic pillars running down the center. A stone roof had once
covered the room, but it had long since fallen in. The interior of the
walls was plain, made of stones and mortar, once covered with cement,
deep blood red in color, of which a few fragments remained. But the
walls on the outside were covered with splendid panels of mosaic work
varied now and then by sculptured stones. The stone used on the outside
was of a light cream color. But the boy did not see the mosaic panels
until later.

Silent and studious, these vast ruins of a mysterious race made a great
appeal to Ned. He forgot the rough brigands for a moment, and stood
there looking at the walls and great columns, upon which the moon was
pouring a flood of beams. What were these outlaws to those mighty
builders whom the past had swallowed up so completely?

The brigands were already lighting a fire beside one of the huge
monoliths, and Carossa lay down on a serape. The fire blazed up, but it
did not detract from the weird effect of the Hall of Pillars. One of the
men warmed food which he brought from another of the ruined houses, and
Carossa told his prisoners to eat.

"What I give you to-night, and what I shall give you to-morrow morning
may be the last food that you will have for some time," he said, "so
enjoy it as best you may."

He smiled, his lips drawing back from his white teeth, and in some
singular way he made Ned think of the black jaguar and his black lips
writhing back from his great fangs. Why had Obed spoken of coming with
them? Better to have been stripped in the path, and to have gone on
alone. But he ate the food, as the long marching had made him hungry,
and lay down within the rim of the firelight.

The men also ate, and Ned saw that they were surly. Doubtless they had
endured much hardship recently and had secured little spoil. He heard
muttered sounds which he knew were curses. He became more uneasy than
ever. Certainly little human kindness lurked in the hearts of such as
these, and he believed that Carossa was playing with them for his own
amusement, just as a trainer with a steel bar makes the animals in a
cage do their tricks.

The mutterings among the men increased. Carossa spoke to one of them,
who brought forth a stone jar from a recess in the wall. Tin cups were
produced and all, including Carossa, drank pulque made from the maguey
plant. They offered it also to Ned and Obed, but both declined.

The pulque did not make the men more quarrelsome, but seemed to plunge
them into a lethargy. Two or three of them hummed doleful songs, as if
they were thinking of homes to which they could not go. One began to
weep, but finally spread out his serape, lay down on it and went to
sleep. Three or four others soon did the same. Two sat near the great
monolithic doorway, with muskets across their knees. Undoubtedly they
were intended to be sentinels, but Ned noted that their heads drooped.

"I shall sleep now, my Gringo guests," said Carossa, "and I advise you
to do the same. You cannot alter anything, and you will need the
strength that sleep brings."

"Your advice is good," said Obed, "and we thank you, Captain Carossa,
for your advice and courtesy. Manners are the fine finish of a man."

His serape had not yet been taken from him, and he rolled himself in it.
Ned was already in his, lying with his feet to the smoldering fire. The
boy did not wish to sleep, nor could he have slept had he wished. But he
saw that Carossa soon slumbered, and the sentinels by the doorway
seemed, at least, to doze. He turned slightly on his side, and looked at
Obed who lay about eight feet away. He could not see the man's face, but
his body did not stir. Perhaps Obed also slept.

A wind was now rising and it made strange sounds among the vast ruins.
It was a moan, a shriek and a hoarse sigh. Perhaps the peons were not so
far wrong! The ghosts did come back to their old abodes. Ned was glad
that he was not alone. Even without Obed the company of brigands would
have been a help. He lay still a long time.

The coals of the fire went out, one by one, and where they had glowed
only black ashes lay. The wind among the ruins played all kinds of
strange variations, and Ned was never more awake in his life. He took a
last look at the sentinels, and he was sure that they slept, sitting,
with their muskets across their laps. Then he rose to his knees and
with difficulty checked a cry of astonishment when he saw Obed rising at
the same time. They remained on their knees a moment or two looking at
each other and then, simultaneously they rose to their feet. Their
comprehension was complete.

Ned looked down at Carossa. The brigand chief slept soundly and his face
in repose was wholly evil. The gayety and courtesy that they had seen
upon it awake were only a mask.

Obed stepped lightly to one of the pillars and Ned followed him. He knew
what Obed was seeking. Here was the great chance. The brigands, careless
from long immunity, had stacked their guns against the pillar, and Ned
and Obed promptly selected the two American rifles that Ned had noticed.
Hung by each was a large supply of powder and bullets to fit which they
also took. Two of the best machetes were chosen too, and then they were
ready to go. With the rifle in his hand, the great weapon with which the
pioneer made his way from ocean to ocean, Ned had strength and courage.
He believed that Obed and he could defeat the entire force of brigands,
but he awaited the signal of his older comrade.

Standing close together behind the massive pillar they could not now see
the sentinels at the doorway. Ned was quite sure that they were sleeping
and that he and his comrade could steal past them. But Obed turned in
another direction and Ned followed without a word. The man had caught a
glimpse of a second entrance at the opposite side of this hall of
pillars, and the two darted into it.

They found themselves in a passage less than the height of a man, and
only about three feet wide, but Obed led on boldly, and Ned, with equal
boldness, followed. The wall was about five feet thick, and they came
out into a court or patio surrounded by four ruined buildings. The floor
of the patio was cement, upon which their footsteps made no noise, and,
going through the great apertures in one of the ruined buildings, they
stood entirely on the outside of the mass of ancient temples, or
whatever it may have been.

"Ned," whispered Obed, "we ought to go right down on our knees and give
thanks. We've not only escaped from Carossa and his cutthroats, but
we've brought with us two American rifles; good enough for anybody and
two or three hundred rounds of ammunition, the things that we needed
most of all."

"It must have been more than chance," said Ned with emotion. "It must
have been a hand leading us."

"When I proposed to go with them I thought we might have a chance of
some kind or other. Well, Captain Carossa, you meant us evil, but you
did us good. Come, Ned, the faster we get away from these ghosts the
better. Besides, we've got more to carry now."

They had also brought away with them their packs of food, but they did
not mind the additional weight of the weapons, which were worth more to
them than gold or jewels. They listened a minute or two to see if any
alarm had been raised, but no sound came from the Hall of Pillars, and
with light steps and strong hearts they began another march on their
northward journey.

They traveled by the moon and stars, and, as they were not hindered now
by any great tangle of undergrowth, they made many miles before dawn,
although they were ascending steadily. They had come upon the edge of
the great central plateau of Mexico, which runs far into the north and
which includes much of Texas. Before them lay another and great change
in the country. They were now to enter a land of little rain, where
they would find the ragged yucca tree, the agave and the cactus, the
scrubby mesquite bush and clumps of coarse grass. But they had passed
through so much that they did not fear it.

They hunted for an hour after sunrise, before they found a small brook,
at which they drank, and, in spirit, returned the thanks which Obed had
said so emphatically were due. Then, wrapped in the useful serapes, they
went to sleep once more in a thicket. They had been sure that the
Mexicans could not trail them, and their confidence was justified. When
they awoke in the afternoon no human being was in sight, and their
loaded rifles lay undisturbed beside them.

Then they entered upon the plain, plodding steadily on over a dusty gray
landscape, but feeling that their rifles would be ample protection
against anything that they might meet. The sun became very hot, and they
longed at times for the shade of the forest that they had left behind,
but they did not cease their march. Off to their left they saw towering
