10


Happy Thurbelow finished sweeping the long barracks and leaned wearily
on his broom. That is, he didn't lean on it, or it would have collapsed
him to the floor, but he made the gesture. Why, he wondered, didn't the
Masters make the Toughs sweep their own barracks? Perhaps the Toughs
couldn't be made, or perhaps the Masters did it just from an excess of
cruelty.

Happy's monstrously bloated body sagged, and his skin felt dangerously
dry and tight. Happy was so adipose that his hands engulfed the broom
handle like a toothpick; under the transparent skin, his flesh was clear
and translucent, and there could be seen the tiny red lines of the
branching veins. Happy was like a jellyfish, in huge human form.

"Shadow!" he called in a high, grating voice. "I'm going below."

Shadow appeared disconcertingly, ten feet away. Dark-skinned Shadow
looked at him silently with white-rimmed eyes. Then Shadow turned and
disappeared, as only Shadow could.

Hanging up the broom, Happy waddled to the iron-barred gate that
prevented entrance to a downward-plunging ramp. He pressed a button
beside it and waited.

He looked out the window beside the gate. The sands of the Desert of
Candor stretched orange and bleak under the bronze sky. Somewhere out
there to the south, across those sands, under that sky, lay the shining
dome of Ophir.

The window would be easily broken, and it was large enough for even
Happy's bulky body to pass through. But the oxygen-scant air of Mars
would sear his lungs to quick death without a helmet; and even if it
would not, Happy's skin would dry and crack in a few hours of that
outside air, and he would die in slower agony.

"What is the purpose of your call?" asked an impersonal voice from the
loudspeaker beside the barred gate.

"I have finished my task, Master," said Happy, puffing a little. "I seek
your grace to go below."

The loudspeaker said no more, but after a moment the gate stirred and
lifted into the ceiling. Happy went through it gratefully, and waddled
down the gently sloping ramp. The gate descended behind him.

Happy did not know whether Shadow had come through the open gate with
him, but it didn't matter. Shadow could slip easily through the bars
when he wished.

At the foot of the ramp was a vast, low cavern, stretching out of sight
in all directions. It was dim, shading into the darkness of distance.
Its floor was water, flat water, subdivided into large rectangular vats.
In most of the vats vegetation grew in various stages, greening under
the ultraviolet rays that radiated from the low roof. Between the vats
ran straight, narrow walkways of packed earth.

Happy waddled along one of the walkways until he found an empty vat. He
lowered himself over its edge and sank happily into the still, cool
water, like a hippopotamus submerging. He immersed himself completely,
then lay back in the water, with only his face floating barely above the
surface.

Shadow appeared, apparently out of nowhere, and sat down on the edge of
the vat, letting his flat legs dangle into the water.

"Nothing like it," proclaimed Happy, splashing a little. "Nothing on
Mars like it. You ought to come on in, Shadow. As flat as you are, you
ought to float on the surface without any trouble at all."

Shadow nodded silently, but made no move.

"I don't see why the Toughs can't take care of their own barracks,"
complained Happy, returning to the subject closest to his displeasure.
"You reckon the Toughs are actually the rebels, and the Masters can't
make them do anything?"

Shadow shook his head, but whether in negation or disclaimer of
knowledge, Happy could not interpret.

Happy flinched, and shifted in the vat.

"There's still part of a skeleton in here," he announced. "I thought
this was an empty one."

Moving, he flinched again. With purpose, he aroused himself and ploughed
to the edge of the vat.

"I've got to find another vat," he said. "I can't take a nap if I'm
going to get punched in the fanny with bones every five minutes."

He heaved himself over the edge onto the walkway with difficulty, and
got slowly to his feet. Shadow lifted his feet out of the vat, stood up
and vanished.

Happy knew how Shadow was able to disappear so suddenly, and it did not
disturb him. Seen directly from front or rear, Shadow had the dimensions
of a normal, black-skinned man. But Shadow was flat, no thicker than
half an inch. When Shadow turned sidewise, he vanished to the sight.

Occasionally, Happy wondered how Shadow happened to be, and why he was
here in the caverns, but it was not the sort of thing to bother his mind
for very long.

Happy moved along the walkways, peering into the vats which appeared to
be empty. He assumed Shadow was following him; Shadow always did.

Around corners, he came upon blubbery creatures like himself, tending
the plants. They nodded greeting at him, and Happy nodded back.

His search was discouraging. All the vats not filled with plants seemed
to have corpses in them, in varying stages of decomposition.

Around one corner, Happy came upon a Tough, lounging in the walkway. The
Tough was a compact, muscular youth, with bullet head, sullen eyes and
hard mouth. He looked as though he lounged with hands in pockets, but,
like Happy and all the others, he was naked, so that was just an
impression.

Happy stopped. He and his soft kind avoided the Toughs when they could.
The Tough looked at him with disinterested eyes, then looked away.

Happy was uncertain what to do or say. His impulse was to turn and go
back, but he did not quite dare.

"Are you a rebel, Tough?" he burbled the first thing in his mind, for
lack of something else to say.

The Tough looked at him contemptuously. Then, suddenly, the Tough's hard
eyes flared with savage excitement and he moved swiftly on Happy. As he
began to turn in panic, Happy saw from the corner of his eye another
Tough racing around the corner of the walkway to come upon him from
behind.

The Tough in front of him reached him and began pummeling him viciously
with his fists, the hard fists sinking like painful hammers deep into
Happy's flesh with every blow. Happy bleated in fright and distress,
trying ineffectually to ward off his attacker.

Then, out of nowhere, Shadow flashed in like a lightning bolt on the
other Tough as he had almost reached Happy. There was a brief, squalling
tangle and the Tough pitched headlong into a plant-choked vat.

Shadow vanished and reappeared, intermittently, like a flashing light.
The first Tough, seeing what had happened to his cohort, ceased
pummeling Happy abruptly and took to his heels. He vanished around a
corner.

The vanquished Tough climbed out of the vat, sputtering and cursing, and
fled in the other direction.

"Oh, my! Oh, my!" exclaimed Happy to the now-invisible Shadow. "What
wicked creatures!"

Sore and shaken, he moved on down the walkway, his search now
intensified by the need for wetness to soothe his injured flesh.

He came upon a vat without vegetation and, at first joyous glance,
thought it empty. Then, disappointment, a comparatively fresh body
floated in it, just under the surface.

It was the body of a man. Naked, it was smooth and plump with the water
that had seeped into its tissues, and it was a uniform dead-white all
over, like the belly of a fish. The face and lips were monochrome white,
the hair was bleached, and when it opened its eyes, they were so
colorless that the action was almost unnoticeable.

Realizing, Happy was paralyzed with shock.

The dead creature's eyes moved from side to side, then stopped, fixing
on Happy. Its chest began to rise and fall slowly, with
breathing--_under water_.

"Shadow!" squeaked Happy helplessly.

Shadow appeared beside him.

"Shadow, it's alive," whispered Happy, desperately frightened.

The two stood side by side, staring breathlessly down into the water.
The creature in the vat moved its hands tentatively, it opened its mouth
and closed it. Then it stirred with purpose, turned and climbed up over
the side of the vat, dripping like a weird creature from the depths of
the sea.

It stood up before them, dripping.

The man bent slightly and belched forth a great quantity of water from
his lungs. He straightened, and breathed in the air in great, satisfied
gasps.

"I'm Dark Kensington," he said in a rusty voice. "Where is this?"

At his words, Shadow disappeared.

Dark Kensington. Had Maya seen him now, she could not possibly have
recognized him. The muscular body and dark, handsome face were bloated
and pale. The black hair was bleached to pale seaweed, and the blue eyes
were completely colorless now.

"This is the Canfell Hydroponic Farm," answered Happy, gaining a little
courage. "Under the surface of the Desert of Candor."

"The Desert of Candor?" repeated Dark, and the pale lips twisted in a
smile. "They hauled me quite a way. I was at Solis Lacus."

"How did you get here?" asked Happy with sudden eagerness. "Only dead
people are thrown in the vats, to make chemicals for the plants. How
could you stay alive under water?"

"I imagine I can breathe water for the same reason I can still live
after a heat beam burned my guts out, but I don't know what that reason
is. I imagine that the first step in finding out is to get out of this
place."

"You can't get away from here," said Happy positively. "Nobody ever
has."

"We'll see," said Dark confidently. "I gather you and your companion are
some sort of prisoners."

"Slaves," corrected Happy with unaccustomed bitterness. "The Jellies are
slaves, to work in the vats. I don't know if the Toughs are slaves, too,
but the Masters let them sleep in barracks on the surface. Shadow's not
either a Jelly or a Tough, and I don't know if he's a slave. Shadow's
just Shadow."

"Before you go on," interrupted Dark, "I seem to be extraordinarily
hungry."

Happy twittered and quivered. He moved hurriedly around a corner to one
of the storage vats, and returned in a moment with a supply of the
tasteless gelatin that was their food here. Dark fell to greedily, and
Happy, his tongue loosed by this new companionship, started feeding him
information in a steady stream.

"I don't know how they get us here," said Happy. "We aren't born here,
but something happens to our memories. We can't stay up in the dry air
very long, or our skin cracks and our flesh collapses. You see, our
tissues are mostly water.

"Everybody down here's like me. Everybody but the Toughs. You'll see
them. I don't know how they got here, either, or what use they are. They
don't work like we do.

"And Shadow. He's different. Shadow likes me. He stays with me all the
time. And then there's Old Beard. He hides down here, and I don't think
the Masters know he's here. He's very old and very wise."

"Who are the Masters?" asked Dark curiously, between mouthfuls. "And
what sort of work do you do for them?"

"They're the people who run the hydroponic farm. They're normal men,
like you--I mean, like you would be if you weren't swollen up and pale
like the bodies that are thrown in the vats.

"Old Beard knows; he's very wise. He calls the Masters 'Marscorp.' I
don't know why, but it seems that before I lost my memory I knew a
language where _corp_ meant _body_. Like _corpse_, you know. Maybe it
has something to do with the bodies they put in the vats.

"Old Beard says that the Masters are developing Martian foods that we
can eat without dying, and he must be right, because sometimes they
bring down some hard foods and make some of us eat them instead of
gelatin. But those who eat the hard foods always die, so I don't suppose
they've succeeded yet, except some of the Toughs. Some of the Toughs
have eaten the hard food without dying, sometimes, but they got pretty
sick. And then--"

"Hold on! Wait a minute!" exclaimed Dark, holding up a restraining hand.
"I know what Marscorp is, and I'm not surprised they're behind it. But
I'm trying to digest all this you're throwing at me."

Happy fell silent, reluctantly, and Dark cogitated deeply.

Happy fidgeted, anxious to speak but afraid to interrupt Dark's
thoughts.

And then Shadow reappeared. Shadow appeared out of nowhere, and made
gestures at Happy. Happy glanced at Dark, timidly. At last, he gained
courage to speak.

"Shadow tells me--" he began, then cringed when Dark looked up in
surprise. Dark gestured to him to go on.

"Shadow tells me," said Happy, "that Old Beard wants to see you. Will
you go with us to Old Beard?"

"Certainly," agreed Dark. "From what you tell me, I'm rather anxious to
meet Old Beard, too."

He followed Happy and the alternately visible and invisible Shadow along
the paths that twisted among the vats for some distance. At last they
ducked into some luxuriant foliage that hung over to form a bower above
the space between two vats.

Old Beard sat there, in a corner of the dimness, pale eyes fixed
silently on the trio. Old Beard was not so very old. He appeared to be
in robust middle age, although his skin was very pale from long
existence underground. His hair and heavy beard were long and untrimmed,
and were a deep iron-gray.

"Thank you for coming," said Old Beard in a deep, resonant voice that
bespoke strength and bore an undertone of bitter determination. "It is
safer for me not to move around too much in the open except at certain
hours."

"I was glad to come, because I'm sure you can help me and I may be able
to help you, too," said Dark. "I'm Dark Kensington."

"So Shadow told me. I find this extremely interesting."

"You've heard of me, then?" asked Dark.

Old Beard laughed, deeply.

"More interesting than that," he said. "Once, before I was marooned here
and Happy's people came to know me as Old Beard, I had a name of my
own."

He stroked his beard, and favored Dark with a shrewd look from his pale
eyes.

"Yes," said Old Beard, "I've heard of Dark Kensington, and there never
