The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Boy Patriot, by Edward Sylvester Ellis


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Boy Patriot


Author: Edward Sylvester Ellis



Release Date: April 17, 2007  [eBook #21125]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY PATRIOT***


E-text prepared by Taavi Kalju, Janet Blenkinship, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from
digital material generously made available by Internet Archive/American
Libraries (http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21125-h.htm or 21125-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/1/2/21125/21125-h/21125-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/1/2/21125/21125-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/boypatriot00elliiala





THE BOY PATRIOT.

by

EDWARD SYLVESTER ELLIS,

The Author of
"The Blue Flag," "Cheerily, Cheerily," Etc.







[Illustration]


"HE WILL BLESS THEM THAT FEAR THE LORD, BOTH SMALL AND
GREAT."


[Illustration]


Published by the
American Tract Society,
150 Nassau-Street, New York.

The character of Blair Robertson, the Fairport boy, will not have been
sketched in vain, if it prompt one young American to such a hearty
serving of God as will make him a blessing to our dear native land. We
have laid the scene of our story fifty years ago, but we trust that its
lessons will be none the less appropriate to the present day.



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863, by the
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, in the Clerk's Office of the District
Court of the Southern District of the State of New York.




CONTENTS.

  CHAPTER I.

  Fairport                                                             5

  CHAPTER II.

  The young Orator                                                     9

  CHAPTER III.

  The English Boy                                                     25

  CHAPTER IV.

  The Patriot's Work                                                  36

  CHAPTER V.

  Blair's Company                                                     44

  CHAPTER VI.

  A Pilot                                                             65

  CHAPTER VII.

  No!                                                                 62

  CHAPTER VIII.

  The Storm                                                           69

  CHAPTER IX

  A Reward                                                            74

  CHAPTER X.

  A New Deck                                                          80

  CHAPTER XI.

  "Mum"                                                               86

  CHAPTER XII.

  The First Effort                                                    95

  CHAPTER XIII.

  Temptation                                                         105

  CHAPTER XIV.

  "Derry Duck"                                                       113

  CHAPTER XV.

  A Letter                                                           128

  CHAPTER XVI.

  A Marvel                                                           134

  CHAPTER XVII.

  The Conflict                                                       144

  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Wages                                                              152

  CHAPTER XIX.

  Home                                                               160

  CHAPTER XX.

  Sacred Joy                                                         170

  CHAPTER XXI.

  Conclusion                                                         174




THE BOY PATRIOT.




CHAPTER I.

FAIRPORT.


Were you ever on the coast of Maine? If so, you know how the rocky
shores stretch out now and then clear into the ocean, and fret the salt
waves till they are all in a foam. Old Ocean is not to be so set at
defiance and have his rightful territory wrung from him, without taking
his revenge after his own fashion. Far up into the land he sends his
arms, and crooks and bends and makes his way amid the rocks, and finally
falls asleep in some quiet harbor, where the tall pines stand by the
shore to sing him a lullaby.

In just such a spot as this the town we shall call Fairport was built.
Axe in one hand and Bible in the other, stern settlers here found a
home. Strong hard-featured sons, and fair rosy-cheeked daughters made
glad the rude cabins that were soon scattered along the shore. The axe
was plied in the woods, and the needle by the fireside, and yet grim
Poverty was ever shaking her fist in the very faces of the settlers, and
whispering sad things of what the uncertain future might have in store
for them.

Cheerily they bore the hardships of the present hour, and a deaf ear
they turned to all such whispers. Yet those settlers were sensible,
matter-of-fact men; and it was soon plain to them, that healthful as
were the breezes that made so rosy the cheeks of their daughters,
Fairport was not the very best site in the world for a settlement, at
least if its people were to depend on the thin and rocky soil won from
the forest, which scarcely produced the bare necessaries of life.

Was Fairport given up in despair? No, no. Her settlers were not the men
to be so daunted and foiled. If the land was unkindly, they could take
to the water; and so they did, to a man. Some were off to the
Newfoundland Banks, tossing about the codfish, and piling them up into
stacks that were more profitable than any hay of their own raising. Some
were on board swift vessels, doing a good share of the carrying trade
between the West Indies and the New England cities. Some were seeking
the whale far in the northern seas; while others, less enterprising,
were content to fish nearer home for all sorts of eatable dwellers in
the sea, from halibut to herring.

Now a new day had begun for Fairport. The original cabins began to
tower in the air or encroach on the submissive gardens, as building
after building was added by the prosperous owners. Miniature villas,
with a wealth of useless piazzas, appeared in the neighborhood of the
town, and substantial wharves bordered one side of the quiet harbor, and
gave a welcome to the shipping that seemed to grow and cluster there
like the trees of a forest.

Fairport had passed the struggles of its early youth when our story
begins, though there were gray-haired citizens yet within its borders
who could tell how the bears had once looked in at their cabin windows,
and the pine-trees had stood thick in what was now the main street of
the rising town.




CHAPTER II.

THE YOUNG ORATOR.


The boys of Fairport were an amphibious set, who could live on land
truly, but were happiest when in or near the water. To fish and swim,
row, trim the sail, and guide the rudder, were accomplishments they all
could boast. A bold, hardy, merry set they were; and but for the
schoolmaster's rod and the teaching of their pious mothers, might have
been as ignorant as oysters and merciless as the sharks. Master Penrose
had whipped into most of them the elements of a plain English education,
and gentle mothers had power to soften and rule these rough boys, when
perhaps a stronger hand would have failed.

Master Penrose always gave a full holiday on Saturday. Then the wharves
were sure to swarm with the mischievous little chaps, all eager to carry
out some favorite plan for amusement, in which old Ocean was sure to be
engaged as a play-fellow. Poor indeed was the lad who had not a
fish-hook and line with which to try his skill. The very youngest had
his tiny boat to be launched, while his elders were planning
sailing-parties, or jumping and leaping in the water like so many
dolphins.

Boys like to have a leader, some one they look up to as superior to the
rest, and capable of deciding knotty questions, and "going ahead" in all
times of doubt and difficulty. Blair Robertson occupied this position
among the youngsters of Fairport. He had lawfully won this place among
his fellows and "achieved greatness," by being the best scholar at the
academy, as well as the boldest swimmer, most skilful fisherman, and
most experienced sailor among all the boys for miles along the coast. It
was Blair Robertson's boast that he belonged to the nineteenth century,
and grew old with it. It was doubtful whether the bold lad considered
this age of progress as honored by his playing his part in its drama, or
whether he claimed a reflected glory, as having been born at the very
dawn of that century which promised so much for the thronging millions
of our world.

Be that as it may, Joe Robertson the pilot and Margaret his wife
rejoiced, in the year 1800, over their first and only child. Thirteen
years had swept by, and the honest couple were now as proud of that
brave, strong boy as they had been of their baby, and with better
reason.

Troublous times had come upon their native land. War had been declared
with England. All Fairport was ablaze at the idea of American seamen
being forced to serve on English ships, and of decks whose timber grew
in the free forests of Maine or North Carolina, being trodden by the
unscrupulous feet of British officers with insolent search-warrants in
their hands.

Blair Robertson had his own views on these subjects--views which we find
him giving forth to his devoted followers one sunny Saturday afternoon.

Blair was mounted on a sugar hogshead which stood in front of one of the
warehouses on the wharf. From this place of eminence he looked down on a
constantly increasing crowd of youthful listeners. A half hour before, a
row of little legs had been hanging over the side of the wharf, while
their owners were intent upon certain corks and lines that danced or
quivered amid the waves below. Now the lines were made fast to stone and
log, while the small fishermen stood agape to listen to the fluent
orator.

This was but the nucleus of the gathering crowd. Every boy who came near
the eager circle must of course stop to find out what was going on; and
it was with no little pride that Blair beheld the dozens of faces soon
upturned to his.

Blair might have remembered that if there had been but a dead dog in the
centre of the group, there would have been an equal gathering and
pushing to know the cause of the meeting; but he, like many an older
speaker, was willing to attribute to his eloquence what might have had
even a humbler cause.

"Our rights invaded; a man's ship no longer his castle; the free
American forced to forsake his stars and stripes! The foot of the
Briton pollutes our decks. His tyrannical arm takes captive our fathers,
and dooms them to a servitude of which the world knows no equal. Shall
