York and Albany a large territory in America, comprehending Long
Island and the islands in its neighborhood--his title to which Lord
Stirling had released--and all the lands and rivers from the west side
of the Connecticut River to the east side of Delaware Bay. This
sweeping grant included the whole of New Netherlands and a part of the
territory of Connecticut, which, two years before, Charles had
confirmed to Winthrop and his associates.

The Duke of York lost no time in giving effect to his patent. As lord
high admiral he directed the fleet. Four ships, the _Guinea_, of
thirty-six guns; the _Elias_, of thirty; the _Martin_, of sixteen; and
the _William and Nicholas_, of ten, were detached for service against
New Netherlands, and about four hundred fifty regular soldiers, with
their officers, were embarked. The command of the expedition was
intrusted to Colonel Richard Nicolls, a faithful Royalist, who had
served under Turenne with James, and had been made one of the
gentlemen of his bedchamber. Nicolls was also appointed to be the
Duke's deputy-governor, after the Dutch possessions should have been
reduced.

With Nicolls were associated Sir Robert Carr, Colonel George
Cartwright, and Samuel Maverick, as royal commissioners to visit the
several colonies in New England. These commissioners were furnished
with detailed instructions; and the New England governments were
required by royal letters to "join and assist them vigorously" in
reducing the Dutch to subjection. A month after the departure of the
squadron the Duke of York conveyed to Lord Berkeley and Sir George
Carteret all the territory between the Hudson and Delaware Rivers,
from Cape May north to 41 deg. 40' latitude, and thence to the Hudson, in
41 deg. latitude, "hereafter to be called by the name or names of Nova
Caesarea or New Jersey."

Intelligence from Boston that an English expedition against New
Netherlands had sailed from Portsmouth was soon communicated to
Stuyvesant by Captain Thomas Willett; and the burgomasters and
_schepens_ of New Amsterdam were summoned to assist the council with
their advice. The capital was ordered to be put in a state of defense,
guards to be maintained, and _schippers_ to be warned. As there was
very little powder at Fort Amsterdam a supply was demanded from New
Amstel, and a loan of five or six thousand guilders was asked from
Rensselaerswyck. The ships about to sail for Curacao were stopt;
agents were sent to purchase provisions at New Haven; and as the enemy
was expected to approach through Long Island Sound, spies were sent to
obtain intelligence at West Chester and Milford.

But at the moment when no precaution should have been relaxed, a
dispatch from the West India directors, who appear to have been misled
by advices from London, announced that no danger need be apprehended
from the English expedition, as it was sent out by the King only to
settle the affairs of his colonies and establish episcopacy, which
would rather benefit the company's interests in New Netherlands.
Willett now retracting his previous statements, a perilous confidence
returned. The Curacao ships were allowed to sail; and Stuyvesant,
yielded to the solicitation of his council, went up the river to look
after affairs at Fort Orange.

The English squadron had been ordered to assemble at Gardiner's
Island. But, parting company in a fog, the _Guinea_, with Nicolls and
Cartwright on board, made Cape Cod, and went on to Boston, while the
other ships put in at Piscataway. The commissioners immediately
demanded the assistance of Massachusetts, but the people of the Bay,
who feared, perhaps, that the King's success in reducing the Dutch
would enable him the better to put down his enemies in New England,
were full of excuses. Connecticut, however, showed sufficient
alacrity; and Winthrop was desired to meet the squadron at the west
end of Long Island, whither it would sail with the first fair wind.

When the truth of Willett's intelligence became confirmed, the council
sent an express to recall Stuyvesant from Fort Orange. Hurrying back
to the capital, the anxious director endeavored to redeem the time
which had been lost. The municipal authorities ordered one-third of
the inhabitants, without exception, to labor every third day at the
fortifications; organized a permanent guard; forbade the brewers to
malt any grain; and called on the provincial government for artillery
and ammunition. Six pieces, besides the fourteen previously allotted,
and a thousand pounds of powder were accordingly granted to the city.
The colonists around Fort Orange, pleading their own danger from the
savages, could afford no help; but the soldiers of Esopus were ordered
to come down, after leaving a small garrison at Ronduit.

In the meantime the English squadron had anchored just below the
Narrows, in Nyack Bay, between New Utrecht and Coney Island. The mouth
of the river was shut up; communication between Long Island and
Manhattan, Bergen and Achter Cul, interrupted; several yachts on their
way to the South River captured; and the block-house on the opposite
shore of Staten Island seized. Stuyvesant now dispatched Counsellor de
Decker, Burgomaster Van der Grist, and the two domines Megapolensis
with a letter to the English commanders inquiring why they had come,
and why they continued at Nyack without giving notice. The next
morning, which was Saturday, Nicolls sent Colonel Cartwright, Captain
Needham, Captain Groves, and Mr. Thomas Delavall up to Fort Amsterdam
with a summons for the surrender of "the town situate on the island
and commonly known by the name of Manhatoes, with all the forts
thereunto belonging."

This summons was accompanied by a proclamation declaring that all who
would submit to his majesty's government should be protected "in his
majesty's laws and justice," and peaceably enjoy their property.
Stuyvesant immediately called together the council and the
burgomasters, but would not allow the terms offered by Nicolls to be
communicated to the people, lest they might insist on capitulating. In
a short time several of the burghers and city officers assembled at
the Stadt-Huys. It was determined to prevent the enemy from surprizing
the town; but, as opinion was generally against protracted resistance,
a copy of the English communication was asked from the director. On
the following Monday the burgomasters explained to a meeting of the
citizens the terms offered by Nicolls. But this would not suffice; a
copy of the paper itself must be exhibited. Stuyvesant then went in
person to the meeting. "Such a course," said he, "would be disapproved
of in the Fatherland--it would discourage the people." All his
efforts, however, were in vain; and the director, protesting that he
should not be held answerable for the "calamitous consequences," was
obliged to yield to the popular will.

Nicolls now addrest a letter to Winthrop, who with other commissioners
from New England had joined the squadron, authorizing him to assure
Stuyvesant that, if Manhattan should be delivered up to the King, "any
people from the Netherlands may freely come and plant there or
thereabouts; and such vessels of their own country may freely come
thither, and any of them may as freely return home in vessels of their
own country." Visiting the city under a flag of truce Winthrop
delivered this to Stuyvesant outside the fort and urged him to
surrender. The director declined; and, returning to the fort, he
opened Nicolls' letter before the council and the burgomasters, who
desired that it should be communicated, as "all which regarded the
public welfare ought to be made public." Against this Stuyvesant
earnestly remonstrated, and, finding that the burgomasters continued
firm, in a fit of passion he "tore the letter in pieces." The citizens
suddenly ceasing their work at the palisades, hurried to the
Stadt-Huys, and sent three of their number to the fort to demand the
letter.

In vain the director hastened to pacify the burghers and urge them to
go on with the fortifications. "Complaints and curses" were uttered on
all sides against the company's misgovernment; resistance was declared
to be idle; "The letter! the letter!" was the general cry. To avoid a
mutiny Stuyvesant yielded, and a copy, made out from the collected
fragments, was handed to the burgomasters. In answer, however, to
Nicolls' summons he submitted a long justification of the Dutch title;
yet while protesting against any breach of the peace between the King
and the States-General, "for the hinderance and prevention of all
differences and the spilling of innocent blood, not only in these
parts, but also in Europe," he offered to treat. "Long Island is gone
and lost;" the capital "can not hold out long," was the last dispatch
to the "Lord Majors" of New Netherlands, which its director sent off
that night "in silence through hell Gate."

Observing Stuyvesant's reluctance to surrender, Nicolls directed
Captain Hyde, who commanded the squadron, to reduce the fort. Two of
the ships accordingly landed their troops just below Breuckelen
(Brooklyn), where volunteers from New England and the Long Island
villages had already encamped. The other two, coming up with full sail
passed in front of Fort Amsterdam and anchored between it and Nutten
Island.[2] Standing on one of the angles of the fortress--an
artilleryman with a lighted match at his side--the director watched
their approach. At this moment the two domines Megapolensis, imploring
him not to begin hostilities, led Stuyvesant from the rampart, who
then, with a hundred of the garrison, went into the city to resist the
landing of the English. Hoping on against hope, the director now sent
Counsellor de Decker, Secretary Van Ruypen, Burgomaster Steenwyck, and
"Schepen" Cousseau with a letter to Nicolls stating that, as he felt
bound "to stand the storm," he desired if possible to arrange on
accommodation. But the English commander merely declared, "To-morrow I
will speak with you at Manhattan."

"Friends," was the answer, "will be welcome if they come in a friendly
manner."

"I shall come with ships and soldiers," replied Nicolls; "raise the
white flag of peace at the fort, and then something may be
considered." When this imperious message became known, men, women, and
children flocked to the director, beseeching him to submit. His only
answer was, "I would rather be carried out dead." The next day the
city authorities, the clergymen, and the officers of the burgher
guard, assembling at the Stadt-Huys, at the suggestion of Domine
Megapolensis, adopted a remonstrance to the director, exhibiting the
hopeless situation of New Amsterdam, on all sides encompassed and
hemmed in by enemies, and protesting against any further opposition to
the will of God. Besides the _schout_, burgomasters, and schepens, the
remonstrance was signed by Wilmerdonck and eighty-five of the
principal inhabitants, among whom was Stuyvesant's own son, Balthazar.

At last the director was obliged to yield. Although there were now
fifteen hundred souls in New Amsterdam, there were not more than two
hundred and fifty men able to bear arms, besides the one hundred fifty
regular soldiers. The people had at length refused to be called out,
and the regular troops were already heard talking of "where booty is
to be found, and where the young women live who wear gold chains." The
city, entirely open along both rivers, was shut on the northern side
by a breastwork and palisades[3], which, though sufficient to keep out
the savages, afforded no defense against a military siege. There were
scarcely six hundred pounds of serviceable powder in store.

A council of war had reported Fort Amsterdam untenable; for though it
mounted twenty-four guns, its single wall of earth, not more than ten
feet high and four thick, was almost touched by the private dwellings
clustered around, and was commanded, within a pistol-shot, by hills on
the north, over which ran the "Heereweg" or Broadway.

Upon the faith of Nicolls' promise to deliver back the city and fort
"in case the difference of the limits of this province be agreed upon
betwixt his majesty of England and the high and mighty States-General,"
Stuyvesant now commissioned Counsellor John de Decker, Captain
Nicholas Varlett, Dr. Samuel Megapolensis, Burgomaster Cornelius
Steenwyck, old Burgomaster Oloff Stevenson van Cortlandt, and old
Schepen Jacques Cousseau to agree upon articles with the English
commander or his representatives. Nicolls, on his part, appointed Sir
Robert Carr and Colonel George Cartwright, John Winthrop, and Samuel
Willys, of Connecticut, and Thomas Clarke and John Pynchon, of
Massachusetts. "The reason why those of Boston and Connecticut were
joined," afterward explained the royal commander, "was because those
two colonies should hold themselves the more engaged with us if the
Dutch had been overconfident of their strength."

At eight o'clock the next morning, which was Saturday, the
commissioners on both sides met at Stuyvesant's "bouwery" and arranged
the terms of capitulation. The only difference which arose was
respecting the Dutch soldiers, whom the English refused to convey back
to Holland. The articles of capitulation promised the Dutch security
in their property, customs of inheritance, liberty of conscience and
church discipline. The municipal officers of Manhattan were to
continue for the present unchanged, and the town was to be allowed to
chose deputies, with "free voices in all public affairs." Owners of
property in Fort Orange might, if they pleased, "slight the
fortifications there," and enjoy their houses "as people do where
there is no fort."

For six months there was to be free intercourse with Holland. Public
records were to be respected. The articles, consented to by Nicolls,
were to be ratified by Stuyvesant the next Monday morning at eight
o'clock, and within two hours afterward, the "fort and town called New
Amsterdam, upon the Isle of Manhatoes," were to be delivered up, and
the military officers and soldiers were to "march out with their arms,
drums beating, and colors flying, and lighted matches."

On the following Monday morning at eight o'clock Stuyvesant, at the
head of the garrison, marched out of Fort Amsterdam with all the
honors of war, and led his soldiers down the Beaver Lane to the
water-side, whence they were embarked for Holland. An English
corporal's guard at the same time took possession of the fort; and
Nicolls and Carr, with their two companies, about a hundred seventy
strong, entered the city, while Cartwright took possession of the
gates and the Stadt-Huys. The New England and Long Island volunteers,
however, were prudently kept at the Breuckelen ferry, as the citizens
dreaded most being plundered by them. The English flag was hoisted on
Fort Amsterdam, the name of which was immediately changed to "Fort
James." Nicolls was now proclaimed by the burgomasters deputy-governor
for the Duke of York, in compliment to whom he directed that the city
of New Amsterdam should thenceforth be known as "New York."

To Nicolls' European eye the Dutch metropolis, with its earthen fort,
enclosing a windmill and high flag-staff, a prison and a governor's
house, and a double-roofed church, above which loomed a square tower,
its gallows and whipping-post at the river's side, and its rows of
houses which hugged the citadel, presented but a mean appearance. Yet
before long he described it to the Duke as "the best of all his
majesty's towns in America," and assured his royal highness that, with
proper management, "within five years the staple of America will be
drawn hither, of which the brethren of Boston are very sensible."...

The reduction of New Netherlands was now accomplished. All that could
be further done was to change its name; and, to glorify one of the
most bigoted princes in English history, the royal province was
ordered to be called "New York." Ignorant of James' grant of New
Jersey to Berkeley and Carteret, Nicolls gave to the region west of
the Hudson the name of "Albania," and to Long Island that of
"Yorkshire," so as to comprehend all the titles of the Duke of York.
The flag of England was at length triumphantly displayed, where, for
half a century, that of Holland had rightfuly waved; and from Virginia
to Canada, the King of Great Britain was acknowledged as sovereign.

Viewed in all its aspects, the event which gave to the whole of that
country a unity in allegiance, and to which a misgoverned people
complacently submitted, was as inevitable as it was momentous. But
whatever may have been its ultimate consequences, this treacherous and
violent seizure of the territory and possessions of an unsuspecting
ally was no less a breach of private justice than of public faith.

It may, indeed, be affirmed that, among all the acts of selfish
perfidy which royal ingratitude conceived and executed, there have
been few more characteristic and none more base.

    [1] From Brodhead's "History of New York."

    [2] Now called Governor's Island.

    [3] A fortification from which has come the modern name of Wall
    Street.




BACON'S REBELLION IN VIRGINIA

(1676)

BY AN ANONYMOUS WRITER[1]


There is no nation this day under the copes of Heaven can so
experimentaly speak the sad effects of men of great parts being
reduc't to necessity, as England; but not to rake up the notorious
misdemeanours of the dead, I shall endeavour to prevent the sad
effects of so deplorable a cause, by giving you an account of the
remarkable life and death of this gentleman of whom I am about to
discourse. And because when a man has once ingag'd himself in an ill
action, all men are ready to heap an innumerable aspersions upon him,
of which he is no ways guilty, I shall be so just in the History of
his Life as not to rob him of those commendations which his Birth and
Acquisitions claim as due, and so kind both to Loyalty and the wholsom
constituted Laws of our Kingdom, as not to smother any thing which
