"That explains it, I think," said Mr. Roumann. "Well, Washington, don't
let it happen again. We don't want to be dashed downward through space
all on account of a rooster."

"No, indeedy; I'll lock him up good an' tight arter dis," promised the
colored man.

They resumed the interrupted dinner, discussing the possibility of what
might have happened, and congratulating themselves that it did not take
place.

"It certainly seems like old times to be eating while travelling along
like a cannon-ball," remarked Jack. "I declare, it gives me an
appetite!"

"You didn't need any," retorted his chum. "But say! maybe things don't
taste good to me, after what I got while that fellow Axtell had me a
prisoner! Jack, I'll have a little more of that cocoanut pie, if you
don't mind."

Jack passed over the pastry, and Mark took a liberal piece. Then
Washington brought in the ice cream, which was frozen on board by means
of an ammonia gas apparatus, the invention of Professor Henderson. The
novelty of dining as comfortably as at home, yet being thousands of
miles above the earth, and, at the same time, speeding along like a
cannon-ball, did not impress our friends as much as it had during their
trip to Mars.

"Well, we're making a little better time now," observed Mark, as he and
the others rose from the table and went to the engine room. "The gauge
shows that we're making twenty-five miles a second."

"We will soon go much faster," announced Professor Roumann. "I have not
yet had a chance to test my Cardite motor to its fullest speed, and I
think I will do so. I wish to see if it will equal my Etherium machine.
I'll turn on the power gradually now, and we'll see what happens."

"How fast do you think it ought to send us along?" asked Jack.

"Oh, perhaps one hundred and twenty-five miles a second. You know we
went a hundred miles a second when we headed for Mars. I would not be
surprised if we made even one hundred and thirty miles a second with
the Cardite."

"Whew! If we ever hit anything going like that!" exclaimed old Andy
Sudds.

"We'd go right through it," finished Jack fervently. The professor was
soon ready for the test. Slowly he shoved over the controlling lever.
The Cardite motor hummed more loudly, like some great cat purring.
Louder snapped the electrical waves. The air vibrated with the enormous
speed of the valve wheels, and there was a prickling sensation as the
power flowed into the positive and negative plates, by which the
projectile was moved through space.

"Watch the hand of the speed indicator, boys," directed Professor
Roumann, "while Professor Henderson and I manipulate the motor. Call
out the figures to us, for we must keep our eyes on the valves." Slowly
the speed indicator hand, which was like that of an automobile
speedometer, swept over the dial.

"Fifty miles a second," read off Mark. The two professors shoved the
levers over still more.

"Seventy-five," called Jack.

"Give it a little more of the positive current," directed Mr. Roumann.

"Ninety miles a second," read Mark a few moments later.

"We are creeping up, but we have not yet equalled our former speed,"
spoke Mr. Henderson. The motor was fairly whining now, as if in protest.

"One hundred and five miles," announced Jack.

"Ha! That's some better!" ejaculated the German. "I think we shall do
it." Once more he advanced the speed lever a notch.

"One hundred and thirty!" fairly shouted Mark. "We are beating all
records!"

"And we will go still farther beyond them!" cried Mr. Roumann. "Watch
the gauge, boys!"

To the last notch went the speed handle. There was a sharp crackling,
snapping sound, as if the metal of which the motor was composed was
strained to the utmost. Yet it held together.

The hand of the dial quivered. It hung on the one hundred and thirty
mark for a second, as if not wanting to leave it, and then the steel
pointer swept slowly on in a circle, past point after point.

"One hundred and thirty-five--one hundred and forty," whispered Jack,
as if afraid to speak aloud. The two professors did not look up from
the motor. They looked at the oil and lubricating cups. Already the
main shaft was smoking with the heat of friction.

"Look! look!" whispered Mark hoarsely.

"One hundred and fifty-three miles a second!" exclaimed Jack. "You've
done it, Professor Roumann!"

"Yes, I have," spoke the German, with a sigh of satisfaction. "That is
faster than mortal man ever travelled before, and I think no one will
ever equal our speed. We have broken all records--even our own. Now I
will slow down, but we must do it gradually, so as not to strain the
machinery."

He slipped back the speed lever, notch by notch. The hand of the dial
began receding, but it still marked one hundred and twenty miles a
second.

Suddenly, above the roar and hum of the motor, there sounded the voice
of Andy.

"Professor!" he shouted. "We're heading right toward a big, black
stone! Is that the moon?"

"The moon? No, we are not half way there," said Mr. Henderson. "Are you
sure, Andy?"

"Sure? Yes! I saw it from the window in the pilot-house. We are
shooting right toward it."

"Look to the motor, and I'll see what it is," directed Mr. Henderson to
his friend. Followed by the boys, he hurried to the steering tower. His
worst fears were confirmed.

Speeding along with a swiftness unrivalled even by some stars, the
projectile was lurching toward a great, black heavenly body. "It's a
meteor! An immense meteor!" cried Professor Henderson, "and it's coming
right toward us."

"Will it hit us?" gasped Mark and Jack together.

"I don't know. We must try to avoid it. Boys, notify Professor Roumann
at once. We are in grave danger!"




CHAPTER XVII

TURNING TURTLE


Together Mark and Jack leaped for the engine room. Their faces showed
the fear they felt. Even before they reached it, they realized that, at
the awful speed at which they were travelling, and the fearful velocity
of the meteor, there might be a crash in mid-air which would destroy
the projectile and end their lives.

"I wonder if we can steer clear of it?" gasped Jack.

"If it's possible the professor will do it," responded his chum.

The next instant they were in the engine room, where Mr. Roumann was
bending over the Cardite motor.

"Shut off the power!" yelled Jack.

"We are going to hit a meteor!" gasped Mark.

The German looked up with a startled glance.

"Slow down?" he repeated. "It is impossible to slow down at once! We
are going ninety miles a second!" He pointed to the speed gauge.

"Then there's going to be a fearful collision!" cried Jack, and he
blurted out the fact of the nearness of the heavenly wanderer.

"So!" exclaimed Professor Roumann. "Dot is bat! ferry bat!" and he
lapsed into the broken language that seldom marked his almost perfect
English. Then, murmuring something in his own tongue, he leaped away
from the motor, calling to the boys:

"Slow it down gradually! Keep pulling the speed lever toward you! I
will set in motion the repelling apparatus and go to help Professor
Henderson steer out of the way. It is our only chance!"

Mark and Jack took their places beside the Cardite motor, which was
still keeping up a fearful speed, though not so fast as at first. To
stop it suddenly would mean that the cessation of strain could not all
be diffused at once, and serious damage might result.

The only way was to come gradually down to the former speed, and, while
Mark kept his eyes on the indicator, Jack pulled the lever toward him,
notch by notch.

"She's down to seventy-five miles a second," whispered Mark. They were
as anxious now to reduce speed as they had been before to increase it.

Meanwhile Professor Roumann had set in motion a curious bit of
apparatus, designed to repel stray meteors or detached bits of comets.
As is well known, bodies floating in space, away from the attraction of
gravitation, attract or repel each other as does a magnet or an
electrically charged object.

Acting on this law of nature, Professor Roumann had, with the aid of
Mr. Henderson, constructed a machine which, when a negative current of
electricity was sent into it, would force away any object that was
approaching the _Annihilator_. In a few moments the boys at the Cardite
motor heard the hum, the throb and crackling that told them that the
repelling apparatus was at work.

But would it act in time? Or would the meteor prove too powerful for
it? And, if it did, would the two scientists be able to steer the
swiftly moving projectile out of the way of the big, black stone, as
the old hunter called it?

These were questions that showed on the faces of the two lads as they
bent over the motor.

"We're only going fifty miles a second now," whispered Jack.

Mark nodded his head. "Can't you pull the lever over faster?" he asked.

"I don't dare," replied his chum. There was nothing to do but to wait
and gradually slow up the projectile as much as possible. The boys
could hear the professors in the pilothouse shifting gears, valves and
levers to change the course of the projectile. Andy Sudds and
Washington White, with fear on their faces, looked into the engine
room, waiting anxiously for the outcome.

"Hab--hab we hit it yet?" asked Washington, moving his hands nervously.

"I reckon not, or we'd know it," said the hunter.

"No, not yet," answered Jack, in a low voice. "How much are we making
now, Mark?"

"Only thirty a second."

"Good! She's coming down."

Hardly had he spoken than there sounded a noise like thunder, or the
rushing of some mighty wind. The projectile, which was trembling
throughout her length from the force of the motor, shivered as though
she had plunged into the unknown depths of some mighty sea. The roaring
increased. Mark and Jack looked at each other. Washington White fell
upon his knees and began praying in a loud voice. Old Andy grasped his
gun, as though to say that, even though on the brink of eternity, he
was ready.

Then, with a scream as of some gigantic shell from a thousand-inch
rifle, something passed over the _Annihilator_; something that shook
the great projectile like a leaf in the wind. And then the scream died
away, and there was silence. For a moment no one spoke, and then Jack
whispered hoarsely:

"We've passed it."

"Yes," added Mark, "we're safe now."

"By golly! I knowed we would!" fairly yelled Washington, leaping to his
feet. "I knowed dat no old meteor could kerflumox us! Perfesser
Henderson he done jumped our boat ober it laik a hunter jumps his boss
ober a fence. Golly! I'se feelin' better now!"

"How did you avoid it?" asked Mark of the professor.

"With the help of the repelling machine and by changing our course. But
we did it only just in time. It was an immense meteor, much larger than
at first appeared, and it was blazing hot. Had it struck us, there
would have been nothing left of us or the projectile either but star
dust. But we managed to pass beneath it, and now we are safe."

They congratulated each other on their lucky escape, and then busied
themselves about various duties aboard the air-craft. The rest of the
day was spent in making minor adjustments to some of the machines,
oiling others, and in planning what they would do when they reached the
moon.

In this way three days and nights passed, mainly without incident. They
slept well on board the _Annihilator_, which was speeding so swiftly
through space--slept as comfortably as they had on earth. Each hour
brought them nearer the moon, and they figured on landing on the
surface of that wonderful and weird body in about three days more.

It was on the morning of the fourth day when, as Mark and Jack were
taking their shift in the engine room, that Jack happened to glance
from the side observation window, which was near the Cardite motor.
What he saw caused him to cry out in surprise.

"I say, Mark, look here! There's the moon over there. We're not heading
for it at all!"

"By Jove! You're right!" agreed his chum. "We're off our course!"

"We must tell Professor Henderson!" cried Jack. "I'll do it. You stay
here and watch things."

A few seconds later a very much alarmed youth was rapidly talking to
the two scientists, who were in the pilot-house.

"Some unknown force must have pulled us off our course," Jack was
saying. "The moon is away off to one side of us."

To his surprise, instead of being alarmed, Mr. Roumann only smiled.

"It's true," insisted Jack.

"Of course, it is," agreed Mr. Henderson. "We can see it from here,
Jack," and he pointed to the observation window, from which could be
noticed the moon floating in the sky at the same time the sun was
shining, a phenomenon which is often visible on the earth early in the
morning at certain of the moon's phases.

"Will we ever get there?" asked Jack.

"Of course," replied Mr. Roumann. "You must remember, Jack, that the
moon is moving at the same time we are. Had I headed the projectile for
Luna, and kept it on that course, she would, by the time we reached
her, been in another part of the firmament, and we would have overshot
our mark. So, instead, I aimed the _Annihilator_ at a spot in the
heavens where I calculated the moon would be when we arrived there.
And, if I am not mistaken, we will reach there at the same time, and
drop gently down on Luna."

"Oh, is that it?" asked the lad, much relieved.

"That's it," replied Mr. Henderson. "And that's why we seem to be
headed away from the moon. Her motion will bring her into the right
position for us to land on when the time comes."

"Then I'd better go tell Mark," said the lad. "He's quite worried." He
soon explained matters to his chum, and together they discussed the
many things necessary to keep in mind when one navigates the heavens.

That day saw several thousand more miles reeled off on the journey to
the moon, and that evening (or rather what corresponded to evening, for
it was perpetual daylight) they began to make their preparations for
landing. Their wonderful journey through space was nearing an end.

"I guess that crazy Axtell fellow was only joking when he said we'd
never reach the moon," ventured Jack. "Nothing has happened yet."

"Only the meteor," said Mark, "and he couldn't know about that. I guess
