The Project Gutenberg EBook Cleopatra, by Georg Ebers, Volume 8.
#42 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Cleopatra, Volume 8.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5480]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 21, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLEOPATRA, BY GEORG EBERS, V8 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





CLEOPATRA

By Georg Ebers

Volume 8.




CHAPTER XIX.

Night brought little sleep to Cleopatra.  Memory followed memory, plan
was added to plan.  The resolve made the day before was the right one.
To-day she would begin its execution.  Whatever might happen, she was
prepared for every contingency.

Ere she went to her work she granted a second audience to the Roman
envoy.  Timagenes exerted all his powers of eloquence, skill in
persuasion, wit, and ingenuity.  He again promised to Cleopatra life and
liberty, and to her children the throne; but when he insisted upon the
surrender or death of Mark Antony as the first condition of any further
negotiations, Cleopatra remained steadfast, and the ambassador set forth
on his way home without any pledge.

After he had gone, the Queen and Iras looked over the plans for the tomb
brought by Gorgias, but the intense agitation of her soul distracted
Cleopatra's attention, and she begged him to come again at a later hour.
When she was alone, she took out the letters which Caesar and Antony had
written to her.  How acute, subtle, and tender were those of the former;
how ardent, impassioned, yet sincere were those of the mighty and fiery
orator, whose eloquence swept the listening multitudes with him, yet whom
her little hand had drawn wherever she desired!

Her heart throbbed faster when she thought of the meeting with Antony,
now close at hand; for Charmian had gone with the Nubian to invite him to
join her again.  They had started several hours ago, and she awaited
their return with increasing impatience.  She had summoned him for their
last mutual battle.  That he would come she did not doubt.  But could she
succeed in rekindling his courage?  Two persons so closely allied should
sink and perish, still firmly united, in the final battle, if victory was
denied.

Archibius was now announced.

It soothed her merely to gaze into the faithful countenance, which
recalled so many of her happiest memories.

She opened her whole soul to him without reserve, and he drew himself up
to his full height, as if restored to youth; while when she told him that
she would never sully herself by treachery to her lover and husband, and
had resolved to die worthy of her name, the expression of his eyes
revealed that she had chosen the right path.

Ere she had made the request that he should undertake the education and
guidance of the children, he voluntarily proposed to devote his best
powers to them.  The plan of uniting Didymus's garden with the Lochias
and giving it to the little ones also met with his approval.  His sister
had already told him that Cleopatra had determined to build her tomb.  He
hoped, he added, that its doors would not open to her for many years.

She shook her head sorrowfully, exclaiming "Would that I could read every
face as I do yours!  My friend Archibius wishes me a long life, if any
one does; but he is as wise as he is faithful, and therefore will
consider that earthly life is by no means a boon in every case.  Besides,
he says to himself: 'Events are impending over this Queen and woman, my
friend, which will perhaps render it advisable to make use of the great
privilege which the immortals bestow on human beings when it becomes
desirable for them to leave the stage of life.  So let her build her
tomb.'  Have I read the old familiar book aright?"

"On the whole, yes," he answered gravely.  "But it is inscribed upon its
pages that a great princess and faithful mother can be permitted to set
forth on the last journey, whence there is no return, only when--"

"When," she interrupted, "a shameful end threatens to fall upon the fair
beginning and brilliant middle period, as a swarm of locusts darkens the
air and devours and devastates the fields.  I know it, and will act
accordingly."

"And," added Archibius, "this end also (faithful to your nature) you will
shape regally.--On my way here I met my sister near the Choma.  You sent
her to your husband.  He will grasp the proffered hand.  Now that it is
necessary to stake everything or surrender, the grandson of Herakles will
again display his former heroic power.  Perhaps, stimulated and
encouraged by the example of the woman he loves, he will even force
hostile Fate to show him fresh favour."

"Destiny will pursue its course," interrupted Cleopatra firmly.  "But
Antony must help me to heap fresh obstacles in the pathway, and when he
wishes to use his giant strength, what masses of rock his mighty arm can
hurl!"

"And if your lofty spirit smooths the path for him, then, my royal
mistress--"

"Even then the close of the tragedy will be death, and every scene a
disappointment.  Was not the plan of bringing the fleet across the
isthmus bold and full of promise?  Even the professional engineers
greeted it with applause, and yet it proved impracticable.  Destiny dug
its grave.  And the terrible omens before and after Actium, and the
stars--the stars!  Everything points to speedy destruction, everything!
Every hour brings news of the desertion of some prince or general.  As if
from a watch-tower, I now overlook what is growing from the seed I sowed.
Sterile ears or poisonous vegetation, wherever I turn my eyes.  And yet!
You, who know my life from its beginning, tell me--must I veil my head in
shame when the question is asked, what powers of intellect, what talents
industry, and desire for good Cleopatra displayed?"

"No, my royal mistress, a thousand times no!"

"Yet the fruit of every tree I planted degenerated and decayed.
Caesarion is withering in the flower of his youth--by whose fault I know
only too well.  You will now take charge of the education of the other
children.  So it is for you to consider what brought me where I now
stand, and how to guard their life-bark from wandering and shipwreck."

"Let me train them to be human beings," replied Archibius gravely, "and
preserve them from the desire to enter the lists with the gods.  From the
simple Cleopatra in the garden of Epicurus, who was a delight to the good
and wise, you became the new Isis, to whom the multitude raised hearts,
eyes, and hands, dazzled and blinded.  We will transfer the twins, Helios
and Selene, the sun and the moon, from heaven to earth; they must become
mortals--Greeks.  I will not transplant them to the garden of Epicurus,
but to another, where the air is more bracing.  The inscription on its
portals shall not be, 'Here pleasure is the chief good,' but 'This is an
arena for character.'  He who leaves this garden shall not owe to it the
yearning for happiness and comfort, but an immovably steadfast moral
discipline.  Your children, like yourself, were born in the East, which
loves what is monstrous, superhuman, exaggerated.  If you entrust them to
me, they must learn to govern themselves.  At the helm stands moral
earnestness, which, however, does not exclude the joyous cheerfulness
natural to our people; the sails will be trimmed by moderation, the
noblest quality of the Greek nation."

"I understand,"  Cleopatra interrupted, with drooping head.  "Interwoven
with the means of securing the children's welfare, you set before the
mother's eyes the qualities she has lacked.  I know that long ago you
abandoned the teachings of Epicurus and the Stoa, and with an earnest aim
before your eyes sought your own paths.  The tempest of life swept me far
away from the quiet garden where we sought the purest delight.  Now I
have learned to know the perils which threaten those who see the chief
good in happiness.  It stands too high for mortals, for in the changeful
stir of life it remains unattainable, and yet it is too low an aim for
their struggles, for there are worthier objects.  Yet one saying of
Epicurus we both believed, and it has always stood us in good stead:
'Wisdom can obtain no more precious contribution to the happiness of
mortal life than the possession of friendship.'"

She held out her hand as she spoke, and while, deeply agitated, he raised
it to his lips, she went on: "You know I am on the eve of the last
desperate battle--if the gods will--shoulder to shoulder with Antony.
Therefore I shall not be permitted to watch your work of education; yet I
will aid it.  When the children question you about their mother, you will
be obliged to restrain yourself from saying: 'Instead of striving for the
painless peace of mind, the noble pleasure of Epicurus, which once seemed
to her the highest good, she constantly pursued fleeting amusements.  The
Oriental recklessly squandered her once noble gifts of intellect and the
wealth of her people, yielded to the hasty impulses of her passionate
nature.'  But you shall also say to them: 'Your mother's heart was full
of ardent love, she scorned what was base, strove for the highest goal,
and when she fell, preferred death to treachery and disgrace.'"
