
'Daily' returned Nydia, with a half-suppressed sigh.

'Daily, indeed!  Does he find her handsome?'

'I should think so, since they are so soon to be wedded.'

'Wedded!' cried Julia, turning pale even through the false roses on her
cheek, and starting from her couch.  Nydia did not, of course, perceive
the emotion she had caused.  Julia remained a long time silent; but her
heaving breast and flashing eyes would have betrayed, to one who could
have seen, the wound her vanity had sustained.

'They tell me thou art a Thessalian,' said she, at last breaking
silence.

'And truly!'

'Thessaly is the land of magic and of witches, of talismans and of
love-philtres,' said Julia.

'It has ever been celebrated for its sorcerers,' returned Nydia,
timidly.

'Knowest thou, then, blind Thessalian, of any love-charms?'

'I!' said the flower-girl, coloring; 'I! how should I?  No, assuredly
not!'

'The worse for thee; I could have given thee gold enough to have
purchased thy freedom hadst thou been more wise.'

'But what,' asked Nydia, 'can induce the beautiful and wealthy Julia to
ask that question of her servant?  Has she not money, and youth, and
loveliness? Are they not love-charms enough to dispense with magic?'

'To all but one person in the world,' answered Julia, haughtily: 'but
methinks thy blindness is infectious; and...  But no matter.'

'And that one person?' said Nydia, eagerly.

'Is not Glaucus,' replied Julia, with the customary deceit of her sex.
'Glaucus--no!'

Nydia drew her breath more freely, and after a short pause Julia
recommenced.

'But talking of Glaucus, and his attachment to this Neapolitan, reminded
me of the influence of love-spells, which, for ought I know or care, she
may have exercised upon him.  Blind girl, I love, and--shall Julia live
to say it?--am loved not in return!  This humbles--nay, not humbles--but
it stings my pride.  I would see this ingrate at my feet--not in order
that I might raise, but that I might spurn him.  When they told me thou
wert Thessalian, I imagined thy young mind might have learned the dark
secrets of thy clime.'

'Alas! no, murmured Nydia: 'would it had!'

'Thanks, at least, for that kindly wish,' said Julia, unconscious of
what was passing in the breast of the flower-girl.

'But tell me--thou hearest the gossip of slaves, always prone to these
dim beliefs; always ready to apply to sorcery for their own low
loves--hast thou ever heard of any Eastern magician in this city, who
possesses the art of which thou art ignorant?  No vain chiromancer, no
juggler of the market-place, but some more potent and mighty magician of
India or of Egypt?'

'Of Egypt?--yes!' said Nydia, shuddering.  'What Pompeian has not heard
of Arbaces?'

'Arbaces! true,' replied Julia, grasping at the recollection. 'They
say he is a man above all the petty and false impostures of dull
pretenders--that he is versed in the learning of the stars, and the
secrets of the ancient Nox; why not in the mysteries of love?'

'If there be one magician living whose art is above that of others, it
is that dread man,' answered Nydia; and she felt her talisman while she
spoke.

'He is too wealthy to divine for money?' continued Julia, sneeringly.
'Can I not visit him?'

'It is an evil mansion for the young and the beautiful,' replied Nydia.
'I have heard, too, that he languishes in...'

'An evil mansion!' said Julia, catching only the first sentence. 'Why
so?'

'The orgies of his midnight leisure are impure and polluted--at least,
so says rumor.'

'By Ceres, by Pan, and by Cybele! thou dost but provoke my curiosity,
instead of exciting my fears,' returned the wayward and pampered
Pompeian. 'I will seek and question him of his lore.  If to these orgies
love be admitted--why the more likely that he knows its secrets!'

Nydia did not answer.

'I will seek him this very day,' resumed Julia; 'nay, why not this very
hour?'

'At daylight, and in his present state, thou hast assuredly the less to
fear,' answered Nydia, yielding to her own sudden and secret wish to
learn if the dark Egyptian were indeed possessed of those spells to
rivet and attract love, of which the Thessalian had so often heard.

'And who dare insult the rich daughter of Diomed?' said Julia,
haughtily. 'I will go.'

'May I visit thee afterwards to learn the result?' asked Nydia,
anxiously.

'Kiss me for thy interest in Julia's honour,' answered the lady. 'Yes,
assuredly.  This eve we sup abroad--come hither at the same hour
to-morrow, and thou shalt know all: I may have to employ thee too; but
enough for the present.  Stay, take this bracelet for the new thought
thou hast inspired me with; remember, if thou servest Julia, she is
grateful and she is generous.'

'I cannot take thy present,' said Nydia, putting aside the bracelet;
'but young as I am, I can sympathize unbought with those who love--and
love in vain.'

'Sayest thou so!' returned Julia.  'Thou speakest like a free woman--and
thou shalt yet be free--farewell!'



Chapter VIII

JULIA SEEKS ARBACES.  THE RESULT OF THAT INTERVIEW.

ARBACES was seated in a chamber which opened on a kind of balcony or
portico that fronted his garden.  His cheek was pale and worn with the
sufferings he had endured, but his iron frame had already recovered from
the severest effects of that accident which had frustrated his fell
designs in the moment of victory.  The air that came fragrantly to his
brow revived his languid senses, and the blood circulated more freely
than it had done for days through his shrunken veins.

'So, then,' thought he, 'the storm of fate has broken and blown
over--the evil which my lore predicted, threatening life itself, has
chanced--and yet I live!  It came as the stars foretold; and now the
long, bright, and prosperous career which was to succeed that evil, if I
survived it, smiles beyond: I have passed--I have subdued the latest
danger of my destiny.  Now I have but to lay out the gardens of my
future fate--unterrified and secure. First, then, of all my pleasures,
even before that of love, shall come revenge!  This boy Greek--who has
crossed my passion--thwarted my designs--baffled me even when the blade
was about to drink his accursed blood--shall not a second time escape
me!  But for the method of my vengeance?  Of that let me ponder well!
Oh! Ate, if thou art indeed a goddess, fill me with thy direst
Inspiration!' The Egyptian sank into an intent reverie, which did not
seem to present to him any clear or satisfactory suggestions.  He
changed his position restlessly, as he revolved scheme after scheme,
which no sooner occurred than it was dismissed: several times he struck
his breast and groaned aloud, with the desire of vengeance, and a sense
of his impotence to accomplish it. While thus absorbed, a boy slave
timidly entered the chamber.

A female, evidently of rank from her dress, and that of the single slave
who attended her, waited below and sought an audience with Arbaces.

'A female!' his heart beat quick.  'Is she young?'

'Her face is concealed by her veil; but her form is slight, yet round,
as that of youth.'

'Admit her,' said the Egyptian: for a moment his vain heart dreamed the
stranger might be Ione.

The first glance of the visitor now entering the apartment sufficed to
undeceive so erring a fancy.  True, she was about the same height as
Ione, and perhaps the same age--true, she was finely and richly
formed--but where was that undulating and ineffable grace which
accompanied every motion of the peerless Neapolitan--the chaste and
decorous garb, so simple even in the care of its arrangement--the
dignified yet bashful step--the majesty of womanhood and its modesty?

'Pardon me that I rise with pain,' said Arbaces, gazing on the stranger:
'I am still suffering from recent illness.'

'Do not disturb thyself, O great Egyptian!' returned Julia, seeking to
disguise the fear she already experienced beneath the ready resort of
flattery; 'and forgive an unfortunate female, who seeks consolation from
thy wisdom.'

'Draw near, fair stranger,' said Arbaces; 'and speak without
apprehension or reserve.'

Julia placed herself on a seat beside the Egyptian, and wonderingly
gazed around an apartment whose elaborate and costly luxuries shamed
even the ornate enrichment of her father's mansion; fearfully, too, she
regarded the hieroglyphical inscriptions on the walls--the faces of the
mysterious images, which at every corner gazed upon her--the tripod at a
little distance--and, above all, the grave and remarkable countenance of
Arbaces himself: a long white robe like a veil half covered his raven
locks, and flowed to his feet: his face was made even more impressive by
its present paleness; and his dark and penetrating eyes seemed to pierce
the shelter of her veil, and explore the secrets of her vain and
unfeminine soul.

'And what,' said his low, deep voice, 'brings thee, O maiden! to the
house of the Eastern stranger?'

'His fame,' replied Julia.

'In what?' said he, with a strange and slight smile.

'Canst thou ask, O wise Arbaces?  Is not thy knowledge the very gossip
theme of Pompeii?'

'Some little lore have I indeed, treasured up,' replied Arbaces: 'but in
what can such serious and sterile secrets benefit the ear of beauty?'

'Alas!' said Julia, a little cheered by the accustomed accents of
adulation; 'does not sorrow fly to wisdom for relief, and they who love
unrequitedly, are not they the chosen victims of grief?'

'Ha!' said Arbaces, 'can unrequited love be the lot of so fair a form,
whose modelled proportions are visible even beneath the folds of thy
graceful robe?  Deign, O maiden! to lift thy veil, that I may see at
least if the face correspond in loveliness with the form.'

Not unwilling, perhaps, to exhibit her charms, and thinking they were
likely to interest the magician in her fate, Julia, after some slight
hesitation, raised her veil, and revealed a beauty which, but for art,
had been indeed attractive to the fixed gaze of the Egyptian.

'Thou comest to me for advice in unhappy love,' said he; 'well, turn
that face on the ungrateful one: what other love-charm can I give thee?'

'Oh, cease these courtesies!' said Julia; 'it is a love-charm, indeed,
that I would ask from thy skill!'

'Fair stranger!' replied Arbaces, somewhat scornfully, 'love-spells are
not among the secrets I have wasted the midnight oil to attain.'

'Is it indeed so?  Then pardon me, great Arbaces, and farewell!'

'Stay,' said Arbaces, who, despite his passion for Ione, was not unmoved
by the beauty of his visitor; and had he been in the flush of a more
assured health, might have attempted to console the fair Julia by other
means than those of supernatural wisdom.

'Stay; although I confess that I have left the witchery of philtres and
potions to those whose trade is in such knowledge, yet am I myself not
so dull to beauty but that in earlier youth I may have employed them in
my own behalf.  I may give thee advice, at least, if thou wilt be candid
with me. Tell me then, first, art thou unmarried, as thy dress
betokens?'

'Yes,' said Julia.

'And, being unblest with fortune, wouldst thou allure some wealthy
suitor?'

'I am richer than he who disdains me.'

'Strange and more strange!  And thou lovest him who loves not thee?'

'I know not if I love him,' answered Julia, haughtily; 'but I know that
I would see myself triumph over a rival--I would see him who rejected me
my suitor--I would see her whom he has preferred in her turn despised.'

'A natural ambition and a womanly,' said the Egyptian, in a tone too
grave for irony.  'Yet more, fair maiden; wilt thou confide to me the
name of thy lover?  Can he be Pompeian, and despise wealth, even if
blind to beauty?'

'He is of Athens,' answered Julia, looking down.

'Ha!' cried the Egyptian, impetuously, as the blood rushed to his cheek;
'there is but one Athenian, young and noble, in Pompeii. Can it be
Glaucus of whom thou speakest!'

'Ah! betray me not--so indeed they call him.'

The Egyptian sank back, gazing vacantly on the averted face of the
merchant's daughter, and muttering inly to himself: this conference,
with which he had hitherto only trifled, amusing himself with the
credulity and vanity of his visitor--might it not minister to his
revenge?'

'I see thou canst assist me not,' said Julia, offended by his continued
silence; 'guard at least my secret.  Once more, farewell!'

'Maiden,' said the Egyptian, in an earnest and serious tone, 'thy suit
hath touched me--I will minister to thy will.  Listen to me; I have not
myself dabbled in these lesser mysteries, but I know one who hath.  At
the base of Vesuvius, less than a league from the city, there dwells a
powerful witch; beneath the rank dews of the new moon, she has gathered
the herbs which possess the virtue to chain Love in eternal fetters.
Her art can bring thy lover to thy feet.  Seek her, and mention to her
the name of Arbaces: she fears that name, and will give thee her most
potent philtres.'

'Alas!' answered Julia, I know not the road to the home of her whom thou
speakest of: the way, short though it be, is long to traverse for a girl
who leaves, unknown, the house of her father. The country is entangled
with wild vines, and dangerous with precipitous caverns.  I dare not
trust to mere strangers to guide me; the reputation of women of my rank
is easily tarnished--and though I care not who knows that I love
Glaucus, I would not have it imagined that I obtained his love by a
spell.'

'Were I but three days advanced in health,' said the Egyptian, rising
and walking (as if to try his strength) across the chamber, but with
irregular and feeble steps, 'I myself would accompany thee.  Well, thou
must wait.'

'But Glaucus is soon to wed that hated Neapolitan.'

'Wed!'

'Yes; in the early part of next month.'

'So soon!  Art thou well advised of this?'

'From the lips of her own slave.'

'It shall not be!' said the Egyptian, impetuously.  'Fear nothing,
Glaucus shall be thine.  Yet how, when thou obtainest it, canst thou
administer to him this potion?'

'My father has invited him, and, I believe, the Neapolitan also, to a
banquet, on the day following to-morrow: I shall then have the
opportunity to administer it.'

'So be it!' said the Egyptian, with eyes flashing such fierce joy, that
Julia's gaze sank trembling beneath them.  'To-morrow eve, then, order
thy litter--thou hast one at thy command?'

'Surely--yes,' returned the purse-proud Julia.

'Order thy litter--at two miles' distance from the city is a house of
entertainment, frequented by the wealthier Pompeians, from the
excellence of its baths, and the beauty of its gardens.  There canst
thou pretend only to shape thy course--there, ill or dying, I will meet
thee by the statue of Silenus, in the copse that skirts the garden; and
I myself will guide thee to the witch.  Let us wait till, with the
evening star, the goats of the herdsmen are gone to rest; when the dark
twilight conceals us, and none shall cross our steps.  Go home and fear
not.  By Hades, swears Arbaces, the sorcerer of Egypt, that Ione shall
never wed with Glaucus.'

'And that Glaucus shall be mine,' added Julia, filling up the
incompleted sentence.

'Thou hast said it!' replied Arbaces; and Julia, half frightened at this
unhallowed appointment, but urged on by jealousy and the pique of
rivalship, even more than love, resolved to fulfill it.

Left alone, Arbaces burst forth:

'Bright stars that never lie, ye already begin the execution of your
promises--success in love, and victory over foes, for the rest of my
smooth existence.  In the very hour when my mind could devise no clue to
the goal of vengeance, have ye sent this fair fool for my guide?' He
paused in deep thought.  'Yes,' said he again, but in a calmer voice; 'I
could not myself have given to her the poison, that shall be indeed a
philtre!--his death might be thus tracked to my door.  But the
witch--ay, there is the fit, the natural agent of my designs!'

He summoned one of his slaves, bade him hasten to track the steps of
Julia, and acquaint himself with her name and condition.  This done, he
stepped forth into the portico.  The skies were serene and clear; but
he, deeply read in the signs of their various change, beheld in one mass
of cloud, far on the horizon, which the wind began slowly to agitate,
that a storm was brooding above.

'It is like my vengeance,' said he, as he gazed; 'the sky is clear, but
the cloud moves on.'



Chapter IX

STORM IN THE SOUTH.  THE WITCH'S CAVERN.

IT was when the heats of noon died gradually away from the earth, that
Glaucus and Ione went forth to enjoy the cooled and grateful air.  At
that time, various carriages were in use among the Romans; the one most
used by the richer citizens, when they required no companion in their
excursion, was the biga, already described in the early portion of this
work; that appropriated to the matrons, was termed carpentum, which had
commonly two wheels; the ancients used also a sort of litter, a vast
sedan-chair, more commodiously arranged than the modern, inasmuch as the
occupant thereof could lie down at ease, instead of being
perpendicularly and stiffly jostled up and down.  There was another
carriage, used both for travelling and for excursions in the country; it
was commodious, containing three or four persons with ease, having a
covering which could be raised at pleasure; and, in short, answering
very much the purpose of (though very different in shape from) the
modern britska.  It was a vehicle of this description that the lovers,
accompanied by one female slave of Ione, now used in their excursion.
About ten miles from the city, there was at that day an old ruin, the
remains of a temple, evidently Grecian; and as for Glaucus and Ione
everything Grecian possessed an interest, they had agreed to visit these
ruins: it was thither they were now bound.

Their road lay among vines and olive-groves; till, winding more and more
towards the higher ground of Vesuvius, the path grew rugged; the mules
moved slowly, and with labor; and at every opening in the wood they
beheld those grey and horrent caverns indenting the parched rock, which
Strabo has described; but which the various revolutions of time and the
volcano have removed from the present aspect of the mountain.  The sun,
sloping towards his descent, cast long and deep shadows over the
mountain; here and there they still heard the rustic reed of the
shepherd amongst copses of the beechwood and wild oak.  Sometimes they
marked the form of the silk-haired and graceful capella, with its
wreathing horn and bright grey eye--which, still beneath Ausonian skies,
recalls the eclogues of Maro, browsing half-way up the hills; and the
grapes, already purple with the smiles of the deepening summer, glowed
out from the arched festoons, which hung pendent from tree to tree.
Above them, light clouds floated in the serene heavens, sweeping so
slowly athwart the firmament that they scarcely seemed to stir; while,
on their right, they caught, ever and anon, glimpses of the waveless
sea, with some light bark skimming its surface; and the sunlight
breaking over the deep in those countless and softest hues so peculiar
to that delicious sea.

'How beautiful!' said Glaucus, in a half-whispered tone, 'is that
expression by which we call Earth our Mother!  With what a kindly equal
love she pours her blessings upon her children! and even to those
sterile spots to which Nature has denied beauty, she yet contrives to
dispense her smiles: witness the arbutus and the vine, which she
wreathes over the arid and burning soil of yon extinct volcano.  Ah! in
such an hour and scene as this, well might we imagine that the Faun
should peep forth from those green festoons; or, that we might trace the
steps of the Mountain Nymph through the thickest mazes of the glade.
But the Nymphs ceased, beautiful Ione, when thou wert created!'

There is no tongue that flatters like a lover's; and yet, in the
exaggeration of his feelings, flattery seems to him commonplace. Strange
and prodigal exuberance, which soon exhausts itself by overflowing!

They arrived at the ruins; they examined them with that fondness with
which we trace the hallowed and household vestiges of our own
ancestry--they lingered there till Hesperus appeared in the rosy
heavens; and then returning homeward in the twilight, they were more
silent than they had been; for in the shadow and beneath the stars they
felt more oppressively their mutual love.

It was at this time that the storm which the Egyptian had predicted
began to creep visibly over them.  At first, a low and distant thunder
gave warning of the approaching conflict of the elements; and then
rapidly rushed above the dark ranks of the serried clouds.  The
suddenness of storms in that climate is something almost preternatural,
and might well suggest to early superstition the notion of a divine
agency--a few large drops broke heavily among the boughs that half
overhung their path, and then, swift and intolerably bright, the forked
lightning darted across their very eyes, and was swallowed up by the
increasing darkness.

'Swifter, good Carrucarius!' cried Glaucus to the driver; 'the tempest
comes on apace.'

The slave urged on the mules--they went swift over the uneven and stony
road--the clouds thickened, near and more near broke the thunder, and
fast rushed the dashing rain.

'Dost thou fear?' whispered Glaucus, as he sought excuse in the storm to
come nearer to Ione.

'Not with thee,' said she, softly.

At that instant, the carriage, fragile and ill-contrived (as, despite
their graceful shapes, were, for practical uses, most of such inventions
at that time), struck violently into a deep rut, over which lay a log of
fallen wood; the driver, with a curse, stimulated his mules yet faster
for the obstacle, the wheel was torn from the socket, and the carriage
suddenly overset.

Glaucus, quickly extricating himself from the vehicle, hastened to
assist Ione, who was fortunately unhurt; with some difficulty they
raised the carruca (or carriage), and found that it ceased any longer
even to afford them shelter; the springs that fastened the covering were
snapped asunder, and the rain poured fast and fiercely into the
interior.

In this dilemma, what was to be done?  They were yet some distance from
the city--no house, no aid, seemed near.

'There is,' said the slave, 'a smith about a mile off; I could seek him,
and he might fasten at least the wheel to the carruca--but, Jupiter! how
the rain beats; my mistress will be wet before I come back.'

'Run thither at least,' said Glaucus; 'we must find the best shelter we
can till you return.'

The lane was overshadowed with trees, beneath the amplest of which
Glaucus drew Ione.  He endeavored, by stripping his own cloak, to shield
her yet more from the rapid rain; but it descended with a fury that
broke through all puny obstacles: and suddenly, while Glaucus was yet
whispering courage to his beautiful charge, the lightning struck one of
the trees immediately before them, and split with a mighty crash its
huge trunk in twain.  This awful incident apprised them of the danger
they braved in their present shelter, and Glaucus looked anxiously round
for some less perilous place of refuge.  'We are now,' said he,
'half-way up the ascent of Vesuvius; there ought to be some cavern, or
hollow in the vine-clad rocks, could we but find it, in which the
deserting Nymphs have left a shelter.' While thus saying he moved from
the trees, and, looking wistfully towards the mountain, discovered
through the advancing gloom a red and tremulous light at no considerable
distance. 'That must come,' said he, 'from the hearth of some shepherd
or vine-dresser--it will guide us to some hospitable retreat.  Wilt thou
stay here, while I--yet no--that would be to leave thee to danger.'

'I will go with you cheerfully,' said Ione.  'Open as the space seems,
it is better than the treacherous shelter of these boughs.'

Half leading, half carrying Ione, Glaucus, accompanied by the trembling
female slave, advanced towards the light, which yet burned red and
steadfastly.  At length the space was no longer open; wild vines
entangled their steps, and hid from them, save by imperfect intervals,
the guiding beam.  But faster and fiercer came the rain, and the
lightning assumed its most deadly and blasting form; they were still
therefore, impelled onward, hoping, at last, if the light eluded them,
to arrive at some cottage or some friendly cavern.  The vines grew more
and more intricate--the light was entirely snatched from them; but a
narrow path, which they trod with labor and pain, guided only by the
constant and long-lingering flashes of the storm, continued to lead them
towards its direction.  The rain ceased suddenly; precipitous and rough
crags of scorched lava frowned before them, rendered more fearful by the
lightning that illumined the dark and dangerous soil.  Sometimes the
blaze lingered over the iron-grey heaps of scoria, covered in part with
ancient mosses or stunted trees, as if seeking in vain for some gentler
product of earth, more worthy of its ire; and sometimes leaving the
whole of that part of the scene in darkness, the lightning, broad and
sheeted, hung redly over the ocean, tossing far below, until its waves
seemed glowing into fire; and so intense was the blaze, that it brought
vividly into view even the sharp outline of the more distant windings of
the bay, from the eternal Misenum, with its lofty brow, to the beautiful
Sorrentum and the giant hills behind.

Our lovers stopped in perplexity and doubt, when suddenly, as the
darkness that gloomed between the fierce flashes of lightning once more
wrapped them round, they saw near, but high, before them, the mysterious
light.  Another blaze, in which heaven and earth were reddened, made
visible to them the whole expanse; no house was near, but just where
they had beheld the light, they thought they saw in the recess of the
cavern the outline of a human form.  The darkness once more returned;
the light, no longer paled beneath the fires of heaven, burned forth
again: they resolved to ascend towards it; they had to wind their way
among vast fragments of stone, here and there overhung with wild bushes;
but they gained nearer and nearer to the light, and at length they stood
opposite the mouth of a kind of cavern, apparently formed by huge
splinters of rock that had fallen transversely athwart each other: and,
looking into the gloom, each drew back involuntarily with a
superstitious fear and chill.

A fire burned in the far recess of the cave; and over it was a small
cauldron; on a tall and thin column of iron stood a rude lamp; over that
part of the wall, at the base of which burned the fire, hung in many
rows, as if to dry, a profusion of herbs and weeds.  A fox, couched
before the fire, gazed upon the strangers with its bright and red
eye--its hair bristling--and a low growl stealing from between its
teeth; in the centre of the cave was an earthen statue, which had three
heads of a singular and fantastic cast: they were formed by the real
skulls of a dog, a horse, and a boar; a low tripod stood before this
wild representation of the popular Hecate.

But it was not these appendages and appliances of the cave that thrilled
the blood of those who gazed fearfully therein--it was the face of its
inmate. Before the fire, with the light shining full upon her features,
sat a woman of considerable age.  Perhaps in no country are there seen
so many hags as in Italy--in no country does beauty so awfully change,
in age, to hideousness the most appalling and revolting.  But the old
woman now before them was not one of these specimens of the extreme of
human ugliness; on the contrary, her countenance betrayed the remains of
a regular but high and aquiline order of feature: with stony eyes turned
upon them--with a look that met and fascinated theirs--they beheld in
that fearful countenance the very image of a corpse!--the same, the
glazed and lustreless regard, the blue and shrunken lips, the drawn and
hollow jaw--the dead, lank hair, of a pale grey--the livid, green,
ghastly skin, which seemed all surely tinged and tainted by the grave!

'It is a dead thing,' said Glaucus.

'Nay--it stirs--it is a ghost or larva,' faltered Ione, as she clung to
the Athenian's breast.

'Oh, away, away!' groaned the slave, 'it is the Witch of Vesuvius!'
