The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zero Data, by Charles Saphro

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Zero Data

Author: Charles Saphro

Release Date: August 19, 2009 [EBook #29727]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZERO DATA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









ZERO DATA

By CHARLES SAPHRO


    _All the intricate, electronic witchery of the 21st century could
    not pin guilt on fabulous Lonnie Raichi, the irreproachable
    philanthropist. But Jason, the cop, was sweating it out ...
    searching for that fourth and final and all-knowing rule that would
    knock Lonnie's "triple ethic" for a gala loop._


Lonnie Raichi was small, heavily built, wet-eyed, dapper and successful.
His success he attributed entirely to his philosophy.

Not knowing about Lonnie's philosophy, the whole twenty-odd years of
Lonnie's success was the abiding crux of Jason's disgust. And this, in
spite of the more and more men Jason came to control and the fitful
stream of new techniques and equipment Gov-Pol and Gov-Mil Labs put at
his disposal.

Jason was a cop. In fact, by this Friday the thirteenth in the fall of
2009, squirming on what had come to be his pet Gov-Park bench right
across from the Tiara of Wold in the Fane, he was only one step short of
being the Head Cop of Government City. He was good. Gathering in a lot
of criminals was what had brought him up the steps.

But he hadn't gathered in Lonnie.

It wasn't for lack for trying. Way back, when Lonnie was known simply as
"Lonnie," Jason managed to get a little help from his associates and
superiors. Sometimes.

But as Lonnie came to be known as Lon Raichi, then Mr. Raichi, and
finally as "THE Launcelot Raichi" (to Everyone Who Mattered), and as
Jason's promotions kept pace with his widening experience and
painstakingly acquired knowledge; peculiarly, there seemed to be fewer
and fewer persons around who could be made interested in "Lonnie."

Inside Government and Gov-Pol-Anx as well as among the general
Two-Worlds public.

So Jason got less and less help, or even passive cooperation, from his
superiors. As a matter of fact, the more men he could command, the fewer
he could use on anything that could be construed as concerning Lonnie.

Equipment, though, was a little different matter. There was usually
enough so that one unit of a kind could be unobtrusively trained on Mr.
Raichi under the care of Jason's own desk sergeant. In 1999, for
example, Moglaut, that erratic and secretive genius in Physlab Nine,
came out with a quantum analyzer and probability reproducer. The machine
installed in Pol-Anx, reconstructed crimes and identified the probable
criminals by their modus operandi and the physical traces they couldn't
avoid leaving at the un-mercy of any of its portable data accumulators.

On Jason's first attempt it almost came close to Lonnie. It did gather
in the hidden, dead, still twitching, completely uncommunicative
carcasses of the five men who actually relieved the vault of the
Citizen's Bank of Berlin of its clutch of millions. It even identified
the body of the rocopilot found floating in the Potomac a few days later
as being one of the group, and the killer. It did _not_ locate the
arsonized remnants of the plane, though, nor the currency; and only
achieved the casting of a slight, or subsidiary, third-hand aspersion in
the direction of THE Launcelot Raichi.

But Lonnie came up with an irrefutable alibi, somehow, and the hassle
that followed made Jason's luck run out. And on Jason's stubborn,
secret, subsequent tries, all the analyzer could produce was a report of
zero data whenever Jason, reasonably or unreasonably, believed that
Lonnie was involved.

Every time.

Zero data when Schicklehitler's marshal's baton disappeared from the
British Museum.

[Illustration: _Lonnie on his dream throne ... Jason at his instruments.
Was the struggle endless between these two?_]

Zero data when Charlemagne's Crown lapsed unobtrusively from its shrine
in Vienna during the Year 2000 Celebration.

Subsequently, Jason realized that the Berlin job in 1999 had marked
Lonnie's last essay after money. Other things seemed to occupy Lonnie's
mind after he'd sprouted publicly into the status of full-fledged,
hyper-respectable, inter-planetary business tycoon; complete with a
many-tentacled industrial organization in Moon Colony and a far-flung
prospecting unit headquartering at Mars Equatorial.

Tycoonship was a status with which Everyone Who Mattered was always
pleased.

Jason's next attempt on Lonnie had to wait until 2005 and was the result
of two unconnected circumstances. The first was Physlab Nine's secretive
genius, Moglaut, evolving another piece of equipment, a disarmer, which,
subsequent to its first use, saved countless cops' lives. The second was
the discovery in the Valley of Kings, of Amenhotep III's own personal
official Uraeus. Positively identified beyond the shadow of doubt.

Jason, playing the hunch he'd built up about Lonnie, rushed a man, armed
with the brand new disarmer, instantly to the scene.

The next morning, Amenhotep's Uraeus was gone and the corpse of Jason's
man was found--part of it. The right hand, arm, shoulder, and most of
the head were missing; burned away. And of the disarmer, only a fused
hunk of mixed metals and silver helix remained.

And the analyzer reported zero data.

Lab Nine's taciturn and exasperating Moglaut failed to derive an
explanation for either circumstance.

"I won't shut up," Jason said, standing on the carpet in front of his
superior. "He did it. I don't know how, but he did."

Another spasm of frustration shook him and he slammed his fist down on
the sacred desk. "I've known Lonnie all my life. I know he doesn't know
