we are all dead men!"

The words were spoken in French; and in French Ivo answered, laughing,--

"Thou art not a dead man yet it seems, Sir Robert; art going on
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, that thou comest in this fashion? Or dost mean
to return to Anjou as bare as thou camest out of it?"

For Sir Robert had, like Edgar in Shakespear's _Lear_, "reserved himself
a blanket, else had we all been shamed."

But very little more did either he, his lady, and his three children
wear, as they trudged along the drove, in even poorer case than that

   Robert of Coningsby,
   Who came out of Normandy,
   With his wife Tiffany,
   And his maid Maupas,
   And his dog Hardigras.

"For the love of heaven and all chivalry, joke me no jokes, Sir Ivo,
but give me and mine clothes and food! The barbarians rose on us last
night,--with Azer, the ruffian who owned my lands, at their head, and
drove us out into the night as we are, bidding us carry the news to you,
for your turn would come next. There are forty or more of them in West
Deeping now, and coming eastward, they say, to visit you, and, what is
more than all, Hereward is come again."

"Hereward?" cried Ivo, who knew that name well.

Whereon Sir Robert told him the terrible tragedy of Bourne.

"Mount the lady on a horse, and wrap her in my cloak. Get that dead
villain's clothes for Sir Robert as we go back. Put your horses' heads
about and ride for Spalding."

"What shall we do with the lass?"

"We cannot be burdened with the jade. She has cost us two good horses
already. Leave her in the road, bound as she is, and let us see if St.
Guthlac her master will come and untie her."

So they rode back. Coming from Deeping two hours after, Azer and his men
found the girl on the road, dead.

"Another count in the long score," quoth Azer. But when, in two hours
more, they came to Spalding town, they found all the folk upon the
street, shouting and praising the host of Heaven. There was not a
Frenchman left in the town.

For when Ivo returned home, ere yet Sir Robert and his family were
well clothed and fed, there galloped into Spalding from, the north Sir
Ascelin, nephew and man of Thorold, would-be Abbot of Peterborough, and
one of the garrison of Lincoln, which was then held by Hereward's old
friend, Gilbert of Ghent.

"Not bad news, I hope," cried Ivo, as Ascelin clanked into the hall. "We
have enough of our own. Here is all Kesteven, as the barbarians call it,
risen, and they are murdering us right and left."

"Worse news than that, Ivo Taillebois," ("Sir," or "Sieur," Ascelin
was loath to call him, being himself a man of family and fashion; and
holding the _nouveaux venus_ in deep contempt,)--"worse news than that:
the North has risen again, and proclaimed Prince Edgar King."

"A king of words! What care I, or you, as long as the Mamzer, God bless
him! is a king of deeds?"

"They have done their deeds, though, too. Gospatrick and Marlesweyn
are back out of Scotland. They attacked Robert de Comines [Footnote:
Ancestor of the Comyns of Scotland.] at Durham, and burnt him in his own
house. There was but one of his men got out of Durham to tell the news.
And now they have marched on York; and all the chiefs, they say, have
joined them,--Archill the Thane, and Edwin and Morcar, and Waltheof too,
the young traitors."

"Blessed Virgin!" cried Ivo, "thou art indeed gracious to thy most
unworthy knight!"

"What do you mean?"

"You will see some day. Now, I will tell you but one word. When fools
make hay, wise men can build ricks. This rebellion,--if it had not come
of itself, I would have roused it. We wanted it, to cure William of this
just and benevolent policy of his, which would have ended in sending
us back to France as poor as we left it. Now, what am I expected to do?
What says Gilbert of Ghent, the wise man of Lic--nic--what the pest do
you call that outlandish place, which no civilized lips can pronounce?"

"Lic-nic-cole?" replied Ascelin, who, like the rest of the French, never
could manage to say Lincoln. "He says, 'March to me, and with me to join
the king at York.'"

"Then he says well. These fat acres will be none the leaner, if I leave
the English slaves to crop them for six months. Men! arm and horse Sir
Robert of Deeping. Then arm and horse yourselves. We march north in half
an hour, bag and baggage, scrip and scrippage. You are all bachelors,
like me, and travel light. So off with you!--Sir Ascelin, you will eat
and drink?"

"That will I."

"Quick, then, butler! and after that pack up the Englishman's
plate-chest, which we inherited by right of fist,--the only plate and
the only title-deeds I ever possessed."

"Now, Sir Ascelin,"--as the three knights, the lady, and the poor
children ate their fastest,--"listen to me. The art of war lies in this
one nutshell,--to put the greatest number of men into one place at one
time, and let all other places shift. To strike swiftly, and strike
heavily. That is the rule of our liege lord, King William; and by it he
will conquer England, or the world, if he will; and while he does that,
he shall never say that Ivo Taillebois stayed at home to guard his own
manors while he could join his king, and win all the manors of England
once and for all."

"Pardieu! whatever men may say of thy lineage or thy virtues, they
cannot deny this,--that thou art a most wise and valiant captain."

"That am I," quoth Taillebois, too much pleased with the praise to care
about being _tutoye_ by younger men. "As for my lineage, my lord the
king has a fellow-feeling for upstarts; and the woodman's grandson may
very well serve the tanner's. Now, men! is the litter ready for the lady
and children? I am sorry to rattle you about thus, madame, but war has
no courtesies; and march I must."

And so the French went out of Spalding town.

"Don't be in a hurry to thank your saints!" shouted Ivo to his victims.
"I shall be back this day three months; and then you shall see a row of
gibbets all the way from here to Deeping, and an Englishman hanging on
every one."




CHAPTER XXII.

HOW HEREWARD SAILED FOE ENGLAND ONCE AND FOR ALL.


So Hereward fought the Viscount of Pinkney, who had the usual luck which
befell those who crossed swords with him, and plotted meanwhile with
Gyda and the Countess Judith. Abbot Egelsin sent them news from King
Sweyn in Denmark; soon Judith and Tosti's two sons went themselves to
Sweyn, and helped the plot and the fitting out of the armament. News
they had from England in plenty, by messengers from Queen Matilda to
the sister who was intriguing to dethrone her husband, and by private
messengers from Durham and from York.

Baldwin, the _debonnaire_ marquis, had not lived to see this fruit of
his long efforts to please everybody. He had gone to his rest the year
before; and now there ruled in Bruges his son, Baldwin the Good, "Count
Palatine," as he styled himself, and his wife Richilda, the Lady of
Hainault.

They probably cared as little for the success of their sister Matilda as
they did for that of their sister Judith; and followed out--Baldwin at
least--the great marquis's plan of making Flanders a retreat for the
fugitives of all the countries round.

At least, if (as seems) Sweyn's fleet made the coast of Flanders its
rendezvous and base of operations against King William, Baldwin offered
no resistance.

So the messengers came, and the plots went on. Great was the delight
of Hereward and the ladies when they heard of the taking of Durham and
York; but bitter their surprise and rage when they heard that Gospatrick
and the Confederates had proclaimed Edgar Atheling king.

"Fools! they will ruin all!" cried Gyda. "Do they expect Swend Ulfsson,
who never moved a finger yet, unless he saw that it would pay him within
the hour, to spend blood and treasure in putting that puppet boy upon
the throne instead of himself?"

"Calm yourself, great Countess," said Hereward, with a smile. "The man
who puts him on the throne will find it very easy to take him off again
when he needs."

"Pish!" said Gyda. "He must put him on the throne first. And how will he
do that? Will the men of the Danelagh, much less the Northumbrians, ever
rally round an Atheling of Cerdic's house? They are raising a Wessex
army in Northumbria; a southern army in the north. There is no real
loyalty there toward the Atheling, not even the tie of kin, as there
would be to Swend. The boy is a mere stalking-horse, behind which each
of these greedy chiefs expects to get back his own lands; and if they
can get them back by any other means, well and good. Mark my words, Sir
Hereward, that cunning Frenchman will treat with them one by one, and
betray them one by one, till there is none left."

How far Gyda was right will be seen hereafter. But a less practised
diplomat than the great Countess might have speculated reasonably on
such an event.

At least, let this be said, that when historians have complained of
the treachery of King Swend Ulfsson and his Danes, they have forgotten
certain broad and simple facts.

Swend sailed for England to take a kingdom which he believed to be his
by right; which he had formerly demanded of William. When he arrived
there, he found himself a mere cat's-paw for recovering that kingdom
for an incapable boy, whom he believed to have no right to the throne at
all.

Then came darker news. As Ivo had foreseen, and as Ivo had done his best
to bring about, William dashed on York, and drove out the Confederates
with terrible slaughter; profaned the churches, plundered the town.
Gospatrick and the earls retreated to Durham; the Atheling, more
cautious, to Scotland.

Then came a strange story, worthy of the grown children who, in those
old times, bore the hearts of boys with the ferocity and intellect of
men.

A great fog fell on the Frenchmen as they struggled over the Durham
moors. The doomed city was close beneath them; they heard Wear roaring
in his wooded gorge. But a darkness, as of Egypt, lay upon them:
"neither rose any from his place."

Then the Frenchmen cried: "This darkness is from St. Cuthbert himself.
We have invaded his holy soil. Who has not heard how none who offend St.
Cuthbert ever went unpunished? how palsy, blindness, madness, fall on
those who dare to violate his sanctuary?"

And the French turned and fled from before the face of St. Cuthbert;
and William went down to Winchester angry and sad, and then went off
to Gloucestershire; and hunted--for, whatever befell, he still would
hunt--in the forest of Dean.

And still Swend and his Danes had not sailed; and Hereward walked to and
fro in his house, impatiently, and bided his time.

In July, Baldwin died. Arnoul, the boy, was Count of Flanders, and
Richilda, his sorceress-mother, ruled the land in his name. She began to
oppress the Flemings; not those of French Flanders, round St. Omer, but
those of Flemish Flanders, toward the north. They threatened to send for
Robert the Frison to right them.

Hereward was perplexed. He was Robert the Frison's friend, and old
soldier. Richilda was Torfrida's friend; so was, still more, the boy
Arnoul; which party should he take? Neither, if he could help it. And he
longed to be safe out of the land.

And at last his time came. Martin Lightfoot ran in, breathless, to tell
how the sails of a mighty fleet were visible from the Dunes.

"Here?" cried Hereward. "What are the fools doing down here, wandering
into the very jaws of the wolf? How will they land here? They were to
have gone straight to the Lincolnshire coast. God grant this mistake be
not the first of dozens!"

Hereward went into Torfrida's bower.

"This is an evil business. The Danes are here, where they have no
business, instead of being off Scheldtmouth, as I entreated them. But go
we must, or be forever shamed. Now, true wife, are you ready? Dare you
leave home and kin and friends, once and for all, to go, you know not
whither, with one who may be a gory corpse by this day week?"

"I dare," said she.

So they went down to Calais by night, with Torfrida's mother, and all
their jewels, and all they had in the world. And their housecarles
went with them, forty men, tried and trained, who had vowed to follow
Hereward round the world. And there were two long ships ready, and
twenty good mariners in each. So when the Danes made the South Foreland
the next morning, they were aware of two gallant ships bearing down on
them, with a great white bear embroidered on their sails.

A proud man was Hereward that day, as he sailed into the midst of the
Danish fleet, and up to the royal ships, and shouted: "I am Hereward
the Berserker, and I come to take service under my rightful lord, Sweyn,
king of England."

"Come on board, then; we know you well, and right glad we are to have
Hereward with us."

And Hereward laid his ship's bow upon the quarter of the royal ship (to
lay alongside was impossible, for fear of breaking oars), and came on
board.

"And thou art Hereward?" asked a tall and noble warrior.

"I am. And thou art Swend Ulfsson, the king?"

"I am Earl Osbiorn, his brother."

"Then, where is the king?"

"He is in Denmark, and I command his fleet; and with me are Canute and
Harold, Sweyn's sons, and earls and bishops enough for all England."

This was spoken in a somewhat haughty tone, in answer to the look of
surprise and disappointment which Hereward had, unawares, allowed to
pass over his face.

"Thou art better than none," said Hereward. "Now, hearken, Osbiorn the
Earl. Had Swend been here, I would have put my hand between his, and
said in my own name, and that of all the men in Kesteven and the fens,
Swend's men we are, to live and die! But now, as it is, I say, for me
and them, thy men we are, to live and die, as long as thou art true to
us."

"True to you I will be," said Osbiorn.

"Be it so," said Hereward. "True we shall be, whatever betide. Now,
whither goes Earl Osbiorn, and all his great meinie?"

"We purpose to try Dover."

"You will not take it. The Frenchman has strengthened it with one of his
accursed keeps, and without battering-engines you may sit before it a
month."

"What if I asked you to go in thither yourself, and try the mettle and
the luck which, they say, never failed Hereward yet?"

"I should say that it was a child's trick to throw away against a
paltry stone wall the life of a man who was ready to raise for you in
Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire, five times as many men as you will lose
in taking Dover."

"Hereward is right," said more than one Earl. "We shall need him in his
own country."

"If you are wise, to that country you yourselves will go. It is ready
to receive you. This is ready to oppose you. You are attacking the
Frenchman at his strongest point instead of his weakest. Did I not send
again and again, entreating you to cross from Scheldtmouth to the Wash,
and send me word that I might come and raise the Fen-men for you, and
then we would all go north together?"

"I have heard, ere now," said Earl Osbiorn, haughtily, "that Hereward,
though he be a valiant Viking, is more fond of giving advice than of
taking it."

Hereward was about to answer very fiercely. If he had, no one would
have thought any harm, in those plain-spoken times. But he was wise; and
restrained himself, remembering that Torfrida was there, all but alone,
in the midst of a fleet of savage men; and that beside, he had a great
deed to do, and must do it as he could. So he answered,--

"Osbiorn the Earl has not, it seems, heard this of Hereward: that
because he is accustomed to command, he is also accustomed to obey. What
thou wilt do, do, and bid me do. He that quarrels with his captain cuts
his own throat and his fellows' too."

"Wisely spoken!" said the earls; and Hereward went back to his ship.

"Torfrida," said he, bitterly, "the game is lost before it is begun."

"God forbid, my beloved! What words are these?"

"Swend--fool that he is with his over-caution,--always the same!--has
let the prize slip from between his fingers. He has sent Osbiorn instead
of himself."

"But why is that so terrible a mistake?"

"We do not want a fleet of Vikings in England, to plunder the French
and English alike. We want a king, a king, a king!" and Hereward stamped
with rage. "And instead of a king, we have this Osbiorn,--all men know
him, greedy and false and weak-headed. Here he is going to be beaten off
at Dover; and then, I suppose, at the next port; and so forth, till the
whole season is wasted, and the ships and men lost by driblets. Pray for
us to God and his saints, Torfrida, you who are nearer to Heaven than I;
for we never needed it more."

And Osbiorn went in; tried to take Dover; and was beaten off with heavy
loss.

Then the earls bade him take Hereward's advice. But he would not.

So he went round the Foreland, and tried Sandwich,--as if, landing
there, he would have been safe in marching on London, in the teeth of
the _elite_ of Normandy.

But he was beaten off there, with more loss. Then, too late, he took
Hereward's advice,--or, rather, half of it,--and sailed north; but only
to commit more follies.

He dared not enter the Thames. He would not go on to the Wash; but he
went into the Orwell, and attacked Ipswich, plundering right and left,
instead of proclaiming King Sweyn, and calling the Danish folk around
him. The Danish folk of Suffolk rose, and, like valiant men, beat him
off; while Hereward lay outside the river mouth, his soul within him
black with disappointment, rage, and shame. He would not go in. He would
not fight against his own countrymen. He would not help to turn the
whole plan into a marauding raid. And he told Earl Osbiorn so, so
fiercely, that his life would have been in danger, had not the force of
his arm been as much feared as the force of his name was needed.

At last they came to Yarmouth. Osbiorn would needs land there, and try
Norwich.

Hereward was nigh desperate: but he hit upon a plan. Let Osbiorn do so,
if he would. He himself would sail round to the Wash, raise the Fen-men,
and march eastward at their head through Norfolk to meet him. Osbiorn
himself could not refuse so rational a proposal. All the earls and
bishops approved loudly; and away Hereward went to the Wash, his heart
well-nigh broken, foreseeing nothing but evil.




CHAPTER XXIII.

HOW HEREWARD GATHERED AN ARMY.


The voyage round the Norfolk coast was rough and wild. Torfrida was ill,
the little girl was ill; the poor old mother was so ill that she could
not even say her prayers. Packed uncomfortably under the awning on the
poop, Torfrida looked on from beneath it upon the rolling water-waste,
with a heart full of gloomy forebodings, and a brain whirling with wild
fancies. The wreaths of cloud were gray witches, hurrying on with the
ship to work her woe; the low red storm-dawn was streaked with blood;
the water which gurgled all night under the lee was alive with hoarse
voices; and again and again she started from fitful slumber to clasp the
child closer to her, or look up for comfort to the sturdy figure of her
husband, as he stood, like a tower of strength, steering and commanding,
the long night through.

Yes; on him she could depend. On his courage, on his skill. And as for
his love, had she not that utterly? And what more did woman need?

But she was going, she scarce knew whither; and she scarce knew for
what. At least, on a fearful adventure, which might have a fearful end.
She looked at the fair child, and reproached herself for a moment; at
the poor old mother, whining and mumbling, her soft southern heart quite
broken by the wild chill northern sea-breeze; and reproached herself
still more. But was it not her duty? Him she loved, and his she was;
and him she must follow, over sea and land, till death; and if possible,
beyond death again forever. For his sake she would slave. For his sake
she would be strong. If ever there rose in her a homesickness, a regret
for leaving Flanders, and much more for that sunnier South where she was
born, he at least should never be saddened or weakened by one hint of
her sadness and weakness. And so it befell that, by the time they made
the coast, she had (as the old chronicler says) "altogether conquered
all womanly softness."

And yet she shuddered at the dreary mud-creek into which they ran their
ships, at the dreary flats on which they landed shivering, swept over by
the keen northeast wind. A lonely land; and within, she knew not what of
danger, it might be of hideous death.

But she would be strong. And when they were all landed, men, arms,
baggage, and had pitched the tents which the wise Hereward had brought
with them, she rose up like a queen, and took her little one by the
hand, and went among the men, and spoke:--

"Housecarles and mariners! you are following a great captain upon a
great adventure. How great he is, you know as well as I. I have given
him myself, my wealth, and all I have, and have followed him I know not
whither, because I trust him utterly. Men, trust him as I trust him, and
follow him to the death."

"That will we!"

"And, men, I am here among you, a weak woman, trying to be brave for his
sake--and for yours. Be true to me, too, as I have been true to you. For
your sake have I worked hard day and night, for many a year. For you I
have baked and brewed and cooked, like any poor churl's wife. Is there
a garment on your backs which my hands have not mended? Is there a wound
on your limbs which my hands have not salved? O, if Torfrida has been
true to you, promise me this day that you will be true men to her and
hers; that if--which Heaven forbid!--aught should befall him and me, you
will protect this my poor old mother, and this my child, who has grown
up among you all,--a lamb brought up within the lions' den. Look at her,
men, and promise me, on the faith of valiant soldiers, that you will be
lions on her behalf, if she shall ever need you. Promise me, that if you
have but one more stroke left to strike on earth, you will strike it to
defend the daughter of Hereward and Torfrida from cruelty and shame"

The men answered by a shout which rolled along the fen, and startled
the wild-fowl up from far-off pools. They crowded round their lady; they
kissed her hands; they bent down and kissed their little playmate, and
swore--one by God and his apostles, and the next by Odin and Thor--that
she should be a daughter to each and every one of them, as long as they
could grip steel in hand.

Then (says the chronicler) Hereward sent on spies, to see whether the
Frenchmen were in the land, and how folks fared at Holbeach, Spalding,
and Bourne.

The two young Siwards, as knowing the country and the folk, pushed
forward, and with them Martin Lightfoot, to bring back news.

Martin ran back all the way from Holbeach, the very first day, with
right good news. There was not a Frenchman in the town. Neither was
there, they said, in Spalding. Ivo Taillebois was still away at the
wars, and long might he stay.

So forward they marched, and everywhere the landsfolk were tilling the
ground in peace; and when they saw that stout array, they hurried out
to meet the troops, and burdened them with food, and ale, and all they
needed.

And at Holbeach, and at Spalding, Hereward split up the war-arrow, and
sent it through Kesteven, and south into the Cambridge fens, calling on
all men to arm and come to him at Bourne, in the name of Waltheof and
Morcar the earls.

And at every farm and town he blew the war-horn, and summoned every man
who could bear arms to be ready, against the coming of the Danish host
from Norwich. And so through all the fens came true what the wild-fowl
said upon the meres, that Hereward was come again.

And when he came to Bourne, all men were tilling in peace. The terror of
Hereward had fallen on the Frenchmen, and no man had dared to enter
on his inheritance, or to set a French foot over the threshold of that
ghastly hall, over the gable whereof still grinned the fourteen heads;
on the floor whereof still spread the dark stains of blood.

Only Geri dwelt in a corner of the house, and with him Leofric the
Unlucky, once a roistering housecarle of Hereward's youth, now a monk of
Crowland, and a deacon, whom Lady Godiva had sent thither that he might
take care of her poor. And there Geri and Leofric had kept house, and
told sagas to each other over the beech-log fire night after night; for
all Leofric's study was, says the chronicler, "to gather together for
the edification of his hearers all the acts of giants and warriors out
of the fables of the ancients or from faithful report, and commit them
to writing, that he might keep England in mind thereof." Which Leofric
was afterwards ordained priest, probably in Ely, by Bishop Egelwin of
Durham; and was Hereward's chaplain for many a year.

Then Hereward, as he had promised, set fire to the three farms close
to the Bruneswold; and all his outlawed friends, lurking in the forest,
knew by that signal that Hereward was come again. So they cleansed out
the old house: though they did not take down the heads from off the
gable; and Torfrida went about it, and about it, and confessed that
England was, after all, a pleasant place enough. And they were as happy,
it may be, for a week or two, as ever they had been in their lives.

"And now," said Torfrida, "while you see to your army, I must be doing;
for I am a lady now, and mistress of great estates. So I must be seeing
to the poor."

"But you cannot speak their tongue."

"Can I not? Do you think that in the face of coming to England and
fighting here, and plotting here, and being, may be, an earl's countess,
I have not made Martin Lightfoot teach me your English tongue, till I
can speak it as well as you? I kept that hidden as a surprise for you,
that you might find out, when you most needed, how Torfrida loved you."

"As if I had not found out already! O woman! woman! I verily believe
that God made you alone, and left the Devil to make us butchers of men."

Meanwhile went round through all the fens, and north into the
Bruneswold, and away again to Lincoln and merry Sherwood, that Hereward
was come again. And Gilbert of Ghent, keeping Lincoln Castle for the
Conqueror, was perplexed in mind, and looked well to gates and bars and
sentinels; for Hereward sent him at once a message, that forasmuch as he
had forgotten his warning in Bruges street, and put a rascal cook into
his mother's manors, he should ride Odin's horse on the highest ash in
the Bruneswold.

On which Gilbert of Ghent, inquiring what Odin's horse might be, and
finding it to signify the ash-tree whereon, as sacred to Odin, thieves
were hanged by Danes and Norse, made answer,--

That he Gilbert had not put his cook into Bourne, nor otherwise harmed
Hereward or his. That Bourne had been seized by the king himself,
together with Earl Morcar's lands in those parts, as all men knew. That
the said cook so pleased the king with a dish of stewed eel-pout, which
he served up to him at Cambridge, and which the king had never eaten
before, that the king begged the said cook of him Gilbert and took him
away; and that after, so he heard, the said cook had begged the said
manors of Bourne of the king, without the knowledge or consent of him
Gilbert. That he therefore knew naught of the matter. That if Hereward
meant to keep the king's peace, he might live in Bourne till Doomsday,
for aught he, Gilbert, cared. But that if he and his men meant to break
the king's peace, and attack Lincoln city, he Gilbert would nail their
skins to the door of Lincoln Cathedral, as they used to do by the
heathen Danes in old time. And that, therefore, they now understood each
other.

At which Hereward laughed, and said that they had done that for many a
year.

And now poured into Bourne from every side brave men and true,--some
great holders dispossessed of their land; some the sons of holders who
were not yet dispossessed; some Morcar's men, some Edwin's, who had been
turned out by the king.

To him came "Guenoch and Alutus Grogan, foremost in all valor and
fortitude, tall and large, and ready for work," and with them their
three nephews, Godwin Gille, "so called because he was not inferior
to that Godwin Guthlacsson who is preached much in the fables of the
ancients," "and Douti and Outi, [Footnote: Named in Domesday-book (?).]
the twins, alike in face and manners;" and Godric, the knight of Corby,
nephew of the Count of Warwick; and Tosti of Davenesse, his kinsman; and
Azer Vass, whose father had possessed Lincoln Tower; and Leofwin Moue,
[Footnote: Probably the Leofwin who had lands in Bourne.]--that is, the
scythe, so called, "because when he was mowing all alone, and twenty
country folk set on him with pitchforks and javelins, he slew and
wounded almost every one, sweeping his scythe among them as one that
moweth"; and Wluncus the Black-face, so called because he once blackened
his face with coal, and came unknown among the enemy, and slew ten of
them with one lance; and "Turbertin, a great-nephew (surely a mistake)
of Earl Edwin"; and Leofwin Prat (perhaps the ancestor of the ancient
and honorable house of Pratt of Ryston), so called from his "Praet" or
craft, "because he had oft escaped cunningly when taken by the enemy,
having more than once killed his keepers;" and the steward of Drayton;
and Thurkill the outlaw, Hereward's cook; and Oger, Hereward's kinsman;
and "Winter and Linach, two very famous ones;" and Ranald, the butler of
Ramsey Abbey,--"he was the standard-bearer"; and Wulfric the Black
and Wulfric the White; and Hugh the Norman, a priest; and Wulfard, his
brother; and Tosti and Godwin of Rothwell; and Alsin; and Hekill; and
Hugh the Breton, who was Hereward's chaplain, and Whishaw, his brother,
"a magnificent" knight, which two came with him from Flanders; and so
forth;--names merely of whom naught is known, save, in a few cases,
from Domesday-book, the manors which they held. But honor to their very
names! Honor to the last heroes of the old English race!

These valiant gentlemen, with the housecarles whom, more or fewer, they
would bring with them, constituted a formidable force, as after
years proved well. But having got his men, Hereward's first care was,
doubtless, to teach them that art of war of which they, like true
Englishmen, knew nothing.

The art of war has changed little, if at all, by the introduction of
gunpowder. The campaigns of Hannibal and Caesar succeeded by the same
tactics as those of Frederic or Wellington; and so, as far as we can
judge, did those of the master-general of his age, William of Normandy.

But of those tactics the English knew nothing. Their armies were little
more than tumultuous levies, in which men marched and fought under local
leaders, often divided by local jealousies. The commissariats of the
armies seem to have been so worthless, that they had to plunder friends
as well as foes as they went along; and with plunder came every sort
of excess: as when the northern men marching down to meet Harold
Godwinsson, and demand young Edwin as their earl, laid waste, seemingly
out of mere brute wantonness, the country round Northampton, which must
have been in Edwin's earldom, or at least in that of his brother Morcar.
And even the local leaders were not over-well obeyed. The reckless
spirit of personal independence, especially among the Anglo-Danes,
prevented anything like discipline, or organized movement of masses, and
made every battle degenerate into a confusion of single combats.

But Hereward had learned that art of war, which enabled the Norman to
crush, piecemeal, with inferior numbers, the vast but straggling levies
of the English. His men, mostly outlaws and homeless, kept together by
the pressure from without, and free from local jealousies, resembled
rather an army of professional soldiers than a country _posse
comitatus_. And to the discipline which he instilled into them; to his
ability in marching and manoeuvring troops; to his care for their food
and for their transport, possibly, also, to his training them in that
art of fighting on horseback in which the men of Wessex, if not the
Anglo-Danes of the East, are said to have been quite unskilled,--in
short, to all that he had learned, as a mercenary, under Robert
the Frison, and among the highly civilized warriors of Flanders and
Normandy, must be attributed the fact, that he and his little army
defied, for years, the utmost efforts of the Normans, appearing and
disappearing with such strange swiftness, and conquering against such
strange odds, as enshrouded the guerilla captain in an atmosphere of
myth and wonder, only to be accounted for, in the mind of Normans as
well as English, by the supernatural counsels of his sorceress wife.

But Hereward grew anxious and more anxious, as days and weeks went on,
and yet there was no news of Osbiorn and his Danes at Norwich. Time
was precious. He had to march his little army to the Wash, and then
