The Project Gutenberg eBook, Pulpit and Press (6th Edition), by Mary Baker
Eddy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net








Title: Pulpit and Press (6th Edition)

Author: Mary Baker Eddy

Release Date: December 11, 2003  [eBook #10437]
[Date last updated: January 8, 2005]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PULPIT AND PRESS (6TH EDITION)***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Tom Allen, Josephine Paolucci
and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Transcriber's Note: The spelling "diapson" occurs in our print copy
                    in the article from the _American Art Journal_.





PULPIT AND PRESS.

Sixth Edition.

BY

REVEREND MARY BAKER EDDY,

DISCOVERER AND FOUNDER OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE.

1897.






CONTENTS


  DEDICATORY SERMON
  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE TEXT-BOOK
  HYMN--_Laying the Corner Stone_
    _Feed My Sheep_
    _Christ My Refuge_
  NOTE

  CLIPPINGS FROM NEWSPAPERS

  CHICAGO INTER-OCEAN
  BOSTON HERALD
  BOSTON SUNDAY GLOBE
  BOSTON TRANSCRIPT
  JACKSON PATRIOT
  OUTLOOK
  AMERICAN ART JOURNAL
  BOSTON JOURNAL
  REPUBLIC, (WASHINGTON, D.C.)
  NEW YORK TRIBUNE
  KANSAS CITY JOURNAL
  MONTREAL HERALD
  BALTIMORE AMERICAN
  REPORTER, (LEBANON, IND.)
  NEW YORK COMMERCIAL ADVERTISER
  SYRACUSE POST
  NEW YORK HERALD
  TORONTO GLOBE
  CONCORD MONITOR
  PEOPLE AND PATRIOT
  UNION SIGNAL
  NEW CENTURY
  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE JOURNAL
  CONCORD MONITOR




PREFACE.


This volume contains scintillations from press and pulpit--utterances
which epitomize the story of the birth of Christian Science, in 1866,
and its progress during the ensuing thirty years. Three quarters of a
century hence, when the children of to-day are the elders of the
twentieth century, it will be interesting to have not only a record of
the inclination given their own thoughts in the latter half of the
nineteenth century, but also a registry of the rise of the mercury in
the glass of the world's opinion.

It will then be instructive to turn backward the telescope of that
advanced age, with its lenses of more spiritual mentality, indicating
the gain of intellectual momentum, on the early footsteps of Christian
Science as planted in the pathway of this generation; to note the
impetus thereby given to Christianity; to con the facts surrounding the
cradle of this grand verity--that the sick are healed and sinners saved,
not by matter, but by Mind; and to further scan the features of the vast
problem of eternal life, as expressed in the absolute power of Truth,
and the actual bliss of man's existence in Science.

MARY BAKER EDDY.

February, 1895.




TO

The dear two thousand and six hundred Children,

WHOSE CONTRIBUTIONS

_Of $4,460 were devoted to the Mother's Room in The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, Boston_,

THIS UNIQUE BOOK IS TENDERLY DEDICATED BY

MARY BAKER EDDY.




DEDICATORY SERMON.

BY REV. MARY BAKER EDDY,

First pastor of The First Church of Christ, Scientist, Boston, Mass.,
Delivered Jan. 6, 1895.


TEXT--Psalms xxxvi, 8. "They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures."

A new year is a nursling, a babe of time, a prophecy and promise clad in
white raiment, kissed--and encumbered with greetings--redolent with
grief and gratitude.

An old year is time's adult, and 1893 was a distinguished character,
notable for good and evil. Time past and time present, both, may pain
us, but time IMPROVED is eloquent in God's praise. For due refreshment
garner the memory of 1894; for if wiser by reason of its large lessons,
and records deeply engraven, great is the value thereof.

  Pass on returnless year!
  The path behind thee is with glory crowned;
  This spot whereon thou troddest was holy ground;
          Pass proudly to thy bier!

To-day being with you in spirit, what need that I should be present _in
propria persona_? Were I present, methinks I should be much like the
Queen of Sheba, when she saw the house Solomon had erected. In the
expressive language of Holy Writ, "there was no more spirit in her;" and
she said: "Behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity
exceedeth the fame which I heard." Both without and within, the spirit
of beauty dominates the Mother Church, from its mosaic flooring to the
soft shimmer of its starlit dome.

Nevertheless, there is a thought higher and deeper than the edifice.
Material light and shade are temporal, not eternal. Turning the
attention from sublunary views, however enchanting, think for a moment
with me of the house wherewith "they shall be abundantly satisfied,"
"Even the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." With the
mind's eye glance at the direful scenes of the war between China and
Japan. Imagine yourselves in a poorly barricaded fort, fiercely besieged
by the enemy. Would you rush forth single-handed to combat the foe? Nay,
would you not rather strengthen your citadel by every means in your
power, and remain within the walls for its defense? Likewise should we
do as metaphysicians and Christian Scientists. The real house in which
"we live, move, and have our being" is Spirit, God, the eternal harmony
of infinite Soul. The enemy we confront would overthrow this sublime
fortress, and it behooves us to defend our heritage.

How can we do this christianly scientific work? By intrenching ourselves
in the knowledge that our true temple is no human fabrication, but the
superstructure of Truth, reared on the foundation of Love, and pinnacled
in Life. Such being its nature, how can our godly temple possibly be
demolished, or even disturbed? Can eternity end? Can Life die? Can
Truth be uncertain? Can Love be less than boundless? Referring to this
temple our Master said: "Destroy this temple and in three days I will
raise it up." He also said: "The kingdom of God is already within you."
Know then that you possess sovereign power to think and act
rightly,--and that nothing can dispossess you of this heritage and
trespass on Love. If you maintain this position, who or what can cause
you to sin or suffer? Our surety is in our confidence that we are indeed
dwellers in Truth and Love, man's eternal mansion. Such a heavenly
assurance ends all warfare, and bids tumult cease, for the good fight we
have waged is over, and divine Love gives us the true sense of victory.
"They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and
thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures." No longer are
we of the church militant, but of the church triumphant; and with Job of
old we exclaim: "Yet in my flesh shall I see God." The river of his
pleasures is a tributary of divine love, whose living waters have their
source in God, and flow into everlasting Life. We drink of this river
when all human desires are quenched, satisfied with what is pleasing to
the divine Mind.

Perchance some one of you may say, "The evidence of spiritual verity in
me is so small that I am afraid. I feel so far from victory over the
flesh that to reach out for a present realization of my hope savors of
temerity. Because of my own unfitness for such a spiritual animus my
strength is naught, and my faith fails." O thou "weak and infirm of
purpose." Jesus said, "Be not afraid."

  "What if the little rain should say,
    'So small a drop as I
  Can ne'er refresh a drooping earth,
    I'll tarry in the sky.'"

Is not a man metaphysically and mathematically number one, a unit, and
therefore whole number, governed and protected by his divine Principle,
God? You have simply to preserve a scientific, positive sense of unity
with your divine Source and daily demonstrate this. Then you will find
that one is as important a factor as duodecillions in being and doing
right, and thus demonstrating deific Principle. A dewdrop reflects the
sun. Each of Christ's little ones reflects the infinite One, and
therefore is the seer's declaration true, that "one with God is a
majority."

A single drop of water may help to hide the stars, or crown the tree
with blossoms.

Who lives in Good, lives also in God,--lives in all Life, through all
space. His is an individual kingdom, his diadem a crown of crowns. His
existence is deathless, forever unfolding its eternal Principle. Wait
patiently on illimitable Love, the lord and giver of Life. _Reflect this
Life_, and with it cometh the full power of Being. "They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house."

In 1893 the World's Parliament of Religions, held in Chicago, used, in
all its public sessions, my form of prayer since 1866; and one of the
very clergymen who had publicly proclaimed me "the prayerless Mrs.
Eddy," offered his audible adoration in the words I use, besides
listening to an address on Christian Science from my pen, read by Judge
S.J. Hanna, in that unique assembly.

When the light of one friendship after another passes from earth to
heaven, we kindle in place thereof the glow of some deathless reality.
Memory, faithful to goodness, holds in her secret chambers those
characters of holiest sort, bravest to endure, firmest to suffer,
soonest to renounce. Such was the founder of the Concord School of
Philosophy--the late A. Bronson Alcott.

After the publication of SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES,
his athletic mind, scholarly and serene, was the first to bedew my hope
with a drop of humanity. When the press and pulpit cannonaded this book,
he introduced himself to its author by saying--"I have come to comfort
you." Then eloquently paraphrasing it and prophesying its prosperity,
his conversation with a beauty all its own reassured me. _That prophecy
is fulfilled_.

This book, in 1895, is in its ninety-first edition of one thousand
copies. It is in the public libraries of the principal cities, colleges,
and Universities of America; also the same in Great Britain, France,
Germany, Russia, Italy, Greece, Japan, India, and China, in the Oxford
University and the Victoria Institute, England; in the Academy of
Greece, and the Vatican at Rome.

This book is the leaven fermenting religion; it is palpably working in
the sermons, Sunday schools, and literature of our and other lands. This
spiritual chemicalization is the upheaval produced when Truth is
neutralizing error, and impurities are passing off. And it will continue
till the antithesis of Christianity engendering the limited forms of a
national or tyrannical religion yields to the church established by the
Nazarene prophet and maintained on the spiritual foundation of Christ's
healing.

Good, the Anglo-Saxon term for God, unites Science to Christianity. It
presents to the understanding, not matter, but Mind; not the deified
drug, but the goodness of God--healing and saving mankind.

The author of "Marriage of the Lamb," who made the mistake of thinking
she caught her notions from my book, wrote to me in 1894, "Six months
ago your book, SCIENCE AND HEALTH, was put into my hands. I had not read
three pages before I realized I had found that for which I had hungered
since girlhood, and was healed instantaneously of an ailment of seven
years standing. I cast from me the false remedy I had vainly used and
turned to the Great Physician. I went with my husband, a missionary to
China, in 1884. He went out under the auspices of the Methodist
Episcopal church. I feel the truth is leading us to return to Japan."

Another brilliant enunciator, seeker, and servant of Truth, the Rev.
William R. Alger of Boston, signalled me kindly as my lone bark rose and
fell and rode the rough sea. At a conversazione in Boston, he said, "You
may find in Mrs. Eddy's metaphysical teachings, more than is dreamt of
in your philosophy."

