The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wee Ones' Bible Stories, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wee Ones' Bible Stories

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 23, 2004 [EBook #11241]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEE ONES' BIBLE STORIES ***




Produced by The Internet Archive Children's Library, The Children's
Library Project Management Team, Christine De Ryck and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreaders.





WEE ONES' BIBLE STORIES


SHORT SKETCHES OF THE BIBLE

SPECIALLY ILLUSTRATED FOR THE LITTLE FOLKS


[Illustration: Knock. It shall be opened unto you]


1903.




FEEDING THE MULTITUDES.


Jesus had chosen twelve out of the many who flocked about Him wishing to
be His disciples, and these twelve were called apostles. He sent them
forth to preach the gospel, giving them power to cast out evil spirits
and to heal diseases; and when they were about to go forth upon their
mission, He gave them instructions regarding what they were to do, and
warned them of the persecutions which would be heaped upon them. He also
bade them be strong and not fear those who had power to kill the body
only, because the soul was far more precious. So the apostles went out
into the cities and towns and preached the word of God and carried
blessing with them.

When they came back they told Jesus what they had done, and they went
with Him across the sea of Galilee to a quiet spot where they could rest
and talk over their work.

But the people went around the sea, or lake, to join them on the other
side; and when Jesus saw the crowds He was sorry for them, and taught
and healed them again as He had done so many times.

In the evening His disciples urged Him to send the people away that they
might buy food for themselves in the village; but Jesus said, "Give ye
them to eat."

The disciples thought this would be impossible. "We have here but five
loaves and two fishes," they told Him; and when He said, "Bring them
hither to Me," they obeyed Him with wonder.

Then Jesus commanded the people to sit down in groups upon the green
grass; and He took the loaves and gave thanks to God for them, and broke
them into pieces, handing them to His disciples to give to the people.

He divided the fishes also in the same way, and the disciples went about
among the groups giving each person a share, and everyone had enough to
eat; for although there were about five thousand men there, besides
women and children, the food was sufficient for all. Even more than
this, when the multitude had eaten all that they wanted, the disciples
gathered up twelve baskets full of the broken pieces.

When the people saw this wonderful miracle which Jesus had done, they
wished to make Him king at once, for they thought He was the Promised
One for whom they had been so long waiting, and they did not know that
the kingdom of Christ was not to be an earthly kingdom.

But Jesus would not allow them to make Him king, and He left them and
went up on the top of a mountain alone.

On another occasion when a great crowd had gathered to hear Him and had
been for a long time without food, He called His disciples to Him and
told them that He felt very sorry for the people because they had been
fasting three days, and He could not send them away so weak and hungry
for fear they would faint before they could reach home.

But His disciples said they did not know where they could get food for
so many, as they were in the wilderness.

Jesus asked them how many loaves of bread they had, and they told Him
seven, and also a few small fishes.

Then Jesus bade the people sit down on the ground around Him, and He
took the seven loaves and the fishes and offered thanks to God;
afterwards, He broke the loaves into pieces as He had done before and
gave them, with the fishes, to His disciples, and the disciples
distributed them among the people. As they gave out the food it
continued to increase wonderfully, so that all the people were fed;
and even after that there was food enough left so that they took up
seven baskets full, although about four thousand men, with many women
and children, had eaten.

These miracles show not only the power of our Lord, but His tenderness
and thoughtfulness for those around Him in the everyday affairs of life.
