The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Practice of the Presence of God the
Best Rule of a Holy Life, by Herman Nicholas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Practice of the Presence of God the Best Rule of a Holy Life

Author: Herman Nicholas

Release Date: October 26, 2004 [EBook #13871]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE OF GOD ***




Produced by Robert Shimmin, Project Manager, Keith M. Eckrich, 
Post-Processor, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team






THE PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE

OF GOD THE BEST RULE

OF A HOLY LIFE.


BROTHER LAWRENCE.


Being Conversations and Letters of Nicholas Herman, of Lorraine
(Brother Lawrence). _Translated from the French._


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY,

NEW YORK.  CHICAGO.   TORONTO.

_Publishers of Evangelical Literature._




PREFACE.



This book consists of notes of several conversations had with, and
letters written by Nicholas Herman, of Lorraine, a lowly and unlearned
man, who, after having been a footman and soldier, was admitted a Lay
Brother among the barefooted Carmelites at Paris in 1666, and was
afterwards known as "Brother Lawrence."

His conversion, which took place when he was about eighteen years old,
was the result, under God, of the mere sight in midwinter, of a dry
and leafless tree, and of the reflections it stirred respecting the
change the coming spring would bring. From that time he grew eminently
in the knowledge and love of GOD, endeavoring constantly to walk "_as
in His presence_." No wilderness wanderings seem to have intervened
between the Red Sea and the Jordan of his experience. A wholly
consecrated man, he lived his Christian life through as a pilgrim--as
a steward and not as an owner, and died at the age of eighty, leaving
a name which has been as "ointment poured forth."

The "Conversations" are supposed to have been written by M. Beaufort,
Grand Vicar to M. de Chalons, formerly Cardinal de Noailles, by whose
recommendation the letters were first published.

The book has, within a short time, gone through repeated English and
American editions, and has been a means of blessing to many souls. It
contains very much of that wisdom which only lips the Lord has touched
can express, and which only hearts He has made teachable can receive.

May this edition also be blessed by GOD, and redound to the praise of
the glory of His grace.




CONVERSATIONS.



FIRST CONVERSATION.


The first time I saw _Brother Lawrence_, was upon the 3d of August,
1666. He told me that GOD had done him a singular favor, in his
conversion at the age of eighteen.

That in the winter, seeing a tree stripped of its leaves, and
considering that within a little time the leaves would be renewed and
after that the flowers and fruit appear, he received a high view of
the Providence and Power of GOD, which has never since been effaced
from his soul. That this view had perfectly set him loose from the
world, and kindled in him such a love for GOD, that he could not tell
whether it had increased during the more than forty years he had lived
since.

That he had been footman to M. Fieubert, the treasurer, and that he
was a great awkward fellow who broke everything.

That he had desired to be received into a monastery, thinking that he
would there be made to smart for his awkwardness and the faults he
should commit, and so he should sacrifice to GOD his life, with its
pleasures: but that God had disappointed him, he having met with
nothing but satisfaction in that state.

That we should establish ourselves in a sense of GOD'S Presence, by
continually conversing with Him. That it was a shameful thing to quit
His conversation, to think of trifles and fooleries.

That we should feed and nourish our souls with high notions of GOD;
which would yield us great joy in being devoted to Him.

That we ought to _quicken_, i.e., _to enliven, our faith_. That it was
lamentable we had so little; and that instead of taking _faith_ for
the rule of their conduct, men amused themselves with trivial
devotions, which changed daily. That the way of Faith was the spirit
of the Church, and that it was sufficient to bring us to a high degree
of perfection.

That we ought to give ourselves up to GOD, with regard both to things
temporal and spiritual, and seek our satisfaction only in the
fulfilling of His will, whether he lead us by suffering or by
consolation, for all would lie equal to a soul truly resigned. That
there needed fidelity in those dryness, or insensibilities and
irksomenesses in prayer, by which GOD tries our love to him; that
_then_ was the time for us to make good and effectual acts of
resignation, whereof one alone would oftentimes very much promote our
spiritual advancement.

That as for the miseries and sins he heard of daily in the world, he
was so far from wondering at them, that, on the contrary, he was
surprised that there were not more, considering the malice sinners
were capable of; that for his part he prayed for them; but knowing
that GOD could remedy the mischiefs they did when He pleased, he gave
himself no farther trouble.

That to arrive at such resignation as GOD requires, we should watch
attentively over all the passions which mingle as well in spiritual
things as in those of a grosser nature; that GOD would give light
concerning those passions to those who truly desire to serve Him. That
if this was my design, viz., sincerely to serve GOD, I might come to
him (B. Lawrence) as often as I pleased, without any Fear of being
troublesome; but if not, that I ought no more to visit him.



SECOND CONVERSATION.
