The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Coal From The Altar, To Kindle The Holy
Fire of Zeale, by Samuel Ward

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Coal From The Altar, To Kindle The Holy Fire of Zeale
       In a Sermon Preached at a Generall Visitation at Ipswich

Author: Samuel Ward

Release Date: August 3, 2005 [EBook #16423]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COAL FROM THE ALTAR, TO ***




Produced by Jordan Dohms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











A COAL FROM THE ALTAR,
TO KINDLE THE holy fire of _Zeale_.

In a Sermon preached at a generall _Visitation at Ipswich._

By SAM WARD Bach. of Divinity.

_The third Edition, corrected and much amended._

[Greek: Theo kai humin]

_LONDON_,

Printed by _E.G._ for _Joyce Macham_, widow; and are to bee sold in
Pauls Church yard, at the signe of _Time_, 1628





To my reverend Friend Mr. SAMUEL WARD.

_Sir, your Sermon which I copied partly from your mouth, and partly from
your notes, I have adventured into the light; encouraged by the
approbation, and earnest entreaty of such, whose judgements you
reverence, and whose love you embrace: who also have made bolde heere
and there to varie some things, not of any great consequence, if I can
judge. I was loth to smoother such fire in my brest; but to vent it, to
enflame others. If you shall blame me, I know others will thanke mee.
What I have done, is out of Zeale to God and his Church._

Your affectionate friend,

_Ambrose Wood._





Revel. 3. 19. _Be zealous._

[Sidenote: Mat. 24. 12.]

[Sidenote: 1 Kin. 1. 1.]

This watch-word of Christ, if it be not now a word in season, I know not
when ever it was, or will bee: Would he now vouchsafe to bestow a letter
upon his Church heere on earth; should hee need to alter the tenour of
this? which being the last, to the last of the seaven Churches, why may
it not (saith an Ancient, upon this text) typifie the estate of the last
Age of his Churches? the coldnesse whereof himselfe hath expressely
foretolde. And if God should now send through he earth such surveying
Angels as _Zacharie_ mentions, chapter 1. Could they returne any other
observation of their travailes then theirs; _The whole world lies in
lukewarmnesse?_ which makes mee often in my thoughts proportion these
ends of time, to the like period of _Davids_ age, when no cloathes were
enough to keepe heare in him. _Faith_ I grant is a more radicall,
vitall, and necessary grace; but yet not so wholly out of _grace_ with
the times, as poore _Zeale_; which yet if by any meanes it might once
againe be reduced into favour and practice, before Time sets, and bee no
more; I doubt not but Christ would also yet once againe in this evening
of the world, come and _Sup_ with us; A favour including all other in
it.

[Sidenote: 2]

My desire especially is, that this our Iland might take it to it selfe,
as well as if it had by name beene directed to it; what would it hurt us
to make an especiall benefit and use of it? Some of our owne, have so
applyed it; (whether out of their judgements, or affections, I say not.)
Learned _Fulk_ marvels if it were not by a Propheticall spirit penned
for us: others more resolutely have made it a singular type of purpose
for us. Their warrant I know not; especially if it bee true which all
travellers tell you, _That they finde more zeale at home then abroad._
We are I grant in sundry respects equall to _Laodicea_: Even the very
names thereof, as well the first and oldest in regard of the blessings
of God, [Greek: Dios polis] Gods Darling, as the later in regard of good
Lawes and Civility, _Laodicea_, How well doe they become us? As rich as
they, and that in the very same commodity of woolls; _Abounding as they_
with many learned _Zenoes_ & bountifull _Hieroes_; _Parallel_ in all
regards; I would I could say lukewarmnesse excepted. But I must bee a
faithfull and true witnesse, and yet this is all I have to say; It was,
as I conceive, _Laodicea's_ complexion and not her constitution, her
practice not her orders, personall lukewarmnesse not legall, which
Christ strikes at. That fault I finde in my text, the same I finde in
our common Christians, whose spirituall condition, and state is too
like the externall situation of our Country, between the Torrid, and the
Frigid Zones; neither hot nor colde: and so like _Laodicea_, that if wee
take not warning, or warming, we may, I feare, in time come to be spued
out of Gods mouth.

[Sidenote: 3]

For this present assembly of Ministers, could all the choice and time in
the world have better fitted mee then mine ordinarie Lot? If fire bee
set upon the Beacons, will not the whole Countrey soone be warned and
enlightned?

[Sidenote: 4]

For my selfe also, mee thinkes it will better beseeme my yeeres to heat,
then to teach my Ancients; to enkindle their affections, then to enforme
their judgements. And whereas _Paul_ bids _Titus_ preach zeale with all
authoritie; though in mine owne name I crave your patience, and
audience, yet in his name that is the first of the creatures, and
_Amen_, I counsell him that hath an eare, to heare what the Spirit saith
to the Churches;

[Greek: Zeloson], _Be Zealous._





_A Coale from the Altar._


Revel. 3.19. [Greek: Zeloson]: _Be Zealous._

Zeale hath been little practized, lesse studied: this heavenly fire hath
ever beene a stranger upon earth. Few in all ages that have felt the
heat of it, fewer that have knowne the nature of it. A description will
rake it out of the embers of obscurity: and it may be that many when
they shall know it better, will better affect it.

2. Zeale hath many counterfets and allies. There are many strange fires
which having sought to carry away the credit of it, have brought in an
ill name upon it: from these it would bee distinguished.

3. Zeale is every where spoken against it hath many enemies and few
friends: the world can no more abide it, then beasts can the elementary
fire, the rebukes of many have falne upon it, the Divell weaves cunning
lies to bring downe the honour of it. Oh that wee could raise and
maintaine it, by setting forth the deserved praise of it; and challenge
it from the false imputations of such as hate it without a cause.

4. Zeale hath in this our earthly molde, little fuell, much quench-coale,
is hardly fired, soone cooled. A good Christian therefore would bee glad
to know the Incentives and preservatives of it, which might enkindle it,
enflame it, feed it, and revive it when it is going out.

5. Zeale in the worlds opinion, is as common as fire on every mans
hearth, no mans heart without zeale, if every man might be his owne
judge; If most might be heard there is too much of it; but the contrary
will appear if the right markes bee taken, and the true rules of triall
and conviction bee observed, and the heart thereby examined.

6. Zeale generally handled will break as lightning in the aire, and seize
upon no subject: Application must set it on mens harts, and exhortation
warme this old and colde age of the world, chiefly this temperate
climate of our nation.


