The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Covenants And The Covenanters, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Covenants And The Covenanters
       Covenants, Sermons, and Documents of the Covenanted Reformation

Author: Various

Editor: James Kerr

Release Date: August 22, 2006 [EBook #19100]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COVENANTS AND THE COVENANTERS ***




Produced by Jordan Dohms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: All items in the Errata have been corrected in the
text, however the Errata has still been included for completeness.]


[Illustration: THE GRASSMARKET, EDINBURGH.]

THE COVENANTS
AND
THE COVENANTERS


COVENANTS, SERMONS, AND DOCUMENTS
OF
THE COVENANTED REFORMATION.
_WITH ILLUSTRATIONS._


INTRODUCTION ON THE NATIONAL COVENANTS
BY
REV. JAMES KERR, D.D., GLASGOW


EDINBURGH:
R.W. HUNTER, GEORGE IV. BRIDGE.




THE COVENANTS AND THE COVENANTERS.

[Illustration]




PREFATORY NOTE.


The Covenants, Sermons, and Papers in this volume carry the readers back
to some of the brightest periods of Scottish history. They mark
important events in that great struggle by which these three kingdoms
were emancipated from the despotisms of Pope, Prince, and Prelate, and
an inheritance of liberty secured for these Islands of the Sea. The
whole achievements of the heroes of the battlefields are comprehended
under that phrase of Reformers and Martyrs, "The Covenanted Work of
Reformation." The attainments of those stirring times were bound
together by the Covenants, as by rings of gold.

The Sermons here were the product of the ripe thought of the main
actors in the various scenes--men of piety, learning, and renown.
Hence, the nature, objects, and benefits of personal and national
Covenanting are exhibited in a manner fitted to attract to that
ordinance the minds and hearts of men. The readers can well believe
the statement of Livingstone, who was present at several ceremonies of
covenant-renovation: "I never saw such motions from the Spirit of God. I
have seen more than a thousand persons all at once lifting up their
hands, and the tears falling down from their eyes." In the presence of
the defences of the Covenants as deeds, by these preachers, the baseless
aspersions of novelists and theologues fade out into oblivion.

True Christians must, as they ponder these productions, be convinced
that the Covenanters were men of intense faith and seraphic fervour, and
their own hearts will burn as they catch the heavenly flame. Members of
the Church of Christ will be stirred to nobler efforts for the Kingdom
of their Lord as they meditate on the heroism of those who were the
"chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof;" and they will behold with
wonder that "to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle that she
might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a time and times and half a time, from the face of the serpent." And
Statesmen will discover how Princes, Parliaments, and Peoples united in
the hearty surrender of themselves to the Prince of the kings and
kingdoms of the earth; and will be aroused to promote that policy of
Christian Statesmanship which, illustrating the purpose and will of God,
the Father, shall liberate Parliaments and nations from the bonds of
false religions, and assert for them those liberties and honours which
spring from the enthronement of the Son of Man, as King of kings and
Lord of lords.

This volume of documents of olden times is sent out on a mission of
Revival of Religion, personal and national, in the present times. It
would do a noble work if it helped to humble classes and masses, and led
them to return as one man to that God in covenant from Whom all have
gone so far away. A national movement, in penitence and faith, for the
repeal of the Acts Rescissory and the recognition of the National
Covenants would be as life from the dead throughout the British Empire.
The people and rulers of these dominions shall yet behold the brilliancy
of the Redeemer's crowns; and shall, by universal consent, exalt Him who
rules in imperial majesty over the entire universe of God. For, "The
seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying,
The kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
His Christ."

GLASGOW, _December, 1895_.




_ERRATA._

Page 29, line 8, instead of "1745," _read_ 1712.

Page 29, line 10, instead of "Crawfordjohn," _read_ Auchensaugh, near
Douglas.




CONTENTS.

                                                        PAGE
PREFATORY NOTE,                                            5

THE NATIONAL COVENANTS--_Introduction_,                   11


THE NATIONAL COVENANT--

    THE NATIONAL COVENANT, OR CONFESSION OF FAITH,        39

    EXHORTATION TO LORDS OF COUNCIL,                      52

    SERMON AT ST. ANDREWS. By Alexander Henderson,        54

    EXHORTATION AT INVERNESS. By Andrew Cant,             77

    SERMON AT GLASGOW. By Andrew Cant,                    83

    SERMON AT EDINBURGH. By Andrew Cant,                 109


THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT--

    THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT,                      131

    ACT OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY,                             136

    EXHORTATION AT WESTMINSTER. By Philip Nye,           138

    ADDRESS AT WESTMINSTER. By Alexander Henderson,      151

    SERMON AT WESTMINSTER. By Thomas Coleman,            159

    SERMON AT WESTMINSTER. By Joseph Caryl,              190

    SERMON AT LONDON. By Thomas Case,                    228

    SERMON AT LONDON. By Thomas Case,                    265

    ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS,                  303

    EXHORTATION BY THE WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY,             307

    SERMON AT LONDON. By Edmund Calamy,                  312


THE NATIONAL COVENANTS--

    CORONATION SERMON AT SCONE. By Robert Douglas,       349

    CHARLES II, TAKING THE COVENANTS,                    386

    THE ACTS RESCISSORY,                                 398

    THE TORWOOD EXCOMMUNICATION,                         408

    ACT AGAINST CONVENTICLES,                            412

    THE SANQUHAR DECLARATION,                            416

    PROTESTATION AGAINST THE UNION,                      419

    SECESSION FROM THE REVOLUTION CHURCH,                434




_Illustrations._

THE GRASSMARKET, EDINBURGH,                   _Frontispiece_

GREYFRIARS CHURCH, EDINBURGH,                             38

ST. MARGARETS AND THE ABBEY, WESTMINSTER,                130




THE NATIONAL COVENANTS


Every person who enters rightly into covenant with God is on the pathway
to gladness and honour. He comes into sympathy with Him who from
eternity made a covenant with His chosen. He gives joy to Him who loves
to see His people even touch the hem of His garments, or eagerly grasp
His Omnipotent hand. The Spirit of God on the heart of the believer
draws him into the firmest attachment to the Beloved. Under His gracious
influence, the bonds of prejudice against covenanting are as green withs
and the covenanter stands forth in liberty and in power. So also, when
the people of a kingdom together come into covenant with the Lord. In
the character of Israel as a covenanted people, there shines out a
special splendour. One of the most brilliant events in Judah's chequered
history is that in which, in the days of the good king Asa, "they
gathered themselves together to Jerusalem and entered into a covenant to
seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their heart and with all
their soul; and all Judah rejoiced at the oath." More than any other
nation of modern times, the people of the British Isles resemble in
their covenant actings the people of Israel; and Scotland is the likest
to Judah. Certainly, Scotland's covenants with God were coronets on
Scotland's brow.

At the beginning of the sixteenth century, Scotland was a moral waste.
The Papacy, which had attained the zenith of its power on the
Continent, reigned in its supremacy throughout the land. In Europe,
indeed, there were some oases in the desolation, but here there were
"stretched out upon the kingdom the line of confusion and the stones of
emptiness." The chaos was as broad and deep as that of the Papal States
before the time of Victor Emanuel. By the presence of the Papacy, mind,
conscience, heart, were blasted; while ignorance, superstition,
iniquity, increased and prevailed. But the Lord that saw the affliction
of Israel in the land of the Pharaohs, was "the same yesterday"; and His
time of visitation was one of love. The first signs of the coming
deliverance were the martyr fires kindled to consume those who were
beginning to cry for liberty. The heroic efforts and successes of the
Reformers on the Continent, in the presence of Papal bulls and
inquisitions, were a trumpet call to independence to the people of this
priest-cursed land; and many responded right nobly, ready to stand amid
the faggots at the stake rather than bear the iron heel that bruised
them.

Those valiant men were led to bind themselves together in "bands," or
covenants, and together to God, in prosecution of their aims. At Dun, in
1556, they entered into a "Band" in which they vowed to "refuse all
society with idolatry." At Edinburgh, in 1557, they entered into "ane
Godlie Band," vowing that "we, by His grace, shall, with all diligence,
continually apply our whole power, substance, and our very lives to
maintain, set forward and establish the most blessed Word of God." At
Perth, in 1559, they entered into covenant "to put away all things that
dishonour His name, that God may be truly and purely worshipped." At
Edinburgh, in 1560, they entered into covenant "to procure, by all means
possible, that the truth of God's Word may have free passage within this
realm." And these covenants were soon followed by the Confession of
Faith prepared by Knox and five other Reformers, and acknowledged by the
three Estates as "wholesome and sound doctrine grounded upon the
infallible truth of God;" by an Act abolishing the "jurisdiction of the
bishop of Rome within this realme," and forbidding "title or right by
the said bishop of Rome or his sect to anything within this realme," and
by the first General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. Seven years
thereafter, 1569, the Parliament recognised, by specific Act, the
reformed Church of Scotland as "the only true and holy kirk of Jesus
Christ within this realm." The young Church of Scotland was based on the
Word of God, anti-papal, free, reformed, and covenanting, and in that
character acknowledged by the State. "At this time," writes D'Aubigne,
"the reformed church was recognised and established by the State--a
triumph similar to that of Christianity when under Constantine the
religion of the Crucified One ascended the throne of the Caesars." In
spite of the vacillating policy of the King and Parliament, and their
repeated attempts to impose the order of bishops on the Church, the
reformation proceeded steadily, and a great advance was reached by the
National Covenant of 1580.

This National Covenant, or Second Confession of Faith, was prepared by
John Craig, minister of Holyrood House. Its original title was "Ane
Short and Generall Confession of the True Christiane Faith and
Religione, according to God's verde and Actis of our Perlamentis,
subscryved by the Kingis Majestie and his Household, with sindrie
otheris, to the glorie of God and good example of all men, att
Edinburghe, the 28 day of Januare, 1580, and 14 yeare of his Majestie's
reigne." The immediate occasion of this memorable transaction was the
discovery of a secret dispensation from the Pope consenting to the
profession of the reformed religion by Roman Catholics, but instructing
them to use all their influence in promotion of the "ancient faith."
Though the King was still in sympathy to some degree with the policy of
Rome against the "new faith," he could not dare to resist the
indignation of the people against Romish intrigues, and their demand for
a national bond as a means of defence. By the National Covenant, the
Covenanters declared their belief "in the true Christian faith and
religion, revealed by the blessed evangel, and received by the Kirk of
Scotland, as God's eternal truth and only ground of our Salvation;"
renounced "all kinds of Papistry," its authority, dogmas, rites and
decrees, and pledged themselves to maintain "the King's majesty, in the
defence of Christ, against all enemies within this realm or without." It
was signed by the King and the Privy Council and throughout the kingdom,
and was subscribed again in 1590 and 1596. "The Kirk of Scotland," wrote
Calderwood, "was now come to her perfection and the greatest puritie
that ever she attained unto, both in doctrine and discipline, so that
her beautie was admirable to forraine kirks. The assemblies of the
sancts were never so glorious." This period was the meridian of the
first Reformation.

But the time of Scotland's rest and joy was short indeed. Ere the
sixteenth century opened, the ecclesiastical edifice, raised by Knox,
the Melvilles and other reformers, was almost in ruins. The monarch had
been taught in his youth the doctrine of the divine right of kings, and
he was now determined to assert it. Both church and state must be laid
in the dust before his absolute will. Both had been delivered from a
popedom on the banks of the Tiber, now they will be confronted by a
popedom on the banks of the Thames; and the despotism of the Pope shall
be even exceeded by the despotism of the Prince. Scotland is now to be
the scene of a struggle with issues more momentous than any ever waged
on any field of battle. Shall civil and religious liberty be saved from
captivity by tyrants on the throne? Shall free assemblies and free
parliaments be extinguished in the land that has, by its people and its
Parliament, abolished the authority of Rome and taken its National
Covenant with God? For nearly a hundred years this conflict was destined
to continue till, at the Revolution Settlement, the divine right of
kings was banished the realm.

Kingcraft forthwith commenced its work of demolition and proceeded to
deliver its blows in rapid succession. Summoning to its aid Laud and
other sycophantic counsellors, it subtly resolved to lay its hand on the
very conscience of the church. Mitres were offered some of her more
prominent ministers, for Charles I. knew that Presbyterianism is the
friend of civil freedom, and that Prelacy in the Church will more
readily consent to despotism in the State. The "Black Acts" were passed
confirming the "king's royal power over all states and subjects within
this realm," discharging all assemblies held "without our Sovereign
Lord's special licence and commandment," and requiring ministers to
acknowledge the ecclesiastical superiority of bishops. The assembly was
induced to adopt a proposal for the appointment of a number of
commissioners to sit and vote in Parliament, become members of the Privy
Council, and Lords of Session; and such honours would not readily be
declined. Then came the Court of High Commission, instituted for the
purpose of compelling the "faithful" ministers to acknowledge the
bishops appointed by the king--a court called into existence by royal
proclamation, "a sort of English Inquisition," writes Dr. M'Crie,
"composed of prelates, noblemen, knights, and ministers, and possessing
the combined power of a civil and ecclesiastical tribunal." After this
came the Act giving full legal status to the "Anti-Christian hierarchy"
of Episcopacy in Scotland; the formal consecration of the first Scottish
prelates; the five articles of Perth; the Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical--a complete code of laws for the Church issued without
any consultation with the representatives of the Church; an Act charging
all His Majesty's subjects to conform to the order of worship
prescribed by him, and the Semi-Popish Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments which was imposed upon all parishes and
ministers. By these and other measures, the sovereign impiously assumed
that spiritual power which belonged to Christ alone, as King and Head of
the Church. Here, in its worst form, was "the absolutism that had so
long threatened the extinction of their liberties; here was the heel of
despotism openly planted on the neck of their Church, and the crown
openly torn from the brow of Christ, her only King."

During all these years, the Reformers were resisting with courage the
assaults of the enemy. At times there were secessions from their ranks
when, under the bribes and threats of prince and prelate, some
ingloriously succumbed. But, as Renwick said later in the struggle, "the
loss of the men was not the loss of the cause." The champions of the
Reformation, led by Andrew Melville, feared not to arraign that monarch
who once told his bishops that "now he had put the sword into their
hands they should not let it rust." They tabled petitions, published
protests, obtained interviews, but all proved powerless to arrest the
career of those who were bent on the annihilation of the Church, and the
establishment on its ruins of the royal Supremacy. In one of their
protests, they call upon the Estates to "advance the building of the
house of God, remembering always that there is no absolute and undoubted
authority in the world excepting the sovereign authority of Christ the
King, to whom it belongeth as properly to rule the Kirk according to the
good pleasure of His own will, as it belongeth to Him to save the Kirk
by the merit of His own sufferings." The attempt to impose Laud's
liturgy gave opportunity for an outburst of the slumbering flame of
discontent. Janet Geddes flung a stool at the head of the officiating
Dean, and the tumult that ensued extended far and wide. A tablet,
recently erected to her memory in St. Giles, states that "she struck the
first blow in the great struggle for freedom of conscience." The
proclamation by the Council of the State, condemning all meetings
against the Episcopal Canons and Service Book, brought the Reformers
accessions from all parts of the kingdom. Could an oppressed people bear
the tyranny longer? But, will they take up arms and scatter carnage and
blood throughout the land? No, their weapons will not be carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds. They will go to
the Covenant God of the kingdom, and they will stand before Him, saying,
"Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse." Scotland will
renew her covenant with God.

The National Covenant of 1580 was produced. An addition was made, in two
parts. The part summarizing the Acts of Parliament, condemning the
papacy and ratifying the confessions of the Church, was drafted by
Warriston; that with special religious articles for the time was by
Henderson. The spot chosen for the solemnities of the first subscription
was the Churchyard of Greyfriars, Edinburgh. "The selection," writes the
historiographer-royal for Scotland, "showed a sound taste for the
picturesque. The graveyard in which their ancestors have been laid from
time immemorial stirs the hearts of men. The old Gothic Church of the
Friary was then existing; and landscape art in Edinburgh has by repeated
efforts established the opinion that from that spot we have the grandest
view of the precipices of the Castle and the national fortress crowning
them. It seemed a homage to that elevating influence of grand external
conditions which the actors in the scene were so vehemently
repudiating." In that memorable spot the Reformers gathered "the
legitimate charters" of their nation into one document and presented
them before heaven. Johnston unrolled the parchment in which these
Scottish charters were inscribed, and read them in a clear, calm voice.
"When he had finished, all was still as the grave. But the silence was
soon broken. An aged man of noble air was seen advancing. He came
forward slowly, and deep emotion was visible in his venerable features.
He took up the pen with a trembling hand and signed the document. A
general movement now took place. All the Presbyterians in the Church
pressed forward to the Covenant and subscribed their names. But this was
not enough; a whole nation was waiting. The immense parchment was
carried into the churchyard and spread out on a large tombstone to
receive on this expressive table the signature of the Church. Scotland
had never beheld a day like that." "This," says Henderson, "was the day
of the Lord's power, in which multitudes offered themselves most
willingly, like dewdrops of the morning. This was, indeed, the great day
of Israel, wherein the arm of the Lord was revealed--the day of the
Redeemer's strength, on which the princes of the people assembled to
swear their allegiance to the King of kings." Charles I. understood well
the force of that mighty movement when, on hearing of it, he said, "I
have no more power in Scotland than a Doge of Venice." The renewal of
that covenant, 28th February, 1638, was a thunderbolt against despotism
in Scotland, and the world over. "The chariots of God are twenty
thousand."

The covenant was transcribed into hundreds of copies, carried throughout
the country from north to south and east to west, and subscribed
everywhere. The spirit that thrilled the thousands filling and
overflowing Greyfriars Church and churchyard, spread with rapidity over
the whole land. It combined the "whole nation into one mighty phalanx of
incalculable energy." The last sparks of the King's fury burst out in
secret instructions to his followers to use all power against the
