The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prayer Book Explained, by Percival Jackson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Prayer Book Explained

Author: Percival Jackson

Release Date: May 8, 2007 [EBook #21351]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAYER BOOK EXPLAINED ***




Produced by Al Haines










THE PRAYER BOOK EXPLAINED


BY THE

REV. PERCIVAL JACKSON, M.A.,

JESUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.




PART I.

THE DAILY OFFICES AND THE LITANY.




CAMBRIDGE:

AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

1901




"_The book requireth but orderly reading._"

HOOKER, v. xxxi. 3.




{v}

PREFACE.

To those who believe in One Holy Catholic Church wherein dwelleth the
Holy Spirit, it will always be difficult to distrust the Service Book
of any Branch of it.  The old claim made at Jerusalem with regard to
the vexed questions of the Church's infancy, _It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and to us_ (Acts xv. 28), rested not on the presence there
of the good and wise, on the prudence or self-sacrifice of those who
had hazarded their lives for the Name, but on the reality of the Lord's
promised Presence.  Not because there were Apostles there, but because
those there were the Catholic and Apostolic Church, they asked and
received the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

It was a living and lasting Presence, touching with saving grace the
treatment of such questions as the observance of Mosaic precepts, {vi}
the eating of bought meat, as well as Purity of Life.  We cannot doubt,
then, that many Services which have been criticised on afterthoughts
were essentially constructed in accordance with the Faith once for all
delivered to the Church.

To renounce this conviction with regard to our own Church of England is
to surrender its inheritance.  Men of various tastes may prefer diverse
rites: reasonable sequence may suggest one method, and glowing impulse
another, fear of misunderstanding a third; but that which has seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and His Temple, the Church, demands that we
shall endeavour to believe it to be good, and use it in the temper of
faith.

The critical spirit, as we now use criticism, is not the spirit of
worship.  For the spirit of worship is moved by Faith--Faith supremely
in God, but also faith in the words which we use, and in the people
with whom we use them.

Thus the truest cure for Doubt is Worship.  If my faith in a friend
weakens I must go to see him, to speak with him, to restore our mutual
{vii} confidence and love.  In like manner, if my faith in God through
Christ weakens, I must go to Him, speak with Him, seek a return of the
old confidence and love.

In the belief that God is calling us to know Him more perfectly by the
Worship which we offer in heart and life, and in the confidence that
our Branch of the Church has the guidance of the Indwelling Spirit,
this book is dedicated to His glory.

P. J.

May 1901.




{ix}

CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

                                                             PAGE

  Extempore Worship and Forms of Worship . . . . . . . . . .    1
  Variations of words and phrases:
    _a._ Variety of Method   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    _b._ Variety in Singing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   --
    _c._ Variations in the component parts   . . . . . . . .    4


CHAPTER II.

  Origin of Morning and Evening Prayer . . . . . . . . . . .    5
  The Day Hours  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
  General Scheme of the Day Hours  . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  Names and Titles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10


CHAPTER III.

  The Model--The Lord's Prayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
    _a._ Two kinds of Worship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
    _b._ Praise and Prayer   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    _c._ Intention and Setting   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    _d._ The Key-note of Prayer and Praise   . . . . . . . .   16
    _e._ Forms of Worship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
    _f._ Worship-Forms   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
  _Table of Worship Forms_ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  _Appendix A.  Hooker on the use of Worship-Forms_  . . . .   22


CHAPTER IV.

  Morning and Evening Prayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
  The two headings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
  Map of the two Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
  Sentences, Exhortation, Confession, Absolution . . . . . .   29
  Rubrics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
  Duplication of Phrases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33


CHAPTER V.  PRAISE I.

  The Psalms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
  The first Lord's Prayer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
  The Ladder of Praise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   --
  Versicles and Psalms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
  Psalms in Daily Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42


CHAPTER VI.  PRAISE II.

  The Lessons  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
  A. The Study of the Bible a help to worship:
     The Old Testament--1. Its agreement with the New  . . .   48
                        2. Its teachings   . . . . . . . . .   --
                        3. Its 3 parts--(_a_) The Law,
                             (_b_) The Psalms, (_c_) The
                             Prophets  . . . . . . . . . . .   --
     The New Testament--4. Its 3 parts--(_a_) The History,
                             (_b_) The Epistles, (_c_) The
                             Revelation  . . . . . . . . . .   49
     The Apocrypha--    5. Its place in the Prayer Book  . .   51
  B. Lessons and Lectionaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   --
     Jewish Lectionaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51
     Early Christian Lectionaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
     Our own Lectionary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
     The Reader  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  _Appendix B.  Justin Martyr's description of Holy_
               _Baptism and Holy Communion_  . . . . . . . .   58


CHAPTER VII.  PRAISE III.

  Hymns in the Daily Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60
  The Day Hour Hymns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   --
  The Canticles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
  _Map of the Lessons and their Canticles_ . . . . . . . . .   64


CHAPTER VIII. PRAISE IV.

  Te Deum Laudamus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   65
  The Latin original.  Its three stanzas . . . . . . . . . .   66
  Notes on the words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
  Note on the Doxology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74


CHAPTER IX. PRAISE V.

  The Canticles, continued . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  Magnificat, Benedicite, Cantate Domino . . . . . . . . . .   77
  Canticles which follow the Second Lesson:  . . . . . . . .   82
  Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, Jubilate Deo, Deus misereatur .   83


CHAPTER X.  PRAISE VI.

  The Creeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
  The Apostles' Creed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   91
  Uses of Creeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   92
  History of the Apostles' Creed . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
  Creeds in the Bible  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   95
  Primitive Creeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   97
  Close of the Praise Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99


CHAPTER XI.

  Reason, History, and Revelation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
  I. About God, _a._ What Reason has to say  . . . . . . . .  101
                _b._ What the Bible Revelation has to say  .  104
  II. About Jesus Christ, _a._ What the outside world said .  106
                          _b._ What the Bible says . . . . .  107
  III. About the Holy Ghost. What the Bible says . . . . . .  111


CHAPTER XII.

  Excursus on The 'Athanasian' Creed . . . . . . . . . . . .  115


CHAPTER XIII.

  The Service of Prayer.  I. Preces and Collects . . . . . .  127
  Worship-Forms in the Prayer Service  . . . . . . . . . . .  128
  The Prayer Service Rubrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  119
  A. Preces, 132; B. Collects, 134; C. The other Prayers . .  142


CHAPTER XIV.

  The Service of Prayer.  II. Anthems  . . . . . . . . . . .  146
  _a._ Simple Anthems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
     Example.  Advent setting of Venite  . . . . . . . . . .   --
  _b._ Compound Anthems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  148
     Example.  The Easter Anthems in their original form . .   --
  Praise and Prayer Anthems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  151
  Hymns as Anthems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  152


CHAPTER XV.

  The Service of Prayer.  III. The Litany  . . . . . . . . .  153
  Ancient Litanies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  154
  Rogation Litanies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
  Structure of the Litany  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  157
    i. Our cry to Christ, 159.  ii. Our cry to the Father, 170.
    iii. Appeal for help, 171.  iv. Pressing anxieties of
    the moment, 172.  v. Final Commendation of our
    prayers to Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173

  _Appendix C. Lessons in the Day Hours_ . . . . . . . . . .  173
  _Appendix D. Pliny's Letter to Trajan_ . . . . . . . . . .  174
  _Appendix E.  The addition of Filioque_  . . . . . . . . .  176
  _Appendix F. Greek origin of Litanies_ . . . . . . . . . .  177
  _Tables of Dates_  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179

  Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  183




{1}

CHAPTER I.

EXTEMPORE WORSHIP AND FORMS OF WORSHIP.

There is no such special merit in monotony as to require that the
worship of God should be conducted wholly in one method rather than in
several.  Rather it must be acknowledged that there is merit in variety
if it be subjected to dignity and order.  For a certain measure of
variety arrests and engages the attention of the worshippers and
sustains their interest.

VARIATIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.  Much has been said from time to time
concerning Extempore Prayers and Extempore Praise, as opposed to those
which are more carefully prepared and agreed upon.

The discussion has been somewhat confused by the misuse of the word
Extempore.  Prior to the invention of Printing every one who had to
conduct Services was required to know them by heart, so as to be able
to say them without book.  The fact that he used no book did not make
the prayers extempore.  In like manner one who is about to conduct the
prayers of a Congregation may carefully prepare his subjects, phrases,
and words, so as to avoid disorder in the subjects and unfitness in the
words.  His prayers in that case are not strictly extempore.

{2}

If however he determines to leave the order of subjects and the choice
of words and phrases to the impulse of the moment, his thoughts may
travel too fast, or too slowly, or too irregularly for the essential
result: for the blessing which Christ promised is to those who _unite_
in worship.  (S. Matth. xviii. 19, 20.)

When a few people gather together with the same difficulties,
temptations, dangers, sins, successes, a truly extempore prayer may be
made by one of them without creating any discord of desire amongst the
rest: but as soon as the congregation begins to include men and women
of different occupations, tempers, ideas, talents--if moreover the
persons for whom intercessions should be made are widely scattered and
very variously employed--it becomes necessary to supplement by careful
preparation the impulses of any one who leads the worship of a
congregation.  There is also great advantage in choosing the best
phrases for expressing and including the worship of all.
