The Project Gutenberg EBook of Quiet Talks on the Crowned Christ of
Revelation, by S. D. Gordon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Quiet Talks on the Crowned Christ of Revelation

Author: S. D. Gordon

Release Date: October 16, 2007 [EBook #23038]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUIET TALKS ***




Produced by Stephen Hope, Colin Bell, Fox in the Stars and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






             QUIET TALKS
           ON THE CROWNED
        Christ of Revelation
                 BY
            S. D. GORDON

             Author of
      "Quiet Talks on Power",
      "Quiet Talks on Prayer",
"Quiet Talks about Our Lord's Return"



           [Illustration]

     CHICAGO  NEW YORK  TORONTO
     FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY
       LONDON AND EDINBURGH




         COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY
       FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY

     New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
     Chicago: 17 North Wabash Ave.
     London: 21 Paternoster Square
     Edinburgh: 75 Princes Street




PREFACE


Crowning the Christ is an intensely practical thing, whether taken in
the _personal_ sense or the _world_ sense. He has been crowned in the
upper world. With wondrous patience and graciousness He pleads for the
personal crowning in our lives. Some day--no one knows just when--He
will begin to _act_ as the crowned Christ _in all the affairs of our
earth_.

The initiative of all action to-day on the earth is in man's hands. Some
day the initiative of _governing_ action on the earth will be in the
hands of the crowned Christ, even while the personal initiative of each
man's life will still be in his own hands.

God is intensely practical. Jesus was never concerned about speculation
nor mere discussion; He was too intent on helping people. The Bible is
wholly a practical book. It is concerned only with helping us. It does
not tell us all the truth there is; we shall be constantly learning more
in the future life. But it does tell us all we need to know now. And its
purpose in telling us what it does is wholly practical,--to urge us to
right choice, and to lives that square with the choice. This is the
purpose that decided just what truth should be told in the Book.

There is one book of the sixty-six devoted wholly to this subject of the
crowned Christ,--"The Revelation of John." Every one of these books
touches Him at some angle, and finds its deepest meaning in what He was
to do and did do, and yields up its secrets only under the touch of His
hand. But this book, the closing and climax of all, the knot in the end
of the inspired thread, this deals wholly with the action of the crowned
Christ.

No book of the sixty-six has seemed so much like a riddle and set so
many a-guessing. And without doubt much of its meaning will be clear
only as events work themselves out. Events will prove the only expositor
of much. But it is with the deep conviction that this is wholly a
_practical book_, written wholly from a practical point of view, and
concerned wholly with our practical daily lives, that I have ventured to
take it up in this series of simple, wholly practical, Quiet Talks. And
it is only this side of its teachings that will be dealt with here. The
Book is a street leading into the true overcoming life the Master would
woo us to.

It is only after many years' study of this Book of the Revelation, and a
special study the past three years and a little more, that I have
ventured to put these talks together. And now they are sent out with the
earnest humble prayer that others may find some little practical help in
prayerfully reading, as I have found much in prayerfully studying, under
the Master's gracious faithful touch.




CONTENTS


I.   THE CHRIST CROWNED, THE FACT               9

II.  THE CROWN BOOK                            39

III. A SIGHT OF THE CROWNED CHRIST             63

IV.  A MESSAGE FROM THE CROWNED CHRIST         97

V.   AN ADVANCE STEP IN THE ROYAL PROGRAMME   127

VI. A CLEARING-UP STORM IN THE REALM          151

VII. THE CROWNED CHRIST REIGNING              215

VIII. WATCHING THE HORIZON                    235




I.--THE CHRIST CROWNED, THE FACT


 "When God sought a King for His people of old,
   He went to the fields to find him;
 A shepherd was he, with his crook and his lute
   And a following flock behind him.

 "O love of the sheep, O joy of the lute,
   And the sling and the stone for battle;
 A shepherd was King, the giant was naught,
   And the enemy driven like cattle.

 "When God looked to tell of His good will to men,
   And the Shepherd-King's son whom He gave them;
 To shepherds, made meek a-caring for sheep,
   He told of a Christ sent to save them.

 "O love of the sheep, O watch in the night,
   And the glory, the message, the choir;
 'Twas shepherds who saw their King in the straw,
   And returned with their hearts all on fire.

 "When Christ thought to tell of His love to the world
   He said to the throng before him,
 'The Good Shepherd giveth His life for the sheep--'
   And away to the cross they bore Him.

 "O love of the sheep, O blood sweat of prayer,
   O man on the cross, God-forsaken;
 A shepherd has gone to defend all alone
   The sheepfold by death overtaken.

 "When God sought a King for His people, for aye,
   He went to the grave to find him;
 And a shepherd came back, Death dead in His grasp,
   And a following flock behind Him.

 "O love of the sheep, O life from the dead,
   O strength of the faint and the fearing;
 A shepherd is King, and His Kingdom will come.
   And the day of His coming is nearing."[1]


Coronation Gift.

Christ is crowned. Not in any vague far-fetched meaning, but in the
plain common-sense meaning of the word, He is _crowned_.

For crowned means put in the place of highest power, with full right to
exercise that power at will. And when the crucified Jesus went up that
Olivet day, before the astonished eyes of the disciples, into the
sightless blue, on the cloud, He was received in the upper world by the
Father. And He was lifted up into the place of highest honour and
greatest power. He sat down at the right hand of the Father.[2]

He had said it would be so. Breathing the air thick with bitter hate on
the night of His trial, He had quietly said to the Jewish rulers that
even so it would be, bringing at once about His person the bursting of
the storm of hate.[3] Now His unfaltering trust in His Father has its
sweet reward.

The Holy Spirit poured out on Pentecost, the birthday of the Church, was
the gift of the _crowned_ Christ. The rushing sound as of a mighty wind
that filled all the house, the tongues of flame plainly seen, the bold
talking to the crowds of foreign Jews of God's mighty power, the
faithful witnessing about the crucified Jesus in the city that hounded
Him to death, the convinced crowds openly declaring at the peril of
their lives their belief in the despised Jesus, the strangely rare
unselfishness even in money matters, and the winsome graciousness of
spirit that marked, not only the inner circle, but these greatly
increased crowds,--all this said one thing in clear unanswerable tones
of unmistakable power, _Christ is crowned_.[4] For the sending down of
the Holy Spirit was the act of the crowned Christ.

And every touch of the Holy Spirit's presence within trusting
hearts,--the sweet peace, the quiet assurance, the longing for purity,
the drawing away to prayer, the hunger for God's Word, the intense
desire to have others saved, the passion to please this wondrous God of
ours,--all these simple marks of the Holy Spirit's presence in our
hearts, all tell us, and each tells us, in unmistakable tones, that
Christ is crowned. For this wondrous Spirit within is the gift of the
crowned Christ.

When Jesus went up from the earth, holding as His sure captive the
captivity of suffering and death to which He had with such great
strength yielded, He received gifts, coronation gifts. The Father gave
Him all. He gave Him the disposal and control of all. This was the
crowning.

And in His great out-reaching love Christ received these gifts _on
behalf of men_, His blood brothers. And at once He gave to men, to His
trusting disciples, the all-inclusive gift, the Holy Spirit, His
coronation gift.[5] So God came anew to dwell with men as originally
planned.

This blessed Presence within tells me, by His mere presence, that Christ
is crowned.

The writers of the New Testament make a chorus of sweet music on this
chord, ringing out in clear tones the full notes of delight and joy.
Luke's simple narrative sounds the note four times. Paul swells it out
with a joyous fulness that grows in volume and intensity as his
narrowing prison walls shut out more and more the lower lights, and
centres his upward gaze upon Jesus, "far above all rule, and authority,
and power, and dominion, and every name that is named," with "all things
in subjection under His feet."[6] John's special companion and working
partner, Peter, makes this note blend with and dominate the minor chord
of suffering for Christ's sake.[7]

The Christian Hebrew who wrote so eloquently to his fellow-countrymen of
the immense superiority of Jesus and so modestly withheld his own name,
strikes this note five times with strong, clear touch.[8] He quotes
that Eighth Psalm, which so wonderfully gives God's own ideal for man's
mastery over all creation. And then he tells us that in Jesus the ideal
will yet be fully realized. And that while the whole plan has not yet
fully worked out as it will, yet _even now_ we see the Jesus who tasted
death for every one, crowned with glory and honour as part of the plan
which He carried out in suffering the extreme suffering of death.

And our Lord Jesus Himself, talking out of the glory to the man who was
His bosom companion on earth, reserves as His last tender plea to us to
live the overcoming life this--"he that overcometh I will give him to
sit down with me in my throne as I also overcame and _sat down with my
Father on His throne_."[9]

And so we find out just what this word crowned means. Jesus was received
in the upper world, exalted, glorified, made to sit down at the Father's
right hand, put far above all rule and authority, with a name greater in
the sweep of its power than any other, and with all things put in
absolute subjection under His feet. This is the simple, direct meaning
of the sentence--Christ is crowned.

What a contrast the two faces of that glory cloud saw! The face looking
down, and the face looking up! The one--the downward face--looked upon a
cross, a Man hanging there with a mocking crown of thorns without and a
breaking heart within, scowling priests, jeering crowds, deserting
disciples, sneering soldiers, weeping women, heart-broken friends, a
horror of darkness, a cave-tomb under imperial seal, and blackest night
settling down over all.

The other--the upward face--looked upon a great burst of the upper
glory, the countless angels singing swelling songs of worship, the
wondrous winged cherubim, the redeemed hosts from Eden days on
reverently bowing and exultantly singing, the exquisitely
soft-green-rainbow-circled throne, the Father's face, once hidden, but
to be hidden now never again, the _shared_ seat on the Father's
throne,--what a contrast!

Here crucified--there crowned. Crucified on earth, one of the smaller
globes of the universe. On the throne of the whole universe of
globes--crowned! From the lowest depth to the one extreme height. From
hate's worst to Love's best. From love poured out for men to love
enthroned for those same men; love triumphant each time, on cross and on
throne. What a contrast! What a coronation! What a welcome home to a
throne!


The Music of a Name.

It is most intensely interesting to recall that, of course, this is just
what the very word Christ means,--the Crowned One. We sometimes get so
used to a word that it is easy to forget its real meaning. The word
Christ has been used so generally for so many centuries as a _name_
that we forget that originally it was a title, and not a name.

And it still is a title, though used chiefly as a name. Some day the
title-meaning will overlap the name-meaning. We may never cease thinking
of it as a name, but there is a time coming when events will make the
title-meaning so big as to clear over-shadow our thought and use of it
as a name.

It helps to recall the distinctive meaning of the words we use for Him
who walked amongst, and was one of us. Jesus is His _name_. It belongs
to the _man_. It belongs peculiarly to the thirty-three years and a bit
more that He was here, even though not exclusively used in that way in
the Book.

There's a rare threefold sweetness of meaning in that five-lettered
name. There is the meaning of the old word lying within the name, before
it became a name, victory, victor, saviour-victor, Jehovah-victor. There
is the swing and rhythm and murmur of music, glad joyous music, in its
very beginnings as a common word.

Then it has come to stand wholly for a _personality_, the rarely gentle,
winsome, strong personality of the Man of Bethlehem and Nazareth, and of
those crowded service-days. And every memory of His personality sweetens
and enriches the music in the old word.

And then the deepest significance, the richest rhythm, the sweetest
melody, come from the meaning His experiences, His life, pressed into
it. The sympathy, the suffering, the wilderness, the Cross, the
Resurrection, all the experiences He went through, these give to this
victory-word, Jesus, a meaning unknown before. They put the name Jesus
actually above every name in the experiences of tense conflict and
sweeping victory it stands for. This threefold chording makes music
never to be broken nor forgotten.

 "There is no name so sweet on earth,
   No name so sweet in heaven,
 The name before His wondrous birth,
   To Christ the Saviour given."

Lord is a title, of course. It was used of one who was a proprietor, an
owner, or a master. It was commonly used as a title of honour for one in
superior position, as a leader or teacher. In speaking of Jesus it is
coupled with the title Christ as an interchangeable word,[10] as well as
an additional title. But peculiarly it is the _personal title_ given
Jesus by one who takes Him as his own personal Master,[11] while it
still retains its broader meaning.
