The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Voice of Warning, by Parley P. Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Voice of Warning
       An introduction to the faith and doctrine of The Church
       of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Author: Parley P. Pratt

Release Date: March 11, 2011 [EBook #35554]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VOICE OF WARNING ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project,
http://bencrowder.net/books/mtp. Volunteers: Benjamin
Bytheway, Meridith Crowder, Ben Crowder, Cameron Dixon,
Eric Heaps, Tod Robbins, David Van Leeuwen.





A VOICE OF WARNING
AND
INSTRUCTION TO ALL PEOPLE,

OR,

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE FAITH AND DOCTRINE OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.


By PARLEY P. PRATT.


Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.--_Isaiah xlii,
9_.

Produce your cause, saith the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons,
saith the King of Jacob.--_Isaiah xli, 24_.


ELEVENTH EDITION.


SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH:

DESERET NEWS COMPANY, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
1881.




CONTENTS.

  Preface to the Second European Edition
  Preface to the First American Edition

CHAPTER I.

  On Prophecy already Fulfilled.

CHAPTER II.

  On the Fulfilment of Prophecy yet future.

CHAPTER III.

  The Kingdom of God.

CHAPTER IV.

  The Book of Mormon--Origin of the American Indians, etc.

CHAPTER V.

  The Resurrection of the Saints, and the Restoration of all things
  spoken by the Prophets.

CHAPTER VI.

  The dealings of God with all Nations in regard to Revelation.

CHAPTER VII.

  A Contrast between the Doctrine of Christ, and the False Doctrines
  of the nineteenth century.




PREFACE

TO THE SECOND EUROPEAN EDITION.


When the following Work was first published in America, in 1837, it
was but little known, and seemed to meet with little or no
encouragement. Months passed away, and very few copies were sold or
read. But, to the astonishment of the author, it worked itself into
notice more and more, by the blessing of God, and by virtue of its own
real merits; till, in two years, the first edition, consisting of
three thousand copies, was all sold, and many more were called for. A
new edition was published in 1839, consisting of two thousand five
hundred copies; these were also disposed of. Other three editions have
since been published, making in all thirteen thousand copies now
disposed of, and the demand is still increasing both in America and
Europe.

It has already found its way into most of the American States, and
into the provinces of the Canadas, as well as many parts of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. It has visited the cottages of the
humble, and the parlors of the great; and from the best information we
have on the subject, very few have risen from its perusal without a
deep and settled conviction of the truth of its principles.

The author has now in his possession the testimony of hundreds of
people, from different states and nations, all bearing witness that
this Work has been a means, in the hands of God, of saving them from
infidelity, from sectarian error and delusion, and of guiding them
into the light of TRUTH.

All these considerations, and an intense desire to impart the truth to
mankind as widely as possible, have induced the author to send forth
this new edition; which he greatly desires may prove a blessing to
thousands who are yet grovelling in darkness and superstition, and
lead them to the true fold of God.

If there be anything to admire, or anything praiseworthy in this Work,
the author has no claim to the honor or the praise; it is justly due
to Him who is the Source and Fountain of all TRUTH. The author was a
husbandman, inured to the plow--unpolished by education, untaught in
the schools of modern Sectarianism, (falsely called "Divinity")--
reared in the wilds of America, with a mind independent, untrammelled
and free. He drank of the pure fountain of Truth, unsullied and
unmixed, as it unfolded in majesty of light and splendor from the
opening heavens in all the simplicity of its nature. As such it has
flowed from his pen in the following volume; not veiled in mystery;
not dressed in the pomp of high-sounding names, and titles, and
learned terms; not adorned in the gay attire of eloquence flowing from
the imagination and the passions; but standing forth in the undress of
its own native modesty, as if conscious of the purity and innocence of
its nature.

He is indebted not only to the _Spirit_ of Truth for the principles
contained in this Work, but also to several men, who have been made
the instruments in the hands of God, to reveal the knowledge of God to
this generation, and to be the founders and leaders of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Among the foremost of these, he would make honorable mention of
President Joseph Smith, by whose instrumentality most of these
glorious truths (so well known to the ancients) have been restored to
the knowledge of the world--and whose zeal, labors, sufferings, and
subsequent murder, will stand forth as a bright memorial to all
succeeding ages, and be celebrated by happy millions yet unborn.

With an assurance that the principles of this Work will yet prevail
over the whole earth, this new edition of the VOICE OF WARNING is now
sent forth; and should the author be called to sacrifice his life for
the cause of Truth, he will have the consolation that it will be said
of him, as it was said of Abel, viz: "HE, BEING DEAD, YET SPEAKETH."

                                               PARLEY P. PRATT.

Manchester, England,
    Dec. 4, 1846.




PREFACE

TO THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

During the last nine years, the public mind has been constantly
agitated, more or less, through all parts of our country, with the cry
of "Mormonism, Mormonism, Delusion, Imposture, Fanaticism," etc.,
chiefly through the instrumentality of the press. Many of the
newspapers of the day have been constantly teeming with
misrepresentations and slanders of the foulest kind, in order to
destroy the influence and character of an innocent society in its very
infancy; a society of whose real principles many of them know nothing
at all. Every species of wickedness has been resorted to, and all
manner of evil has been spoken against them falsely; insomuch, that in
many places, houses and ears are closed against them, without the
possibility of being heard for a moment.

Were this the only evil, we might have less cause of complaint; but in
consequence of this we have been assaulted by mobs, some of our houses
have been torn down or burned, our goods destroyed, and fields of
grain laid waste. Yea, more--some of us have been stoned, whipped, and
shot; our blood has been caused to flow, and still smokes to heaven,
because of our religious principles, in this our native land, the
boasted land of liberty and equal law! while we have sought in vain
for redress. Officers of state have been deaf to the voice of
Innocence, imploring at their feet for justice and protection in the
enjoyment of rights as American citizens.

Under these circumstances, what could be done? How were we to correct
the public mind? We were few in number, and our means of giving
information very limited; the columns of most of the papers were
closed against us, their popularity being at stake the moment our
principles were admitted. It is true we published a monthly paper, in
which our principles were clearly set forth; but its circulation was
limited to a few thousands. Under these circumstances, had we the
tongue of angels, and the zeal of Apostles, with our hearts expanded
wide as eternity, with the intelligence of heaven, and the love of God
burning in our bosoms; and commissioned to bear as joyful tidings as
ever were borne by Michael, the Archangel, from the regions of glory;
yet, it would have been as impossible for us to have communicated the
same to the public, as it was for Paul, when he stood in the midst of
Ephesus, to declare the glad tidings of a crucified and risen
Redeemer, when his voice was lost amid the universal cry of "Great is
Diana of the Ephesians!"

Go, lift your voice to the tumultuous waves of the ocean, or try to
reason amid the roar of cannon while the tumult of war is gathering
thick around, or speak to the howling tempest while it pours a deluge
over the plains; let your voice be heard amid the roar of chariots
rushing suddenly over the pavements; or, what is still less useful,
converse with a man who is lost in slumbers, or reason with a drunkard
while he reels to and fro under the influence of the intoxicating
poison, and those will convince you of the impossibility of
communicating truth to that soul who is willing to make up his
judgment upon popular rumor, or to be wafted gently down the current
of public opinion, without stopping for a moment to listen, to weigh,
to hear both sides of the question, and judge for himself.

One of the greatest obstacles in the way of the spread of truth, in
every age, is the tide of public opinion. Let one ray of light burst
upon the world in any age, and it is sure to come in contact with the
traditions and long-established usages of men, and their opinions; or
with some religious craft, so that, like the Ephesians, they counsel
together what shall be done; their great goddess will be spoken
against, her magnificence despised, her temple deserted; or, what is
still worse, their craft is in danger, for by this they have their
wealth. Call to mind the Apostles in contact with the Jewish Rabbis,
or with Gentile superstitions; in short, at war with every religious
establishment on the earth. Witness the popular clamor: "If we let
them thus alone, all men will believe on them, and the Romans will
come and take away our place and nation." "These men that turn the
world upside down have come hither also." "What new doctrine is this,
for thou bringest certain strange things to our ears?" "These men do
exceedingly trouble our city, and teach customs which are not lawful
for us to receive, being Romans." "What will this babbler say, he
seems to be a setter forth of strange gods?" And many other such like
sayings.

Or, let us for a moment contemplate the events of later date; for
instance, the Mother Church against the reformers of various ages; see
them belied, slandered, degraded, whipped, stoned, imprisoned, burned,
and destroyed in various ways, while the ignorant multitude were made
to believe they were the very worst of men.

Again, think for a moment of the struggles of Columbus, an obscure
individual of limited education, but blessed with a largeness of
heart, a noble genius, a mind which disdained to confine itself to the
old beaten track; accustomed to think for itself, it burst the chains
which, in ages past, had held in bondage the nations of the earth; it
soared aloft, as it were on eagle's wings; it outstripped and left far
behind the boasted genius of Greece and Rome; it penetrated the dark
mysteries which lay concealed amid the western waters. Behold him
struggling for eight years against the learned ignorance of the courts
and councils of Europe, while the sneer of contempt, the finger of
scorn, and the hiss of derision, were the solid arguments opposed to
his theory.

But what was the result when, after many a fruitless struggle, an
expedition was fitted out, consisting of three small vessels? A new
world presented itself to the wondering nations of the East, destined,
at no distant period, to become the theatre of the most glorious and
astonishing events of the last days. This fact was no sooner
demonstrated than their philosophical, geographical, and religious
objections vanished in a moment; haughty ignorance and bigotry were
for once constrained to cast their honors in the dust, and bow their
reverend heads at the feet of real worth, and learn, in humble
silence, that one fact, clearly demonstrated, was worth ten thousand
theories and opinions of men.

Having said so much to impress upon the human mind the necessity of
hearing, and then judging, I would only add, that the object of this
publication is to give the public correct information concerning a
religious system, which has penetrated every State from Maine to
Missouri, as well as the Canadas, in the short space of nine years;
organizing Churches and Conferences in every region, and gathering in
its progress from fifty to a hundred thousand disciples; having, at
the same time, to sustain the shock of an overwhelming, religious
influence, opposed to it by the combined powers of every sect in
America. What but the arm of Omnipotence could have moved it forward
amid the rage of mobs? having to contend with the prejudice of the
ignorant and the pen of the learned; at war with every creed and craft
in Christendom; while the combined powers of earth and hell were
hurling a storm of persecution, unparalleled in the history of our
country.

This Work is also intended as a warning voice, or proclamation of
truth, to all people into whose hands it may fall, that they may
understand, and be prepared for the great day of the Lord. Opinion and
guesswork in the things of God are worse than useless; facts, well
demonstrated, can alone be of service to mankind. And as the Holy
Ghost can alone guide us into all truth, we pray God the Eternal
Father, in the name of Jesus Christ His Son, that the Spirit of Truth
may inspire our hearts in inditing this matter; that we may be able to
write the truth in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, that it
may be the word of God, the everlasting Gospel, the power of God unto
salvation, to the Gentile first, and also to the Jew.




A VOICE OF WARNING
AND
INSTRUCTION TO ALL PEOPLE.


CHAPTER I.

ON PROPHECY ALREADY FULFILLED.


    We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well
    that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place,
    until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts: knowing
    this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
    interpretation; for the prophecy came not in old time by the will
    of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved upon by the
    Holy Ghost.--PETER.

In order to prove anything from Scripture, it is highly necessary in
the first place to lay down some certain, definite, infallible rule of
interpretation, without which the mind is lost in uncertainty and
doubt, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth.

The neglect of such a rule has thrown mankind into the utmost
confusion and uncertainty in all their biblical researches. Indeed,
while mankind are left at liberty to transform, spiritualize, or give
any uncertain or private interpretation to the word of God, all is
uncertainty.

"Whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our profit and
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope." Now, suppose a friend from a distance should write
us a letter, making certain promises to us on certain conditions,
which, if we obtained, would be greatly to our profit and advantage:
of course it might be said the letter was written for our profit and
learning, that through patience and comfort of the letter we might
have hope to obtain the things promised. Now if we clearly understood
the letter, and knew what to expect, then it would afford us comfort
and hope; whereas, if there was any doubt or uncertainty on our minds
in the understanding of the same, then could we derive no certain
comfort or hope from the things written, not knowing what to hope for;
consequently the letter would not profit us at all. And so it is with
the Scriptures. No prophecy or promise will profit the reader, or
produce patience, comfort, or hope in his mind until clearly
understood, that he may know precisely what to hope for. Now, the
predictions of the Prophets can be clearly understood, as much so as
the almanac when it foretells an eclipse; or else the Bible of all
books is of most doubtful usefulness. Far better would it have been
for mankind, if the great Author of our existence had revealed nothing
to His fallen creatures, than to have revealed a book which would
leave them in doubt and uncertainty, to contend with one another, from
age to age, respecting the meaning of its contents. That such
uncertainty and contention have existed for ages, none will deny. The
wise and learned have differed, and do still widely differ, from each
other, in the understanding of prophecy. Whence then this difference?
Either Revelation itself is deficient, or else the fault is in
mankind. But to say Revelation is deficient, would be to charge God
foolishly; God forbid: the fault must be in man. There are two great
causes for this blindness, which I will now show:

First, mankind have supposed that direct inspiration by the Holy Ghost
was not intended for all ages of the Church, but was confined to
primitive times; the "Canon of Scripture being full," and all things
necessary being revealed; the Spirit which guides into all truth was
no longer for the people: therefore they sought to understand, by
their own wisdom, and by their own learning, what could never be
clearly understood, except by the Spirit of Truth: for the things of
God knoweth no man, except by the Spirit of God.

Secondly, having lost the Spirit of Inspiration, they began to
institute their own opinions, traditions, and commandments; giving
constructions and private interpretations to the written word, instead
of believing the things written. And the moment they departed from its
literal meaning, one man's opinion, or interpretation, was just as
good as another's; all were clothed with equal authority, and from
thence arose all the darkness and misunderstanding on these points,
which have agitated the world for the last seventeen hundred years.

Among the variety of commodities which attract the attention of
mankind, there is one thing of more value than all others. A principle
which, if once possessed, will greatly assist in obtaining all other
things worth possessing, whether it were power, wealth, riches,
honors, thrones, or dominions. Comparatively few have ever possessed
it, although it was within the reach of many others, but they were
either not aware of it, or did not know its value. It has worked
wonders for the few who have possessed it. Some it enabled to escape
from drowning, while every soul who did not possess it was lost in the
mighty deep. Others it saved from famine, while thousands perished all
around them; by it men have often been raised to dignity in the state;
yea, more, some have been raised to the throne of empires. The
possession of it has sometimes raised men from a dungeon to a palace;
and there are instances in which those that possessed it were
delivered from the flames, while cities were consumed, and every soul,
themselves excepted, perished. Frequently, when a famine or the sword
has destroyed a city or nation, they alone who possessed it escaped
unhurt. By this time the reader inquires, What can this be? Inform me,
and I will purchase it, even at the sacrifice of all I possess on
earth. Well, kind reader, this treasure is FOREKNOWLEDGE! a knowledge
of things future! Let a book be published, entitled, "A Knowledge of
the Future," and let mankind be really convinced that it did give a
certain, definite knowledge of future events, so that its pages unfold
the future history of the nations, and of many great events, as the
history of Greece or Rome does unfold the past, and a large edition
would immediately sell at a great sum per copy; indeed, they would be
above all price. Now, kind reader, the books of the Prophets, and the
Spirit of Prophecy were intended for this very purpose. Well did the
Apostle say, "Covet earnestly the best gifts; but rather that ye
prophesy."

Having said so much, we will now enter into the wide expanded field
which lies before us, and search out the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge which have been shining for ages like a light in a dark
place. We will explore regions unknown to many; we will gaze upon the
opening glories which present themselves on every side, and feast our
souls with knowledge which is calculated in its nature to enlarge the
heart, to exalt the mind, and to raise the affections above the
little, mean, grovelling things of the world, and to make one wise
unto salvation.

But, first, for the definite rule of interpretation. For this we will
not depend on any man or commentary, for the Holy Ghost has given it
by the mouth of Peter: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private interpretation." 2 Peter i, 20.

There is one grand division to be kept constantly, in view in the
study of prophecy; namely, the distinction between the past and the
future. The reader should be careful to ascertain what portion has
been fulfilled, and what remains to be fulfilled: always remembering
Peter's rule of interpretation will apply to both. Now, if we should
find in our researches that every prophecy which has been fulfilled to
the present year, has been _literally_ fulfilled, then it follows of
necessity that every prophecy which is yet future will not fail of a
_literal_ fulfilment. Let us commence with the days of Noah. Gen. vi,
17: "And behold I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth,
to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under
heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die."

In the verses which follow the above the Lord commands Noah to enter
the Ark, and take with him animals of every kind, etc. And in the 22d
verse it is written, "Thus did Noah, according to all that God
commanded him, so did he." It was well for Noah that he was not well
versed in the spiritualizing systems of modern divinity; for, under
their benighted influence, he would never have believed that so
marvelous a prophecy would have had a literal meaning and
accomplishment. No, he would have been told that the flood meant a
spiritual flood, and the Ark a spiritual Ark, and, the moment he
thought otherwise, he would have been set down for a fanatic, knave,
or fool; but it was so, that he was just simple enough to believe the
prophecy literally. Here then is a fair sample of _foreknowledge_; for
all the world, who did not possess it, perished by the flood.

The next prediction we will notice is Gen. xv, 13-16. "And he said
unto Abraham. Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a
land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict
them four hundred years. And also that nation, whom they shall serve,
will I judge; and afterwards shall they come out with great substance.
And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a
good old age; but in the fourth generation they shall come hither
again, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full."

The evil entreating of the children of Israel four hundred years,
together with their coming out with great substance, and the judgment
of God upon Egypt, as well as the death of Abraham in a good old age,
are all facts too well known to need comment here; suffice it to say,
that it is a striking example of the exact fulfilment of prophecy,
uttered more than four hundred years before it had its accomplishment.
From this we gather that none of those ancient men knew anything of
the modern system of spiritualizing.

Our next is Gen. xix, 12, 13: "And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou
here any besides? son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and
whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place: for we
will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxed great before
the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it." Now,
Lot being simple enough to believe the thing in its literal sense,
took as many of his family as would follow, and escaped for his life;
to the great amusement, no doubt, of the Sodomites, who probably stood
gazing after, crying "Delusion, delusion!" they thinking all the while
that the prophecy was only a figure. Here is an example of a man
escaping from the flames by _foreknowledge_ imparted to him, while the
whole city perished. O! what a blessing that Lot had no knowledge of
the modern manner of interpreting prophecy. If it had once entered his
heart that he must come out of Sodom spiritually, instead of
literally, it would have cost him his life.

Let us examine a prophecy of Joseph in the land of Egypt. Gen. xli,
29-31: "Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all
the land of Egypt: and there shall arise after them seven years of
famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land: and the plenty shall not be
known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be
very grievous." Joseph then proceeds to give directions for corn to be
laid up in great abundance during the seven plenteous years, in order
to provide against the famine. And Pharaoh, being no better versed in
the school of modern divinity than his predecessors, never once
thought of any other interpretation but the most literal, And thus he
was the means, together with Joseph, in the hand of God, of saving,
not only their nation, but the house of Israel, from famine. This is
another striking example of the power of _foreknowledge_. _It_ not
only saved from famine, but it exalted Joseph from a dungeon to a
palace; from the lowest degradation to the highest honor; so that they
cried before him, "Bow the knee!" But, O! what death and mourning
would have followed had they dreamed only of spiritual famine and
spiritual corn.

Having given a few plain examples of early ages, we will lightly touch
upon some of the most remarkable events of prophecy, and its
fulfilment, until we come down to the Jewish Prophets, where the field
opens wide, touching in its progress the most remarkable events of all
ages, and terminating in a full development of the opening glories of
the last days.

One remarkable instance, concerning Elijah the Prophet, was, that he
prophesied to Ahab that it should not rain for three years and
upwards, which came to pass according to his word. There is also a
remarkable instance of Hazael, the Syrian, who came to Elisha to
inquire of the Lord concerning the king of Syria, his master, who was
sick. The Prophet, earnestly beholding him, burst into tears: and
Hazael asked him, saying, "Why weepest thou?" and he, answering, said,
"The Lord hath showed me that thou shalt be king over Syria." And he
then proceeded to unfold unto him the cruelties which he would
afterwards exercise towards Israel, which are too horrible to mention
here, lest in so doing I might offend the delicate ear. But Hazael,
astonished to hear these things predicted concerning himself, which at
that time filled him with horror, exclaimed with surprise, "But what?
is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" Yet
astonishing to tell, all was afterwards fulfilled to the very letter.

In the 21st chapter, 2 Chron., it is written that there came a writing
to Jehoram from Elijah, which, after stating the great wickedness of
which he had been guilty, in turning to idolatry, and also murdering
his brethren of his father's house, who were better than himself,
proceeds thus: "Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy
people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods; and thou
shalt have great sickness by disease of the bowels, until thy bowels
fall out, by reason of thy sickness, day by day." In the same chapter
it is written, that the Philistines and Arabians came against him, and
took his wives, and children, and goods captive; and after all this,
the Lord smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease, and his
bowels fell out by reason of his sickness, so he died of sore disease.

In the 6th chapter of Joshua, 26th verse, there is a wonderful
prediction concerning Jericho: "Cursed be the man before the Lord,
that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho. He shall lay the
foundation thereof in his first-born, and in his youngest son shall he
set up the gates of it."

After this curse the city of Jericho lay waste for ages, none daring
to rebuild it at the expense of their first-born and of their youngest
son; until after a long succession of judges and kings, when hundreds
of years had passed, Hiel the Bethelite, who lived in the days of
Ahab, probably supposing that the Lord had forgotten the curse
pronounced upon it by Joshua, ventured to rebuild the city: but no
sooner had he laid the foundation thereof than Abiram his first-born
died, and, still persevering in the hardness of his heart, he set up
the gates thereof, with the loss of his youngest son, Segub, according
to the word of the Lord by Joshua; see 1 Kings, xvi, 34. We might
fill a volume with instances of a similar kind, dispersed through the
historical part of the Scriptures; but we forbear, in order to hasten
to a more full examination of the books of the Jewish Prophets. We
shall trace them in their fulfilment upon Jerusalem, Babylon, Tyre,
Egypt, and various other nations.
