Project Gutenberg's First Book of Adam and Eve, by Rutherford Platt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: First Book of Adam and Eve

Author: Rutherford Platt

Release Date: January 19, 2008 [EBook #398]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIRST BOOK OF ADAM AND EVE ***









The First Book of Adam and Eve

by Rutherford Platt




TABLE OF CONTENTS


Prologue

Chapter I - The crystal sea, God commands Adam, expelled from Eden, to
live in the Cave of Treasures.

Chapter II - Adam and Eve faint when they leave the Garden.  God sends
His Word to encourage them.

Chapter III - Concerning the promise of the great five and a half days.

Chapter IV - Adam mourns over the changed conditions.  Adam and Eve
enter the Cave of Treasures.

Chapter V - Eve makes a noble and emotional intercession, taking the
blame on herself.

Chapter VI - God's reprimand to Adam and Eve in which he points out how
and why they sinned.

Chapter VII - The beasts are appeased.

Chapter VIII - The "Bright Nature" of man is taken away.

Chapter IX - Water from the Tree of Life.  Adam and Eve near drowning.

Chapter X - Their bodies need water after they leave the garden.

Chapter XI - A recollection of the glorious days in the Garden.

Chapter XII - How darkness came between Adam and Eve.

Chapter XIII - The fall of Adam.  Why night and day were created.

Chapter XIV - The earliest prophesy of the coming of Christ.

Chapter XV - Adam and Eve grieve over the suffering of God to save them
from their sins.

Chapter XVI - The first sunrise.  Adam and Eve think it is a fire
coming to burn them.

Chapter XVII - The Chapter of the Serpent.

Chapter XVIII - The mortal combat with the serpent.

Chapter XIX - Beasts made subject to Adam.

Chapter XX - Adam wishes to protect Eve.

Chapter XXI - Adam and Eve attempt suicide.

Chapter XXII - Adam in a gracious mood.

Chapter XXIII - Adam and Eve strengthen themselves and make the first
altar ever built.

Chapter XXIV - A vivid prophecy of the life and death of Christ.

Chapter XXV - God represented as merciful and loving.  The establishing
of worship.

Chapter XXVI - A beautiful prophecy of eternal life and joy (v. 15).
The fall of night.

Chapter XXVII - The second tempting of Adam and Eve.  The devil takes
on the form of a beguiling light.

Chapter XXVIII - The Devil pretends to lead Adam and Eve to the water
to bathe.

Chapter XXIX - God tells Adam of the Devil's purpose. (v. 4).

Chapter XXX - Adam receives the first worldly goods.

Chapter XXXI - They make themselves more comfortable in the Cave of
Treasures on the third day.

Chapter XXXII - Adam and Eve go into the water to pray.

Chapter XXXIII - Satan falsely promises the "bright light."

Chapter XXXIV - Adam recalls the creation of Eve.  He eloquently
appeals for food and drink.

Chapter XXXV - God's reply.

Chapter XXXVI - Figs.

Chapter XXXVII - Forty-three days of penance do not redeem one hour of
sin (v. 6).

Chapter XXXVIII - "When 5500 years are fulfilled. . . ."

Chapter XXXIX - Adam is cautious--but too late.

Chapter XL - The first Human hunger.

Chapter XLI - The first Human thirst.

Chapter XLII - A promise of the Water of Life.  The third prophecy of
the coming of Christ.

Chapter XLIII - The Devil attempts arson.

Chapter XLIV - The power of fire over man.

Chapter XLV - Why Satan didn't fulfil his promises.  Description of
hell.

Chapter XLVI - "How many times have I delivered you out of his hand . .
."

Chapter XLVII - The Devil's own Scheming.

Chapter XLVIII - Fifth apparition of Satan to Adam and Eve.

Chapter XLIX - The first prophecy of the Resurrection.

Chapter L - Adam and Eve seek to cover their nakedness.

Chapter LI - "What is his beauty that you should have followed him?"

Chapter LII - Adam and Eve sew the first shirt.

Chapter LIII - The prophecy of the Western Lands and of the great flood.

Chapter LIV - Adam and Eve go exploring.

Chapter LV - The Conflict between God and Satan.

Chapter LVI - A chapter of divine comfort.

Chapter LVII - "Therefore I fell. . . . "

Chapter LVIII - "About sunset on the 53rd day. . ."

Chapter LIX - Eighth apparition of Satan of Satan to Adam and Eve.

Chapter LX - The Devil appears like an old man.  He offers "a place of
rest."

Chapter LXI - They begin to follow Satan.

Chapter LXII - Two fruit trees.

Chapter LXIII - The first joy of trees.

Chapter LXIV - Adam and Eve partake of the first earthly food.

Chapter LXV - Adam and Eve acquire digestive organs.  Final hope of
returning to the Garden is lost.

Chapter LXVI - Adam does his first day's work.

Chapter LXVII - "Then Satan began to lead astray Adam and Eve. . . ."

Chapter LXVIII - How destruction and trouble is of Satan when he is the
master.  Adam and Eve establish the custom of worship.

Chapter LXIX - Twelfth apparition of Satan to Adam and Eve, while Adam
was praying over the offering on the altar; when Satan beat him.

Chapter LXX - Thirteenth apparition of Satan, to trick Adam into
marrying Eve.

Chapter LXXI - Adam is troubled by the thought of marrying Eve.Chapter

Chapter LXXII - Adam's heart is set on fire.  Satan appears as beautiful
maidens.

Chapter LXXIII - The marriage of Adam and Eve.

Chapter LXXIV - The birth of Cain and Luluwa.  Why they received those
names.

Chapter LXXV - The family revisits the Cave of Treasures.  Birth of
Abel and Aklia.

Chapter LXXVI - Cain becomes jealous of Abel because of his sisters.

Chapter LXXVII - Cain, 15 years old, and Abel 12 years old, grow apart.

Chapter LXXVIII - Jealousy overcomes Cain.  He makes trouble in the
family.  How the first murder was planned.

Chapter LXXIX - A wicked plan is carried to a tragic conclusion.  Cain
is frightened.  "Am I my brother's keeper?" The seven punishments.
Peace is shattered.




Prologue

The First Book of Adam and Eve details the life and times of Adam and
Eve after they were expelled from the garden to the time that Cain
kills his brother Abel.  It tells of Adam and Eve's first dwelling--the
Cave of Treasures; their trials and temptations; Satan's many
apparitions to them; the birth of Cain, Abel, and their twin sisters;
and Cain's love for his beautiful twin sister, Luluwa, whom Adam and
Eve wished to join to Abel.

This book is considered by many scholars to be part of the
"Pseudepigrapha" (soo-duh-pig-ruh-fuh).  The "Pseudepigrapha" is a
collection of historical biblical works that are considered to be
fiction.  Because of that stigma, this book was not included in the
compilation of the Holy Bible.  This book is a written history of what
happened in the days of Adam and Eve after they were cast out of the
garden. Although considered to be pseudepigraphic by some, it carries
significant meaning and insight into events of that time.  It is
doubtful that these writings could have survived all the many centuries
if there were no substance to them.

This book is simply a version of an account handed down by word of
mouth, from generation to generation, linking the time that the first
human life was created to the time when somebody finally decided to
write it down.  This particular version is the work of unknown
Egyptians.  The lack of historical allusion makes it difficult to
precisely date the writing, however, using other pseudepigraphical
works as a reference, it was probably written a few hundred years
before the birth of Christ.  Parts of this version are found in the
Jewish Talmud, and the Islamic Koran, showing what a vital role it
played in the original literature of human wisdom.  The Egyptian author
wrote in Arabic, but later translations were found written in Ethiopic.
The present English translation was translated in the late 1800's by
Dr. S. C. Malan and Dr. E. Trumpp.  They translated into King James
English from both the Arabic version and the Ethiopic version which was
then published in The Forgotten Books of Eden in 1927 by The World
Publishing Company.  In 1995, the text was extracted from a copy of
The Forgotten Books of Eden and converted to electronic form by Dennis
Hawkins.  It was then translated into more modern English by simply
exchanging 'Thou' s for 'You's, 'Art's for 'Are's, and so forth.  The
text was then carefully re-read to ensure its integrity.




Chapter I - The crystal sea, God commands Adam, expelled from Eden, to
live in the Cave of Treasures.


1 On the third day, God planted the garden in the east of the earth, on
the border of the world eastward, beyond which, towards the sun-rising,
one finds nothing but water, that encompasses the whole world, and
reaches to the borders of heaven.

2 And to the north of the garden there is a sea of water, clear and
pure to the taste, unlike anything else; so that, through the clearness
thereof, one may look into the depths of the earth.

3 And when a man washes himself in it, he becomes clean of the
cleanness thereof, and white of its whiteness--even if he were dark.

4 And God created that sea of his own good pleasure, for He knew what
would come of the man He would make; so that after he had left the
garden, on account of his transgression, men should be born in the
earth.  Among them are righteous ones who will die, whose souls God
would raise at the last day; when all of them will return to their
flesh, bathe in the water of that sea, and repent of their sins.

5 But when God made Adam go out of the garden, He did not place him on
the border of it northward.  This was so that he and Eve would not be
able to go near to the sea of water where they could wash themselves in
it, be cleansed from their sins, erase the transgression they had
committed, and be no longer reminded of it in the thought of their
punishment.

6 As to the southern side of the garden, God did not want Adam to live
there either; because, when the wind blew from the north, it would
bring him, on that southern side, the delicious smell of the trees of
the garden.

7 Wherefore God did not put Adam there.  This was so that he would not
be able to smell the sweet smell of those trees, forget his
transgression, and find consolation for what he had done by taking
delight in the smell of the trees and yet not be cleansed from his
transgression.

8 Again, also, because God is merciful and of great pity, and governs
all things in a way that He alone knows--He made our father Adam live
in the western border of the garden, because on that side the earth is
very broad.

9 And God commanded him to live there in a cave in a rock--the Cave of
Treasures below the garden.




Chapter II - Adam and Eve faint when they leave the Garden.  God sends
His Word to encourage them.

1 But when our father Adam, and Eve, went out of the garden, they
walked the ground on their feet, not knowing they were walking.

2 And when they came to the opening of the gate of the garden, and saw
the broad earth spread before them, covered with stones large and
small, and with sand, they feared and trembled, and fell on their
faces, from the fear that came over them; and they were as dead.

3 Because--whereas until this time they had been in the garden land,
beautifully planted with all manner of trees--they now saw themselves,
in a strange land, which they knew not, and had never seen.

4 And because, when they were in the garden they were filled with the
grace of a bright nature, and they had not hearts turned toward earthly
things.

5 Therefore God had pity on them; and when He saw them fallen before
the gate of the garden, He sent His Word to our father, Adam and Eve,
and raised them from their fallen state.




Chapter III - Concerning the promise of the great five and a half days.


1 God said to Adam, "I have ordained on this earth days and years, and
you and your descendants shall live and walk in them, until the days
and years are fulfilled; when I shall send the Word that created you,
and against which you have transgressed, the Word that made you come
out of the garden, and that raised you when you were fallen.

2 Yes, the Word that will again save you when the five and a half days
are fulfilled."

3 But when Adam heard these words from God, and of the great five and a
half days, he did not understand the meaning of them.

4 For Adam was thinking there would be only five and a half days for
him until the end of the world.

5 And Adam cried, and prayed to God to explain it to him.

6 Then God in his mercy for Adam who was made after His own image and
likeness, explained to him, that these were 5,000 and 500 years; and
how One would then come and save him and his descendants.

7 But before that, God had made this covenant with our father, Adam, in
the same terms, before he came out of the garden, when he was by the
tree where Eve took of the fruit and gave it to him to eat.

8 Because, when our father Adam came out of the garden, he passed by
that tree, and saw how God had changed the appearance of it into
another form, and how it shriveled.

9 And as Adam went to it he feared, trembled and fell down; but God in
His mercy lifted him up, and then made this covenant with him.

10 And again, when Adam was by the gate of the garden, and saw the
cherub with a sword of flashing fire in his hand, and the cherub grew
angry and frowned at him, both Adam and Eve became afraid of him, and
thought he meant to put them to death.  So they fell on their faces,
trembled with fear.

11 But he had pity on them, and showed them mercy; and turning from
them went up to heaven, and prayed to the Lord, and said;--

12 "Lord, You sent me to watch at the gate of the garden, with a sword
of fire.

13 But when Your servants, Adam and Eve, saw me, they fell on their
faces, and were as dead.  O my Lord, what shall we do to Your servants?"

14 Then God had pity on them, and showed them mercy, and sent His Angel
to keep the garden.

15 And the Word of the Lord came to Adam and Eve, and raised them up.

16 And the Lord said to Adam, "I told you that at the end of the five
and a half days, I will send my Word and save you.

17 Strengthen your heart, therefore, and stay in the Cave of Treasures,
of which I have before spoken to you."

18 And when Adam heard this Word from God, he was comforted with that
which God had told him.  For He had told him how He would save him.




Chapter IV - Adam mourns over the changed conditions.  Adam and Eve
enter the Cave of Treasures.

1 But Adam and Eve cried for having come out of the garden, their first
home.

2 And indeed, when Adam looked at his flesh, that was altered, he cried
bitterly, he and Eve, over what they had done.  And they walked and
went gently down into the Cave of Treasures.

3 And as they came to it, Adam cried over himself and said to Eve,
"Look at this cave  that is to  be our prison in this world, and a
place of punishment!

4 What is it compared with the garden?  What is its narrowness compared
with the space of the other?

5 What is this rock, by the side of those groves?  What is the gloom of
this cavern, compared with the light of the garden?

6 What is this overhanging ledge of rock to shelter us, compared with
the mercy of the Lord that overshadowed us?

7 What is the soil of this cave compared with the garden land?  This
earth, strewed with stones; and that, planted with delicious fruit
trees?"

8 And Adam said to Eve, "Look at your eyes, and at mine, which before
beheld angels praising in heaven; and they too, without ceasing.

9 But now we do not see as we did; our eyes have become of flesh; they
cannot see like they used to see before."

10 Adam said again to Eve, "What is our body today, compared to what it
was in former days, when we lived in the garden?"

11 After this, Adam did not want to enter the cave, under the
overhanging rock; nor would he ever want to enter it.

12 But he bowed to God's orders; and said to himself, "Unless I enter
the cave, I shall again be a transgressor."




Chapter V - Eve makes a noble and emotional intercession, taking the
blame on herself.

1 Then Adam and Eve entered the cave, and stood praying, in their own
tongue, unknown to us, but which they knew well.

2 And as they prayed, Adam raised his eyes and saw the rock and the
roof of the cave that covered him overhead.  This prevented him from
seeing either heaven or God's creatures.  So he cried and beat his
chest hard, until he dropped, and was as dead.

