Psalm civ. 31, 33.  "The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever:  The 
Lord shall rejoice in his works.  I will sing unto the Lord as long as I 
live:  I will sing praise to my God while I have my being."

This is Trinity Sunday, on which we think especially of the name of God.  
A day which, to a wise man, may well be one of the most solemn, and the 
most humiliating days of the whole year.  For is it not humiliating to 
look stedfastly, even for a moment, at God's greatness, and then at our 
own littleness; at God's strength and at our own weakness; at God's 
wisdom, and at our own ignorance; and, most of all, at God's 
righteousness, and at our own sins?

I do not say that it should not be so.  Rather, I say, it should be so.  
For what is more wholesome for you and me, and any man, than to be 
humiliated--humbled--and brought to our own level--that all may see who, 
what, and where we are?  What more wholesome than to be made holy and 
humble men of heart?  What more wholesome for us, who are each of us 
tempted to behave as if we were the centre of the universe, to judge 
ourselves the most important personages in the world, and to judge of 
everything according as it is pleasant or unpleasant to us, each in our 
own family, our own sect, our own neighbourhood; what more wholesome than 
to be brought now and then face to face with God Himself, and see what 
poor, little, contemptible atoms we are at best, compared with Him who 
made heaven and earth?--to see how well God and God's world have gone on 
for thousands of years without our help;--how well they will go on after 
we are dead and gone?

Face to face with God!  And how far shall we have to go to find ourselves 
face to face with God?  Not very far, according to St Paul.  God, he 
says, is "not far from every one of us; for in Him we live, and move, and 
have our being."

In God, in the ever blessed Trinity--Father, Son, and Holy Ghost--we, and 
not we only, but every living thing--each flower, each insect--lives, and 
moves, and has its being.  So it is--strange as it may seem, and we 
cannot make it otherwise.  You fancy God far off--somewhere in the skies, 
beyond suns and stars.  Know that the heavens, and the heaven of heavens, 
cannot contain Him.  Rather, in the very deepest sense, He contains them.  
In God, suns and stars, and all the host of heaven, live, and move, and 
have their being; and if God destroyed them all at this very moment, and 
the whole universe became nothing once more, as it was nothing at first, 
still God would remain, neither greater nor less, neither stronger nor 
weaker, neither richer nor poorer, than He was before.  For He is the 
self-existent I Am; who needs nought save Himself, and who needs nought 
save to assert Himself in His Word, Jesus Christ our Lord, and say "I 
Am," in order to create all things and beings, save Himself.  He is the 
infinite; whom nothing, however huge, and vast, or strong, can 
comprehend--that is, take in and limit.  He takes in and limits all 
things; giving to each thing, form according to its own kind, and life 
and growth according to its own law; appointing to all (as says St Paul) 
their times, and the bounds of their habitation; that if they be rational 
creatures, as we are, they may feel after the Lord and find Him; and if 
they be irrational creatures, like the animals and the plants, mountains 
and streams, clouds and tempests, sun and stars, they may serve God's 
gracious purposes in the economy of His world.

Therefore, everything which you see, is, as it were, a thought of God's, 
an action of God's; a message to you from God.  Therefore you can look at 
nothing in the earth without seeing God Himself at work thereon.  As our 
Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work."  You can look 
neither at the sun in the sky, nor at the grass beneath your feet, 
without being brought face to face with God, the ever blessed Trinity.  
The tiniest gnat which dances in the sun, was conceived by God the 
Father, in whose eternal bosom are the ideas and patterns of all things, 
past, present, and to come; it was created by God the Son, by whom the 
Father made all things, and without whom nothing is made:  and it is kept 
alive by God the Holy Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, of whom it is 
written, "Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created; and thou 
renewest the face of the earth."

Oh that we could all remember this.  That when we walk across the field, 
or look out into the garden, we could have the wisdom to remember, 
Whither, O God, can I go from Thy presence?  For Thou art looking down on 
the opening of every bud and flower, and without Thee not a sparrow falls 
to the ground.  Whither can I flee from Thy Spirit?  For Thy Spirit is 
giving life perpetually, alike to me and to the insect at my feet; 
without Thy Spirit my lungs could not breathe one breath, my heart could 
not beat one pulse.  In Thee, I and all things live, move, and have our 
being.  And shall I forget Thee, disobey Thee, neglect to praise, and 
honour, and worship Thee, and thank Thee day and night, for Thy great 
glory?

If we could but remember that, there would be no fear of our being 
ungodly, irreligious, undevout.  We look too often, day after day, month 
after month, on the world around us just as the dumb beasts do, as a 
place out of which we can get something to eat, and forget that it is 
also a place out of which we can get, daily and hourly, something to 
admire, to adore, to worship, even the thought of God's wisdom, God's 
power, God's goodness, God's glory.  Oh blind and heedless that we are.  
Truly said the wise man--"An undevout astronomer is mad."  And truly said 
another wise man, an Englishman--the saintly philosopher Faraday, now 
with God,--"How could he be otherwise than religious; when at every step 
he found himself brought more closely face to face with the signs of a 
mind constructed like his own, with an aim and a purpose which he could 
understand, employing ways and means, and tending clearly to an end, and 
methodically following out a system which he could both perceive and 
grasp."  Such a man's whole life is one act of reverence to that God in 
whose inner presence he finds himself illuminated and strengthened; and 
if there be revelation of divine things on earth, it is when the hidden 
secrets of nature are disclosed to the sincere and self-denying seeker 
after truth.

Yes, that is true.  The more you look into the world around you, and 
consider every flower, and bird, and stone, the more you will see that a 
Mind planned them, even the mind of God; a Mind like yours and mine; but 
how infinitely different, how much deeper, wiser, vaster.  Before that 
thought we shrink into the nothingness from whence He called us out at 
first.  The difference between our minds and the Mind of God is--to what 
shall I liken it?  Say, to the difference between a flake of soot and a 
mountain of pure diamond.  That soot and that diamond are actually the 
same substance; of that there is no doubt whatsoever; but as the light, 
dirty, almost useless soot is to the pure, and clear, hard diamond, ay, 
to a mountain, a world, a whole universe made of pure diamond--if such a 
thing were possible--so is the mind of man compared with that Mind of the 
ever blessed Trinity, which made the worlds, and sustains them in life 
and order to this day.

My friends, it is not in great things only, but in the very smallest, 
that the greatest glory of the ever blessed Trinity is seen.  Ay, most, 
perhaps, in the smallest, when one considers the utterly inconceivable 
wisdom, which can make the smallest animal--so made as to be almost 
invisible under the strongest microscope--as perfect in all its organs as 
the hugest elephant.  Ay, more, which can not only make these tiny living 
things, but, more wonderful still, make them make themselves?  For what 
is growth, but a thing making itself?  What is the seed growing into a 
plant, the plant into a flower, the flower to a seed again, but that 
thing making itself, transforming itself, by an inward law of life which 
God's Spirit gives it.  I tell you the more earnestly and carefully you 
examine into the creation, birth, growth of any living thing, even of the 
daisy on the grass outside; the more you inquire what it really is, how 
it came to be like what it is, how it got where it is, and so forth; you 
will be led away into questions which may well make you dizzy with 
thinking, so strange, so vast, so truly miraculous is the history of 
every organised creature upon earth.  And when you recollect (as you are 
bound to do on this day), that each of these things is the work of the 
ever blessed Trinity; that upon every flower and every insect, generation 
after generation of them, since the world was made, the ever blessed 
Trinity has been at work, God the Father thinking and conceiving each 
thing, in His eternal Mind, God the Son creating it and putting it into 
the world, each thing according to the law of its life, God the Holy 
Ghost inspiring it with life and law, that it may grow and thrive after 
its kind--when such thoughts as these crowd upon you, and they ought to 
crowd upon you, this day of all the year, at sight of the meanest insect 
under your feet; then what can a rational man do, but bow his head and 
worship in awful silence, adoring humbly Him who sits upon the throne of 
the universe, and who says to us in all His works, even as He said to Job 
of old, "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?  When 
the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?  
Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou seen the 
doors of the shadow of death?  Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?  
Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may 
cover thee?  Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto 
thee, Here we are?  Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the 
appetite of the young lions?  Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the 
peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich?  Hast thou given the 
horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?  Doth the hawk 
fly by thy wisdom? doth the eagle mount up at thy command?"

When God speaks thus to us--and He does thus speak to us, by every cloud 
and shower, and by every lightning flash and ray of sunshine, and by 
every living thing which flies in air, or swims in water, or creeps upon 
the earth--what can we say, save what Job said--"Behold, I am vile; what 
shall I answer thee?  I will lay mine hand upon my mouth."

But if God be so awful in the material world, of which our five senses 
tell us, how much more awful is He in that spiritual and moral world, of 
which our senses tell us nought?  That unseen world of justice and 
truthfulness, of honour and duty, of reverence and loyalty, of love and 
charity, of purity and self-sacrifice; that spiritual world, I say, which 
can be only seen by the spiritual eye of the soul, and felt by the 
spiritual heart of the soul?  How awful is God in that eternal world of 
right and wrong; wherein cherubim, seraphim, angel and archangel cry to 
Him for ever, not merely Mighty, mighty, mighty, but "Holy, holy, holy."  
How awful to poor creatures like us.  For then comes in the question--not 
merely is God good? but, am not I bad?  Is God sinless? but, am not I a 
sinner?  Is God pure? but am not I impure?  Is God wise? then am not I a 
fool?  And when once that thought has crossed our minds, must we not 
tremble, must we not say with Isaiah of old, "Woe is me! for I am undone; 
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people 
of unclean lips:  for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts."

Yes; awful as is the thought of God's perfection in the material world 
about us, more awful still is the thought of His perfection in the 
spiritual world.  So awful, that we might well be overwhelmed with dread 
and horror at the sight of God's righteousness and our sinfulness; were 
it not for the gracious message of revelation that tells us, that God, 
the Father of heaven, is OUR Father likewise, who so loved us that He 
gave for us His only begotten, God the Son; that for His sake our sins 
might be freely forgiven us; that God the Son is our Atonement, our 
Redeemer, our King, our Intercessor, our Example, our Saviour in life and 
death; and God the Holy Ghost, our Comforter, our Guide, our Inspirer, 
who will give to our souls the eternal life which will never perish, even 
as He gives to our bodies the mortal life which must perish.

On the mercy and the love of the ever blessed Trinity, shown forth in 
Christ upon His cross, we can cast ourselves with all our sins; we can 
cry to Him, and not in vain, for forgiveness and for sanctification; for 
a clean heart and a right spirit; and that we may become holy and humble 
men of heart.  We can join our feeble praises to that hymn of praise 
which goes up for ever to God from suns and stars, clouds and showers, 
beasts and birds, and every living thing, giving Him thanks for ever for 
His great glory.  O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise 
Him and magnify Him for ever.  O ye holy and humble Men of heart, bless 
ye the Lord; praise Him and magnify Him for ever.



SERMON XVII.  LOVE OF GOD AND MAN



FIRST SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.

Eversley.  Chester Cathedral, 1872.

1 John iv. 16, 21.  "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God in him. . . .  And this commandment have we from Him, 
That he who loveth God love his brother also."

This is the first Sunday after Trinity.  On it the Church begins to teach 
us morals,--that is, how to live a good life; and therefore she begins by 
teaching us the foundation of all morals,--which is love,--love to God 
and love to man.

But which is to come first,--love to God, or love to man?

On this point men in different ages have differed, and will differ to the 
end.  One party has said, You must love God first, and let love to man 
come after as it can; and others have contradicted that and said, You 
must love all mankind, and let love to God take its chance.  But St John 
says, neither of the two is before or after the other; you cannot truly 
love God without loving man, or love man without loving God.  St John 
says so, being full of the Spirit of God:  but alas! men, who are not 
full of the Spirit of God, but only let themselves be taught by Him now 
and then and here and there, have found it very difficult to understand 
St John, and still more difficult to obey him; and therefore there always 
have been in God's Church these two parties; one saying, You must love 
God first, and the other, You must love your neighbour first,--and each, 
of course, quoting Scripture to prove that they are in the right.

The great leader of the first party--perhaps the founder of it, as far as 
I am aware--was the famous St Augustine.  He first taught Christians that 
they ought to love God with the same passionate affection with which they 
love husband or wife, mother or child; and to use towards God the same 
words of affection which those who love really utter one to each other.  
I will not say much of that; still less will I mention any of the words 
which good men and women who are of that way of thinking use towards God.  
I should be sorry to hold up such language to blame, even if I do not 
agree with it; and still more sorry to hold it up to ridicule from 
vulgar-minded persons if there be any in this Church.  All I say is, that 
all which has been written since about this passionate and rapturous love 
toward God by the old monks and nuns, and by the Protestant Pietists, 
both English and foreign, is all in St Augustine better said than it ever 
has been since.  Some of the Pietist hymns, as we know, are very 
beautiful; but there are things in them which one wishes left out; which 
seem, or ought to seem, irreverent when used toward God; which hurt, or 
ought to hurt, our plain, cool, honest English common-sense.  A true 
Englishman does not like to say more than he feels; and the more he 
feels, the more he likes to keep it to himself, instead of parading it 
and talking of it before men.  Still waters run deep, he holds; and he is 
right for himself; only he must not judge others, or think that because 
he cannot speak to God in such passionate language as St Augustine, who 
was an African, a southern man, with much stronger feelings than we 
Englishmen usually have, that therefore St Augustine, or those who copy 
him now, do not really feel what they say.  But, nevertheless, plain 
common-sense people, such as most Englishmen are, are afraid of this 
enthusiastical religion.  They say, We do not pretend to feel this 
rapturous love to God, how much-soever we may reverence Him, and wish to 
keep His commandments; and we do not desire to feel it.  For we see that 
people who have talked in this way about God have been almost always 
monks and nuns; or brain-sick, disappointed persons, who have no natural 
and wholesome bent for their affections.  And even though this kind of 
religion may be very well for them, it is not the religion for a plain 
honest man who has a wife and family and his bread to earn in the world, 
and has children to provide for, and his duty to do in the State as well 
as in the Church.  And more, they say, these enthusiastic, rapturous 
feelings do not seem to make people better, and more charitable, and more 
loving.  Some really good and charitable people say that they have these 
feelings, but for all that we can see they would be just as good and 
charitable without the feelings, while most persons who take up with this 
sort of religion are not the better for it.  They do not control their 
tempers; they can be full,--as they say,--of love and devotion to God one 
minute, but why are they the next minute peevish, proud, self-willed, 
harsh and cruel to those who differ from them?  Their religion does not 
make them love their neighbours.  In old times (when persecution was 
allowed), it made them, or at least allowed them, to persecute, torment, 
and kill their neighbours, and fancy that by such conduct they did God 
service; and now it tempts them to despise their neighbours--to look on 
every one who has not these strange, intense feelings which they say they 
have, as unconverted, and lost, and doomed to everlasting destruction.  
Not, says the plain man, that we are more satisfied with the mere 
philanthropist of modern times,--the man who professes to love the whole 
human race without loving God, or indeed often believing that there is a 
God to love.  To us he seems as unloving a person as the mere fanatic.  
Meanwhile, plain people say, we will have nothing to do with either 
fanaticism or philanthropy,--we will try to do our duty where God has put 
us, and to behave justly and charitably by our neighbours; but beyond 
that we cannot go.  We will not pretend to what we do not feel.

My friends, there is, as usual, truth on both sides,--both are partly 
right, and both are partly wrong.  And both may go on arguing against 
each other, and quoting texts of Scripture against each other till the 
last day; if they will not listen to St John's message in the text.  One 
party will say, It is written, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and soul, and strength, and mind; and if thou doest that, and 
thy soul is filled with love for the Creator, thou canst have no love 
left for the creature; or if thy heart is filled with love for the 
creature, there is no room left for love to God.  And then thou wilt find 
that God is a jealous God, and will take from thee what thou lovest, 
because He will not have His honour given to another.

And to that the other party will answer, Has not God said, "Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself?"  Has He not commanded us to love our 
wives, our children?  And even if He had not, would not common sense tell 
us that He intended us to do so?  Do you think that God is a tempter and 
a deceiver?  He has given us feelings and powers.  Has He not meant us to 
use them?  He has given us wife and child.  Did He mean us not to love 
them, after He has made us love them, we know not how or why?  You say 
that God is a jealous God.  Yes, jealous He may be of our worshipping 
false gods, and idols, saints, or anything or person save Himself,--
jealous of our doing wrong, and ruining ourselves, and wandering out of 
the path of His commandments, in which alone is life; but jealous of our 
loving our fellow creature as well as Himself, never.  That sort of 
jealousy is a base and wicked passion in man, and dare we attribute it to 
God?  What a thing to say of the loving God, that He takes away people's 
children, husbands, and friends, because they love them too much!

Then the first party will say, But is it not written, "Love not the 
world, neither the things that are in the world.  If any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him?"  And to that, the second 
party will answer, And do you say that we are not to love this fair and 
wonderful earth which God has made for our use, and put us into it?  Why 
did He make it lovely?  Why did He put us into it, if He did not mean us 
to enjoy it?  That is contrary to common sense, and contrary to the whole 
teaching of the Old Testament.  But if by the world you mean the world of 
man, the society in which we live--dare you compare a Christian and 
civilized country like England with that detestable Roman world, sunk in 
all abominable vices, against which St John and St Paul prophesied?  Are 
not such thoughts unjust and uncharitable to your neighbours, to your 
country, to all mankind?  Then the first party will say, But you do away 
with all devoutness; and the second party will answer, And you do away 
with all morality, for you tell people that the only way to please God is 
to feel about Him in a way which not one person in a thousand can feel; 
and therefore what will come, and does come, of your binding heavy 
burdens and grievous to be borne and laying them on men's shoulders is 
this,--that the generality of people will care nothing about being good 
or doing right, because you teach them that it will not please God, and 
will leave all religion to a few who have these peculiar fancies and 
feelings.

And so they may argue on for ever, unless they will take honestly the 
