splendour have, O _Brahmarshi_, at my desire, been born on earth, and
endued with mighty energy, will lighten the burden thereof. Besides
this, there are certain Asuras known as Nivatakavachas, who, proud of
the boon they have acquired, are employed in doing us injuries. Boastful
of their strength, they are even now planning the destruction of the
gods, for, having received a boon, they no longer regard the gods. Those
fierce and mighty Danavas live in the nether regions. Even all the
celestials together are incapable of fighting with them. The blessed
Vishnu--the slayer of Madhu--he, indeed who is known on earth as Kapila,
and whose glance alone, O exalted one, destroyed the illustrious sons of
Sagara, when they approached him with loud sounds in the bowels of the
earth,--that illustrious and invincible Hari is capable, O Brahmana of
doing us a great service. Either he or Partha or both may do us that
great service, without doubt. Verily as the illustrious Hari had slain
the Nagas in the great lake, he, by sight alone, is capable of slaying
those Asuras called the Nivatakavachas, along with their followers. But
the slayer of Madhu should not be urged when the task is insignificant.
A mighty mass of energy that he is, it swelleth to increasing
proportions, it may consume the whole universe. This Arjuna also is
competent to encounter them all, and the hero having slain them in
battle, will go back to the world of men. Go thou at my request to
earth. Thou wilt behold the brave Yudhishthira living in the woods of
Kamyaka. And for me tell thou the virtuous Yudhishthira of unbaffled
prowess in battle, that he should not be anxious on account of Phalguna,
for that hero will return to earth a thorough master of weapons, for
without sanctified prowess of arms, and without skill in weapons, he
would not be able to encounter Bhishma and Drona and others in battle.
Thou wilt also represent unto Yudhishthira that the illustrious and
mighty-armed Gudakesa, having obtained weapons, hath also mastered the
science of celestial dancing and music both instrumental and vocal. And
thou wilt also tell him, O king of men, O slayer of foes, thyself also,
accompanied by all thy brothers, should see the various sacred shrines.
For having bathed in different sacred waters, thou wilt be cleansed from
thy sins, and the fever of thy heart will abate. And then thou wilt be
able to enjoy thy kingdom, happy in the thought that thy sins have been
washed off. And, O foremost of Brahmanas, endued with ascetic power, it
behoveth thee also to protect Yudhishthira during his wandering over the
earth. Fierce Rakshasas ever live in mountain fastnesses and rugged
steppes. Protect thou the king from those cannibals.'

"After Mahendra had spoken thus unto Lomasa, Vibhatsu also reverently
addressed that Rishi, saying, 'Protect thou ever the son of Pandu. O
best of men, let the king, O great Rishi, protected by thee, visit the
various places of pilgrimage and give away unto Brahmanas in charity.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "The mighty ascetic Lomasa, having answered both
saying, 'So be it,' set out for the earth, desirous of arriving at
Kamvaka. And having arrived at those woods, he beheld the slayer of foes
and son of Kunti, king Yudhishthira the just, surrounded by ascetics and
his younger brothers."


SECTION XLVIII

Janamejaya said, "These feats of Pritha's son endued with immeasurable
energy, were certainly marvellous. O Brahmana, what did Dhritarashtra of
great wisdom say, when he heard of them?"

Vaisampayana said, "Amvika's son, king Dhritarashtra, having heard of
Arjuna's arrival and stay at Indra's abode, from Dwaipayana, that
foremost of Rishis, spake unto Sanjaya, saying, 'O charioteer, dost thou
know in detail the acts of the intelligent Arjuna, of which I have heard
from beginning to end? O charioteer, my wretched and sinful son is even
now engaged in a policy of the most vulgar kind. Of wicked soul, he will
certainly depopulate the earth. The illustrious person whose words even
in jest are true, and who hath Dhananjaya to fight for him, is sure to
win the three worlds. Who that is even beyond the influence of Death and
Decay will be able to stay before Arjuna, when he will scatter his
barbed and sharp-pointed arrows whetted on stone? My wretched sons, who
have to fight with the invincible Pandavas are indeed, all doomed.
Reflecting day and night, I see not the warrior amongst us that is able
to stay in battle before the wielder of the _Gandiva_. If Drona, or
Karna, or even Bhishma advance against him in battle, a great calamity
is likely to befall the earth. But even in that case, I see not the way
to our success. Karna is kind and forgetful. The preceptor Drona is old,
and the teacher (of Arjuna). Arjuna, however, is wrathful, and strong,
and proud, and of firm and steady prowess. As all these warriors are
invincible, a terrible fight will take place between them. All of them
are heroes skilled in weapons and of great reputation. They would not
wish for the sovereignty of the world, if it was to be purchased by
defeat. Indeed, peace will be restored only on the death of these or of
Phalguna. The slayer of Arjuna, however, existeth not, nor doth one that
can vanquish him. Oh, how shall that wrath of his which hath myself for
its object be pacified. Equal unto the chief of the celestials, that
hero gratified Agni at _Khandava_ and vanquished all the monarchs of the
earth on the occasion of the great _Rajasuya_. O Sanjaya, the
thunder-bolt falling on the mountain top, leaveth a portion unconsumed;
but the shafts, O child, that are shot by Kiriti leave not a rack
behind. As the rays of the sun heat this mobile and immobile universe,
so will the shafts shot by Arjuna's hands scorch my sons. It seemeth to
me that the _Chamus_ of the Bharatas, terrified at the clatter of
Arjuna's chariot-wheels, are already broken through in all directions.
Vidhatri hath created Arjuna as an all-consuming Destroyer. He stayeth
in battle as a foe, vomitting and scattering swarms of arrows. Who is
there that will defeat him?'"


SECTION XLIX

"Sanjaya said, 'That which hath been uttered by thee, O king, with
respect to Duryodhana is all true. Nothing that thou hast said, O lord
of the earth, is untrue. The Pandavas of immeasurable energy have been
filled with rage at the sight of Krishna their wedded wife of pure
fame brought in the midst of the assembly. Hearing also those cruel
words of Dussasana and Karna, they have been so incensed, O king, that
they will not, I ween, forgive (the Kurus) on thy account. I have heard,
O king, how Arjuna hath gratified in battle by means of his bow the god
of gods--Sthanu of eleven forms. The illustrious lord of all the
gods--Kapardin himself--desirous of testing Phalguna, fought with him,
having assumed the guise of a _Kirata_. And there it was that the
_Lokapala_, in order to give away their weapons unto that bull of the
Kuru race, showed themselves unto him of undeteriorating prowess. What
other man on earth, except Phalguna, would strive to have a sight of
these gods in their own forms? And, O king, who is there that will
weaken in battle Arjuna, who could not be weakened by Maheswara himself
possessed of eight forms? Thy sons, having dragged Draupadi, and thereby
incensed the sons of Pandu, have brought this frightful and horrifying
calamity upon themselves. Beholding Duryodhana showing both his thighs
unto Draupadi, Bhima said with quivering lips, _wretch! those thighs of
thine will I smash with my fierce descending mace, on the expiration of
thirteen years_. All the sons of Pandu are the foremost of smiters; all
of them are of immeasurable energy; all of them are well-versed in every
kind of weapons. For these, they are incapable of being vanquished even
by the gods. Incensed at the insult offered to their wedded wife,
Pritha's sons, urged by wrath, will, I ween, slay all thy sons in
battle.'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'O charioteer, what mischief hath been done by
Karna uttering those cruel words, to the sons of Pandu! Was not the
enmity sufficient that was provoked by bringing Krishna into the
assembly? How can my wicked sons live, whose eldest brother and
preceptor walketh not in the path of righteousness? Seeing me void of
eye-sight, and incapable of exerting myself actively, my wretched son, O
charioteer, believeth me to be a fool, and listeneth not to my words.
Those wretches also that are his counsellors, _viz_., Karna and Suvala,
and others, always pander to his vices, as he is incapable of
understanding things rightly. The shafts that Arjuna of immeasurable
prowess may lightly shoot, are capable of consuming all my sons, leave
alone those shafts that he will shoot, impelled by anger. The arrows
urged by the might of Arjuna's arms and shot from his large bow, and
inspired with _mantras_ capable of converting them into celestial
weapons can chastise the celestials themselves. He who hath for his
counsellor and protector and friend that smiter of sinful men--the lord
of the three worlds--Hari himself--encountereth nothing that he cannot
conquer. This, O Sanjaya, is most marvellous in Arjuna that, as we have
heard, he hath been clasped by Mahadeva in his arms. That also which
Phalguna, assisted by Damodara did of old towards helping Agni in the
conflagration of _Khandava_, hath been witnessed by all the world. When,
therefore, Bhima and Partha and Vasudeva of the Satwata race become
enraged, surely my sons along with their friends and the Suvalas are all
unequal to fight with them.'"


SECTION L

Janamejaya said, "Having sent the heroic sons of Pandu into exile, these
lamentations, O _Muni_, of Dhritarashtra were perfectly futile. Why did
the king permit his foolish son Duryodhana to thus incense those mighty
warriors, the sons of Pandu? Tell us now, O Brahmana, what was the food
of the sons of Pandu, while they lived in the woods? Was it of the
wilderness, or was it the produce of cultivation?"

Vaisampayana said, "Those bulls among men, collecting the produce of the
wilderness and killing the deer with pure arrows, first dedicated a
portion of the food to the Brahmanas, and themselves ate the rest. For,
O king, while those heroes wielding large bows lived in the woods, they
were followed by Brahmanas of both classes, _viz_., those worshipping
with fire and those worshipping without it. And there were ten thousand
illustrious _Snataka_ Brahmanas, all conversant with the means of
salvation, whom Yudhishthira supported in the woods. And killing with
arrows _Rurus_ and the black deer and other kinds of clean animals of
the wilderness, he gave them unto those Brahmanas. And no one that lived
with Yudhishthira looked pale or ill, or was lean or weak, or was
melancholy or terrified. And the chief of the Kurus--the virtuous king
Yudhishthira--maintained his brothers as if they were his sons, and his
relatives as if they were his uterine brothers. And Draupadi of pure
fame fed her husbands and the Brahmanas, as if she was their mother; and
last of all took her food herself. And the king himself wending towards
the east, and Bhima, towards the south, and the twins, towards the west
and the north, daily killed with bow in hand the deer of the forest, for
the sake of meat. And it was that the Pandavas lived for five years in
the woods of _Kamyaka_, in anxiety at the absence of Arjuna, and engaged
all the while in study and prayers and sacrifices."


SECTION LI

Vaisampayana said, "That bull among men--Dhritarashtra--the son of
Amvika, having heard of this wonderful way of life--so above that of
men--of the sons of Pandu, was filled with anxiety and grief. And
overwhelmed with melancholy and sighing heavily and hot, that monarch,
addressing his charioteer Sanjaya, said, 'O charioteer, a moment's peace
I have not, either during the day or the night, thinking of the terrible
misbehaviour of my sons arising out of their past gambling, and thinking
also of the heroism, the patience, the high intelligence, the unbearable
prowess, and the extraordinary love unto one another of the sons of
Pandu. Amongst the Pandavas, the illustrious Nakula and Sahadeva, of
celestial origin and equal unto the chief himself of the celestials in
splendour, are invincible in battle. They are firm in the wielding of
weapons, capable of shooting at a long distance, resolute in battle, of
remarkable lightness of hand, of wrath that is not easily quelled,
possessed of great steadiness, and endued with activity. Possessed of
the prowess of lions and unbearable as the Aswins themselves, when they
will come to the field of battle with Bhima and Arjuna in front, I see,
O Sanjaya, that my soldiers will all be slain without a remnant. Those
mighty warriors of celestial origin, unrivalled in battle by anybody,
filled with rage at the remembrance of that insult to Draupadi, will
show no forgiveness. The mighty warriors of the Vrishnis also, and the
Panchalas of great energy, and the sons of Pritha themselves, led by
Vasudeva of unbaffled prowess, will blast my legions. O charioteer, all
the warriors on my side assembled together, are not competent to bear
the impetus of the Vrishnis alone when commanded by Rama and Krishna.
And amongst them will move that great warrior Bhima of terrible prowess,
armed with his iron mace held on high and capable of slaying every hero.
And high above the din will be heard the twang of the _Gandiva_ loud as
the thunder of heaven. The impetus of Bhima's mace and the loud twang of
the Gandiva are incapable of being stood against by any of the kings on
my side. It is then, O Sanjaya, that obedient as I have been to the
voice of Duryodhana, I shall have to call back the rejected counsels of
my friends--counsels that I should have attended to in time.'

"Sanjaya said, 'This hath been thy great fault, O king, _viz_., that
though capable, thou didst not, from affection prevent thy son from
doing what he hath done. The slayer of Madhu, that hero of unfading
glory, hearing that the Pandavas had been defeated at dice, soon went to
the woods of _Kamyaka_ and consoled them there. And Draupadi's sons also
headed by Dhrishtadyumna, and Virata, and Dhrishtaketu, and those mighty
warriors, the Kekayas, all went there. All that was said by these
warriors at the sight of Pandu's son defeated at dice, was learnt by me
through our spies. I have also told thee all, O king. When the slayer of
Madhu met the Pandavas, they requested him to become the charioteer of
Phalguna in battle. Hari himself, thus requested, answered them, saying,
_so be it_. And even Krishna himself beholding the sons of Pritha
dressed in deer skins, became filled with rage, and addressing
Yudhishthira, said, "That prosperity which the sons of Pritha had
acquired at Indraprastha, and which, unobtainable by other kings, was
beheld by me at the _Rajasuya_ sacrifice, at which, besides, I saw all
kings, even those of the Vangas and Angas and Paundras and Odras and
Cholas and Dravidas and Andhakas, and the chiefs of many islands and
countries on the sea-board as also of frontier states, including the
rulers of the Sinhalas, the barbarous _mlecchas_, the natives of Lanka,
and all the kings of the West by hundreds, and all the chiefs of the
sea-coast, and the kings of the Pahlavas and the Daradas and the various
tribes of the Kiratas and Yavanas and Sakras and the Harahunas and
Chinas and Tukharas and the Sindhavas and the Jagudas and the Ramathas
and the Mundas and the inhabitants of the kingdom of women and the
Tanganas and the Kekayas and the Malavas and the inhabitants of Kasmira,
afraid of the prowess of your weapons, present in obedience to your
invitation, performing various offices,--that prosperity, O king, so
unstable and waiting at present on the foe, I shall restore to thee,
depriving thy foe of his very life. I shall, O chief of the Kurus,
assisted by Rama and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins and Akrura and Gada
and Shamva and Pradyumna and Ahuka and the heroic Dhrishtadyumna and the
son of Sisupala, slay in battle in course of a day Duryodhana and Karna
and Dussasana and Suvala's son and all others who may fight against us.
And thou shalt, O Bharata, living at Hastinapura along with thy
brothers, and snatching from Dhritarashtra's party the prosperity they
are enjoying, rule this earth." Even these, O king, were Krishna's words
unto Yudhishthira, who, on the conclusion of Krishna's speech, addressed
him in that meeting of heroes and in the hearing of all those brave
warriors headed by Dhrishtadyumna, saying, "O Janardana, I accept these
words of thine as truth. O thou of mighty arms, do thou, however, slay
my enemies along with all their followers on the expiry of thirteen
years. O Kesava, promise this truly unto me. I promised in the presence
of the king to live in the forest as I am now living." Consenting to
these words of king Yudhishthira the just, his counsellors headed by
Dhrishtadyumna soon pacified the incensed Kesava with sweet words and
expressions suitable to the occasion. And they also said unto Draupadi
of pure deeds in the hearing of Vasudeva himself, these words, "O lady,
in consequence of thy anger, Duryodhana shall lay down his life. We
promise it, O thou of the fairest complexion. Therefore, grieve no more.
O Krishna, those that mocked thee, beholding thee won at dice, shall
reap the fruit of their act. Beasts of prey and birds shall eat their
flesh, and mock them thus. Jackals and vultures will drink their blood.
And, O Krishna, thou shalt behold the bodies of those wretches that
dragged thee by the hair prostrate on the earth, dragged and eaten by
carnivorous animals. They also that gave thee pain and disregarded thee
shall lie on the earth destitute of their heads, and the earth herself
shall drink their blood." These and other speeches of various kinds were
uttered there, O king, by those bulls of the Bharata race. All of them
are endued with energy and bravery, and marked with the marks of battle.
On the expiration of the thirteenth year, those mighty warriors, chosen
by Yudhishthira and headed by Vasudeva, will come (to the field of
battle). Rama and Krishna and Dhananjaya and Pradyumna and Shamva and
Yuyudhana and Bhima and the sons of Madri and the Kekaya princes and the
Panchala princes, accompanied by the king of Matsya, these all,
illustrious and celebrated and invincible heroes, with their followers
and troops, will come. Who is there that, desiring to live, will
encounter these in battle, resembling angry lions of erect manes?'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'What Vidura told me at the time of the game at
dice, "If thou seekest, O king, to vanquish the Pandavas (at dice), then
certainly a terrible blood-shed ending in the destruction of all the
Kurus will be the result," I think it is about to be realised. As Vidura
told me of old, without doubt a terrible battle will take place, as soon
as the pledged period of the Pandavas expireth.'"


SECTION LII

(Nalopakhyana Parva)

Janamejaya said, "When the high-souled Partha went to Indra's region for
obtaining weapons, what did Yudhishthira and the other sons of Pandu
do?"

Vaisampayana said, "When the high-souled Partha went to Indra's region
for obtaining weapons, those bulls of the Bharata race continued to
dwell with Krishna in (the woods of) _Kamyaka_. One day, those foremost
of the Bharatas, afflicted with grief, were seated with Krishna on a
clean and solitary sward. Grieving for Dhananjaya, overwhelmed with
sorrow, their voices were choked with weeping. Tortured by Dhananjaya's
absence, grief afflicted them equally. And filled with sorrow at their
separation from Arjuna and at the loss of their kingdom, the
mighty-armed Bhima among them addressed Yudhishthira, saying, 'That Bull
of the Bharata race, Arjuna, O great king, on whom depend the lives of
Pandu's sons, and on whose death the Panchalas as also ourselves with
our sons and Satyaki and Vasudeva are sure to die, hath gone away at thy
behest. What can be sadder than this that the virtuous Vibhatsu hath
gone away at thy command, thinking of his many griefs? Depending upon
the might of that illustrious hero's arms, regard our foes as already
vanquished in battle, and the whole earth itself as already acquired by
us. It was for the sake of that mighty warrior that I refrained from
sending to the other world all the Dhartarashtras along with the
Suvalas, in the midst of the assembly. Gifted with might of arms, and
supported by Vasudeva, we have to suppress the wrath that hath been
roused in us, because thou art the root of that wrath. Indeed, with
Krishna's help, slaying our foes headed by Karna, we are able to rule
the entire earth (thus) conquered by our own arms. Endued with
manliness, we are yet overwhelmed with calamities, in consequence of thy
gambling vice, while the foolish followers of Dhritarashtra are growing
stronger with the tributes (gathered from dependent kings). O mighty
monarch, it behoveth thee to keep in view the duties of the Kshatriya. O
great king, it is not the duty of a Kshatriya to live in the woods. The
wise are of the opinion that to rule is the foremost duty of a
Kshatriya. O king, thou art conversant with Kshatriya morality. Do not,
therefore, deviate from the path of duty. Turning away from the woods,
let us, summoning Partha and Janardana, slay, O king, the sons of
Dhritarashtra, even before the twelve years are complete. O illustrious
monarch, O king of kings, even if these Dhartarashtras be surrounded by
soldiers in array of battle, I shall send them to the other world by
dint of might alone. I shall slay all the sons of Dhritarashtra along
with the Sauvalas, indeed, Duryodhana, Karna, and any one else that will
fight with me. And after I shall have slain all our foes, thou mayst
come back unto the woods. By acting thus, O king, no fault will be
thine. (Or if any sin be thine), O represser of foes, O mighty monarch,
washing it off, O sire, by various sacrifices, we may ascend to a
superior heaven. Such a consummation may come to pass, if our king
proveth not unwise or procrastinating. Thou art, however, virtuous.
Verily the deceitful should be destroyed by deceit. To slay the
deceitful by deceit, is not regarded as sinful. O Bharata, it is also
said by those versed in morality that one day and night is, O great
prince, equal unto a full year. The Veda text also, exalted one, is
often heard, signifying that a year is equivalent to a day when passed
in the observance of certain difficult vows. O thou of unfading glory,
if the Vedas are an authority with thee, regard thou the period of a day
and something more as the equivalent of thirteen years. O represser of
foes, this is the time to slay Duryodhana with his adherents. Else, O
king, he will beforehand bring the whole earth obedient to his will. O
foremost of monarchs, all this is the result of thy addiction to
gambling. We are on the verge of destruction already, in consequence of
thy promise of living one year undiscovered. I do not find the country
where, if we live, the wicked-minded Suyodhana may not be able to trace
us by his spies. And finding us out, that wretch will again deceitfully
send us into such exile in the woods. Or if that sinful one beholdeth us
emerge, after the expiry of the pledged period of non-discovery, he will
again invite thee, O great king, to dice, and the play will once more
begin. Summoned once more, thou wilt again efface thyself at dice. Thou
art not skilled at dice, and when summoned at play, thou wilt be
deprived of thy senses. Therefore, O mighty monarch thou wilt have to
lead a life in the woods again. If, O mighty king, it behoveth thee not
to make us wretched for life, observe thou fully the ordinance of the
Vedas, (which inculcateth that) verily the deceitful ought to be slain
by deceit. If I but have thy command I would go (to Hastinapura) and,
even as fire falling upon a heap of grass consumeth it, would slay
Duryodhana, putting forth my utmost might. It behoveth thee, therefore,
to grant me the permission.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Bhima, king Yudhishthira the
just, smelt the crown of that son of Pandu, and pacifying him said, 'O
mighty-armed one, without doubt, thou wilt, assisted by the wielder of
the _Gandiva_, slay Suyodhana at the expiry of the thirteenth year. But,
O son of Pritha, as for thy assertion, _O Lord, the time is complete_, I
cannot dare tell an untruth, for untruth is not in me. O son of Kunti,
without the help of fraud, wilt thou kill the wicked and irrepressible
Duryodhana, with his allies.'

"While Yudhishthira the just, was speaking unto Bhima thus, there came
the great and illustrious Rishi Vrihadaswa before them. And beholding
that virtuous ascetic before him, the righteous king worshipped him
according to the ordinance, with the offering of _Madhuparka_. And when
the ascetic was seated and refreshed, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira sat
by him, and looking up at the former, addressed him thus in exceedingly
piteous accents:

"'O holy one, summoned by cunning gamblers skilled at dice, I have been
deprived of wealth and kingdom through gambling. I am not an adept at
dice, and am unacquainted with deceit. Sinful men, by unfair means,
vanquished me at play. They even brought into the public assembly my
wife dearer unto me than life itself. And defeating me a second time,
they have sent me to distressful exile in this great forest, clad in
deer skins. At present I am leading a distressful life in the woods in
grief of heart. Those harsh and cruel speeches they addressed me on the
occasion of that gambling match, and the words of my afflicted friends
relating to the match at dice and other subjects, are all stored up in
my remembrance. Recollecting them I pass the whole night in (sleepless)
anxiety. Deprived also (of the company) of the illustrious wielder of
the Gandiva, on whom depend the lives of us all, I am almost deprived of
life. Oh, when shall I see the sweet-speeched and large-hearted Vibhatsu
so full of kindness and activity, return to us, having obtained all
weapons? Is there a king on this earth who is more unfortunate than
myself? Hast thou ever seen or heard of any such before? To my thinking,
there is no man more wretched than I am.'

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O great king, O son of Pandu, thou sayest, "There is
no person more miserable than I am." O sinless monarch, if thou wilt
listen, I will relate unto thee the history of a king more wretched than
thyself.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And thereupon the king said unto the ascetic,
'O illustrious one, tell me, I desire to hear the history of the king
who had fallen into such a condition.'

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O king, O thou that never fallest off, listen
attentively with thy brothers, I will narrate the history of a prince
more miserable than thyself. There was a celebrated king among the
Nishadhas, named Virasena. He had a son named Nala, versed in (the
knowledge of) virtue and wealth. It hath been heard by us that, that
king was deceitfully defeated by Pushkara, and afflicted with calamity,
he dwelt in the woods with his spouse. And, O king, while he was living
in the forest, he had neither slaves nor cars, neither brother nor
friends with him. But thou art surrounded by thy heroic brothers like
unto the celestials, and also by foremost regenerate ones like unto
Brahma himself. Therefore, it behoveth thee not to grieve.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'I am anxious to hear in detail, O thou foremost of
eloquent men, the history of the illustrious Nala. It behoveth thee
therefore to relate it unto me.'"


SECTION LIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'There was a king named Nala, the son of Virasena. And
he was strong, and handsome, and well-versed in (the knowledge of)
horses, and possessed of every desirable accomplishment. And he was at
the head of all the kings, even like the lord of the celestials. And
exalted over all, he resembled the sun in glory. And he was the king of
the Nishadhas, intent on the welfare of the Brahmanas, versed in the
Vedas, and possessed of heroism. And he was truth-telling, fond of dice,
and the master of a mighty army. And he was the beloved of men and
women, and of great soul and subdued passions. And he was the protector
(of all), and the foremost of bowmen, and like unto Manu himself. And
like him, there was among the Vidarbhas (a king named) Bhima, of
terrible prowess, heroic and well-disposed towards his subjects and
possessed of every virtue. (But withal) he was childless. And with a
fixed mind, he tried his utmost for obtaining issue. And, O Bharata
there came unto him (once) a Brahmarshi named Damana. And, O king of
kings, desirous of having offspring, Bhima, versed in morality, with his
queen gratified that illustrious Rishi by a respectful reception. And
Damana, well-pleased, granted unto the king and his consort a boon in
the form of a jewel of a daughter, and three sons possessed of lofty
souls and great fame. (And they were called respectively) Damayanti, and
Dama and Dama, and illustrious Damana. And the three sons were possessed
of every accomplishment and terrible mien and fierce prowess. And the
slender-waisted Damayanti, in beauty and brightness, in good name and
grace and luck, became celebrated all over the world. And on her
attaining to age, hundreds of hand-maids, and female slaves, decked in
ornaments, waited upon her like _Sachi_ herself. And Bhima's daughter of
faultless features, decked in every ornament, shone in the midst of her
hand-maids, like the luminous lightning of the clouds. And the
