an owl; the k[)o]-ko/-k[)o]-[-o]/. The second post, of similar size, is
painted red, and over the entire surface of it are spots of white made
by applying clay with the finger tips. (Pl. XV, No. 2.) These spots are
symbolical of the sacred m[-i]/gis, the great number of them denoting
increased power of the magic influence which fills the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.
A small cedar tree is also planted at each of the outer angles of the
inclosure.

  [Illustration: Fig. 23.--Diagram of Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n of the second
  degree.]

The sweat-lodge, as before, is erected at some distance east of the main
entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, but a larger structure is arranged
upon a similar plan; more ample accommodations must be provided to
permit a larger gathering of Mid[-e]/ priests during the period of
preparation and instruction of the candidate.

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE.

A Mid[-e]/ of the first degree is aware of the course to be pursued by
him when he contemplates advancement into the next higher grade. Before
making known to the other members his determination, he is compelled to
procure, either by purchase or otherwise, such a quantity of blankets,
robes, peltries, and other articles of apparel or ornament as will
amount in value to twice the sum at which were estimated the gifts
presented at his first initiation. A year or more usually elapses before
this can be accomplished, as but one hunting season intervenes before
the next annual meeting of the society, when furs are in their prime;
and fruits and maple sugar can be gathered but once during the season,
and these may be converted into money with which to purchase presents
not always found at the Indian traders/ stores. Friends may be called
upon to advance goods to effect the accomplishment of his desire, but
such loans must be returned in kind later on, unless otherwise agreed.
When a candidate feels convinced that he has gathered sufficient
material to pay for his advancement, he announces to those members of
the society who are of a higher grade than the first degree that he
wishes to present himself at the proper time for initiation. This
communication is made to eight of the highest or officiating priests, in
his own wig/iwam, to which they have been specially invited. A feast is
prepared and partaken of, after which he presents to each some tobacco,
and smoking is indulged in for the purpose of making proper offerings,
as already described. The candidate then informs his auditors of his
desire and enumerates the various goods and presents which he has
procured to offer at the proper time. The Mid[-e]/ priests sit in
silence and meditate; but as they have already been informally aware of
the applicant's wish, they are prepared as to the answer they will give,
and are governed according to the estimated value of the gifts. Should
the decision of the Mid[-e]/ priests be favorable, the candidate
procures the services of one of those present to assume the office of
instructor or preceptor, to whom, as well as to the officiating priests,
he displays his ability in his adopted specialties in medical magic,
etc. He seeks, furthermore, to acquire additional information upon the
preparation of certain secret remedies, and to this end he selects a
preceptor who has the reputation of possessing it.

For acting in the capacity of instructor, a Mid[-e]/ priest receives
blankets, horses, and whatever may be mutually agreed upon between
himself and his pupil. The meetings take place at the instructor's
wig/iwam at intervals of a week or two; and sometimes during the autumn
months, preceding the summer in which the initiation is to be conferred,
the candidate is compelled to resort to a sudatory and take a vapor
bath, as a means of purgation preparatory to his serious consideration
of the sacred rites and teachings with which his mind "and heart" must
henceforth be occupied, to the exclusion of everything that might tend
to divert his thoughts.

What the special peculiarities and ceremonials of initiation into the
second degree may have been in former times, it is impossible to
ascertain at this late day. The only special claims for benefits to be
derived through this advancement, as well as into the third and fourth
degrees, are, that a Mid[-e]/ upon his admission into a new degree
receives the protection of that Man/id[-o] alleged and believed to be
the special guardian of such degree, and that the repetition of
initiation adds to the magic powers previously received by the initiate.
In the first degree the sacred m[-i]gis was "shot" into the two sides,
the heart, and head of the candidate, whereas in the second degree this
sacred, or magic, influence, is directed by the priests toward the
candidate's joints, in accordance with a belief entertained by some
priests and referred to in connection with the Red Lake chart presented
on Pl. III. The second, third, and fourth degrees are practically mere
repetitions of the first, and the slight differences between them are
noted under their respective captions.

In addition to a recapitulation of the secrets pertaining to the
therapeutics of the Mid[-e]/, a few additional magic remedies are taught
the candidate in his preparatory instruction. The chief of these are
described below.

  Ma-kwa/ w[-i]/-i-s[)o]p, "Bear's Gall," and Pi/-zhi-ki
    w[-i]/-i-s[)o]p, "Ox Gall," are both taken from the freshly killed
    animal and hung up to dry. It is powdered as required, and a small
    pinch of it is dissolved in water, a few drops of which are dropped
    into the ear of a patient suffering from earache.

  G[-o]/-gi-mish (gen. et sp.?).--A plant, described by the preceptor as
    being about 2 feet in height, having black bark and clusters of
    small red flowers.

    1. The bark is scraped from the stalk, crushed and dried. When it is
      to be used the powder is put into a small bag of cloth and soaked
      in hot water to extract the virtue. It is used to expel evil
      man/id[-o]s which cause obstinate coughs, and is also administered
      to consumptives. The quantity of bark derived from eight stems,
      each 10 inches long, makes a large dose. When a Mid[-e]/ gives
      this medicine to a patient, he fills his pipe and smokes, and
      before the tobacco is all consumed the patient vomits.

    2. The root of this plant mixed with the following is used to
      produce paralysis of the mouth. In consequence of the power it
      possesses it is believed to be under the special protection of
      the Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o], i.e., Ki/tshi Man/id[-o].

  The compound is employed also to counteract the evil intentions,
    conjurations, or other charms of so-called bad Mid[-e]/,
    W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, and J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/.

  Tzhi-b[-e]/-g[)o]p-- "Ghost Leaf."

    After the cuticle is removed from the roots the thick under-bark is
      crushed into a powder. It is mixed with G[-o]/gimish.

  Dzhi-bai/-[)e]-m[)o]k/-ke-z[)i]n/-- "Ghost Moccasin;" "Puff-ball."

    The spore-dust of the ball is carefully reserved to add to the above
      mixture.

  O-kw[-e]/-mish-- "Bitter Black Cherry."

    The inner bark of branches dried and crushed is also added.

  N[-e]/-w[)e]-- "Rattlesnake" (_Crotalus durissus, L._).

    The reptile is crushed and the blood collected, dried, and used in a
      pulverulent form. After partially crushing the body it is hung up
      and the drippings collected and dried. Other snakes may be
      employed as a substitute.

It is impossible to state the nature of the plants mentioned in the
above compound, as they are not indigenous to the vicinity of White
Earth, Minnesota, but are procured from Indians living in the eastern
extremity of the State and in Wisconsin. Poisonous plants are of rare
occurrence in this latitude, and if any actual poisonous properties
exist in the mixture they may be introduced by the Indian himself, as
strychnia is frequently to be purchased at almost any of the stores, to
be used in the extermination of noxious animals. Admitting that crotalus
venom may be present, the introduction into the human circulation of
this substance would without doubt produce death and not paralysis of
the facial muscles, and if taken into the stomach it quickly undergoes
chemical change when brought in contact with the gastric juice, as is
well known from experiments made by several well known physiologists,
and particularly by Dr. Coxe (Dispensatory, 1839), who employed the
contents of the venom sack, mixed with bread, for the cure of
rheumatism.

  [Illustration: Plate XII.
  Invitation Sticks.]

I mention this because of my personal knowledge of six cases at White
Earth, in which paralysis of one side of the face occurred soon after
the Mid[-e]/ administered this compound. In nearly all of them the
distortion disappeared after a lapse of from six weeks to three months,
though one is known to have continued for several years with no signs of
recovery. The Catholic missionary at White Earth, with whom conversation
was held upon this subject, feels impressed that some of the so-called
"bad Mid[-e]/" have a knowledge of some substance, possibly procured
from the whites, which they attempt to employ in the destruction of
enemies, rivals, or others. It may be possible that the instances above
referred to were cases in which the dose was not sufficient to kill the
victim, but was enough to disable him temporarily. Strychnia is the only
substance attainable by them that could produce such symptoms, and then
only when given in an exceedingly small dose. It is also alleged by
almost every one acquainted with the Ojibwa that they do possess
poisons, and that they employ them when occasion demands in the removal
of personal enemies or the enemies of those who amply reward the
Mid[-e]/ for such service.

When the time of ceremony of initiation approaches, the chief Mid[-e]/
priest sends out a courier to deliver to each member an invitation to
attend (Pl. XII), while the candidate removes his wig/iwam to the
vicinity of the place where the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n has been erected. On
the fifth day before the celebration he visits the sweat-lodge, where he
takes his first vapor bath, followed on the next by another; on the
following day he takes the third bath, after which his preceptor visits
him. After making an offering to Ki/tshi Man/i[-o] the priest sings a
song, of which the characters are reproduced in Pl. XIII, A. The Ojibwa
words employed in singing are given in the first lines, and are said to
be the ancient phraseology as taught for many generations. They are
archaic, to a great extent, and have additional meaningless syllables
inserted, and used as suffixes which are intoned to prolong notes. The
second line of the Ojibwa text consists of the words as they are spoken
at the present time, to each of which is added the interpretation. The
radical similarity between the two is readily perceived.

  [Illustration]
  Hi/-na-wi/-a-ni-ka[n]. (As sung.)
  We/-me-a/ ni-kan mi/-sha man/-i-d[-o]
  I am crying my colleague great spirit.
  ni-wa/-ma-bi-go/ ma/-w[)i]-yan/.
  He sees me crying.
    [The singer is represented as in close relationship or communion
    with Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], the circle denoting union; the short zigzag
    lines within which, in this instance, represent the tears, i.e.,
    "eye rain," directed toward the sky.]

  [Illustration]
  Ki-n[)u]n/-no, h[-e]/, ki-mun/-i-d[-o]/-we, h[-e]/, esh/-i-ha/-ni.
  (As sung.)
  Gi-n[)u]n/-d[-o]n ni-kan/ [-e]-zhi-an.
  I hear you, colleague, what you say to me.
    [The singer addresses the Otter Spirit, whose figure is emerging
    from the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n of which he is the chief guardian.]

  [Illustration]
  T[-e]/-ti-w[^a]/-tshi-wi-m[-o]/ a-ni/-me-ga/-si. (As sung.)
  T[-e]/-ti-w[^a]/-tsh[)o]-t[^a]g/ ni-m[-i]/-g[)i]-s[)i]m.
  He will tell you (--inform you) [of] my migis.
  t[-e]/-ti-wa/-tsh[)i]-mo-ta/ [^a]g.
  He it is who will tell you.
    [The reference is to a superior spirit as indicated by the presence
    of horns, and the zigzag line upon the breast. The words signify
    that Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] will make known to the candidate the
    presence within his body of the m[-i]/gis, when the proper time
    arrives.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest, or pause, in the song.

During this interval another smoke offering is made, in which the
Mid[-e]/ priest is joined by the candidate.

  [Illustration]
  H[)i]u/-a-me/-da-ma/ ki/-a-w[-e]n/-da-mag
  man/-i-d[-o]/-w[)i]t h[)i]u/-a-wen/-da-mag. (As sung.)
  Ki-w[)i]n/-da-mag/-[-u]-nan man/-i-d[-o]/-wid.
  He tells us he is [one] of the man/id[-o]s.
    [This ma/nid[-o] is the same as that referred to in the above-named
    phrase. This form is different, the four spots denoting the four
    sacred m[-i]/gis points upon his body, the short radiating lines
    referring to the abundance of magic powers with which it is filled.]

  [Illustration]
  Wa/-sa-wa/-d[-i], h[-e]/, wen/-da-na-ma/,
  m[)i]-t[-e]/-wi[n]. (As sung.)
  Wa/-sa-wa/-d[)u]n/-da-na-ma/
  I get it from afar
  mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n/.
  The "grand medicine."
    [The character represents a leg, with a magic line drawn across the
    middle, to signify that the distance is accomplished only through
    the medium of supernatural powers. The place "from afar" refers to
    the abode of Ki/tshi Man/id[-o].]

  [Illustration]
  Ki-go/-na-bi-hi[n] [-e]/-ni-na mi-t[-e]/. (As sung.)
  Ki[n]-do/-na-b[-i]-in/ mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n-ni-ni/
  I place you there "in the grand medicine" (among the "Mid[-e]/
  people") a-bit/-da-win/. Half way (in the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n).
    [The Mid[-e]/ priest informs the candidate that the second
    initiation will advance the candidate half way into the secrets of
    the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. The candidate is then placed so that his body
    will have more magic influence and power as indicated by the zigzag
    lines radiating from it toward the sky.]

  [Illustration: Plate XIII.
  Mnemonic Songs.]

  [Illustration]
  Hi/-sha-we-ne/-me-go/, h[-e]/, n[-e]/.
  Ni-go/-tshi-mi, h[-e]/. (As sung.)
  Ni/-sha-we/-ni-mi-go/ [)e]/-ne-m[^a]/-bi-dzh[)i]k.
  They have pity on me those who are sitting here.
    [This request is made to the invisible man/id[-o]s who congregate in
    the Mide/wig[^a]n during the ceremonies, and the statement implies
    that they approve of the candidate's advancement.]

Another smoke offering is made upon the completion of this song, after
which both individuals retire to their respective habitations. Upon the
following day, that being the one immediately preceding the day of
ceremony, the candidate again repairs to the sudatory to take a last
vapor bath, after the completion of which he awaits the coming of his
preceptor for final conversation and communion with man/id[-o]s
respecting the step he is prepared to take upon the morrow.

The preceptor's visit is merely for the purpose of singing to the
candidate, and impressing him with the importance of the rites of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. After making the usual offering of tobacco smoke the
preceptor becomes inspired and sings a song, the following being a
reproduction of the one employed by him at this stage of the preparatory
instruction. (See Pl. XIII B.)

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/, h[-e]/, n[-e], man/-i-d[-o]/, h[-e]/, n[-e]/.
  Spirit, spirit,
  Ni/-man-i-d[-o]/ win/-da-bi-an/.
  I am a spirit (is) the reason why I am here.
    [The zigzag lines extending downward and outward from the mouth
    indicate singing. He has reached the power of a man/id[-o], and is
    therefore empowered to sit within the sacred inclosure of the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, to which he alludes.]

  [Illustration]
  Da/-b[-i]-w[-a]-ni/, ha/, h[-e]/,
  A[n]/-n[)i]n, e-k[-o]/-w[-e]-an/.
  Drifting snow, why do I sing.
    [The first line is sung, but no interpretation of the words could be
    obtained, and it was alleged that the second line contained the idea
    to be expressed. The horizontal curve denotes the sky, the vertical
    zigzag lines indicating falling snow--though being exactly like the
    lines employed to denote rain. The drifting snow is likened to a
    shower of delicate m[-i]/gis shells or spots, and inquiry is made of
    it to account for the feeling of inspiration experienced by the
    singer, as this shower of m[-i]/gis descends from the abode of
    Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] and is therefore, in this instance, looked upon
    as sacred.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest, or pause.

  [Illustration]
  Gi-man/-i-d[-o]/-w[-e], ni/-me-ne/-ki-nan/ wan-da.
  Gi/-a-w[)i]ngk, gi-man/-i-d[-o]/-a-ni-min/,
  Your body, I believe it is a spirit.
  Gi-a-w[)i]ngk.
  your body.
    [The first line is sung, but the last word could not be
    satisfactorily explained. The first word, as now pronounced, is
    Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], and the song is addressed to him. The curved
    line, from which the arm protrudes, is the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and the
    arm itself is that of the speaker in the attitude of adoration:
    reaching upward in worship and supplication.]

  [Illustration]
  Pi-n[-e]/-si ne/-pi-mi/-a ni[n]/-ge-g[-e]/-kwe-a[n]
  The bird as I promise the falcon
  mi-we/-tshi-man/-i-d[-o]/-wid.
  the reason he is a spirit.
    [The second word is of archaic form and no agreement concerning its
    correct signification could be reached by the Mid[-e]/. The meaning
    of the phrase appears to be that Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] promised to
    create the Thunder-bird, one of the man/id[-o]s. The falcon is here
    taken as a representative of that deity, the entire group of
    Thunderers being termed a-ni/-mi-ki/.]

  [Illustration]
  Zh[-i]n/-gwe mi/-shi-ma-kwa/
  Makes a great noise the bear.
  we[n]/-dzhi-wa-ba-mok-kw[-e]d/ k[)u]n-n[-e]t/.
  the reason I am of flame.
    [The character of the bear represents the great bear spirit of the
    malevolent type, a band about his body indicating his spirit form.
    By means of his power and influence the singer has become endowed
    with the ability of changing his form into that of the bear, and in
    this guise accomplishing good or evil. The reference to flame (fire)
    denotes the class of conjurers or Shamans to which this power is
    granted, i.e., the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, and in the second degree this
    power is reached as will be referred to further on.]

  [Illustration]
  Ni/-a-wen/-din-da-sa/, ha/, sa/, man/-i-d[-o]/-wid.
  Gi/-a-w[)i]ngk in/-do-sa man/-i-d[-o]/-wid.
  In your body I put it the spirit.
    [The first line is sung, and is not of the modern style of spoken
    language. The second line signifies that the arm of Ki/tshi
    Man/id[-o], through the intermediary of the Mid[-e]/ priest,
    will put the spirit, i.e., the m[-i]/gis, into the body of the
    candidate.]

The singer accompanies his song either by using a short baton of wood,
termed "singing stick" or the Mid[-e]/ drum. After the song is completed
another present of tobacco is given to the preceptor, and after making
an offering of smoke both persons return to their respective wig/iwams.
Later in the evening the preceptor calls upon the candidate, when both,
with the assistance of friends, carry the presents to the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, where they are suspended from the rafters, to be ready
for distribution after the initiation on the following day. Several
friends of the candidate, who are Mid[-e]/, are stationed at the doors
of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n to guard against the intrusion of the
uninitiated, or the possible abstraction of the gifts by strangers.

INITIATION OF CANDIDATE.

The candidate proceeds early on the morning of the day of initiation to
take possession of the sweat-lodge, where he awaits the coming of his
preceptor and the eight officiating priests. He has an abundance of
tobacco with which to supply all the active participants, so that they
may appease any feeling of opposition of the man/id[-o]s toward the
admission of a new candidate, and to make offerings of tobacco to the
guardian spirit of the second degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. After the
usual ceremony of smoking individual songs are indulged in by the
Mid[-e]/ priests until such time as they may deem it necessary to
proceed to the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, where the members of the society have
long since gathered and around which is scattered the usual crowd of
spectators. The candidate leads the procession from the sweat-lodge to
the eastern entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, carrying an ample supply
of tobacco and followed by the priests who chant. When the head of the
procession arrives at the door of the sacred inclosure a halt is made,
the priests going forward and entering. The drummer, stationed within,
begins to drum and sing, while the preceptor and chief officiating
priest continue their line of march around the inclosure, going by way
of the south or left hand. Eight circuits are made, the last terminating
at the main or eastern entrance. The drumming then ceases and the
candidate is taken to the inner side of the door, when all the members
rise and stand in their places. The officiating priests approach and
stand near the middle of the inclosure, facing the candidate, when one
of them says to the Mid[-e]/ priest beside the latter: O-da/-pin
a-s[-e]/-ma--"Take it, the tobacco," whereupon the Mid[-e]/ spoken to
relieves the candidate of the tobacco and carries it to the middle of
the inclosure, where it is laid upon a blanket spread upon the ground.
The preceptor then takes from the cross-poles some of the blankets or
robes and gives them to the candidate to hold. One of the malevolent
spirits which oppose the entrance of a stranger is still supposed to
remain with the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, its body being that of a serpent, like
flames of fire, reaching from the earth to the sky. He is called
I/-shi-ga-n[-e]/-b[)i]-g[)o]g--"Big-Snake." To appease his anger the
candidate must make a present; so the preceptor says for the candidate:

  Ka-w[-i]/[n]-n[)i]-na-ga/ wa/-ba-ma/-si-ba/-sh[)i]-gi/-ne-g[-e]t/?
  Do you not see    how he carries the goods?

This being assented to by the Mid[-e]/ priests the preceptor takes the
blankets and deposits them near the tobacco upon the ground. Slight taps
upon the Mid[-e]/ drum are heard and the candidate is led toward the
left on his march round the interior of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, the
officiating priests following and being followed in succession by all
others present. The march continues until the eighth passage round, when
the members begin to step back into their respective places, while the
