And there is one other thing we know here at once without being told. If
a friend tells me that he has a rose garden under the care of a skilled
gardener, I know without being told that the roses are growing. I at
once look through my friend's words and see bushes full of roses of all
colours, some full blown, some half blown, some bursting buds, and some
just budding. For there is a garden, and a gardener, and sun and rain
and dew. I know there must be growth and beauty.

Even so we know that the loved ones who have parted from us, are
growing. They are in the Father's presence, in intimate fellowship. That
tells me of their growth. That little one who slipped away so young,
years ago, has been growing in mental powers, in character as well as in
what down here we call stature, and growing most of all in love. And so
at the meeting time, in the air or up there, there will be instant
recognition, as well as instant delight over the growth under such
wondrous tutorage.

This is the glimpse into the upper world which John sees and is allowed
to give us here. The redeemed ones of earth of all the ages are in the
presence of the Father and of the Lord Jesus and of the angels, on terms
of intimate fellowship, made pure and perfect in character, but always
growing from more to more, and having a share in blessed ministry. And
they listen to and have share in making music more exquisite than our
earthly language can describe.

They understand the wondrous plans for the earth, for now they see all
things through the Lord Jesus' eyes. They have some part without doubt
in welcoming those who come to join them, even as they will have part in
receiving those who are caught up at our Lord's return. And they look
forward eagerly to the glad time of righting that will come then.

But let us look a bit more at what John sees. Out of the throne are seen
proceeding lightnings and voices and thunders. Three other times in
this book it speaks of lightning and voices and thunder.[97] These
things of course are the familiar accompaniments of a storm. It is
noticeable that each other time they are named in the book it is in
connection with some direct action being taken by God in the affairs of
the earth. And each time there is some added item intensifying the
scene.

A physical storm is caused by two areas of unequal temperature coming
together. The storm is the process of coming together and equalizing of
the atmospheric conditions. The inference here would seem to be that the
time of action has come to straighten out matters on the earth. The two
moral atmospheres of heaven and earth seem to be coming into contact,
and a storm is resulting before clear weather comes. It suggests that
our Lord Jesus is taking the next direct step in His broader plan.


God's Ideal of Creation.

But let us look a little further. In the book's picture language there
are "seven lamps of fire burning before the throne." These we are
plainly told "are the seven spirits of God." That is a Hebrew way of
saying "the perfect spirit of God." This is of intense interest. The
Holy Spirit is represented as being before the throne.

In the confidential talk with the inner group of disciples on the
betrayal night, in John's Gospel,[98] Jesus promises that when He has
ascended up to the Father He will send down the Holy Spirit to them.
When the Spirit has come down to the disciples He will begin a new
ministry of witnessing to the world through them.

In the Book of Acts that promise is fulfilled. The Spirit comes down
with remarkable manifestations on the day of Pentecost. The distinctive
thing He does is to take possession of a group of men and form them into
a new witnessing body called the Church. He had dwelt in the nation of
Israel as a nation, and had been withdrawn from that nation when it
proved finally faithless to its mission. He had dwelt in individual men
before and during and after that time.

At Pentecost He is sent down on a new mission. He is to do in men all
that Jesus has done for them in His life and death and resurrection. But
the distinctive thing of Pentecost is His forming this new body called
the Church, through which He begins a new ministry of witnessing to the
world.

All through the Acts and Epistles He is constantly spoken of as here on
the earth working in the Church and through it. He in the Church is a
powerful restraint upon the powers of evil in the world. In
Thessalonians,[99] Paul has spoken of a day coming when that restraint
would be withdrawn. The Holy Spirit, the "One that restraineth now," is
to be taken away.

Now here the Holy Spirit is represented as being, not in the Church, as
always in the Acts and Epistles, but as being "before the throne." This
is the second significant thing to note in this scene. This also would
seem to suggest the beginning of a new order of things.

John goes quietly on with his description. Before the throne he sees a
great expanse that looks like a sea of clear, bright, beautiful crystal.
Before the throne and around about the throne are four living creatures
or creatures of life. These living creatures are of intensest interest.
They appear throughout the Scriptures from the Garden of Eden in Genesis
to the very close of this Book of Revelation.

They are also called cherubim and seraphim, that is, cherubs and
seraphs. They are always associated directly with the immediate presence
of God,[100] and with His presence-chamber, in the tabernacle,[101] in
the temple,[102] and in Ezekiel's vision of a new temple,[103] and in
the thought of the people.[104] There is one possible exception to this,
where they are seen at the entrance to the Garden of Eden.[105] The
description of them is most full in Ezekiel. It varies in details, but
with the essentials always the same.

The general appearance is that of a man, but there are four faces as of
a man, a lion, an ox or calf, a flying eagle, and sometimes a cherub
face. They are full of eyes everywhere, and they seem enveloped in the
pure fire which everywhere is associated with God's own presence. These
descriptions combined suggest perfection of purity, of intelligence, of
obedience, and of power.

In this book of the Revelation they are spoken of seven times,[106] that
is, more frequently than in any other book, though not so fully as in
Ezekiel. Five times they are leading or joining in the worship of God,
by men and angels, and twice they are cooeperating with the Lamb or the
angels in what is being done on the earth.

These beautiful, intelligent beings seem to represent the whole animate
creation, man, the animals intimately associated in service with man,
those that roam at will, and the birds, and the angels. It would seem as
though they stand for _God's ideal of creation_, as it was before the
hurt of sin came, as He holds it in His heart, and as it will be after
sin has gone. His ideal of a perfect and perfected creation is always in
His presence and before His face, intelligently and gladly carrying out
His will, reverently and joyously sounding His praise.

It suggests that He will not rest content until His ideal for the
creation shall be a sweet, full realization, all sin and rebellion
removed and all His works uniting in joyous, continuous worship, and
glad, harmonious obedience.


The Significant Book.

All this is interesting; some of it intense in interest. But it is only
a setting. It is incidental. The chief thing is yet to be told. John had
been told that he would be shown the things that would come to pass some
time in the future. We come now to the beginnings of these "things."

The One who is sitting on the throne has a carefully sealed book or
document in his hand. An angel calls out loudly for any one who is
qualified to do so to step forward and take the document and break its
seals. And as John watches intently no one comes forward. No one can be
found, either in the heaven, in earth, or in the region spoken of as
under the earth.

At this John is greatly distressed, and weeps much, so he must have
understood at once just what this meant. And one of the elders comforts
him with the assurance that there is One who has "_overcome_ to open the
book, and the seven seals thereof," "the lion of the tribe of Judah."
This word "overcome" suggests that this one has been in some great
conflict and has gotten the victory and overcome all opposition. And
this qualifies Him to take and open the document. He is the only one
among untold numbers so qualified.

And now John sees this One. He is standing in the very midst of the
throne surrounded by creatures and elders. We easily recognize this as
our Lord Jesus. He is a lion in leadership and strength. He is a lamb in
gentleness of character, and in the sacrificial experience He has been
through. The marks of death are plainly seen on His person.

As He comes forward He reaches and takes the book out of the hand of the
One on the throne. He is allowed to take it. His qualification to take
the document and break its seals is acceptable to the One on the throne.

And as He takes the book there is a remarkable burst of praise and
adoration that must have made all heaven ring. And those on earth in
touch of spirit with the scene and its purpose and the Chief Actor would
surely feel some thrill in the spirit currents of earth.

The outburst of worship is led by the four living creatures and the
twenty-four elders who fall down before the Lamb and sing a song. What
music that must be when the untold thousands sing as only redeemed ones
can sing. Then countless hosts of angels join in and lift the chorus.
And then there is the creation chorus, every created thing in heaven and
earth, under the earth, in the sea, absolutely everything seems to join
in this indescribable music. And the four living creatures say, "Amen."
And again the elders fall down and worship.

John's distress at the beginning, and now this indescribable outburst of
praise, tell us that this is something thrilling and significant beyond
expression. What does this mean, our Lord Jesus taking the sealed
document preparatory to breaking its seals?

It has been said in a previous talk that every thread woven into the
fabric of the Old Testament can be found in the fabric of this
Revelation book. So that if one goes to work patiently he can trace
every allusion here to something back in these older leaves. This gives
us the clue to the significance of this remarkable scene.

That clue seems in this case to be found in the book of Jeremiah,
chapter thirty-two. There is found an allusion to a simple primitive
custom of the Hebrew people in the exchange of real estate and in taking
possession of property to which one is entitled.

The old Hebrew custom seems to have been as follows: When property was
purchased the deed to the new owner was made out in duplicate, an open
copy and a sealed copy. The open copy was clearly for public
information, open to all. The sealed copy as clearly belonged only to
the owner of the property as his evidence of ownership. So it identified
him as the one named in the open copy.

If a new heir comes to take possession of an estate, or in case of a
dispute over ownership, the claimant who was adjudged the rightful heir
or owner would be given the possession of the sealed document or deed.
And as so attested by the judge or court, he only would be properly
qualified to "take" the sealed roll, break its seals, read its
contents, and so formally take possession of the estate, or property.

Now under the symbolism of this old bit of Hebrew custom, our Lord Jesus
is represented here as stepping forward to take possession of the earth,
and begin His reign over it. A Hebrew immersed in the old primitive
customs of his people in Palestine would understand this allusion at
once, however startled or sceptical he might be as to its significance
in this connection.


Taking Possession.

The language used in the song of praise when our Lord Jesus takes the
sealed book is significant. They say, "thou art _worthy_," that is, thou
art _qualified_; thou art the duly attested one with the right to take
possession. "For thou wast _slain_, and didst purchase unto God with thy
blood men of every tribe," and so on.

Man had been given the dominion of the earth. He had by obedience to the
evil one transferred his right to Him who is repeatedly called "the
prince of this world." Our Lord Jesus _purchased_ men out of their
slavery back to their original Lord,--with all that was rightfully
theirs. He has allowed fullest opportunity for all who will to accept
His Lordship. Now He is about to take possession of the earth on behalf
of men, and for them.

This is the tremendous significance of what John is shown here as
something that will take place hereafter. In the scene of the
candlesticks He is patiently waiting, holding Himself in restraint. Now
the waiting time is over. He is making the next move in His broader plan
for the earth.

There is no hint as to the length of interval between the two scenes,
how long He will wait. There is no suggestion as to when this next move
will be made. But we are here plainly told that at some time that
candlestick waiting time will end, and He will take a forward step in
connection with His plans for the earth. And it should be keenly noticed
that what follows now in this book of Revelation is the run of events
that will immediately follow that next step of His.

Yet this step is taken up _in heaven_. The first action of the new move
will be there. There will be nothing to be seen on the earth to indicate
the change. Things there will go on as before, eating and drinking,
buying and selling, marrying and giving in marriage, all unconscious of
the tremendous events being worked out.

But now the waiting time still waits. Our opportunity is still open. If
we might only be simple enough to be true to our absent Lord Jesus
during this waiting time.

A bishop of the American Episcopal Church, widely known for his saintly
character, his culture, and long years of tireless service, was visiting
in the South. In the town there lived a judge of wide repute for his
scholarly learning as well as for his culture and uprightness. Now he
was seriously ill, and had requested an interview with the bishop.

He asked the bishop to talk to him about personal religion. And the
clergyman talked to this thoughtful, scholarly judge in choice
philosophical language about the fatherhood of God, the character of
Christ, and the essential harmony of man's true nature with God. The
judge listened attentively for some time.

Then he apologetically interrupted his visitor, and said:

"Bishop, I'm dying. Won't you please talk to me just like you'd talk to
my black boy, Jim?"

And the bishop could, and did. He told him in simplest talk that he was
a sinner. Jesus died to save sinners. His blood washes away our sins. We
must take Christ as a Saviour, just trust Him, as simply as a child
trusts its mother.

So he talked. And the judge listened. And the tears came, and the peace.
He came as a child, and trusted, and he knew the peace that passeth
understanding. It was the simple telling of the simple story of the
Saviour who died, and the simple, child-like acceptance of that Saviour.
The scholarly bishop helped the learned judge best, in the crisis of his
life, by talking as simply as to a child.

If we might only be simple enough to be true to this Jesus who died,
during the remnant of waiting time that remains.


FOOTNOTES:

[83] W. O. Cushing.

[84] Rev. iii. 4-5.

[85] Rev. iii. 18.

[86] Rev. vi. 11.

[87] Rev. vii. 9.

[88] Rev. xix. 8, 14.

[89] Rev. xix. 8.

[90] Rev. vii. 14; xxii. 14.

[91] Rev. ii. 10; iii. 11; I Corinthians ix. 25; II Timothy iv. 8; James
i. 12; I Peter v. 4.

[92] Matthew xix. 28.

[93] Luke xxii. 30.

[94] Rev. iii. 21.

[95] Rev. v. 10; xx. 4, 6.

[96] Hebrews i. 14 with Daniel vii. 10 and Psalm ciii. 20-21.

[97] Rev. viii. 5; xi. 19; xvi. 18, 21.

[98] John xiv.-xvi.

[99] II Thessalonians ii. 6-7.

[100] Ezekiel i. 4-28; x. 1-22.

[101] Exodus xxv. 17-22; xxxvii. 6-9.

[102] I Kings vi. 23-26; viii. 6-7; II Chronicles iii. 10-14; v. 7-8.

[103] Ezekiel xli. 15-26.

[104] I Samuel iv. 4; II Samuel vi. 2; xxii. 11; I Chronicles xiii. 6;
Psalm xviii. 10; lxxx. 1; xcix. 1; Isaiah vi. 1-3; xxxvii. 16.

[105] Genesis iii. 24.

[106] iv. 6-9; v. 6, 8, 14; vi. 1, 3, 5, 7; vii. 11; xiv. 3; xv. 7; xix.
4.




VI.--A CLEARING-UP STORM IN THE REALM

(Revelation, Chapters vi.-viii.)


