was first suggested to me by Professor Anatole Le Braz, author of _La
Legende de la Mort_, and by Professor Georges Dottin, both of the
University of Rennes. But before evidence to sustain and to illustrate
this opinion is offered, it will be well to consider the less important
Breton _fees_ or beings like them, and then _corrigans_ and _nains_
(dwarfs).

_The 'Grac'hed Coz'._--F. M. Luzel, who collected so many of the popular
stories in Brittany, found that what few _fees_ or fairies there are
almost always appear in folk-lore as little old women, or as the Breton
story-teller usually calls them, _Grac'hed coz_. I have selected and
abridged the following legendary tale from his works to illustrate the
nature of these Breton fairy-folk:--

In ancient times, as we read in _La Princesse Blondine_, a rich nobleman
had three sons; the oldest was called Cado, the second, Meliau, and the
youngest, Yvon. One day, as they were together in a forest with their
bows and arrows, they met a little old woman whom they had never seen
before, and she was carrying on her head a jar of water. 'Are you able,
lads,' Cado asked his two brothers, 'to break with an arrow the jar of
the little old woman without touching her?' 'We do not wish to try it,'
they said, fearing to injure the good woman. 'All right, I'll do it
then, watch me.' And Cado took his bow and let fly an arrow. The arrow
went straight to its mark and split the jar without touching the little
old woman; but the water wet her to the skin, and, in anger, she said to
the skilful archer: 'You have failed, Cado, and I will be revenged on
you for this. From now until you have found the Princess Blondine all
the members of your body will tremble as leaves on a tree tremble when
the north wind blows.' And instantly Cado was seized by a trembling
malady in all his body. The three brothers returned home and told their
father what had happened; and the father, turning to Cado, said: 'Alas,
my unfortunate son, you have failed. It is now necessary for you to
travel until you find the Princess Blondine, as the _fee_ said, for that
little old woman was a _fee_, and no doctor in the world can cure the
malady she has put upon you.'[76]

_'Fees' of Lower Brittany._--Throughout the Morbihan and Finistere, I
found that stories about _fees_ are much less common than about
_corrigans_, and in some localities extremely rare; but the ones I have
been fortunate enough to collect are much the same in character as those
gathered in the Cotes-du-Nord by Luzel, and elsewhere by other
collectors. Those I here record were told to me at Carnac during the
summer of 1909; the first one by M. Yvonne Daniel, a native of the Ile
de Croix (off the coast north-west of Carnac); and the others by M.
Goulven Le Scour.[77]

'The little Ile de Croix was especially famous for its old _fees_; and
the following legend is still believed by its oldest inhabitants:--"An
aged man who had suffered long from leprosy was certain to die within a
short time, when a woman bent double with age entered his house. She
asked from what malady he suffered, and on being informed began to say
prayers. Then she breathed upon the sores of the leper, and almost
suddenly disappeared: the _fee_ had cured him."'

'It is certain that about fifty years ago the people in Finistere still
believed in _fees_. It was thought that the _fees_ were spirits who came
to predict some unexpected event in the family. They came especially to
console orphans who had very unkind step-mothers. In their youth, Tanguy
du Chatel and his sister Eudes were protected by a _fee_ against the
misfortune which pursued them; the history of Brittany says so. In Leon
it is said that the _fees_ served to guide unfortunate people, consoling
them with the promise of a happy and victorious future. In the
Cornouailles, on the contrary, it is said that the _fees_ were very
evilly disposed, that they were demons.

'My grandmother, Marie Le Bras, had related to me that one evening an
old _fee_ arrived in my village, Kerouledic (Finistere), and asked for
hospitality. It was about the year 1830. The _fee_ was received; and
before going to bed she predicted that the little daughter whom the
mother was dressing in night-clothes would be found dead in the cradle
the next day. This prediction was only laughed at; but in the morning
the little one was dead in her cradle, her eyes raised toward Heaven.
The _fee_, who had slept in the stable, was gone.'

In these last three accounts, by M. Le Scour, we observe three quite
different ideas concerning the Breton fairies or _fees_: in Finistere
and in Leon the _fees_ are regarded as good protecting spirits, almost
like ancestral spirits, which originally they may have been; in the
Cornouailles they are evil spirits; while in the third account, about
the old _fee_--and in the legend of the leper cured by a _fee_--the
_fees_ are rationalized, as in Luzel's tale quoted above, into
sorceresses or _Grac'hed Coz_.

_Children Changed by 'Fees'._--M. Goulven Le Scour, at my request, wrote
down in French the following account of actual changelings in
Finistere:--'I remember very well that there was a woman of the village
of Kergoff, in Plouneventer, who was called ----,[78] the mother of a
family. When she had her first child, a very strong and very pretty boy,
she noticed one morning that he had been changed during the night; there
was no longer the fine baby she had put to bed in the evening; there
was, instead, an infant hideous to look at, greatly deformed,
hunchbacked, and crooked, and of a black colour. The poor woman knew
that a _fee_ had entered the house during the night and had changed her
child.

'This changed infant still lives, and to-day he is about seventy years
old. He has all the possible vices; and he has tried many times to kill
his mother. He is a veritable demon; he often predicts the future, and
has a habit of running abroad during the night. They call him the
"Little _Corrigan_", and everybody flees from him. Being poor and infirm
now, he has been obliged to beg, and people give him alms because they
have great fear of him. His nick-name is Olier.

'This woman had a second, then a third child, both of whom were seen by
everybody to have been born with no infirmity; and, in turn, each of
these two was stolen by a _fee_ and replaced by a little hunchback. The
second child was a most beautiful daughter. She was _taken_ during the
night and replaced by a little girl babe, so deformed that it resembled
a ball. If her brother Olier was bad, she was even worse; she was the
terror of the village, and they called her Anniac. The third child met
the same luck, but was not so bad as the first and second.

'The poor mother, greatly worried at seeing what had happened, related
her troubles to another woman. This woman said to her, "If you have
another child, place with it in the cradle a little sprig of box-wood
which has been blessed (by a priest), and the _fee_ will no longer have
the power of stealing your children." And when a fourth child was born
to the unfortunate woman it was not stolen, for she placed in the cradle
a sprig of box-wood which had been blessed on Palm Sunday (_Dimanche des
Rameaux_).[79]

'The first three children I knew very well, and they were certainly
hunchbacked: it is pretended in the country that the _fees_ who come at
night to make changelings always leave in exchange hunchbacked infants.
It is equally pretended that a mother who has had her child so changed
need do nothing more than leave the little hunchback out of doors crying
during entire hours, and that the _fee_ hearing it will come and put the
true child in its place. Unfortunately, Yvonna ---- did not know what
she should have done in order to have her own children again.'

_Transformation Power of 'Fees'._--At Kerallan, near Carnac, this is
what Madame Louise Le Rouzic said about the transformation power of
_fees_:--'It is said that the _fees_ of the region when insulted
sometimes changed men into beasts or into stones.'[80]

_Other Breton Fairies._--Besides the various types of _fees_ already
described, we find in Luzel's collected stories a few other types of
fairy-like beings: in _Les Compagnons_ (The Companions),[81] the _fee_
is a magpie in a forest near Rennes--just as in other Celtic lands,
fairies likewise often appear as birds (see our study, pp. 302 ff.); in
_La Princesse de l'Etoile Brillante_ (The Princess of the Brilliant
Star),[81] a princess under the form of a duck plays the part of a fairy
(cf. how fairy women took the form of water-fowls in the tale entitled
the _Sick Bed of Cuchulainn_ (see our study, p. 345); in _Pipi Menou et
les Femmes Volantes_ (Pipi Menou and the Flying Women),[81] there are
fairy women as swan-maidens; and then there are yet to be mentioned _Les
Morgans de l'ile d'Ouessant_ (The _Morgans_ of the Isle of Ushant), who
live under the sea in rare palaces where mortals whom they love and
marry are able to exist with them. In some legends of the _Morgans_,
like one recorded by Luzel, the men and women of this water-fairy race,
or the _Morgans_ and _Morganezed_, seem like anthropomorphosed survivals
of ancient sea-divinities, such, for example, as the sea-god called
_Shony_, to whom the people of Lewis, Western Hebrides, still pour
libations that he may send in sea-weed, and the sea-god to whom
anciently the people of Iona poured libations.[82]

_The 'Morgan'._--To M. J. Cuillandre (Glanmor), President of the
_Federation des Etudiants Bretons_, I am indebted for the following
weird legend of the _Morgan_, as it is told among the Breton fisher-folk
on the Ile Molene, Finistere:--'Following a legend which I have
collected on the Ile Molene, the _Morgan_ is a fairy eternally young, a
virgin seductress whose passion, never satisfied, drives her to despair.
Her place of abode is beneath the sea; there she possesses marvellous
palaces where gold and diamonds glimmer. Accompanied by other fairies,
of whom she is in some respects the queen, she rises to the surface of
the waters in the splendour of her unveiled beauty. By day she slumbers
amid the coolness of grottoes, and woe to him who troubles her sleep. By
night she lets herself be lulled by the waves in the neighbourhood of
the rocks. The sea-foam crystallizes at her touch into precious stones,
of whiteness as dazzling as that of her body. By moonlight she moans as
she combs her fair hair with a comb of fine gold, and she sings in a
harmonious voice a plaintive melody whose charm is irresistible. The
sailor who listens to it feels himself drawn toward her, without power
to break the charm which drags him onward to his destruction; the bark
is broken upon the reefs: the man is in the sea, and the _Morgan_ utters
a cry of joy. But the arms of the fairy clasp only a corpse; for at her
touch men die, and it is this which causes the despair of the amorous
and inviolate _Morgan_. She being pagan, it suffices to have been
touched by her in order to suffer the saddest fate which can be reserved
to a Christian. The unfortunate one whom she had clasped is condemned to
wander for ever in the trough of the waters, his eyes wide open, the
mark of baptism effaced from his forehead. Never will his poor remains
know the sweetness of reposing in holy ground, never will he have a tomb
where his kindred might come to pray and to weep.'

_Origin of the 'Morgan'._--The following legendary origin is attributed
to the _Morgan_ by M. Goulven Le Scour, our Carnac witness:--'Following
the old people and the Breton legends, the _Morgan_ (_Mari Morgan_ in
Breton) was Dahut, the daughter of King Gradlon, who was ruler of the
city of Is. Legend records that when Dahut had entered at night the
bedchamber of her father and had cut from around his neck the cord which
held the key of the sea-dike flood-gates, and had given this key to the
Black Prince, under whose evil love she had fallen, and who, according
to belief, was no other than the Devil, St. Guenole soon afterwards
began to cry aloud, "Great King, arise! The flood-gates are open, and
the sea is no longer restrained!"[83] Suddenly the old King Gradlon
arose, and, leaping on his horse, was fleeing from the city with St.
Guenole, when he encountered his own daughter amid the waves. She
piteously begged aid of her father, and he took her up behind him on the
horse; but St. Guenole, seeing that the waters were gaining on them,
said to the king, "Throw into the sea the demon you have behind you, and
we shall be saved!" Thereupon Gradlon flung his daughter into the abyss,
and he and St. Guenole were saved. Since that time, the fishermen
declare that they have seen, in times of rough sea and clear moonlight,
Dahut, daughter of King Gradlon, sitting on the rocks combing her fair
hair and singing, in the place where her father flung her. And to-day
there is recognized under the Breton name _Marie Morgan_, the daughter
who sings amid the sea.'

_Breton Fairyland Legends._--In a legend concerning Mona and the king of
the _Morgans_, much like the Christabel story of English poets, we have
a picture of a fairyland not under ground, but under sea; and this
legend of Mona and her _Morgan_ lover is one of the most beautiful of
all the fairy-tales of Brittany.[84] Another one of Luzel's legends,
concerning a maiden who married a dead man, shows us Fairyland as a
world of the dead. It is a very strange legend, and one directly bearing
on the Psychological Theory; for this dead man, who is a dead priest,
has a palace in a realm of enchantment, and to enter his country one
must have a white fairy-wand with which to strike 'in the form of a
cross' two blows upon the rock concealing the entrance.[84] M. Paul
Sebillot records from Upper Brittany a tradition that beneath the
sea-waves there one can see a subterranean world containing fields and
villages and beautiful castles; and it is so pleasant a world that
mortals going there find years no longer than days.[85]

_Fairies of Upper Brittany._[86]--Principally in Upper Brittany, M.
Sebillot found rich folk-lore concerning _fees_, though some of his
material is drawn from peasants and fishermen who are not so purely
Celtic as those in Lower Brittany; and he very concisely summarizes the
various names there given to the fairy-folk as follows:--'They are
generally called _Fees_ (Fairies), sometimes _Fetes_ (Fates), a name
nearer than _fees_ to the Latin _Fata_; _Fete_ (fem.) and _Fete_ (mas.)
are both used, and from _Fete_ is probably derived _Faito_ or _Faitaud_,
which is the name borne by the fathers, the husbands, or the children of
the _fees_ (Saint-Cast). Near Saint-Briac (Ille-et-Vilaine) they are
sometimes called _Fions_; this term, which is applied to both sexes,
seems also to designate the mischievous _lutins_ (sprites). Round the
Mene, in the cantons of Collinee and of Moncontour, they are called
_Margot la Fee_, or _ma Commere_ (my Godmother) _Margot_, or even the
_Bonne Femme_ (Good Woman) _Margot_. On the coast they are often enough
called by the name of _Bonnes Dames_ (Good Ladies), or of _nos Bonnes
Meres les Fees_ (our Good Mothers the Fairies); usually they are spoken
of with a certain respect.'[87] As the same authority suggests, probably
the most characteristic _Fees_ in Upper Brittany are the _Fees des
Houles_ (Fairies of the Billows); and traditions say that they lived in
natural caverns or grottoes in the sea-cliffs. They form a distinct
class of sea-fairies unknown elsewhere in France or Europe.[88] M.
Sebillot regards them as sea-divinities greatly rationalized. Associated
with them are the _fions_, a race of dwarfs having swords no bigger than
pins.[88] A pretty legend about magic buckwheat cakes, which in
different forms is widespread throughout all Brittany, is told of these
little cave-dwelling fairies:--

Like the larger _fees_ the _fions_ kept cattle; and one day a black cow
belonging to the _fions_ of Pont-aux-Hommes-Nees ate the buckwheat in
the field of a woman of that neighbourhood. The woman went to the
_fions_ to complain, and in reply to her a voice said: 'Hold your
tongue; you will be paid for your buckwheat!' Thereupon the _fions_ gave
the woman a cupful of buckwheat, and promised her that it would never
diminish so long as none should be given away. That year buckwheat was
very scarce, but no matter how many buckwheat cakes the woman and her
family ate there was never diminution in the amount of the fairy
buckwheat. At last, however, the unfortunate hour came. A rag-gatherer
arrived and asked for food. Thoughtlessly the woman gave him one of her
buckwheat cakes, and suddenly, as though by magic, all the rest of the
buckwheat disappeared for ever.

Along the Rance the inhabitants tell about _fees_ who appear during
storms. These storm-fairies are dressed in the colours of the rainbow,
and pass along following a most beautiful _fee_ who is mounted in a boat
made from a nautilus of the southern seas. And the boat is drawn by two
sea-crabs. In no other place in Brittany are similar _fees_ said to
exist.[89] In Upper Brittany, as in Lower Brittany, the _fees_ generally
had their abodes in tumuli, in dolmens, in forests, in waste lands where
there are great rocks, or about menhirs; and many other kinds of spirits
lived in the sea and troubled sailors and fisher-folk. Like all
fairy-folk of Celtic countries, those of Upper Brittany were given to
stealing children. Thus at Dinard not long ago there was a woman more
than thirty years old who was no bigger than a girl of ten, and it was
said she was a fairy changeling.[90] In Lower Brittany the _taking_ of
children was often attributed to dwarfs rather than to _fees_, though
the method of making the changeling speak is the same as in Upper
Brittany, namely, to place in such a manner before an open fire a number
of eggshells filled with water that they appear to the changeling--who
is placed where he can well observe all the proceedings--like so many
small pots of cooking food; whereupon, being greatly astonished at the
unusual sight, he forgets himself and speaks for the first time, thus
betraying his demon nature.

The following midwife story, as told by J. M. Comault, of Gouray, in
1881, is quite a parallel to the one we have recorded (on p. 54) as
coming from Grange, Ireland:--A midwife who delivered a _Margot la fee_
carelessly allowed some of the fairy ointment to get on one of her own
eyes. The eye at once became clairvoyant, so that she beheld the _fees_
in their true nature. And, quite like a midwife in a similar story about
the _fees des houles_, this midwife happened to see a _fee_ in the act
of stealing, and spoke to her. Thereupon the _fee_ asked the midwife
with which eye she beheld her, and when the midwife indicated which one
it was, the _fee_ pulled it out.[91]

Generally, like their relatives in insular Celtdom, the fairies of Upper
Brittany could assume various forms, and could even transform the human
body; and they were given to playing tricks on mortals, and always to
taking revenge on them if ill-treated. In most ways they were like other
races of fairies, Celtic and non-Celtic, though very much
anthropomorphosed in their nature by the peasant and mariner.

As a rule, the _fees_ of Upper Brittany are described in legend as young
and very beautiful. Some, however, appear to be centuries old, with
teeth as long as a human hand, and with backs covered with seaweeds, and
mussels, or other marine growths, as an indication of their great
age.[92] At Saint-Cast they are said to be dressed (like the _corrigans_
at Carnac, see p. 208) in _toile_, a kind of heavy linen cloth.[92]

On the sea-coast of Upper Brittany the popular opinion is that the
_fees_ are a fallen race condemned to an earthly exile for a certain
period. In the region of the Mene, canton of Collinee, the old folk say
that, after the angels revolted, those left in paradise were divided
into two parts: those who fought on the side of God and those who
remained neutral. These last, already half-fallen, were sent to the
earth for a time, and became the _fees_.[92]

The general belief in the interior of Brittany is that the _fees_ once
existed, but that they disappeared as their country was changed by
modern conditions. In the region of the Mene and of Erce
(Ille-et-Vilaine) it is said that for more than a century there have
been no _fees_; and on the sea-coast, where it is still firmly believed
that the _fees_ used to live in the billows or amid certain grottoes in
the cliffs against which the billows broke, the opinion is that they
disappeared at the beginning of the last century. The oldest Bretons say
that their parents or grandparents often spoke about having seen _fees_,
but very rarely do they say that they themselves have seen _fees_. M.
Sebillot found only two who had. One was an old needle-woman of
Saint-Cast, who had such fear of _fees_ that if she was on her way to do
some sewing in the country, and it was night, she always took a long
circuitous route to avoid passing near a field known as the _Couvent des
Fees_. The other was Marie Chehu, a woman eighty-eight years old.[93]


THE _CORRIGAN_ RACE[94]

It is the _corrigan_ race, however, which, more than _fees_ or fairies,
forms a large part of the invisible inhabitants of Brittany; and this
race of _corrigans_ and _nains_ (dwarfs) may be made to include many
kinds of _lutins_, or as they are often called by the peasant, _follets_
or _esprits follets_ (playful elves). Though the peasants both in Upper
and in Lower Brittany may have no strong faith in _fees_, most of them
say that _corrigans_, or _nains_, and mischievous house-haunting spirits
still exist. But in a few localities, as M. Sebillot discovered, there
is an opinion that the _lutins_ departed with the _fees_, and with them
will return in this century, because during each century with an odd
number like 1900, the fairy tribes of all kinds are said to be visible
or to reappear among men, and to become invisible or to disappear during
each century with an even number like 1800. So this is the visible
century.

_Corrigans_ and _follets_ only show themselves at night, or in the
twilight. No one knows where they pass the day-time. Some _lutins_ or
_follets_, after the manner of Scotch kelpies, live solitary lives in
lakes or ponds (whereas _corrigans_ are socially united in groups or
families), and amuse themselves by playing tricks on travellers passing
by after dark. Souvestre records a story showing how the _lutins_ can
assume any animal form, but that their natural form is that of a little
man dressed in green; and that the _corrigans_ have declared war on them
for being too friendly to men.[95] From what follows about _lutins_, by
M. Goulven Le Scour, they show affinity with Pucks and such
shape-shifting hobgoblins as are found in Wales:--'The _lutins_ were
little dwarfs who generally appeared at cross-roads to attack belated
travellers. And it is related in Breton legends that these _lutins_
sometimes transformed themselves into black horses or into goats; and
whoever then had the misfortune to encounter them sometimes found his
life in danger, and was always seized with great terror.' But generally,
what the Breton peasant tells about _corrigans_ he is apt to tell at
another time about _lutins_. And both tribes of beings, so far as they
can be distinguished, are the same as the elfish peoples--pixies in
Cornwall, Robin Good-fellows in England, goblins in Wales, or brownies
in Scotland. Both _corrigans_ and _lutins_ are supposed to guard hidden
treasure; some trouble horses at night; some, like their English
cousins, may help in the house-work after all the family are asleep;
some cause nightmare; some carry a torch like a Welsh death-candle; some
trouble men and women like obsessing spirits; and nearly all of them are
mischievous. In an article in the _Revue des Traditions Populaires_ (v.
101), M. Sebillot has classified more than fifty names given to _lutins_
and _corrigans_ in Lower Brittany, according to the form under which
these spirits appear, their peculiar traits, dwelling-places, and the
country they inhabit.

Like the fairies in Britain and Ireland, the _corrigans_ and the Cornish
pixies find their favourite amusement in the circular dance. When the
moon is clear and bright they gather for their frolic near menhirs, and
dolmens, and tumuli, and at cross-roads, or even in the open country;
and they never miss an opportunity of enticing a mortal passing by to
join them. If he happens to be a good-natured man and enters their sport
heartily, they treat him quite as a companion, and may even do him some
good turn; but if he is not agreeable they will make him dance until he
falls down exhausted, and should he commit some act thoroughly
displeasing to them he will meet their certain revenge. According to a
story reported from Lorient (Morbihan)[96] it is taboo for the
_corrigans_ to make a complete enumeration of the days of the week:--

_The 'Corrigan' Taboo._--'At night, the _corrigans_ dance, singing,
"Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday"; they are prohibited from
completing the enumeration of the days of the week. A _corrigan_ having
had the misfortune to permit himself to be tempted to add "Saturday",
immediately became hunchbacked. His comrades, stupefied and distressed,
attempted in vain to knock in his hump with blows of their fists.'

_'Corrigans' at Carnac._--How the tradition of the dancing _corrigans_
and their weekday song still lives, appears from the following accounts
which I found at and near Carnac, the first account having been given
during January 1909 by Madame Marie Ezanno, of Carnac, then sixty-six
years old:--'The _corrigans_ are little dwarfs who formerly, by
moonlight, used to dance in a circle on the prairies. They sang a song
the couplet of which was not understood, but only the refrain,
translated in Breton: "_Di Lun_ (Monday), _Di Merh_ (Tuesday), _Di
Merhier_ (Wednesday)."

'They whistled in order to assemble. Where they danced mushrooms grew;
and it was necessary to maintain silence so as not to interrupt them in
their dance. They were often very brutal towards a man who fell under
their power, and if they had a grudge against him they would make him
submit to the greatest tortures. The peasants believed strongly in the
_corrigans_, because they thus saw them and heard them. The _corrigans_
dressed in very coarse white linen cloth. They were mischievous spirits
(_esprits follets_), who lived under dolmens.'

One morning, M. Lemort and myself called upon Madame Louise Le Rouzic in
her neat home at Kerallan, a little group of thatched cottages about a
mile from Carnac. As we entered, Madame Le Rouzic herself was sitting on
a long wooden bench by the window knitting, and her daughter was
watching the savoury-smelling dinner as it boiled in great iron pots
hanging from chains over a brilliant fire on the hearth. Large gleaming
brass basins were ranged on a shelf above the broad open chimney-place
wherein the fire burned, and massive bedsteads carved after the Breton
style stood on the stone floor. When many things had been talked about,
our conversation turned to _corrigans_, and then the good woman of the
house told us these tales:--

_'Corrigans' at Church._--'In former times a young girl having taken the
keys of the church (presumably at Carnac) and having entered it, found
the _corrigans_ about to dance; and the _corrigans_ were singing,
"_Lundi, Mardi_" (Monday, Tuesday). On seeing the young girl, they
stopped, surrounded her, and invited her to dance with them. She
accepted, and, in singing, added to their song "_Mercredi_" (Wednesday).
In amazement, the _corrigans_ cried joyfully, "She has added something
to our song; what shall we give her as recompense?" And they gave her a
bracelet. A friend of hers meeting her, asked where the fine bracelet
came from; and the young girl told what had happened. The second girl
hurried to the church, and found the _corrigans_ still dancing the
_rond_. She joined their dance, and, in singing, added "_Jeudi_"
(Thursday) to their song; but that broke the cadence; and the
_corrigans_ in fury, instead of recompensing her wished to punish her.
"What shall we do to her?" one of them cried. "Let the day be as night
to her!" the others replied. And by day, wherever she went, she saw only
the night.'

_The 'Corrigans'' Sabbath._--'Where my grandfather lived,' continued
Madame Le Rouzic, 'there was a young girl who went to the sabbath of the
_corrigans_; and when she returned and was asked where she had been,
said, "I have travelled over water, wood, and hedges." And she related
all she had seen and heard. Then one night, afterwards, the _corrigans_
came into the house, beat her, and dragged her from bed. Upon hearing
the uproar, my grandfather arose and found the girl lying flat on the
stone floor. "Never question me again," she said to him, "or they will
kill me."'[97]

_'Corrigans' as Fairies._--Some Breton legends give _corrigans_ the
chief characteristics of fairies in Celtic Britain and Ireland; and
Villemarque in his _Barzaz Breiz_ (pp. 25-30) makes the Breton word
_corrigan_ synonymous with _fee_ or fairy, thus:--'_Le Seigneur Nann et
la Fee (Aotrou Nann hag ar Corrigan)_.' In this legend the _corrigan_
seems clearly enough to be a water-fairy: 'The _Korrigan_ was seated at
the edge of her fountain, and she was combing her long fair hair.' But
unlike most water-fairies, the _Fee_ lives in a grotto, which, according
to Villemarque, is one of those ancient monuments called in Breton
_dolmen_, or _ti ar corrigan_; in French, _Table de pierres_, or _Grotte
aux Fees_--like the famous one near Rennes. The fountain where the _Fee_
was seated seems to be one of those sacred fountains, which, as
Villemarque says, are often found near a _Grotte aux Fees_, and called
_Fontaine de la Fee_, or in Breton, _Feunteun ar corrigan_. In another
of Villemarque's legends, _L'Enfant Suppose_, after the egg-shell test
has been used and the little _corrigan_-changeling is replaced by the
real child, the latter as though all the while it had been in an
unconscious trance-state--which has a curious bearing on our
Psychological Theory--stretches forth its arms and awakening exclaims,
'Ah! mother, what a long time I have been asleep.'[98] And in _Les
Nains_ we see the little _Duz_ or dwarfs inhabiting a cave and guarding
treasures.[98]

In his introduction to the _Barzaz Breiz_, Villemarque describes _les
korrigan_, whom he equates with _les fees_, as very similar to ordinary
fairies. They can foretell the future, they know the art of war--quite
like the Irish 'gentry' or Tuatha De Danann--they can assume any animal
form, and are able to travel from one end of the world to another in the
twinkling of an eye. They love feasting and music--like all Celtic
fairy-folk; and dance in a circle holding hands, but at the least noise
disappear. Their favourite haunts are near fountains and dolmens. They
are little beings not more than two feet high, and beautifully
proportioned, with bodies as aerial and transparent as those of wasps.
And like all fairy, or elvish races, and like the Breton _Morgans_ or
water-spirits, they are given to stealing the children of mortals.
Professor J. Loth has called my attention to an unpublished Breton
legend of his collection, in which there are fairy-like beings
comparable to these described by Villemarque; and he tells me, too, that
throughout Brittany one finds to-day the counterpart of the Welsh
_Tylwyth Teg_ or 'Fair Family', and that both in Wales and Brittany the
_Tylwyth Teg_ are popularly described as little women, or maidens, like
fairies no larger than children.

_Fairies and Dwarfs._--Where Villemarque draws a clear distinction is
between these _korrigan_ and _fees_ on the one hand, and the _nains_ or
dwarfs on the other. These last are what we have found associated or
identified with _corrigans_ in the Morbihan. Villemarque describes the
_nains_ as a hideous race of beings with dark or even black hairy
bodies, with voices like old men, and with little sparkling black eyes.
They are fond of playing tricks on mortals who fall into their power;
and are given to singing in a circular dance the weekday song. Very
often _corrigans_ regarded as _nains_, equally with all kinds of
_lutins_, are believed to be evil spirits or demons condemned to live
here on earth in a penitential state for an indefinite time; and
sometimes they seem not much different from what Irish Celts, when
talking of fairies, call fallen angels. _Le Nain de Kerhuiton_,
translated from Breton by Professor J. Loth, in part illustrates
this:--Upon seeing water boiling in a number of egg-shells ranged before
an open fire, a _polpegan_-changeling is so greatly astonished that he
unwittingly speaks for the first time, and says, 'Here I am almost one
hundred years old, and never such a thing have I yet seen!' 'Ah! son of
Satan!' then cries out the mother, as she comes from her place of hiding
and beats the _polpegan_--who thus by means of the egg-shell test has
been tricked into revealing his demon nature.[99] In a parallel story,
reported by Villemarque in his _Barzaz Breiz_ (p. 33 n.), a
_nain_-changeling is equally astonished to see a similar row of
egg-shells boiling before an open fire like so many pots of food, and
gives himself away through the following remark:--'I have seen the acorn
before the oak; I have seen the egg before the white chicken: I have
never seen the equal to this.'

_Nature of the 'Corrigans'._--As to the general ideas about the
_corrigans_, M. Le Scour says:--'Formerly the _corrigans_ were the
terror of the country-folk, especially in Finistere, in the Morbihan,
and throughout the Cotes-du-Nord. They were believed to be souls in pain
condemned to wander at night in waste lands and marshes. Sometimes they
were seen as dwarfs; and often they were not seen at all, but were heard
in houses making an infernal noise. Unlike the _lavandieres de nuits_
(phantom washerwomen of the night), they were heard only in summer,
never in winter.'


THE BRETON LEGEND OF THE DEAD

We come now to the Breton Legend of the Dead, common generally to all
parts of Armorica, though probably even more widespread in Lower
Brittany than in Upper Brittany; and this we call the Armorican
Fairy-Faith. Even where the peasants have no faith in _fees_ or fairies,
and where their faith in _corrigans_ is weak or almost gone, there is a
strong conviction among them that the souls of the dead can show
themselves to the living, a vigorous belief in apparitions,
phantom-funerals, and various death-warnings. As Professor Anatole Le
Braz has so well said in his introduction to _La Legende de la Mort_,
'the whole conscience of these people is fundamentally directed toward
that which concerns death. And the ideas which they form of it, in spite
of the strong Christian imprint which they have received, do not seem
much different from those which we have pointed out among their pagan
ancestors. For them, as for the primitive Celts, death is less a change
of condition than a journey, a departure for another world.' And thus it
seems that this most popular of the Breton folk-beliefs is genuinely
Celtic and extremely ancient. As Renan has said, the Celtic people are
'a race mysterious, having knowledge of the future and the secret of
death'.[100] And whereas in Ireland unusual happenings or strange
accidents and death are attributed to fairy interference, in Brittany
they are attributed to the influence of the dead.

The Breton Celt makes no distinction between the living and the dead.
All alike inhabit this world, the one being visible, the other
invisible. Though seers can at all times behold the dead, on November
Eve (_La Toussaint_) and on Christmas Eve they are most numerous and
most easily seen; and no peasant would think of questioning their
existence. In Ireland and Scotland the country-folk fear to speak of
fairies save through an euphemism, and the Bretons speak of the dead
indirectly, and even then with fear and trembling.

The following legend, which I found at Carnac, will serve to illustrate
both the profundity of the belief in the power of the dead over the
living in Lower Brittany, and how deeply the people can be stirred by
the predictions of one who can see the dead; and the legend is quite
typical of those so common in Armorica:--

_Foretelling Deaths._--'Formerly there was a woman whom spirits
impelled to rise from her bed, it made no difference at what hour of the
night, in order to behold funerals in the future. She predicted who
should die, who should carry the corpse, who the cross, and who should
follow the _cortege_. Her predictions frightened every one, and made her
such a terror to the country that the mayor had threatened to take legal
proceedings against her if she continued her practice; but she was
compelled to tell the things which the spirits showed her. It is about
ten years since this woman died in the hospital at Auray.'

_Testimony of a Breton Seeress._--There lives in the little hamlet of
Kerlois, less than a mile from Carnac, a Breton seeress, a woman who
since eight years of age has been privileged to behold the world
invisible and its inhabitants, quite like the woman who died at Auray.
She is Madame Eugenie Le Port, now forty-two years old, and what she
tells of things seen in this invisible world which surrounds her, might
easily be taken for Irish legends about fairies. Knowing very little
French, because she is thoroughly Breton, Madame Le Port described her
visions in her own native tongue, and her eldest daughter acted as
interpreter. I had known the good woman since the previous winter, and
so we were able to converse familiarly; and as I sat in her own little
cottage, in company with her husband and daughters, and with M. Lemort,
who acted as recording secretary, this is what she said in her clear
earnest manner in answer to my questions:--

'We believe that the spirits of our ancestors surround us and live with
us. One day on a road from Carnac I encountered a woman of Kergoellec
who had been dead eight days. I asked her to move to one side so that I
could pass, and she vanished. This was eleven o'clock in the morning. I
saw her at another time in the Marsh of Breno; I spoke, but she did not
reply. On the route from Plouharnel (near Carnac) I saw in the day-time
the funeral of a woman who did not die until fifteen days afterwards. I
recognized perfectly all the people who took part in it; but the person
with me saw nothing. Another time, near three o'clock in the afternoon,
and eight days before her death, I saw upon the same route the funeral
of a woman who was drowned. And I have seen a phantom horse going to the
sabbath, and as if forced along against its will, for it reared and
pawed the earth. When Pierre Rouzic of Kerlois died, I saw a light of
all colours between heaven and earth, the very night of his death. I
have seen a woman asleep whose spirit must have been free, for I saw it
hovering outside her body. She was not awakened [at the time] for fear
that the spirit would not find its body again.' In answer to my question
as to how long these various visions usually lasted, Madame Le Port
said:--'They lasted about a quarter of an hour, or less, and all of them
disappeared instantaneously.' As Madame Le Port now seemed unable to
recall more of her visions, I finally asked her what she thought about
_corrigans_, and she replied:--'I believe they exist as some special
kind of spirits, though I have never seen any.'

_Proof that the Dead Exist._--This is what M. Jean Couton, an old
Breton, told me at Carnac:--'I am only an old peasant, without
instruction, without any education, but let me tell you what I think
concerning the dead. Following my own idea, I believe that after death
the soul always exists and travels among us. I repeat to you that I have
belief that the dead are seen; I am now going to prove this to you in
the following story:--

'One winter evening I was returning home from a funeral. I had as
companion a kinswoman of the man just buried. We took the train and soon
alighted in the station of Plouharnel. We still had three kilometres to
go before reaching home, and as it was winter, and at that epoch there
was no stage-coach, we were obliged to travel afoot. As we were going
along, suddenly there appeared to my companion her dead relative whom we
had buried that day. She asked me if I saw anything, and since I replied
to her negatively she said to me, "Touch me, and you will see without
doubt." I touched her, and I saw the same as she did, the person just
dead, whom I clearly recognized.'[101]

_Phantom Washerwomen._--Concerning a very popular Breton belief in
phantom washerwomen (_les lavandieres de nuits_; or in Breton, _cannered
noz_), M. Goulven Le Scour offers the following summary:--'The
_lavandieres de nuits_ were heard less often than the _corrigans_, but
were much more feared. It was usually towards midnight that they were
heard beating their linen in front of different washing-places, always
some way from the villages. According to the old folk of the past
generation, when the phantom washerwomen would ask a certain passer-by
to help them to wring sheets, he could not refuse, under pain of being
stopped and wrung like a sheet himself. And it was necessary for those
who aided in wringing the sheets to turn in the same direction as the
washerwomen; for if by misfortune the assistant turned in an opposite
direction, he had his arms wrung in an instant. It is believed that
these phantom washerwomen are women condemned to wash their mortuary
sheets during whole centuries; but that when they find some mortal to
wring in an opposite direction, they are delivered.'[102]

_Breton Animistic Beliefs._--M. Z. Le Rouzic, a Breton Celt who has
spent most of his life studying the archaeology and folk-lore of the
Morbihan, and who is at present Keeper of the Miln Museum at Carnac,
summarizes for us the state of popular beliefs as he finds them existing
in the Carnac country now:--'There are few traditions concerning the
_fees_ in the region of Carnac; but the belief in spirits, good and
bad--which seems to me to be the same as the belief in _fees_--is
general and profound, as well as the belief in the incarnation of
spirits. And I am convinced that these beliefs are the reminiscences of
ancient Celtic beliefs held by the Druids and conserved by
Christianity.'

In Finistere, as purely Breton as the Morbihan, I found the Legend of
the Dead just as widespread, and the belief in spirits and the
apparitional return of the dead quite as profound; but nothing worth
recording concerning fairies. The stories which follow were told to me
by M. Pierre Vichon, a pure Breton Celt, born at Lescoff, near the
Pointe du Raz, Finistere, in 1842. Peter is a genuine old 'sea-dog',
having made the tour of the globe, and yet he has not lost the innate
faith of his ancient ancestors in a world invisible; for though he says
he cannot believe all that the people in his part of Finistere tell
about spirits and ghosts, he must have a belief that the dead as spirits
exist and influence the living, because of his own personal
experience--one of the most remarkable of its kind. Peter speaks Breton,
French, and English fluently, and since he had an opportunity for the
first time in seventeen months of using English, he told me the stories
in my own native language:--

_Pierre Vichon's Strange Experience._--'Some forty years ago a strange
thing happened in my life. A relative of mine had taken service in the
Austrian army, for by profession he was a soldier, though at first he
had begun to study for the priesthood. During the progress of the war I
had no news from him; and, then one day while I was on the deck of a
Norwegian ship just off Dover (England), my fellow sailors heard a noise
as though of a gun being discharged, and the whirr of a shot. At the
same moment I fell down on the deck as though mortally wounded, and lay
in an unconscious state for two hours. When the news came, it was
ascertained that at the very moment I fell and the gun-report was heard,
my relative in Austria had been shot in the head and fell down dead. And
he had been seen to throw his hands up to his head to grasp it just as I
did.'

_An Apparition of the Dead._--'I had another relative who died in a
hospital near Christiania, Norway; and on the day he died a sister of
mine, then a little girl, saw his spirit appear here in Lescoff, and she
easily recognized it; but none of her girl companions with her at the
time saw the spirit. After a few days we had the news of the death, and
the time of it and the time of my sister's seeing the spirit coincided
exactly.'

In all the peninsula of which the famous and dangerous Pointe du Raz is
the terminus, similar stories are current. And among the fisher-folk
with whom I lived on the strange and historic Ile de Sein, the Legend of
the Dead is even more common.

_The Dead and Fairies Compared._--Without setting down here in detail
numerous other death-legends which we have collected, we may now note
how much the same are the powers and nature of the dead and spirits in
Brittany, and the power and nature of the fairy races in Celtic Britain
and Ireland. Thus the Breton dead strike down the living just as fairies
are said to do; the _Ankou_,[103] who is a king of the dead, and his
subjects, like a fairy king and fairies, have their own particular paths
or roads over which they travel in great sacred processions;[104] and
exactly as fairies, the hosts of the dead are in possession of the earth
on November Eve, and the living are expected to prepare a feast and
entertainment for them of curded-milk, hot pancakes, and cider, served
on the family table covered with a fresh white table-cloth, and to
supply music. The Breton dead come to enjoy this hospitality of their
friends; and as they take their places at the table the stools are heard
to move, and sometimes the plates; and the musicians who help to
entertain them think that at times they feel the cold breath of the
invisible visitors. Concerning this same feast of the dead (_La
Toussaint_) Villemarque in his _Barzaz Breiz_ (p. 507) records that in
many parts of Brittany libations of milk are poured over or near
ancestral tombs--just as in Ireland and Scotland libations of milk are
poured to fairies. And the people of Armorica at other times than
November Eve remember the dead very appropriately, as in Ireland the
Irish remember fairies. The Breton peasant thinks of the dead as
frequently as the Irishman thinks of fairies. One day while I was
walking toward Carnac there was told to me in the most ordinary manner a
story about a dead man who used to be seen going along the very road I
was on. He quite often went to the church in Carnac seeking prayers for
his soul. And almost every man or woman one meets in rural Lower
Brittany can tell many similar stories. If a mortal should happen to
meet one of the dead in Brittany and be induced to eat food which the
dead sometimes offer, he will never be able to return among the
living,[105] for the effect would be the same as eating fairy-food. Like
