heaven, of man, of beasts, of Asuras,[FN#13l] of hundreds of grass,
and of thousands of trees.  There are characters, some long, some
short, some round, some square, some blue, some red, some yellow, and
some white-in short, all the phenomena in the universe are the
characters with which the sutra is written."  Shakya Muni read that
sutra through the bright star illuminating the broad expanse of the
morning skies, when he sat in meditation under the Bodhi Tree.


[FN#13l]  The name of a demon.


Ling Yun (Rei-un) read it through the lovely flowers of a peach-tree
in spring after some twenty years of his research for Light, and said:

"A score of years I looked for Light:
There came and went many a spring and fall.
E'er since the peach blossoms came in my sight,
I never doubt anything at all."

Hian Yen (Kyo-gen) read it through the noise of bamboo, at which he
threw pebbles.  Su Shih (So-shoku) read it through a waterfall, one
evening, and said:

"The brook speaks forth the Tathagata's words divine,
The hills reveal His glorious forms that shine."



6. Great Men and Nature.

All great men, whether they be poets or scientists or religious men
or philosophers, are not mere readers of books, but the perusers of
Nature.  Men of erudition are often lexicons in flesh and blood, but
men of genius read between the lines in the pages of life.  Kant, a
man of no great erudition, could accomplish in the theory of
knowledge what Copernicus did in astronomy.  Newton found the law of
gravitation not in a written page, but in a falling apple.
Unlettered Jesus realized truth beyond the comprehension of many
learned doctors.  Charles Darwin, whose theory changed the whole
current of the world's thought, was not a great reader of books, but
a careful observer of facts.  Shakespeare, the greatest of poets, was
the greatest reader of Nature and life.  He could hear the music even
of heavenly bodies, and said:

"There's not the smallest orb which thou beholdest,
But in his motion like an angel sings."

Chwang Tsz (So-shi), the greatest of Chinese philosophers, says:
"Thou knowest the music of men, but not the music of the earth. Thou
knowest the music of the earth, but not the music of the
heaven."[FN#132]   Goethe, perceiving a profound meaning in Nature,
says: "Flowers are the beautiful hieroglyphics of Nature with which
she indicates how much she loves us."


[FN#132]  Chwang Tsz, vol. i., p. 10.


Son-toku[FN#133] (Ninomiya), a great economist, who, overcoming all
difficulties and hardships by which he was beset from his childhood,
educated himself, says: "The earth and the heaven utter no word, but
they ceaselessly repeat the holy book unwritten."

[FN#133]  One of the greatest self-made men in Japan, who lived
1787-1856.



7. The Absolute and Reality are but an Abstraction.

A grain of sand you, trample upon has a deeper significance than a
series of lectures by your verbal philosopher whom you respect.  It
contains within itself the whole history of the earth; it tells you
what it has seen since the dawn of time; while your philosopher
simply plays on abstract terms and empty words.  What does his
Absolute, or One, or Substance mean?  What does his Reality or Truth
imply?  Do they denote or connote anything?  Mere name! mere
abstraction!  One school of philosophy after another has been
established on logical subtleties; thousands of books have been
written on these grand names and fair mirages, which vanish the
moment that your hand of experience reaches after them.

"Duke Hwan," says Chwang Tsz,[FN#134] "seated above in his hall, was"
(once) reading a book, and a wheelwright, Phien, was making a wheel
below it.  Laying aside his hammer and chisel, Phien went up the
steps and said: 'I venture to ask your Grace what words you are
reading?'  The duke said: 'The words of sages.'  'Are these sages
alive?' Phien continued.  'They are dead,' was the reply.  'Then,'
said the other, 'what you, my Ruler, are reading is only the dregs
and sediments of those old men.'  The duke said:


[FN#134]  Chwang Tsz, vol. ii., p. 24.


'How should you, a wheelwright, have anything to say about the book
which I am reading?  If you can explain yourself, very well; if you
cannot, you shall die.'  The wheelwright said: 'Your servant will
look at the thing from the point of view of his own art.  In making a
wheel, if I proceed gently, that is pleasant enough, but the
workmanship is not strong; if I proceed violently, that is toilsome
and the joinings do not fit.  If the movements of my hand are neither
(too) gentle nor (too) violent, the idea in my mind is realized.  But
I cannot tell (how to do this) by word of mouth; there is a knack in
it.  I cannot teach the knack to my son, nor can my son learn it from
me.  Thus it is that I am in my seventieth year, and am (still)
making wheels in my old age.  But these ancients, and what it was not
possible for them to convey, are dead and gone.  So then what you, my
Ruler, are reading is but their dregs and sediments."  Zen has no
business with the dregs and sediments of sages of yore.



8. The Sermon of the Inanimate.

The Scripture of Zen is written with facts simple and familiar, so
simple and familiar with everyday life that they escape observation
on that very account.  The sun rises in the east.  The moon sets in
the west.  High is the mountain.  Deep is the sea.  Spring comes with
flowers; summer with the cool breeze; autumn with the bright moon;
winter with the fakes of snow.  These things, perhaps too simple and
too familiar for ordinary observers to pay attention to, have had
profound significance for Zen.  Li Ngao (Ri-ko) one day asked Yoh
Shan (Yaku-san): "What is the way to truth?"  Yoh Shan, pointing to
the sky and then to the pitcher beside him, said: "You see?"  "No,
sir," replied Li Ngao.  "The cloud is in the sky," said Yoh Shan,
"and the water in the pitcher."  Huen Sha (Gen-sha) one day went upon
the platform and was ready to deliver a sermon when he heard a
swallow singing.  "Listen," said he, "that small bird preaches the
essential doctrine and proclaims the eternal truth."  Then he went
back to his room, giving no sermon.[FN#135]


[FN#135]  Den-to-roku and E-gen.


The letters of the alphabet, a, b, c, etc., have no meaning whatever.
 They are but artificial signs, but when spelt they can express any
great idea that great thinkers may form.  Trees, grass, mountains,
rivers, stars, moons, suns.  These are the alphabets with which the
Zen Scripture is written.  Even a, b, c, etc., when spelt, can
express any great idea.  Why not, then, these trees, grass, etc., the
alphabets of Nature when they compose the Volume of the Universe?
Even the meanest clod of earth proclaims the sacred law.

Hwui Chung[FN#136] (E-chu) is said first to have given an expression
to the Sermon of the Inanimate.  "Do the inanimate preach the
Doctrine?" asked a monk of Hwui Chung on one occasion.  "Yes, they
preach eloquently and incessantly.  There is no pause in their
orations," was the reply.  "Why, then, do I not hear them?" asked the
other again.  "Even if you do not, there are many others who can hear
them."  "Who can hear them?"  "All the sages hear and understand
them," said Hwui Chung.  Thus the Sermon of the Inanimate had been a
favourite topic of discussion 900 years before Shakespeare who
expressed the similar idea, saying:

"And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything."


[FN#136]  A direct disciple of the Sixth Patriarch.


"How wonderful is the Sermon of the Inanimate," says Tung Shan
(To-zan).  "You cannot hear it through your ears, but you can hear it
through your eyes."  You should hear it through your mind's eyes,
through your heart's eyes, through your inmost soul's eyes, not
through your intellect, not through your perception, not through your
knowledge, not through your logic, not through your metaphysics.  To
understand it you have to divine, not to define; you have to observe,
not to calculate; you have to sympathize, not to analyze; you have to
see through, not to criticize; you have not to explain, but to feel;
you have not to abstract, but to grasp; you have to see all in each,
but not to know all in all; you have to get directly at the soul of
things, penetrating their hard crust of matter by your rays of the
innermost consciousness.  "The falling leaves as well as the blooming
flowers reveal to us the holy law of Buddha," says a Japanese Zenist.

Ye who seek for purity and peace, go to Nature.  She will give you
more than ye ask.  Ye who long for strength and perseverance, go to
Nature.  She will train and strengthen you.  Ye who aspire after an
ideal, go to Nature.  She will help you in its realization.  Ye who
yearn after Enlightenment, go to Nature.  She will never fail to
grant your request.





CHAPTER IV



BUDDHA, THE UNIVERSAL SPIRIT


1. The Ancient Buddhist Pantheon.

The ancient Buddhist pantheon was full of deities or Buddhas,
3,000[FN#137] in number, or rather countless, and also of
Bodhisattvas no less than Buddhas.  Nowadays, however, in every
church of Mahayanism one Buddha or another together with some
Bodhisattvas reigns supreme as the sole object of worship, while
other supernatural beings sink in oblivion.  These Enlightened
Beings, regardless of their positions in the pantheon, were generally
regarded as persons who in their past lives cultivated virtues,
underwent austerities, and various sorts of penance, and at length
attained to a complete Enlightenment, by virtue of which they secured
not only peace and eternal bliss, but acquired divers supernatural
powers, such as clairvoyance, clairaudience, all-knowledge, and what
not.  Therefore, it is natural that some Mahayanists[FN#138] came to
believe that, if they should go through the same course of discipline
and study, they could attain to the same Enlightenment and Bliss, or
the same Buddhahood, while other Mahayanists[FN#139] came to believe
in the doctrine that the believer is saved and led up to the eternal
state of bliss, without undergoing these hard disciplines, by the
power of a Buddha known as having boundless mercy and fathomless
wisdom whom he invokes.


[FN#137]  Trikalpa-trisahasra-buddhanrama-sutra gives the names of
3,000 Buddhas, and Buddhabhisita-buddhanama-sutra enumerates Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas 11,093 in number.  See Nanjo's Catalogue, Nos. 404,
405, 406, 407.

[FN#138]  Those who believe in the doctrine of Holy Path.  See 'A
History of the Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects,' pp. 109-111.

[FN#139]  Those who believe in the doctrine of the Pure Land.



2. Zen is Iconoclastic.

For the followers of Bodhidharma, however, this conception of Buddha
seemed too crude to be accepted unhesitatingly and the doctrine too
much irrelevant with and uncongenial to actual life.  Since Zen
denounced, as we have seen in the previous chapter, the scriptural
authority, it is quite reasonable to have given up this view of
Buddha inculcated in the Mahayana sutras, and to set at naught those
statues and images of supernatural beings kept in veneration by the
orthodox Buddhists.  Tan Hia (Tan-ka), a noted Chinese Zen master,
was found warming himself on a cold morning by the fire made of a
wooden statue of Buddha.  On another occasion he was found mounting
astride the statue of a saint.  Chao Chen (Jo-shu) one day happened
to find Wang Yuen (Bun-yen) worshipping the Buddha in the temple, and
forthwith struck him with his staff.  "Is there not anything good in
the worshipping of the Buddha?" protested Wang Yuen.  Then the master
said: "Nothing is better than anything good."[FN#140]  These examples
fully illustrate Zen's attitude towards the objects of Buddhist
worship.  Zen is not, nevertheless, iconoclastic in the commonly
accepted sense of the term, nor is it idolatrous, as Christian
missionaries are apt to suppose.


[FN#140]  Zen-rin-rui-shu.


Zen is more iconoclastic than any of the Christian or the Mohammedan
denominations in the sense that it opposes the acceptance of the
petrified idea of Deity, so conventional and formal that it carries
no inner conviction of the believers.  Faith dies out whenever one
comes to stick to one's fixed and immutable idea of Deity, and to
deceive oneself, taking bigotry for genuine faith.  Faith must be
living and growing, and the living and growing faith should assume no
fixed form.  It might seem for a superficial observer to take a fixed
form, as a running river appears constant, though it goes through
ceaseless changes.  The dead faith, immutable and conventional, makes
its embracer appear religious and respectable, while it arrests his
spiritual growth.  It might give its owner comfort and pride, yet it
at bottom proves to be fetters to his moral uplifting.  It is on this
account that Zen declares: "Buddha is nothing but spiritual chain or
moral fetters," and, "If you remember even a name of Buddha, it would
deprive you of purity of heart."  The conventional or orthodox idea
of Buddha or Deity might seem smooth and fair, like a gold chain,
being polished and hammered through generations by religious
goldsmiths; but it has too much fixity and frigidity to be worn by us.

"Strike off thy fetters, bonds that bind thee down
Of shining gold or darker, baser ore;

Know slave is slave caressed or whipped, not free;
For fetters tho' of gold, are not less strong to bind."

--The Song of the Sannyasin.



3. Buddha is Unnamable.

Give a definite name to Deity, He would be no more than what the name
implies.  The Deity under the name of Brahman necessarily differs
from the Being under the appellation of Jehovah, just as the Hindu
differs from the Jew.  In like manner the Being designated by God
necessarily differs from One named Amitabha or from Him entitled
Allah.  To give a name to the Deity is to give Him tradition,
nationality, limitation, and fixity, and it never brings us nearer to
Him.  Zen's object of worship cannot be named and determined as God,
or Brahman, or Amitabha, or Creator, or Nature, or Reality, or
Substance, or the like.  Neither Chinese nor Japanese masters of Zen
tried to give a definite name to their object of adoration.  They now
called Him That One, now This One, now Mind, now Buddha, now
Tathagata, now Certain Thing, now the True, now Dharma-nature, now
Buddha-nature, and so forth.  Tung Shan[FN#141] (To-zan) on a certain
occasion declared it to be "A Certain Thing that pillars heaven above
and supports the earth below; dark as lacquer and undefinable;
manifesting itself through its activities, yet not wholly comprisable
within them."  So-kei[FN#142] expressed it in the same wise: "There
exists a Certain Thing, bright as a mirror, spiritual as a mind, not
subjected to growth nor to decay."  Huen Sha (Gen-sha) comparing it
with a gem says: "There exists a bright gem illuminating through the
worlds in ten directions by its light."[FN#143]


[FN#141]  Tung Shan Luh (To-zan-roku, 'Sayings and Doings of Ta-zan')
is one of the best Zen books.

[FN#142]  So-kei, a Korean Zenist, whose work entitled Zen-ke-ki-kwan
is worthy of our note as a representation of Korean Zen.

[FN#143]  Sho-bo-gen-zo.


This certain thing or being is too sublime to be named after a
traditional or a national deity, too spiritual to be symbolized by
human art, too full of life to be formulated in terms of mechanical
science, too free to be rationalized by intellectual philosophy, too
universal to be perceived by bodily senses; but everybody can feel
its irresistible power, see its invisible presence, and touch its
heart and soul within himself.  "This mysterious Mind," says Kwei
Fung (Kei-ho), "is higher than the highest, deeper than the deepest,
limitless in all directions.  There is no centre in it.  No
distinction of east and west, and above and below.  Is it empty?
Yes, but not empty like space.  Has it a form?  Yes, but has no form
dependent on another for its existence.  Is it intelligent?  Yes, but
not intelligent like your mind.  Is it non-intelligent?  Yes, but not
non-intelligent like trees and stone.  Is it conscious?  Yes, but not
conscious like you when waking.  Is it bright?  Yes, but not bright
like the sun or the moon."  To the question, "What and who is
Buddha?"  Yuen Wu (En-go) replied: "Hold your tongue: the mouth is
the gate of evils!" while Pao Fuh (Ho-fuku) answered to the same
question: "No skill of art can picture Him."  Thus Buddha is
unnamable, indescribable, and indefinable, but we provisionally call
Him Buddha.

