improvement of existing conditions, so long as the Greek Church has
the education of the masses in charge. To become politically free, men
must first be intellectually emancipated. If a Russian is not
permitted to choose his own religion, will he be permitted to choose
his own form of government? If he will allow a priest to impose his
religion upon him, why may he not permit the Czar to impose despotism
upon him? If it is wrong for him to question the tenets of his
religion, is it not equally wrong for him to discuss the laws of his
government? If a slave of the church, why may he not be also a slave
of the state? If there is room upon his neck for the yoke of the
church, there will be room, also, for the yoke of the autocracy. If he
is in the habit of bending his knees, what difference does it make to
how many or to whom he bends them?

Not until Russia has become religiously emancipated, will she conquer
political freedom. She must first cast out of her mind the fear of the
church, before she can enter into the glorious fellowship of the free.
In Turkey, all the misery of the people will not so much as cause a
ripple of discontent, because the Moslem has been brought up to submit
to the Sultan as to the shadow on earth of Allah. Both in Russia and
Turkey, the protestants are the heretics. The orthodox Turk and the
orthodox Christian permit without a murmur both the priest and the
king to impose upon them at the point of a bayonet, the one his
religion, and the other his government. It is only by taking the
education of the masses out of the hands of the clergy that either
country can enjoy any prosperity. Orthodoxy and autocracy are twins.

Let me now try to present to you a picture of the world under
Christianity about the year 400 of the present era. Let us discuss
this phase of the subject in a liberal spirit, extenuating nothing,
nor setting down aught in malice. Please interpret what I say in the
next few minutes metaphorically, and pardon me if my picture is a
repellant one.

We are in the year of our Lord, 400:

I rose up early this morning to go to church. As I approached the
building, I saw there a great multitude of people unable to secure
admission into the edifice. The huge iron doors were closed, and upon
them was affixed a notice from the authorities, to the effect that all
who worshiped in this church would, by the authority of the state, be
known and treated hereafter as "infamous heretics," and be exposed to
the extreme penalty of the law if they persisted in holding services
there. But the party to which I belonged heeded not the prohibition,
but beat against the doors furiously and effected an entrance into the
church. The excitement ran high; men and leaders shouted, gesticulated
and came to blows. The Archbishop was urged to ascend his episcopal
throne and officiate at the altar in spite of the formal interdiction
against him. He consented. But he had not proceeded far when soldiers,
with a wild rush, poured into the building and began to discharge
arrows at the panic-stricken people. Instantly pandemonium was let
loose. The officers commanding the soldiers demanded the head of the
offending Archbishop. The worshipers made an attempt to resist; then
blood was shed, the sight of which reeled people's heads, and, in an
instant, the sanctuary was turned into a house of murder. Taking
advantage of the uproar, the Archbishop, assisted by his secretaries,
escaped through a secret door behind the altar.

[Illustration: Engraving of XV Century Representing the Trinity.]

On my way home from this terrible scene, I fell upon a procession of
monks. They were carrying images and relics, and a banner upon which
were inscribed these words: "The Virgin Mary, Mother of God." As they
marched on, their number increased by new additions. But suddenly they
encountered another band of monks, carrying a different banner,
bearing the same words which were on the other party's banner, but
instead of "The Virgin Mary, Mother of God," their banner read: "The
Virgin Mary, Mother of Jesus Christ." The two processions clashed, and
a bloody encounter followed; in an instant images, relics and banners
were all in an indiscriminate heap. The troops were called out again,
but such was the zeal of the conflicting parties that not until the
majority of them were disabled and exhausted, was tranquility
restored.

Looking about me, I saw the spire of a neighboring church. My
curiosity prompted me to wend my steps thither. As soon as I entered,
I was recognized as belonging to the forbidden sect, and in an instant
a hundred fists rained down blows upon my head. "He has polluted the
sanctuary," they cried. "He has committed sacrilege." "No quarter to
the enemies of the true church," cried others, and it was a miracle
that, beaten, bruised, my clothes torn from my back, I regained the
street. A few seconds later, looking up the streets, I saw another
troop of soldiers, rushing down toward this church at full speed. It
seems that while I was being beaten in the main auditorium, in the
baptistry of the church they were killing, in cold blood, the
Archbishop, who was suspected of a predilection for the opposite
party, and who had refused to retract or resign from his office. The
next day I heard that one hundred and thirty-seven bodies were taken
out of this building.

Seized with terror, I now began to run, but, alas, I had worse
experiences in store for me. I was compelled to pass the principal
square in the center of the city before I could reach a place of
safety. When I reached this square, it had the appearance of a
veritable battlefield. It was Sunday morning, and the partisans of
rival bishops, differing in their interpretation of theological
doctrines, were fighting each other like maddened, malignant
creatures. One could hear, over the babel of discordant yells,
scriptural phrases. The words, "The Son is equal to the Father," "The
Father is greater than the Son," "He is begotten of the same substance
as the Father," "He is of like substance, but not of the same
substance," "You are a heretic," "You are an atheist," were invariably
accompanied with blows, stabs and sword thrusts, until, as an eye-
witness, I can take an oath that I saw the streets leading out of the
square deluged with palpitating human blood. Suddenly the commander of
the cavalry, Hermogenes, rode upon the scene of feud and bloodshed. He
ordered the followers of the rival bishops to disperse, but instead of
minding his authority, the zealots of both sides rushed upon his
horse, tore the rider from the saddle and began to beat him with clubs
and stones which they picked up from the street. He managed to escape
into a house close by, but the religious rabble surrounded the house
and set fire to it. Hermogenes appeared at the window, begging for his
life. He was attacked again, and killed, and his mangled body dragged
through the streets and rushed into a ditch.

The spectacle inflamed me, being a sectarian myself. I felt ashamed
that I was not showing an equal zeal for _my_ party. I, too, longed to
fight, to kill, to be killed, for my religion. And, anon! the
opportunity presented itself. I saw, looking up the street to my
right, a group of my fellow-believers, who, like myself, shut out of
their own church by the orthodox authorities, armed with whips loaded
with lead and with clubs, were entering a house. I followed them. As
we went in, we commanded the head of the family and his wife to
appear. When they did, we asked them if it was true that in their
prayers to Mary they had refrained from the use of the words, "The
mother of God." They hesitated to give a direct answer, whereupon we
used the club, and then, the scourge. Then they said they believed in
and revered the blessed virgin, but would not, even if we killed them,
say that she was the mother of God. This obstinacy exasperated us and
we felt it to be our religious duty, for the honor of our divine
Queen, to perpetrate such cruelties upon them as would shock your
gentle ears to hear. We held them over slowly burning fires, flung
lime into their eyes, applied roasted eggs and hot irons to the
sensitive parts of their bodies, and even gagged them to force the
sacrament into their mouths.....As we went from house to house, bent
upon our mission, I remember an expression of one of the party who
said to the poor woman who was begging for mercy: "What! shall I be
guilty of defrauding the vengeance of God of its victims?" A sudden
chill ran down my back. I felt my flesh creep. Like a drop of poison
the thought embodied in those words perverted whatever of pity or
humanity was left in me, and I felt that I was only helping to secure
victims with which to feed the vengeance of God!

[Illustration: Trinity in XIII Century.]

I was willing to be a monster for the glory of God!

The Christian sect to which I belonged was one of the oldest in
Christendom. Our ancestors were called the Puritans of the fourth and
fifth centuries. We believe that no one can be saved outside of our
communion. When a Christian of another church joins us, we re-baptize
him, for we do not believe in the validity of other baptisms. We are
so particular that we deny our cemeteries to any other Christians than
our own members. If we find that we have, by mistake, buried a member
of another church in our cemetery, we dig up his bones, that he may
not pollute the soil. When one of the churches of another denomination
falls into our hands, we first fumigate the building, and with a sharp
knife we scrape the wood off the altars upon which other Christian
priests have offered prayers. We will, under no consideration, allow a
brother Christian from another church to commune with us; if by
stealth anyone does, we spare not his life. But we are persecuted just
as severely as we persecute, ourselves. [Footnote: This sect
(Donatist) and others, lasted for a long time, and made Asia and
Africa a hornet's nest,--a blood-stained arena, of feud and riot and
massacre, until Mohammedanism put an end, in these parts of the world,
not only to these sects, but to Christianity itself.]

As the sun was setting, fatigued with the holy Sabbath's religious
duties, I started to go home. On my way back, I saw even wilder,
bloodier scenes, between rival ecclesiastical factions, streets even
redder with blood, if possible, yea, certain sections of the city
seemed as if a storm of hail, or tongues of flame had swept over them.
Churches were on fire, cowled monks attacking bishops' residences,
rival prelates holding uproarious debates, which almost always
terminated in bloodshed, and, to cap the day of many vicissitudes, I
saw a bear on exhibition which had been given its freedom by the
ruler, as a reward for his faithful services in devouring heretics.
The Christian ruler kept two fierce bears by his own chamber, to which
those who did not hold the orthodox faith were thrown in his presence
while he listened with delight to their groans.

When I reached home, I was panting for breath. I had lived through
another Sabbath day. [Footnote: If the reader will take the pains to
read Dean Milman's History of Christianity, and his History of Latin
Christianity; also Gibbon's Downfall of the Roman Empire, and
Mosheim's History of Christianity, he will see that we have
exaggerated nothing. The Athanasian and the Arian, the Donatist and
Sabellian, the Nestorian and Alexandrian factions converted the early
centuries into a long reign of terror.]

I feel like covering my face for telling you so grewsome a tale. But
if this were the fourth or the fifth century, instead of the
twentieth, and this were Constantinople, or Alexandria, or Antioch,
instead of Chicago, I would have spent just such a Sunday as I have
described to you. In giving you this concentrated view of human
society in the great capitals of Christendom in the year 400, I have
restrained, rather than spurred, my imagination. Remember, also, that
I have confined my remarks to a specific and short period in history,
and have excluded from my generalization all reference to the
centuries of religious wars which tore Europe limb from limb,--the
wholesale exterminations, the crusades, which represented one of the
maddest spells of misguided and costly zeal which ever struck our
earth, the persecution of the Huguenots, the extermination of the
Albigenses and of the Waldenses,--the massacre of St. Bartholomew, the
Inquisition with its red hand upon the intellect of Europe, the
Anabaptist outrages in Germany, the Smithfield fires in England, the
religious outrages in Scotland, the Puritan excesses in America,--the
reign of witchcraft and superstition throughout the twenty centuries--I
have not touched my picture with any colors borrowed from these
terrible chapters in the history of our unfortunate earth. I have also
left out all reference to Papal Rome, with its dungeons, its stakes,
its massacres and its burnings. I have said nothing of Galileo,
Vanini, Campanella or Bruno. I have passed over all this in silence.
You can imagine, now, how much more repellant and appalling this
representation of the Roman world under Christianity would have been
had I stretched my canvas to include also these later centuries.

But I tremble to be one-sided or unjust, and so I hasten to say that
during the twenty centuries' reign of our religion, the world has also
seen some of the fairest flowers spring out of the soil of our earth.
During the past twenty centuries there have been men and women,
calling themselves Christians, who have been as generous, as heroic
and as deeply consecrated to high ideals as any the world has ever
produced. Christianity has, in many instances, softened the manners of
barbarians and elevated the moral tone of primitive peoples. It gives
us more pleasure to speak of the good which religions have
accomplished than to call attention to the evil they have caused. But
this raises a very important question. "Why do you not confine
yourself," we are often asked, "to the virtues you find in
Christianity or Mohammedanism, instead of discussing so frequently
their short-comings? Is it not better to praise than to blame, to
recommend than to find fault?" This is a fair question, and we may
just as well meet it now as at any other time.

Such is the economy of nature that no man, or institution or religion,
can be altogether evil. The poet spoke the truth when he said: "There
is a soul of goodness in things evil." Evil, in a large sense, is the
raw material of the good. All things contribute to the education of
man. The question, then, whether an institution is helpful or hurtful,
is a relative one. The character of an institution, as that of an
individual, is determined by its ruling passion. Despotism, for
instance, is generally considered to be an evil. And yet, a hundred
good things can be said of despotism. The French people, over a
hundred years ago, overthrew the monarchy. And yet the monarchy had
rendered a thousand services to France. It was the monarchy that
created France, that extended her territory, developed her commerce,
built her great cities, defended her frontiers against foreign
invasion, and gave her a place among the first-class nations of
Europe. Was it just, then, to pull down an institution that had done
so much for France?

Why did the Americans overthrow British rule in this country? Had not
England rendered innumerable services to the colony? Was she not one
of the most progressive, most civilizing influences in the modern
world? Was it just, then, that we should have beaten out of the land a
government that had performed for us so many friendly acts?

Referring once more to the case of Russia: Why do the awakened people
in that country demand the overthrow of the autocracy? Is there
nothing good to be said of Russian autocracy? Have not the Czars loved
their country and fought for her prosperity? Have they not brought
Russia up to her present size, population and political influence in
Europe? Have they not beautified her cities and enacted laws for the
protection of their subjects? Is it right, then, in spite of all these
things that autocracy has done for Russia, to seek to overthrow it?

Once more: Why do the missionaries go into India and China and Japan
trying to replace the ancestral religion of these people with the
Christian faith? Why does the missionary labor to overthrow the
worship of Buddha, Confucius and Zoroaster? Have not these great
teachers helped humanity? Have they not rendered any services to their
countrymen? Are there no truths in their teachings? Are there no
virtues in their lives? Is it right, then, that the missionary should
criticise these ancient faiths?

[Illustration: Conception of Trinity, Ninth Century.]

Let us take an example from nearer home. We were talking some years
ago with a gentleman who had just returned from Dowie's Zion. He was
surprised to find there a clean, orderly and well-behaved people,
apparently quite happy. He said that after his experiences there, he
would rather do business with Dowie and his men than with the average
member of other religious bodies. He found the Dowieites honest,
reliable and peaceful. Now, all this may be true, and I hope it is;
but what of it? Dowieism is an evil, notwithstanding this recital of
its virtues. It is an evil, because it arrests the intellectual
development of man, because it makes dwarfs of the people it converts,
because it pinches the forehead of each convert into that of either a
charlatan or an idiot. We regret to have to use these harsh terms. But
Dowieism is denounced, because it brings up human beings as if they
were sheep, because it robs them of the most glorious gift of life,
the freedom to grow, Dowieism is an evil, because it makes the human
race mediocre by contracting its intellect down to the measure of a
creed. We would much rather that the Dowieites smoked and drank and
swore, than that they should fear to think. There is hope for a bad
man. There is no hope for the stupid.

In the case of an institution or a religion, then, it is not by adding
up the debit and credit columns and striking a balance sheet that the
question whether it has helped or hurt mankind is to be determined. We
cannot, for instance, place ninety-nine vices in one column, and a
hundred virtues in another, and conclude therefrom that the
institution or the religion should be preserved. Nor, conversely
speaking, can we place a hundred vices against ninety-nine virtues,
and, therefore, condemn, the institution. Even as a man is hanged for
one act in his life, in spite of the thousand good acts which may be
quoted against the one evil deed, so an institution or a religion is
honored or condemned, as we said above, for its _ruling passion_.
Mohammedanism, Judaism and Christianity have done much good, just as
other religions have, but they are condemned today by modern thought,
because they are a conspiracy against reason--because they combat
progress, as if it were a crime!

Another criticism frequently advanced against us is that we fail to
