passions), thou preachest yet (of virtue); but this thy sinful act of
eating up the eggs transgresseth thy speech!'


SECTION XLI

"Sisupala said,--'That mighty king Jarasandha who desired not to fight
with Krishna, saying "He is a slave," was worthy of my greatest esteem.
Who will regard as praiseworthy the act which was done by Kesava, as
also by Bhima and Arjuna, in the matter of Jarasandha's death? Entering
by an improper gate, disguised as a Brahmana, thus Krishna observed the
strength of king Jarasandha. And when that monarch offered at first
unto this wretch water to wash his feet, it was then that he denied his
Brahmanahood from seeming motives of virtue. And when Jarasandha, O
thou of the Kuru race, asked Krishna and Bhima and Dhananjaya to eat,
it was this Krishna that refused that monarch's request. If this one is
the lord of the universe, as this fool representeth him to be, why doth
he not regard himself as a Brahmana? This, however, surpriseth me
greatly that though thou leadest the Pandavas away from the path of the
wise, they yet regard thee as honest. Or, perhaps, this is scarcely a
matter of surprise in respect of those that have thee, O Bharata,
womanish in disposition and bent down with age, for their counsellor in
everything.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Sisupala, harsh both
in import and sound, that foremost of mighty men, Bhimasena endued with
energy became angry. And his eyes, naturally large and expanding and
like unto lotus leaves became still more extended and red as copper
under the influence of that rage. And the assembled monarchs beheld on
his forehead three lines of wrinkles like the Ganga of treble currents
on the treble-peaked mountain. When Bhimasena began to grind his teeth
in rage, the monarchs beheld his face resembling that of Death himself,
at the end of the Yuga, prepared to swallow every creature. And as the
hero endued with great energy of mind was about to leap up impetuously,
the mighty-armed Bhishma caught him like Mahadeva seizing Mahasena (the
celestial generalissimo). And, O Bharata, Bhima's wrath was soon
appeased by Bhishma, the grand-sire of the Kurus, with various kinds of
counsel. And Bhima, that chastiser of foes, could not disobey Bhishma's
words, like the ocean that never transgresseth (even when swollen with
the waters of the rainy season) its continents. But, O king, even
though Bhima was angry, the brave Sisupala depending on his own
manhood, did not tremble in fear. And though Bhima was leaping up
impetuously every moment, Sisupala bestowed not a single thought on
him, like a lion that recks not a little animal in rage. The powerful
king of Chedi, beholding Bhima of terrible prowess in such rage,
laughingly said,--'Release him, O Bhishma! Let all the monarchs behold
him scorched by my prowess like an insect in fire.' Hearing these words
of the ruler of the Chedis, Bhishma, that foremost of the Kurus and
chief of all intelligent men, spoke unto Bhima these words.


SECTION XLII

"Bhishma said,--'This Sisupala was born in the line of the king of
Chedi with three eyes and four hands. As soon as he was born, he
screamed and brayed like an ass. On that account, his father and mother
along with their relatives, were struck with fear. And beholding these
extraordinary omens, his parents resolved to abandon him. But an
incorporeal voice, about this time, said unto the king and his wife
with their ministers and priest, all with hearts paralysed by anxiety,
those words,--"This thy son, O king, that hath been born will become
both fortunate and superior in strength. Therefore thou hast no fear
from him. Indeed cherish the child without anxiety. He will not die (in
childhood). His time is not yet come. He that will slay him with
weapons hath also been born." Hearing these words, the mother, rendered
anxious by affection for her son, addressed the invisible Being and
said,--"I bow with joined hands unto him that hath uttered these words
respecting my son; whether he be an exalted divinity or any other
being, let him tell me another word. I desire to hear who will be the
slayer of this my son." The invisible Being then said,--"He upon whose
lap this child being placed the superfluous arms of his will fall down
upon the ground like a pair of five-headed snakes, and at the sight of
whom his third eye on the forehead will disappear, will be his slayer?"
Hearing of the child's three eyes and four arms as also of the words of
the invisible Being, all the kings of the earth went to Chedi to behold
him. The king of Chedi worshipping, as each deserved, the monarchs that
came, gave his child upon their laps one after another. And though the
child was placed upon the laps of a thousand kings, one after another,
yet that which the incorporeal voice had said came not to pass. And
having heard of all this at Dwaravati, the mighty Yadava heroes
Sankarshana and Janarddana also went to the capital of the Chedis, to
see their father's sister--that daughter of the Yadavas (the queen of
Chedi). And saluting everybody according to his rank and the king and
queen also, and enquiring after every body's welfare, both Rama and
Kesava took their seats. And after those heroes had been worshipped,
the queen with great pleasure herself placed the child on the lap of
Damodara. As soon as the child was placed on his lap, those superfluous
arms of his fell down and the eye on his forehead also disappeared. And
beholding this, the queen in alarm and anxiety begged of Krishna a
boon. And she said,--"O mighty-armed Krishna, I am afflicted with fear;
grant me a boon. Thou art the assurer of all afflicted ones and that
the dispeller of everybody's fear." Thus addressed by her, Krishna,
that son of the Yadu race, said--"Fear not, O respected one. Thou art
acquainted with morality. Thou needest have no fear from me. What boon
shall I give thee? What shall I do, O aunt? Whether able or not, I
shall do thy bidding."--Thus spoken to by Krishna, the queen said, "O
thou of great strength, thou wilt have to pardon the offences of
Sisupala for my sake. O tiger of the Yadu race. Know O lord, even this
is the boon that I ask." Krishna then said, "O aunt, even when he will
deserve to be slain, I will pardon an hundred offences of his. Grieve
thou not."'

"Bhishma continued,--'Even thus, O Bhima, is this wretch of a
king--Sisupala of wicked heart, who, proud of the boon granted by
Govinda, summons thee to battle!'


SECTION XLIII

"Bhishma said,--'The will under which the ruler of Chedi summoneth thee
to fight though thou art of strength that knoweth no deterioration, is
scarcely his own intention. Assuredly, this is the purpose of Krishna
himself, the lord of the universe. O Bhima, what king is there on earth
that would dare abuse me thus, as this wretch of his race, already
possessed by Death, hath done to-day? This mighty-armed one is, without
doubt, a portion of Hari's energy. And surely, the Lord desireth to
take back unto himself that energy of his own.' In consequence of this,
O tiger of the Kuru race, this tiger-like king of Chedi, so wicked of
heart, roareth in such a way caring little for us all."

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Bhishma, the king of
Chedi could bear no more. He then replied in rage unto Bhishma in these
words.--

"'Let our foes, O Bhishma, be endued with that prowess which this
Kesava hath, whom thou like a professional chanter of hymns praisest,
rising repeatedly from thy seat. If thy mind, O Bhishma, delighteth so
in praising others, then praise thou these kings, leaving off Krishna.
Praise thou this excellent of kings, Darada, the ruler of Valhika, who
rent this earth as soon as he was born. Praise thou, O Bhishma, this
Karna, the ruler of the territories of Anga and Vanga, who is equal in
strength unto him of a thousand eyes, who draweth a large bow, who
endued with mighty arms owneth celestial ear-rings of heavenly make
with which he was born and this coat of mail possessing the splendour
of the rising sun, who vanquished in a wrestling encounter the
invincible Jarasandha equal unto Vasava himself, and who tore and
mangled that monarch. O Bhishma, praise Drona and Aswatthaman, who both
father and son, are mighty warriors, worthy of praise, and the best of
Brahmanas, and either of whom, O Bhishma, if enraged could annihilate
this earth with its mobile and immobile creatures, as I believe. I do
not behold, O Bhishma, the king that is equal in battle unto Drona or
Aswatthaman. Why wishest thou not to praise them? Passing over
Duryyodhana, that mighty-armed king of kings, who is unequalled in
whole earth girt with her seas and king Jayadratha accomplished in
weapons and endued with great prowess, and Druma the preceptor of the
Kimpurushas and celebrated over the world for prowess, and Saradwata's
son, old Kripa, the preceptor of the Bharata princes and endued with
great energy, why dost thou praise Kesava? Passing over that foremost
of bowmen--that excellent of kings, Rukmin of great energy, why
praisest thou Kesava? Passing over Bhishmaka of abundant energy, and
king Dantavakra, and Bhagadatta known for his innumerable sacrificial
stakes, and Jayatsena the king of the Magadha, and Virata and Drupada,
and Sakuni and Vrihadvala, and Vinda and Anuvinda of Avant Pandya,
Sweta Uttama Sankhya of great prosperity, the proud Vrishasena, the
powerful Ekalavya, and the great charioteer Kalinga of abundant energy,
why dost thou praise Kesava? And, O Bhishma, if thy mind is always
inclined to sing the praises of others, why dost thou not praise Salya
and other rulers of the earth? O king, what can be done by me when (it
seemeth) thou hast not heard anything before from virtuous old men
giving lessons in morality? Hast thou never heard, O Bhishma, that
reproach and glorification, both of self and others, are not practices
of those that are respectable? There is no one that approveth thy
conduct, O Bhishma, in unceasingly praising with devotion, from
ignorance alone, Kesava so unworthy of praise. How dost thou, from thy
wish alone, establish the whole universe in the servitor and cowherd of
Bhoja (Kansa)? Perhaps, O Bharata, this thy inclination is not
conformable to thy true nature, like to what may be in the bird
Bhulinga, as hath already been said by me. There is a bird called
Bhulinga living on the other side of the Himavat. O Bhishma, that bird
ever uttereth words of adverse import. "Never do anything rash,"--this
is what she always sayeth, but never understandeth that she herself
always acteth very rashly. Possessed of little intelligence that bird
picketh from the lion's mouth the pieces of flesh sticking between the
teeth, and at a time when the lion is employed in eating. Assuredly, O
Bhishma, that bird liveth at the pleasure of the lion. O sinful wretch,
thou always speakest like that bird. And assuredly, O Bhishma, thou art
alive at the pleasure only of these kings. Employed in acts contrary to
the opinions of all, there is none else like thee!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these harsh words of the ruler of
Chedi, Bhishma, O king, said in the hearing of the king of
Chedi,--'Truly am I alive at the pleasure of these rulers of earth. But
I do regard these kings as not equal to even a straw.' As soon as these
words were spoken by Bhishma, the kings became inflamed with wrath. And
the down of some amongst them stood erect and some began to reprove
Bhishma. And hearing those words of Bhishma, some amongst them, that
were wielders of large bows exclaimed, 'This wretched Bhishma, though
old, is exceedingly boastful. He deserveth not our pardon. Therefore,
ye kings, incensed with rage as this Bhishma is, it is well that this
wretch were slain like an animal, or, mustering together, let us burn
him in a fire of grass or straw.' Hearing these words of the monarchs,
Bhishma the grand-sire of the Kurus, endued with great intelligence,
addressing those lords of earth, said,--'I do not see the end of our
speeches, for words may be answered with words. Therefore, ye lords of
earth, listen ye all unto what I say. Whether I be slain like an animal
or burnt in a fire of grass and straw, thus do I distinctly place my
foot on the heads of ye all. Here is Govinda, that knoweth no
deterioration. Him have we worshipped. Let him who wisheth for speedy
death, summon to battle Madhava of dark hue and the wielder of the
discus and the mace; and falling enter into and mingle with the body of
this god!'"


SECTION XLIV

Vaisampayana said,--"Hearing these words of Bhishma, the ruler of Chedi
endued with exceeding prowess, desirous of combating with Vasudeva
addressed him and said,--'O Janarddana, I challenge thee. Come, fight
with me until I slay thee today with all the Pandavas. For, O Krishna,
the sons of Pandu also, who disregarding the claims of all these kings,
have worshipped thee who art no king, deserve to be slain by me along
with thee. Even this is my opinion, O Krishna, that they who from
childishness have worshipped thee, as if thou deservest it, although
thou art unworthy of worship, being only a slave and a wretch and no
king, deserve to be slain by me.' Having said this, that tiger among
kings stood there roaring in anger. And after Sisupala had ceased,
Krishna addressing all the kings in the presence of the Pandavas, spoke
these words in a soft voice.--'Ye kings, this wicked-minded one, who is
the son of a daughter of the Satwata race, is a great enemy of us of
the Satwata race; and though we never seek to injure him, he ever
seeketh our evil. This wretch of cruel deeds, ye kings, hearing that we
had gone to the city of Pragjyotisha, came and burnt Dwaraka, although
he is the son of my father's sister. While king Bhoja was sporting on
the Raivataka hill, this one fell upon the attendants of that king and
slew and led away many of them in chains to his own city. Sinful in all
his purpose, this wretch, in order to obstruct the sacrifice of my
father, stole the sacrificial horse of the horse-sacrifice that had
been let loose under the guard of armed men. Prompted by sinful
motives, this one ravished the reluctant wife of the innocent Vabhru
(Akrura) on her way from Dwaraka to the country of the Sauviras. This
injurer of his maternal uncle, disguising himself in the attire of the
king of Karusha, ravished also the innocent Bhadra, the princess of
Visala, the intended bride of king Karusha. I have patiently borne all
these sorrows for the sake of my father's sister. It is, however, very
fortunate that all this hath occurred today in the presence of all the
kings. Behold ye all today the hostility this one beareth towards me.
And know ye also all that he hath done me at my back. For the excess of
that pride in which he hath indulged in the presence of all these
monarchs, he deserveth to be slain by me. I am ill able to pardon today
the injuries that he hath done me. Desirous of speedy death, this fool
had desired Rukmini. But the fool obtained her not, like a Sudra
failing to obtain the audition of the Vedas.'

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Vasudeva, all the
assembled monarchs began to reprove the ruler of Chedi. But the
powerful Sisupala, having heard these words, laughed aloud and spoke
thus,--'O Krishna, art thou not ashamed in saying in this assembly,
especially before all these kings that Rukmini (thy wife) had been
coveted by me? O slayer of Madhu, who else is there than thee, who
regarding himself a man would say in the midst of respectable men that
his wife had been intended for some body else? O Krishna, pardon me if
thou pleasest, or pardon me not. But angry or friendly, what canst thou
do unto me?'

"And while Sisupala was speaking thus, the exalted slayer of Madhu
thought in his mind of the discus that humbleth the pride of the
Asuras. And as soon as the discus came into his hands, skilled in
speech the illustrious one loudly uttered these words,--'Listen ye
lords of earth, why this one had hitherto been pardoned by me. As asked
by his mother, a hundred offences (of his) were to be pardoned by me.
Even this was the boon she had asked, and even this I granted her. That
number, ye kings, hath become full. I shall now slay him in your
presence, ye monarchs.' Having said this, the chief of the Yadus, that
slayer of all foes, in anger, instantly cut off the head of the ruler
of Chedi by means of his discus. And the mighty-armed one fell down
like a cliff struck with thunder. And, O monarch, the assembled kings
then beheld a fierce energy, like unto the sun in the sky, issue out of
the body of the king of Chedi, and O king, that energy then adored
Krishna, possessed of eyes like lotus leaves and worshipped by all the
worlds, and entered his body. And all the kings beholding the energy
which entered that mighty-armed chief of men regarded it as wonderful.
And when Krishna had slain the king of Chedi, the sky, though
cloudless, poured showers of rain, and blasting thunders were hurled,
and the earth itself began to tremble. There were some among the kings
who spoke not a word during those unspeakable moments but merely sat
gazing at Janarddana. And some there were that rubbed in rage their
palms with their forefingers. And there were others who deprived of
reason by rage bit their lips with their teeth. And some amongst the
kings applauded him of the Vrishni race in private. And some there were
that became excited with anger; while others became mediators. The
great Rishis with pleased hearts praised Kesava and went away. And all
the high-souled Brahmanas and the mighty kings that were there,
beholding Krishna's prowess, became glad at heart and praised him.

"Yudhishthira then commanded his brothers to perform without delay the
funeral rites of king Sisupala, the brave son of Damaghosha, with
proper respect. The sons of Pandu obeyed the behest of their brother.
And Yudhishthira then, with all the kings, installed the son of king
Sisupala in the sovereignty of the Chedis.

"Then that sacrifice, O monarch, of the king of the Kurus possessed of
great energy, blessed with every kind of prosperity, became exceedingly
handsome and pleasing unto all young men. And commenced auspiciously,
and all impediments removed, and furnished with abundance of wealth and
corn, as also with plenty of rice and every kind of food, it was
properly watched by Kesava. And Yudhishthira in due time completed the
great sacrifice. And the mighty-armed Janarddana, the exalted Sauri,
with his bow called Saranga and his discus and mace, guarded that
sacrifice till its completion. And all the Kshatriya monarchs, having
approached the virtuous Yudhishthira who had bathed after the
conclusion of the sacrifice, said these words: 'By good fortune thou
hast come out successful. O virtuous one, thou hast obtained the
imperial dignity. O thou of the Ajamida race, by thee hath been spread
the fame of thy whole race. And, O king of kings, by this act of thine,
thou hast also acquired great religious merit. We have been worshipped
by thee to the full extent of our desires. We now tell thee that we are
desirous of returning to our own kingdoms. It behoveth thee to grant us
permission.'

"Hearing these words of the monarchs, king Yudhishthira the just,
worshipping each as he deserved, commanded his brothers, saying, 'These
monarchs had all come to us at their own pleasure. These chastisers of
foes are now desirous of returning to their own kingdoms, bidding me
farewell. Blest be ye, follow ye these excellent kings to the confines
of our own dominions.' Hearing these words of their brother, the
virtuous Pandava princes followed the kings, one after another as each
deserved. The powerful Dhrishtadyumna followed without loss of time
king Virata: and Dhananjaya followed the illustrious and mighty
charioteer Yajnasena; and the mighty Bhimasena followed Bhishma and
Dhritarashtra: and Sahadeva, that master of battle, followed the brave
Drona and his son; and Nakula, O king, followed Suvala with his son;
and the sons of Draupadi with the son of Subhadra followed those mighty
warriors--the kings of the mountainous countries. And other bulls among
Kshatriyas followed other Kshatriyas. And the Brahmanas by thousands
also went away, duly worshipped.

"After all the Kings and the Brahmanas had gone away, the powerful
Vasudeva addressing Yudhishthira said,--'O son of the Kuru race, with
thy leave, I also desire to go to Dwaraka. By great good fortune, thou
hast accomplished the foremost of sacrifices--Rajasuya!' Thus addressed
by Janarddana, Yudhishthira replied, 'Owing to thy grace, O Govinda, I
have accomplished the great sacrifice. And it is owing to thy grace
that the whole Kshatriya world having accepted my sway, had come hither
with valuable tribute. O hero, without thee, my heart never feeleth any
delight. How can I, therefore, O hero, give thee, O sinless one, leave
to go? But thou must have to go to the city of Dwaraka.' The virtuous
Hari of worldwide fame, thus addressed by Yudhishthira, cheerfully went
with his cousin to Pritha and said,--'O aunt, thy sons have now
obtained the imperial dignity. They have obtained vast wealth and been
also crowned with success. Be pleased with all this. Commanded by thee,
O aunt, I desire to go to Dwaraka.' After this, Kesava bade farewell to
Draupadi and Subhadra. Coming out then of the inner apartments
accompanied by Yudhishthira, he performed his ablutions and went
through the daily rites of worship, and then made the Brahmanas utter
benedictions. Then the mighty armed Daruka came there with a car of
excellent design and body resembling the clouds. And beholding that
Garuda-bannered car arrived thither, the high-souled one, with eyes
like lotus leaves, walked round it respectfully and ascending on it set
out for Dwaravati. And king Yudhishthira the just, blessed with
prosperity, accompanied by his brothers, followed on foot the mighty
Vasudeva. Then Hari with eyes like lotus leaves, stopping that best of
cars for a moment, addressing Yudhishthira the son of Kunti, said,--'O
king of kings, cherishest thou thy subjects with ceaseless vigilance
and patience. And as the clouds are unto all creatures, as the large
tree of spreading bough is unto birds, as he of a thousand eyes is unto
the immortals, be thou the refuge and support of thy relatives.' And
Krishna and Yudhishthira having thus talked unto each other took each
other's leave and returned to their respective homes. And, O king,
after the chief of the Satwata race had gone to Dwaravati, king
Duryodhana alone, with king Suvala's son, Sakuni,--these bulls among
men,--continued to live in that celestial assembly house."


SECTION XLV

(Dyuta Parva)

Vaisampayana said,--"when that foremost of sacrifices, the Rajasuya so
difficult of accomplishment, was completed, Vyasa surrounded by his
disciples presented himself before Yudhishthira. And Yudhishthira, upon
beholding him quickly rose from his seat, surrounded by his brothers,
and worshipped the Rishi who was his grand-father, with water to wash
his feet and the offer of a seat. The illustrious one having taken his
seat on a costly carpet inlaid with gold, addressed king Yudhishthira
the just and said.--'Take thy seat'. And after the king had taken his
seat surrounded by his brothers, the illustrious Vyasa, truthful in
speech said,--'O son of Kunti, thou growest from good fortune. Thou
hast obtained imperial sway so difficult of acquisition. And O
perpetuator of the Kuru race, all the Kauravas have prospered in
