themselves'; and we are quite comfortable when this indictment is
kept in the general terms of universality--'All have sinned.'
Suppose I sharpen the point a little. God grant that the point may
get to some indurated conscience here. Suppose, instead of reading
'All have sinned,' I beseech each one of my hearers to strike out
the general word, and put in the individual one, and to say
'_I_ have sinned.' You have to do with this indictment just as
you have to do with the promises and offers of the Gospel--wherever
there is a  'whosoever' put your pen through it, and write your own
name over it. The blank cheque is given to us in regard to these
promises and offers, and we have to fill in our own names. The
charge is handed to us, in regard to this indictment, and if we are
wise we shall write our own names there, too.

Dear brethren, I leave this on your consciences, and I will venture to
ask that, if not here, at any rate when you get quietly home to-night,
and lie down on your beds, you would put to yourselves the question,
'Is it I?' And sure I am that, if you do, you will see a finger
pointing out of the darkness, and hear a voice sterner than that of
Nathan, saying 'Thou art the man.'

II. Christ can heal us all.

I was going to use an inappropriate word, and say, the _superb_ ease
with which He grappled with, and overcame, all types of disease is a
revelation on a lower level of the inexhaustible and all-sufficient
fullness of His healing power. He can cope with all sin-the world's
sin, and the individual's. And, as I believe, He alone can do it.

Just look at the problem that lies before any one who attempts to
stanch these wounds of humanity. What is needed in order to deliver
men from the sickness of sin? Well! that evil thing, like the fabled
dog that sits at the gate of the infernal regions, is three-headed.
And you have to do something with each of these heads if you are to
deliver men from that power.

There is first the awful power that evil once done has over us of
repeating itself on and on. There is nothing more dreadful to a
reflective mind than the damning influence of habit. The man that
has done some wrong thing once is a _rara avis_ indeed. If
once, then twice; if twice, then onward and onward through all the
numbers. And the intervals between will grow less, and what were
isolated points will coalesce into a line; and impulses wax as
motives wane, and the less delight a man has in his habitual form of
evil the more is its dominion over him, and he does it at last not
because the doing of it is any delight, but because the _not_
doing of it is a misery. If you are to get rid of sin, and to eject
the disease from a man, you have to deal with that awful degradation
of character, and the tremendous chains of custom. That is one of
the heads of the monster.

But, as I said, sin has reference to God, and there is another of
the heads, for with sin comes guilt. The relation to God is
perverted, and the man that has transgressed stands before Him as
guilty, with all the dolefulness that that solemn word means; and
that is another of the heads.

The third is this--the consequences that follow in the nature of
penalty. 'Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.' So long
as there is a universal rule by God, in which all things are
concatenated by cause and effect, it is impossible but that 'Evil
shall slay the wicked.' And that is the third head. These three,
habit, guilt, and penalty, have all to be dealt with if you are
going to make a thorough job of the surgery.

And here, brethren, I want not to argue but to preach. Jesus Christ
died on the Cross for you, and your sin was in His heart and mind
when He died, and His atoning sacrifice cancels the guilt, and
suspends all that is dreadful in the penalty of the sin. Nothing
else--nothing else will do that. Who can deal with guilt but the
offended Ruler and Judge? Who can trammel up consequences but the
Lord of the Universe? The blood of Jesus Christ is the sole and
sufficient oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world.

That disposes of two of the monster's heads. What about the third?
Who will take the venom out of my nature? What will express the
black drop from my heart? How shall the Ethiopian change his skin or
the leopard his spots? How can the man that has become habituated to
evil 'learn to do well'? Superficially there may be much
reformation. God forbid that I should forget that, or seem to
minimise it. But for the thorough ejection from your nature of the
corruption that you have yourselves brought into it, I believe--and
that is why I am here, for I should have nothing to say if I did not
believe it--I believe that there is only one remedy, and that is
that into the sinful heart there should come, rejoicing and
flashing, and bearing on its broad bosom before it all the rubbish
and filth of that dunghill, the great stream of the new life that is
given by Jesus Christ. He was crucified for our offences, and He
lives to bestow upon us the fullness of His own holiness. So the
monster's heads are smitten off. Our disease and the tendency to it,
and the weakness consequent upon it, are all cast out from us, and
He reveals Himself as 'the Lord who healeth thee.'

Now, dear brethren, you may say 'That is all very fine talking.'
Yes! but it is something a great deal more than fine talking. For
nineteen centuries have established the fact that it is so; and with
all their imperfections there have been millions, and there are
millions to-day, who are ready to say, 'Behold! it is not a
delusion; it is not rhetoric, _I_ have trusted in Him and He
has made _me_ whole.'

Now, if these things that I have been saying do fairly represent the
gravity of the problem which has to be dealt with in order to heal
the sicknesses of the world, then there is no need to dwell upon the
thought of how absolutely confined to Jesus Christ is the power of
thus dealing. God forbid that I should not give full weight to all
other methods for partial reformation and bettering of humanity. I
would wish them all God-speed. But, brethren, there is nothing else
that will deal either with my sin in its relation to God, or in its
relation to my character, or in its relation to my future, except
the message of the Gospel. There are plenty of other things, very
helpful and good in their places, but I do want to say, in one word,
that there is nothing else that goes deep enough.

Education? Yes! it will do a great deal, but it will do nothing in
regard to sin. It will alter the type of the disease, because the
cultured man's transgressions will be very different from those of
the illiterate boor. But wise or foolish, professor, student,
thinker, or savage with narrow forehead and all but dead brain, are
alike in this, that they are sinners in God's sight. I would that I
could get through the fence that some of you have reared round you,
on the ground of your superior enlightenment and education and
refinement, and make you feel that there is something deeper than
all that, and that you may be a very clever, and a very well
educated, a very highly cultured, an extremely thoughtful and
philosophical sinner, but you are a sinner all the same.

And again, we hear a great deal at present, and I do not desire that
we should hear less, about social and economic and political
changes, which some eager enthusiasts suppose will bring the
millennium. Well, if the land were nationalised, and all 'the means
of production and distribution' were nationalised, and everybody got
his share, and we were all brought to the communistic condition,
what then? That would not make men better, in the deepest sense of
the word. The fact is, these people are beginning at the wrong end.
You cannot better humanity merely by altering its environment for
the better. Christianity reverses the process. It begins with the
inmost man, and it works outwards to the circumference, and that is
the thorough way. Why! suppose you took a company of people out of
the slums, for instance, and put them into a model lodging-house,
how long will it continue a model? They will take their dirty habits
with them, and pull down the woodwork for firing, and in a very
short time make the place where they are as like as possible to the
hovel whence they came. You must change the men, and then you can
change their circumstances, or rather they will change them for
themselves. Now, all this is not to be taken as casting cold water
on any such efforts to improve matters, but only as a protest
against its being supposed that these _alone_ are sufficient to
rectify the ills and cure the sorrows of humanity. 'Ye have healed
the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly.' The patient is
dying of cancer, and you are treating him for a skin disease. It is
Jesus Christ alone who can cure the sins, and therein the sorrows,
of humanity.

III. Lastly, we are not all healed.

That is only too plain. All the sick in the crowd round Christ were
sent away well, but the gifts He bestowed so broadcast had no
relation to their spiritual natures, and gifts that have relation to
our spiritual nature cannot be thus given in entire disregard of our
actions in the matter.

Christ cannot heal you unless you take His healing power. He did on
earth sometimes, though not often, cure physical disease without the
requirement of faith on the part of the healed person or his
friends, but He cannot (He would if He could) do so in regard to the
disease of sin. There, unless a man goes to Him, and trusts Him, and
submits his spirit to the operation of Christ's pardoning and
hallowing grace, there cannot be any remedy applied, nor any cure
effected. That is no limitation of the universal power of the
Gospel. It is only saying that if you do not take the medicine you
cannot expect that it will do you any good, and surely that is plain
common-sense. There are plenty of people who fancy that Christ's
healing and saving power will, somehow or other, reach every man,
apart from the man's act. It is all a delusion, brethren. If it
could it would. But if salvation could be thus given, independent of
the man, it would come down to a mere mechanical thing, and would
not be worth the having. So I say, first, if you will not take the
medicine you cannot get the cure.

I say, second, if you do not feel that you are ill you will not take
the medicine. A man crippled with lameness, or tortured with fever,
or groping in the daylight and blind, or deaf to all the sounds of
this sweet world, could not but know that he was a subject for the
healing. But the awful thing about our disease is that the worse you
are the less you know it; and that when conscience ought to be
speaking loudest it is quieted altogether, and leaves a man often
perfectly at peace, so that after he has done evil things he wipes
his mouth and says, 'I have done no harm.'

So, dear brethren, let me plead with you not to put away these poor
words that I have been saying to you, and not to be contented until
you have recognised what is true, that you--_you_, stand a
sinful man before God.

There is surely no madness comparable to the madness of the man that
prefers to keep his sin and die, rather than go to Christ and live.
We all neglect to take up many good things that we might have if we
would, but no other neglect is a thousandth part so insane as that
of the man who clings to his evil and spurns the Lord. Will you look
into your own hearts? Will you recognise that awful solemn law of
God which ought to regulate all our doings, and, alas! has been so
often neglected, and so often transgressed by each of us? Oh! if
once you saw yourselves as you are, you would turn to Him and say,
'Heal me'; and you would be healed, and He would lay His hand upon
you. If only you will go, sick and broken, to Him, and trust in His
great sacrifice, and open your hearts to the influx of His healing
power, He will give you 'perfect soundness'; and your song will be,
'Bless the Lord, O my soul.... Who forgiveth all thine iniquities;
who healeth thy diseases.'

May it be so with each of us!




CHRIST'S CROSS AND OURS


    'And it came to pass, as He was alone praying, His
    disciples were with Him; and He asked them, saying,
    Whom say the people that I am I 19. They answering,
    said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and
    others say, that one of the old prophets is risen
    again. 20. He said unto them, But whom say ye that I
    am? Peter answering, said, The Christ of God. 21. And
    He straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell
    no man that thing; 22. Saying, The Son of man must
    suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders,
    and chief priests, and scribes, and be slain, and be
    raised the third day. 23. And He said to them all, If
    any man will come after Me. let him deny himself, and
    take up his cross daily, and follow Me. 24. For
    whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but
    whosoever will  lose his life for My sake, the same
    shall save it. 25. For what is a man advantaged, if he
    gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast
    away? 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of Me, and of
    My words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when
    He shall come in His own glory, and in His Father's,
    and of the holy angels. 27. But I tell you of a truth,
    there be some standing here, which shall not taste of
    death, till they see the kingdom of God.'--Luke ix. 18-27.

This passage falls into three distinct but closely connected parts:
the disciples' confession of Christ by Peters mouth, the revelation
to them of Christ's sufferings as necessarily involved in His
Messiahship, and His extension to them of the law of suffering as
necessarily involved in discipleship. Luke dwells much more lightly
than Matthew on the first of these stages, omitting the eulogium and
benediction on Simon Bar-Jona, and the great words about the rock on
which the Church is built, but he retains the essentials, and
emphasises the connection of the three parts by his very brevity in
regard to the first.

I. Luke has special interest in recording Christ's prayers, and
though he does not tell us where the great confession was made, he
tells what Jesus did before it was made. We may well suppose that
His solitary thoughts had been busied with the sufferings on which
He was soon to enter, and that His resolve to impart the knowledge
of these to His followers was felt by Him to be a sharp trial of
their loyalty. The moment was a fateful one. How should fateful
moments be prepared for but by communion with the Father? No doubt
the feebleness of the disciples was remembered in His petitions.

Jesus' double question was intended, first, to make the disciples
feel the gulf which separated them from the rest of the nation, and
so to make them hold the faster by their unshared faith, and be
ready to suffer for it, if needful, as probably it would be. It
braces true men to know that they are but a little company in the
midst of multitudes who laugh at their belief. That Jesus should
have seen that it was safe to accentuate the disciples' isolation
indicates the reality which He discerned in their faith, imperfect
as it was.

'Whom say ye that I am?' Jesus brings them to articulate utterance
of the thought that had been slowly gathering distinctness in their
minds. We see our beliefs more clearly, and hold them more firmly,
when we put them into definite words. The question acted like a
chemical element dropped into a solution, which precipitates its
solid matter. Nebulous opinions are gathered up into spheres of
light by the process of speaking them. That question is all-important
for us. Our conceptions of Christ's nature and office determine our
relation to Him and our whole cast of life. True, we may say that He
is Lord, and not be His disciples, but we are not His disciples as He
would have us unless His Messiahship stands out clear and axiomatic
in our thoughts of Him. The conviction must pass into feeling, and
thence into life, but it must underlie all real discipleship.
Doctrine is not Christianity, but it is the foundation of
Christianity. The Apostolic confession here is the 'irreducible
minimum' of the Christian creed.

It does not contain more than Nathanael had said at the beginning,
but here it is spoken, not as Peter's private belief, but he is the
mouthpiece of all. 'Whether it were I or they, so we' believe. This
confession summed up the previous development of the disciples, and
so marked the end of one stage and the beginning of another. Christ
would have them, as it were, take stock of their convictions, as
preliminary to opening a new chapter of teaching.

II. That new chapter follows at once. The belief in Him as Messiah
is the first story of the building, and the second is next piled on
it. The new lesson was a hard one for men whose hopes were coloured
by Jewish dreams of a kingdom. They had to see all these vulgar
visions melting away, and to face a stern, sad reality. The very
fact that He was the Messiah necessarily drew after it the fact of
suffering. Whence did the 'must' arise? From the divine purpose,
from the necessities of the case, and the aim of His mission. These
had shaped prophetic utterances, and hence there was yet another
form of the 'must,' namely, the necessity for the Messiah's
fulfilling these predictions.

No doubt our Lord led His saddened listeners to many a prophetic
saying which current expositions had smoothed over, but which had
for many years set before Him His destiny. What a scene that would
be--the victim calmly pointing to the tragic words which flashed
ominous new meanings to the silent hearers, stricken with awe and
grief as the terrible truth entered their minds! What had become of
their dreams? Gone, and in their place shame and death. They had
fancied a throne; the vision melted into a cross.

We note the minute particularity of Jesus' delineation, and the
absolute certainty in His plain declaration of the fact and time of
the Resurrection. It is not wonderful that that declaration should
have produced little effect. The disciples were too much absorbed
and confounded by the dismal thought of His death to have ears for
the assurance of His Resurrection. Comfort coming at the end of the
announcement of calamities so great finds no entrance into, nor room
in, the heart. We all let a black foreground hide from us a brighter
distance.

III. The Master's feet mark the disciples' path. If suffering was
involved in Messiahship, it is no less involved in discipleship. The
cross which is our hope is also our pattern. In a very real sense we
have to be partakers of the sufferings of Christ, and no faith in
these as substitutionary is vital unless it leads to being conformed
to His death. The solemn verses at the close of this lesson draw out
the law of Christian self-denial as being inseparable from true
discipleship.

Verse 23 lays down the condition of following Jesus as being the
daily bearing, by each, of his own cross. Mark that self-denial is
not prescribed for its own sake, but simply as the means of
'following.' False asceticism insists on it, as if it were an end;
Christ treats it as a means. Mark, too, that it is 'self' which is
to be denied--not this or that part of our nature, but the central
'self.' The will is the man, and _it_ is to be brought into
captivity to Jesus, so that the true Christian says, 'I live; yet
not I, but Christ liveth in me.' That is much deeper, harder,
wholesomer teaching than separate austerities or forsakings of this
or that.

Verse 24 grounds this great requirement on the broad principle that
to make self the main object of life is the sure way to ruin
oneself, and that to slay self is the road to true life. Note that
it is he who '_would_ save' his life that loses it, because the
desire is itself fatal, whether carried out or not; while it is he
who _does_ 'lose' his life for Christ that preserves it,
because even if the extreme evil has been suffered, the possession
of our true lives is not imperilled thereby. No doubt the words
refer primarily to literal death, and threaten the cowards who
sacrifice their convictions for the sake of keeping a whole skin
with the failure of their efforts, while they promise the martyr
dying in the arena or at the stake a crown of life. But they go far
beyond that. They carry the great truth that to hug self and to make
its preservation our first aim is ruinous, and the corresponding
one, that to slay self for Christ's sake is to receive a better
self. Self-preservation is suicide; self-immolation is not only
self-preservation, but self-glorification with glory caught from
Jesus. Give yourselves to Him, and He gives you back to yourselves,
ennobled and transfigured.

Verse 25 urges obedience to the precept, by an appeal to reasonable
self-regard and common-sense. The abnegation enjoined does not
require that we should be indifferent to our own well-being. It is
right to consider what will 'profit,' and to act accordingly. The
commercial view of life, if rightly taken, with regard to all a
man's nature through all the duration of it, will coincide
accurately with the most exalted. It 'pays' to follow Christ.
Christian morality has not the hypersensitive fear of appealing to
self-interest which superfine moralists profess nowadays. And the
question in verse 25 admits of only one answer, for what good is the
whole world to a dead man? If our accounts are rightly kept, a world
gained shows poorly on the one side, against the entry on the other
of a soul lost.

Verse 26 tells in what that losing oneself consists, and enforces
the original exhortation by the declaration of a future appearance
of the Son of man. He of whom Christ is then ashamed loses his own
soul. To live without His smile is to die, to be disowned by Him is
to be a wreck. To be ashamed of Jesus is equivalent to that base
self-preservation which has been denounced as fatal. If a man
disavows all connection with Him, He will disavow all connection
with the disavower. A man separated from Jesus is dead while he
lives, and hereafter will live a living death, and possess neither
the world for which he sacrificed his own soul nor the soul for
which he sacrificed it.

We cannot but note the authoritative tone of our Lord in these
verses. He claims the obedience and discipleship of all men. He
demands that all shall yield themselves unreservedly to Him, and
that, even if actual surrender of life is involved, it shall be
gladly given. He puts our relation to Him as determining our whole
present and future. He assumes to be our Judge, whose smile is life,
whose averted face darkens the destiny of a man. Whom say ye that He
who dared to speak thus conceived Himself to be? Whom say ye that He
is?

Verse 27 recalls us from the contemplation of that far-off
appearance to something nearer. Remembering the previous
announcement of our Lord's sufferings, these words seem intended to
cheer the disciples with the hope that the kingdom would still be
revealed within the lifetime of some then present. Remembering the
immediately preceding words, this saying seems to assure the
disciples that the blessed recompense of the life of self-crucifying
discipleship is not to be postponed to that future, but may be
enjoyed on earth. Remembering Christ's word, 'Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God,' we doubt whether there is
any reference here to the destruction of Jerusalem, as is commonly
understood. Are not the words rather a declaration that they who are
Christ's true disciples shall even here enter into the possession of
their true selves, and find the Messianic hopes more than fulfilled?
The future indicated will then be no more remote than the completion
of His work by His death and Resurrection, or, at the farthest, the
descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, by which the fuller life of
renewed natures was bestowed on those who were following Jesus in
daily self-surrender.




PRAYER AND TRANSFIGURATION


    'And as He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was
    altered.'--LUKE ix. 29.

This Evangelist is especially careful to record the instances of our
Lord's prayers. That is in accordance with the emphasis which he
places on Christ's manhood. In this narrative of the Transfiguration
it is to Luke that we owe our knowledge of the connection between
our Lord's prayer and the radiance of His face. It may be a question
how far such transfiguration was the constant accompaniment of our
Lord's devotion. It is to be remembered that this is the only time
at which others were present while He prayed, and perhaps it may be
that whensoever, on the mountain top or in the solitude of the
wilderness, He entered into closer communion with His heavenly
Father, that radiance shone from His face, though no eye beheld and
no tongue has recorded the glory.

But that is a mere supposition. However that may be, it would seem
that the light on Christ's face was not merely a reflection caught
from above, but it was also a rising up from within of what always
abode there, though it did not always shine through the veil of
flesh. And in so far it presents no parallel with anything in our
experience, nor any lesson for us. But to regard our Lord's
Transfiguration as only the result of the indwelling divinity
manifested is to construe only one half of the fact that we have to
deal with, and the other half does afford for us a precious lesson.
'As He prayed the fashion of His countenance was altered'; and as we
pray, and in the measure in which we truly and habitually do hold
communion, shall we, too, partake of His Transfiguration.

The old story of the light that flashed upon the face of the
Lawgiver, caught by reflection from the light of God in which He
walked, is a partial parallel to Christ's Transfiguration, and both
the one and the other incident, amongst their other lessons, do also
point to some mysterious and occult relation between the indwelling
soul and the envious veil of flesh which, under certain
circumstances, might become radiant with the manifestation of that
indwelling power.

I. The one great lesson which I seek now to enforce from this
incident is, that communion with God transfigures.

Prayer is more than petitions. It is not necessarily cast into words
at all. In its widest, which is its truest sense, it is the attitude
and exercise of devout contemplation of God and intercourse in
heart, mind, and will with Him, a communion which unites aspiration
and attainment, longing and fruition, asking and receiving, seeking
and finding, a communion which often finds itself beggared for
words, and sometimes even seems to transcend thought. How different
is such an hour of rapt communion with the living God from the
miserable notions which so many professing Christians have of
prayer, as if it were but spoken requests, more or less fervent and
sincere, for things that they want! The noblest communion of a soul
with God can never be free from the consciousness of need and
dependence. Petition must ever be an element in it, but supplication
is only a corner of prayer. Such conscious converse with God is the
very atmosphere in which the Christian soul should always live, and
if it be an experience altogether strange to us we had better ask
ourselves whether we yet know the realities of the Christian life,
or have any claim to the name. 'Truly, our fellowship is with the
Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ,' and if we have no share in
that fellowship we do not belong to the class of whom it is the mark
and possession.

Of course, such communion is not to be attained or maintained without
effort. Sense wars against it. Tasks which are duties interrupt the
enjoyment of it in its more conscious forms. The hard-working man
may well say, 'How can I, with my business cares calling--for my
undivided attention all day long, keep up such communion?' The
toiling mother may well say, 'How can I, in my little house, with my
children round me, and never a quiet minute to myself, get such?'
True, it is hard, and the highest and sweetest forms of communion
cannot be reached by us while so engaged, and therefore we all need
seasons of solitude and repose, in which, being left alone, we may
see the Great Vision, and, the clank of the engines being silenced,
we may hear the Great Voice saying, 'Come up hither.' Such seasons
the busiest have on one day in every week, and such seasons we shall
contrive to secure for ourselves daily, if we really want to be
intimate with our heavenly Friend.

And for the rest it is not impossible to have real communion with
God in the midst of anxious cares and absorbing duties; it is
possible to be like the nightingales, that sing loudest in the trees
by the dusty roadsides, possible to be in the very midst of anxiety
and worldly work, and yet to keep our hearts in heaven and in touch
with God. We do not need many words for communion, but we do need to
make efforts to keep ourselves near Him in desire and aspiration,
and we need jealous and constant watchfulness over our motives for
work, and our temper and aim in it, that neither the work nor our
way of doing it may draw us away. There will be breaches in the
continuity of our conscious communion, but there need not be any in
the reality of our touch with God. For He can be with us, 'like some
sweet, beguiling melody, so sweet we know not we are listening to
it.' There may be a real contact of the spirit with Him, though it
would be hard at the moment to put it into words.

'As He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered.' Such
communion changes and glorifies a man. The very secret of the Gospel
way of making men better is--transfiguration by the vision of God.
Yes! to be much with God is the true way to mend our characters, and
to make them like His. I do not under-value the need of effort in
order to correct faults and acquire virtues. We do not receive
sanctification as we receive justification, by simple faith. For the
latter the condition is 'Only believe,' for the former it is 'Work
out your own salvation.' No man is cured of his evil tendencies
without a great deal of hard work conscientiously directed to
curbing them.

But all the hard work, and all the honest purpose in the world, will
not do it without this other thing, the close communion with God,
and incomparably the surest way to change what in us is wrong, and
to raise what in us is low, and to illumine what in us is dark, is
to live in habitual beholding of Him who is righteousness without
flaw, and holiness supreme, and light without any darkness at all.
That will cure faults. That will pull the poison fangs out of
passions. That will do for the evil in us what the snake-charmers do
by subtle touches, turn the serpent into a rigid rod that does not
move nor sting. That will lift us up high above the trifles of life,
and dwarf all here that imposes upon us with the lie that it is
great, and precious, and permanent; and that will bring us into
loving contact with the living 'Beauty of holiness,' which will
change us into its own fair likeness.

We see illustrations of this transforming power of loving communion
in daily life. People that love each other, and live beside each
other, and are often thinking about one another, get to drop into
each other's ways of looking at things; and even sometimes you will
catch strange imitations and echoes of the face and voice, in two
persons thus knit together. And if you and I are bound to God by a
love which lasts, even when it does not speak, and which is with us
even when our hands are busy with other things, then be sure of
this, we shall get like Him whom we love. We shall be like Him even
here, for even here we shall see Him. Partial assimilation is the
condition of vision; and the vision is the condition of growing
assimilation. The eye would not see the sun unless there were a
little sun imaged on the retina. And a man that sees God gets like
the God he sees; 'for we all, with unveiled face, beholding as in a
glass (or, rather, mirroring as a glass does) the glory of God, are
changed into the same image.' The image on the mirror is only on the
surface; but if my heart is mirroring God He sinks in, and abides
there, and changes me from glory to glory. So it is when we keep
near Christ, who is manifest in the flesh, that we get liker Him day
by day, and the fashion of our countenances will be altered.

Now there is a test for our Christianity. Does my religion alter me?
If it does not, what right or reason have I to believe that it is
genuine at all? Is there a process of purifying going on in my
inward nature? Am I getting any more like Jesus Christ than I was
ten years ago? I say I live with Him and by Him. If I do I shall
become like Him. Do not work at the hopeless task of purifying
yourselves without His help, but go and stay in the sun if you want
to get warm. Lo as the bleachers do, spread the foul cloth on the
green grass, below the blazing sunshine, and that will take all the
dirt out. Believing and loving, and holding fast by Jesus Christ in
true communion, we, too, become like Him we love.

II. Another thought is suggested by these words--namely, that this
transfiguring will become very visible in the life if it be really
in our inmost selves.

Even in the most literal sense of the words it will be so. Did you
never see anybody whose face was changed by holier and nobler
purposes coming into their lives? I have seen more than one or two
whose features became as the face of an angel as they grew more and
more unselfish, and more and more full of that which, in the  most
literal sense of the words, was in them the beauty of holiness. The
devil writes his mark upon people's faces. The world and the flesh
do so. Go into the streets and look at the people that you meet.
Care, envy, grasping griping avarice, discontent, unrest, blotches
of animalism, and many other prints of black fingers are plain
enough on many a face. And on the other hand, if a man or a woman
get into their hearts the refining influences of God's grace and
love by living near the Master, very soon the beauty of expression
which is born of consecration and unselfishness, the irradiation of
lofty emotions, the tenderness caught from Him, will not be lacking,
and some eyes that look upon them will recognise the family
likeness.

But that may be said to be mere fancy. Perhaps it is, or perhaps
there is truth in it deeper and more far-reaching than we know.
Perhaps the life fashions the body, and the 'body of our glory' may
be moulded in immortal loveliness by the perfect Christ-derived life
within it. But be that as it may, the main point to be observed here
is rather this. If we have the real, transforming influence of
communion with Jesus Christ in our hearts, it will certainly rise to
the surface, and show itself in our lives. As oil poured into water
will come to the top, so that inward transforming will not continue
hidden within, 'The king's daughter is all-glorious _within_,
but also 'her _clothing_ is of wrought gold.' The inward life,
beautiful because knit to Him, will have corresponding with it and
flowing from it an outward life of manifest holy beauty.

'His name shall be in their foreheads,' stamped there, where
everybody can see it. Is that where you and I carry Christ's name?
It is well that it should be in our hearts, it is hypocrisy that it
should be in our foreheads unless it is in our hearts first. But if
it be in the latter it will surely be in the former.

Now, dear friends, there is a simple and sure touchstone for us all.
Do not talk about communion with Christ being the life of your
religion, unless the people that have to do with you, your brothers
and sisters, or fathers and mothers, your wives and children, your
servants or your masters, would endorse it and say 'Yes! I take
knowledge of him, he has been with Jesus.' Do you think that it is
easier for anybody to believe in, and to love God, 'whom he hath not
seen' because of you, 'his brother whom he hath seen'? The Christ in
the heart will be the Christ in the face and in the life.

Alas! why is it that so little of this radiance caught from heaven
shines from us? There is but one answer. It is because our communion
with God in Christ is so infrequent, hurried, and superficial. We
should be like those luminous boxes which we sometimes see, shining
in the dark with light absorbed from the day; but, like them, we
need to be exposed to the light and to lie in it if we are to be
light. 'Now are ye light in the Lord,' and only as we abide in Him
by continuous communion shall we resemble Him or reflect Him.

III. The perfection of communion will be the perfection of visible
transformation.

Possibly the Transfiguration of Jesus Christ had an element of
prophecy in it, and pointed onwards to the order of things when His
glorified humanity should be enthroned on the throne of the
universe, and have left the limitations of flesh with the folded
grave-clothes in the empty sepulchre. As the two majestic forms of
the Lawgiver and the Prophet shared His glory on Hermon, and held
converse with Him there, so we may see in that mysterious group
wrapped in the bright cloud the hint of a hope which was destined to
grow to clearness and certainty. Christ's glorified bodily humanity
is the type to which all His followers will be conformed. Gazing on
Him they shall be like Him, and will grow liker as they gaze.
Through eternal ages the double process will go on, and they shall
become ever more assimilated, and therefore capable of truer,
completer vision, and ever seeing Him more fully as He is, and
therefore progressively changed into more perfect resemblance. Nor
will that blessed change into advancing glory be shut up in their
hearts nor lack beholders. For in that realm of truth and reality
all that is within will be visible, our life will no longer fall
beneath our aspirations, nor practice be at variance with the
longings and convictions of our best selves. Then the Christlike
spirit will possess a body which is its glad and perfect servant,
and through which its beauty will shine undimmed. 'When Christ, who
is our life, shall be manifested, then shall we also be manifested
with Him in glory.'




'IN THE HOLY MOUNT'


    'And, behold, there talked with Him two men, which
    were Moses and Elias: 31. Who appeared in glory, and
    spake of His decease which He should accomplish at
    Jerusalem.'--LUKE ix. 30, 31.

The mysterious incident which is commonly called the Transfiguration
contained three distinct portions, each having its own special
significance and lesson. The first was that supernatural change in
the face and garments of our Lord from which the whole incident
derives its name. The second was the appearance by His side of these
two mighty dead participating in the strange lustre in which He
walked, and communing with Him of His death. And the last was the
descent of the bright cloud, visible as bright even amidst the
blazing sunshine on the lone hillside, and the mysterious attesting
Voice that spoke from out of its depths.

I leave untouched altogether the first and the last of these three
portions, and desire briefly to fix our attention on this central
one. Now it is to be observed that whilst all the three Synoptic
Evangelists tell us of the Transfiguration, of the appearance of
Moses and Elias, and of the Cloud and the Voice, only Luke  knows,
or at least records, and therefore alone probably knows, what it was
that they spoke of. Peter and James and John, the only human
witnesses, were lying dazed and drunken with sleep, whilst Christ's
countenance was changed; and during all the earlier portion at all
events of His converse with Moses and Elias. And it was only when
these were about to depart that the mortals awoke from their
slumber. So they probably neither heard the voices nor knew their
theme, and it was reserved for this Evangelist to tell us the
precious truth that the thing about which Lawgiver, Prophet, and the
Greater than both spake in that mysterious communion was none other
than the Cross.

I think, then, that if we look at this incident from the point of
view which our Evangelist enables us to take, we shall get large and
important lessons as to the significance of the death of Jesus
Christ, in many aspects, and in reference to very many different
persons. I see at least four of these. This incident teaches us what
Christ's death was to Himself; what it was in reference to previous
revelation; what it was in reference to past generations; and what
it may be in reference to His servants' death. And upon these four
points I desire briefly to touch now.

I. First, then, I see here teaching as to what the death of the Lord
Jesus Christ was in reference to Himself.

What was it that brought these men--the one who had passed in a
whirlwind to heaven, and the other who had been led by a mysterious
death to slumber in an unknown grave--what was it that brought these
men to stand there upon the side of the slopes of Hermon? It was not
to teach Christ of the impending Cross. For, not to touch upon other
points, eight days before this mysterious interview He had foretold
it in the minutest details to His disciples. It was not for the sake
of Peter and James and John, lying coiled in slumber there, that
they broke the bands of death, and came back from 'that bourne from
which no traveller returns,' but it was for Christ, or for
themselves, or perhaps for both, that they stood there.

You remember that in Gethsemane 'there appeared an angel from heaven
strengthening Him.' And one of the old devout painters has
marvellously embraced the deepest meaning of that vision when he has
painted for us the strengthening angel displaying in the heavens the
Cross on which He must die, as if the holding of it up before Him as
the divine will gave the strength that He needed. And I think in
some analogous way we are to regard the mission and message to Jesus
of these two men in our text. We know that clear before Him, all His
life long, there stood the certainty of the Cross. We know that He
came, not merely to teach, to minister, to bless, to guide, but that
He came to give His life a ransom for many. But we know, too, that
from about this point of time in His life the Cross stood more
distinctly, if that may be, before Him; or at all events, that it
pressed more upon His vision and upon His spirit. And doubtless
after that time when He spoke to the disciples so plainly and
clearly of what was coming upon Him, His human nature needed the
retirement of the mountain-side and prayer which preceded and
occasioned this mysterious incident. Christ shrank from His Cross
with sinless, natural, human shrinking of the flesh. That never
altered His purpose nor shook His will, but He needed, and He got,
strength from the Father, ministered once by an angel from heaven,
and ministered, as I suppose, another time by two men who looked at
death from the other side, and 'who spoke to Him of His decease
which He should accomplish at Jerusalem.'

And now it is to be noticed that the words which our Evangelist
employs are remarkable, and one of them, at least, is all but
unique. The expression translated in my text 'decease' is the same
Greek word which, untranslated, names the second book of the Old
Testament--_Exodus_. And it literally means neither more nor
less than a departure or 'going out.' It is only employed in this
one passage and in another one to which I shall have occasion to
refer presently, which is evidently based and moulded upon this one,
to signify _death_. And the employment of it, perhaps upon
these undying tongues of the sainted dead--or, at all events, in
reference to the subject of their colloquy--seems to us to suggest
that part of what they had to say to the Master and what they had to
hear from Him was that His death was His departure in an altogether
unique, solitary, and blessed sense. 'I came forth from the Father,
and I am come into the world. Again, I leave the world and go to the
Father.' Not dragged by any necessity, but of His own sovereign
will, He passes from earth to the state where He was before. And as
He stands there on the mountain with His radiant face and His white
robes, this thought as to His death brings to Him comfort and
strength, even whilst He thinks of the suffering of the Cross.

But, still further, the other word which is here employed helps us
to understand what our Lord's death was to Him; 'He should
_accomplish_' it as a thing to be fulfilled. And that involves
two ideas, the one that Christ in His death was consciously
submitting to a gladly accepted divine _must_, and was accomplishing
the purpose of Love which dwelt in the heavens and sent Him, as well
as His own purpose of love which would redeem and save. The necessity
of the death of Christ if sin is to be put away, if we are ever to have
a hope of immortality, the necessity of the death of Christ if the
mercy of God is to pour out upon a sinful and rebellious world, the
necessity of the death of Christ, if the deep purposes of the divine
heart are ever to be realised, and the yearning compassion of the
Saviour's soul is ever to reach its purpose--all lie in that great
word that 'His decease' was by Him to be 'accomplished.' This is the
fulfilling of the heart of God, this is the fulfilling of the
compassion of the Christ. It is the accomplishment of the divine
purpose from eternity.

Still further, the word, as I think, suggests another kind of
fulfilment. He was to 'accomplish' His death. That is to say, every
drop of that bitter cup, drop by drop, bitterness by bitterness,
pang by pang, desolation by desolation, He was to drink; and He
drank it. Every step of that road sown with ploughshares and live
coals He was to tread, with bleeding, blistered, slow, unshrinking
feet. And He trod it. He _accomplished_ it; hurrying over none
of the sorrow, perfunctorily doing none of the tasks. And after the
weary moments had ticked themselves away, and the six hours of
agony, when the minutes were as drops of blood falling slowly to the
ground, were passed, He inverted the cup, and it was empty, and He
said 'It is finished'; and He gave up the ghost, having
accomplished His decease in Jerusalem.'

II. Further, note in this incident what that death is in regard to
previous revelation.

I need not remind you, I suppose, that we have here the two great
representative figures of the past history of Israel--the Lawgiver,
who, according to the Old Testament, was not only the medium of
declaring the divine will, but the medium of establishing Sacrifice
as well as Law, and the Prophet, who, though no written words of his
have been preserved, and nothing of a predictive and Messianic
character seems to have dropped from His lips, yet stood as the
representative and head of the great prophetic order to which so
much of the earlier revelation was entrusted. And now here they two
stand with Christ on the mountain; and the theme about which they
spake with Him there is the theme of which the former revelation had
