love, that the Master knew them; but to the faithful souls in
Philadelphia, and to the few in Sardis, who 'had not defiled their
garments,' it was blessedness and life to feel that they walked in the
sunshine of His face.

Is there any joy to us in the thought that the Lord Christ sees us? Oh!
if our hearts are really His, if our lives are as truly built on Him as
our profession of being Christians alleges that they are, then all that
we need for the satisfaction of our nature, for the supply of our
various necessities, or as an armour against temptation, and an amulet
against sorrow, will be given to us, in the belief that His eye is
fixed upon us. _There_ is the foundation of the truest joy for men.
'There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift Thou up
the light of Thy countenance upon us. Thou hast put gladness in my
heart more than in the time when their corn and their wine abound.' One
look _towards_ Christ will more than repay and abolish earth's sorrow.
One look _from_ Christ will fill our hearts with sunshine. All tears
are dried on eyes that meet His. Loving hearts find their heaven in
looking into one another's faces, and if Christ be our love, our
deepest and purest joys will be found in His glance and our answering
gaze.

If one could anyhow take a bit of the Arctic world and float it down
into the tropics, the ice would all melt, and the white dreariness
would disappear, and a new splendour of colour and of light would
clothe the ground, and an unwonted vegetation would spring up where
barrenness had been. And if you and I will only float our lives
southward beneath the direct vertical rays of that great 'Sun of
Righteousness,' then all the dreary winter and ice of our sorrows will
melt, and joy will spring. Brother! the Christian life is a glad life,
because Christ, the infinite and incarnate Lover of our souls, looks
upon the heart that loves and trusts Him.

III. Still further, note how our Lord here sets forth His disciples'
joy as beyond the reach of violence and independent of externals.

'No man taketh it from you.' Of course, that refers primarily to the
opposition and actual hostility of the persecuting world, which that
handful of frightened men were very soon to face; and our Lord assures
them here that, whatsoever the power of the devil working through the
world may be able to filch away from them, it cannot filch away the joy
that He gives. But we may extend the meaning beyond that reference.

Much of our joy, of course, depends upon our fellows, and disappears
when they fade away from our sight and we struggle along in a solitude,
made the more dreary because of remembered companionship. And much of
our joy depends upon the goodwill and help of our fellows, and they can
snatch away all that so depends. They can hedge up our road and make it
uncomfortable and sad for us in many ways, but no man but myself can
put a roof over my head to shut me out from God and Christ; and as long
as I have a clear sky overhead, it matters very little how high may be
the walls that foes or hostile circumstances pile around me, and how
close they may press upon me. And much of our joy necessarily depends
upon and fluctuates with external circumstances of a hundred different
kinds, as we all only too well know. But we do not need to have all our
joy fed from these surface springs. We may dig deeper down if we like.
If we are Christians, we have, like some beleaguered garrison in a
fortress, a well in the courtyard that nobody can get at, and which
never can run dry. 'Your joy no man taketh from you.'

As long as we have Christ, we cannot be desolate. If He and I were
alone in the universe, or, paradoxical as it may sound, if He and I
were alone, and the universe were not, I should have all that I needed
and my joy would be full, if I loved Him as I ought to do.

So, my brother! let us see to it that we dig deep enough for the
foundation of our blessedness, and that it is on Christ and nothing
less infinite, less eternal, less unchangeable, that we repose for the
inward blessedness which nothing outside of us can touch. That is the
blessedness which we may all possess, 'For I am persuaded that neither
death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us' from the eye and the heart of
the risen Christ who lives for us. But remember, though externals have
no power to rob us of our joy, they have a very formidable power to
interfere with the cultivation of that faith, which is the essential
condition of our joy. They cannot force us away from Christ, but they
may tempt us away. The sunshine did for the traveller in the old fable
what the storm could not do; and the world may cause you to think so
much about it that you forget your Master. Its joys may compel Him to
hide His face, and may so fill your eyes that you do not care to look
at His face; and so the sweet bond may be broken, and the consciousness
of a living, loving Jesus may fade, and become filmy and unsubstantial,
and occasional and interrupted. Do you see to it that what the world
cannot do by violence and directly, it does not do by its harlot kisses
and its false promises, tempting you away from the paths where alone
you can meet your Master.

IV. Lastly, note that this life of joy, which our Lord here speaks of,
is made certain by the promise of a faithful Christ.

'Verily, verily, I say unto you,'--He was accustomed to use that
impressive and solemn formula, when He was about to speak words beyond
the reach of human wisdom to discover, or of prime importance for men
to accept and believe. He tells these men, who had nothing but His bare
word to rely upon, that the astonishing thing which He is going to
promise them will certainly come to pass. He would encourage them to
rest an unfaltering confidence, for the brief parenthesis of sorrow,
upon His faithful promise of joy. He puts His own character, so to
speak, in pawn. His words are precisely equivalent in meaning to the
solemn Old Testament words which are represented as being the oath of
God, 'As I live saith the Lord,' 'You may be as sure of this thing as
you are of My divine existence, for all My divine Being is pledged to
you to bring it about.' 'Verily, verily, I say unto you,' 'You may be
as sure of this thing as you are of Me, for all that I am is pledged to
fulfil the words of My lips.'

So Christ puts His whole truthfulness at stake, as it were; and if any
man who has ever loved Jesus Christ and trusted Him aright has not
found this 'joy unspeakable and full of glory,' then Jesus Christ has
said the thing that is not.

Then why is it that so many professing Christians have such joyless
lives as they have? Simply because they do not keep the conditions. If
we will love Him so as to set our hearts upon Him, if we will desire
Him as our chief good, if we will keep our eyes fixed upon Him, then,
as sure as He is living and is the Truth, He will flood our hearts with
blessedness, and His joy will pour into our souls as the flashing tide
rushes into some muddy and melancholy harbour, and sets everything
dancing that was lying stranded on the slime. If, my brother, you, a
professing Christian, know but little of this joy, why, then, it is
_your_ fault, and not _His_. The joyless lives of so many who say that
they are His disciples cast no shadow of suspicion upon His veracity,
but they do cast a very deep shadow of doubt upon their profession of
faith in Him.

Is your religion joyful? Is your joy religious? The two questions go
together. And if we cannot answer these questions in the light of God's
eye as we ought to do, let these great promises and my text prick us
into holier living, into more consistent Christian character, and a
closer walk with our Master and Lord.

The out-and-out Christian is a joyful Christian. The half-and-half
Christian is the kind of Christian that a great many of you are--little
acquainted with 'the joy of the Lord.' Why should we live half way up
the hill and swathed in mists, when we might have an unclouded sky and
a visible sun over our heads, if we would only climb higher and walk in
the light of His face?



'IN THAT DAY'

'And in that day ye shall ask Me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My name, He will give it
you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My name: ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.'--JOHN xvi. 23, 24.

Our Lord here sums up the prerogatives and privileges of His servants
in the day that was about to dawn and to last till He came again. There
is nothing absolutely new in the words; substantially the promises
contained in them have appeared in former parts of these discourses
under somewhat different aspects and connections. But our Lord brings
them together here, in this condensed repetition, in order that the
scattered rays, being thus focussed, may have more power to illuminate
with certitude, and to warm into hope. 'Ye shall ask Me nothing.... Ask
and ye shall receive.... Your joy shall be full.' These are the jewels
which He sets in a cluster, the juxtaposition making each brighter, and
gives to us for a parting keepsake.

Now it is to be noticed that the two askings which are spoken of here
are expressed by different words in the Greek. Our English word 'ask'
means two things, either to question or to request; to ask in the sense
of interrogating, in order to get information and teaching, or in the
sense of beseeching, in order to get gifts. In the former sense the
word is employed in the first clause of my text, with distinct
reference to the disciples' desire, a moment or two before, to ask Him
a very foolish question; and in the second sense it is employed in the
central portion of my text.

So, then, there are three things here as the marks of the Christian
life all through the ages: the cessation of the ignorant questions
addressed to a present Christ; the satisfaction of desires; and the
perfecting of joy. These are the characteristics of a true Christian
life. My brother, are they in any degree the characteristics of yours?

I. Note then, first, the end of questionings.

'In that day ye shall ask Me nothing,' and do not you think that when
the disciples heard that, they would be tempted to say, 'Then what in
all the world are we to do?' To them the thought that He was not to be
at their sides any longer, for them to go to with their difficulties,
must have seemed despair rather than advance; but in Christ's eyes it
was progress. He tells them and us that we gain by losing Him, and are
better off than they were, precisely because He does not any longer
stand at our sides for us to question. It is better for a boy to puzzle
out the meaning of a Latin book by his own brains and the help of a
dictionary than it is lazily to use an interlinear translation. And,
though we do not always feel it, and are often tempted to think how
blessed it would be if we had an infallible Teacher visible here at our
sides, it is a great deal better for us that we have not, and it is a
step in advance that He has gone away. Many eager and honest Christian
souls, hungering after certainty and rest, have cast themselves in
these latter days into the arms of an infallible Church. I doubt
whether any such questioning mind has found what it sought; and I am
sure that it has taken a step downwards, in passing from the spiritual
guidance realised by our own honest industry and earnest use of the
materials supplied to us in Christ's word, to any external authority
which comes to us to save us the trouble of thinking, and to confirm to
us truth which we have not made our own by search and effort. We gain
by losing the visible Christ; and He was proclaiming progress and not
retrogression, when He said: 'In that day ye shall ask Me no more
questions.'

For what have we instead? We have two things: a completed revelation,
and an inward Teacher.

We have a completed revelation. Great and wonderful and unspeakably
precious as were and are the words of Jesus Christ, His deeds are far
more. The death of Christ has told us things that Christ before His
death could not tell. The resurrection of Christ has cast light upon
all the darkest places of man's destiny which Christ, before His
resurrection, could not by any words so illuminate. The ascension of
Christ has opened doors for thought, for faith, for hope, which were
fast closed, notwithstanding all His teachings, until He had burst them
asunder and passed to His throne. And the facts which are substituted
for the bodily presence of Jesus with His disciples tell us a great
deal more than they could ever have drawn from Him by questionings,
however persistent and however wisely directed. We have a completed
revelation, and therefore we need 'ask Him nothing.'

And we have a divine Spirit that will come to us if we will, and teach
us by means of blessing the exercise of our own faculties, and guiding
us, not, indeed, into the uniform perception of the intellectual
aspects of Christian truth, but into the apprehension and the loving
possession, as a power in our lives, of all the truth that we need to
mould our characters and to raise us to the likeness of Himself.

Only, brother! let us remember what such a method of teaching demands
from us. It needs that we honestly use the revelation that is given us;
it needs that we loyally, lovingly, trustfully, submit ourselves to the
teaching of that Spirit who will dwell in us; it needs that we bring
our lives up to the height of our present knowledge, and make
everything that we know a factor in shaping what we do and what we are.
If thus we will to do His will, 'we shall know of the doctrine'; if
thus we yield ourselves to the divine Spirit, we shall be taught the
practical bearings of all essential truth; and if thus we ponder the
facts and principles that are enshrined in Christ's life, and the
Apostolic commentary on them, as preserved for us in the Scripture, we
shall not need to envy those that could go to Him with their questions,
for _He_ will come to us with His all-satisfying answers.

Ah! but you say experience does not verify these promises. Look at a
divided Christendom; look at my own difficulties of knowing what I am
to believe and to think. Well, as for a divided Christendom, saintly
souls are all of one Church, and however they may formulate the
intellectual aspects of their creed, when they come to pray, they say
the same things. Roman Catholic and Protestant, and Quaker and
Churchman, and Calvinist and Arminian, and Greek and Latin
Christians--all contribute to the hymn-book of every sect; and we all
sing their songs. So the divisions are like the surface cracks on a dry
field, and a few inches down there is continuity. As for the difficulty
of knowing what I am to believe and think about controverted questions,
no doubt there will remain many gaps in the circle of our knowledge; no
doubt there will be much left obscure and unanswered; but if we will
keep ourselves near the Master, and use honestly and diligently the
helps that He gives us--the outward help in the Word, and the inward
help in His teaching Spirit--we shall not 'walk in darkness,' but shall
have light enough given to be to us 'the Light of Life.'

Brother, keep close to Christ, and Christ--present though absent--will
teach you.

II. Secondly, satisfied desires.

This second great promise of my text, introduced again by the solemn
affirmation, 'Verily, verily, I say unto you,' substantially appeared
in a former part of these discourses with a very significant
difference. 'Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name that will I do.' 'If ye
shall ask anything in My name I will do it.' There Christ presented
Himself as the Answerer of the petitions, because His more immediate
purpose was to set forth His going to the Father as His elevation to a
yet loftier position. Here, on the other hand, He sets forth the Father
as the Answerer of the petitions, because His purpose is to point away
from undue dependence on His own corporeal presence. But the fact that
He thus, as occasion requires, substitutes the one form of speech for
the other, and indifferently represents the same actions as being done
by Himself and by the Father in heaven, carries with it large teachings
which I do not dwell upon now. Only I would ask you to consider how
much is involved in that fact, that, as a matter of course, and without
explanation of the difference, our Lord alternates the two forms, and
sometimes says, 'I will do it,' and sometimes says, 'The Father will do
it.' Does it not point to that great and blessed truth, 'Whatsoever
thing the Father doeth, that also doeth the Son likewise?'

But passing from that, let me ask you to note very carefully the
limitation, which is here given to the broad universality of the
declaration that desires shall be satisfied. 'If ye shall ask anything
in My name'; there is the definition of Christian prayer. And what does
it mean? Is a prayer, which from the beginning to the end is reeking
with self-will, hallowed because we say, as a kind of charm at the end
of it, 'For Christ's sake. Amen'? Is _that_ praying in Christ's name?
Surely not! What is the 'name' of Christ? His whole revealed character.
So these disciples could not pray in His name 'hitherto,' because His
character was not all revealed. Therefore, to pray in His name is to
pray, recognising what He is, as revealed in His life and death and
resurrection and ascension, and to base all our dependence of
acceptance of our prayers upon that revealed character. Is that all?
Are any kind of wishes, which are presented in dependence upon Christ
as our only Hope and Channel of divine blessing, certain to be
fulfilled? Certainly not. To pray 'in My name' means yet more than
that. It means not only to pray in dependence upon Christ as our only
Ground of hope and Source of acceptance and God's only Channel of
blessing, but it means exactly what the same phrase means when it is
applied to us. If I say that I am doing something in your name, that
means on your behalf, as your representative, as your organ, and to
express your mind and will. And if we pray in Christ's name, that
implies, not only our dependence upon His merit and work, but also the
harmony of our wills with His will, and that our requests are not
merely the hot products of our own selfishness, but are the calm issues
of communion with Him. _Thus_ to pray requires the suppression of self.
Heathen prayer, if there be such a thing, is the violent effort to make
God will what I wish. Christian prayer is the submissive effort to make
my wish what God wills, and that is to pray in Christ's name.

My brother! do we construct our prayers thus? Do we try to bring our
desires into harmony with Him, before we venture to express them? Do we
go to His footstool to pour out petulant, blind, passionate,
un-sanctified wishes after questionable and contingent good, or do we
wait until He fills our spirits with longings after what it must be His
desire to give, and then breathe out those desires caught from His own
heart, and echoing His own will? Ah! The discipline that is wanted to
make men pray in Christ's name is little understood by multitudes
amongst us.

Notice how certain such prayer is of being answered. Of course, if it
is in harmony with the will of God, it is sure not to be offered in
vain. Our Revised Version makes a slight alteration in the order of the
words in the first clause of this promise by reading, 'If ye ask
anything of the Father He will give it you _in My name_.' God's gifts
come down through the same channel through which our prayer goes up. We
ask in the name of Christ, and get our answers in the name of Christ.

But, whether that be the true collocation of ideas or not, mark the
plain principle here, that only desires which are in harmony with the
divine will are sure of being satisfied. What is a bad thing for a
child cannot be a good thing for a man. What is a foolish and wicked
thing for a father down here to do cannot be a kind and a wise thing
for the Father in the heavens to do. If you wish to spoil your child
you say, 'What do you want, my dear? tell me and you shall have it.'
And if God were saying anything like that to us, through the lips of
Jesus Christ His Son, in the text, it would be no blessing, but a
curse. He knows a great deal better what is good for us; and so He
says: 'Bring your wishes into line with My purpose, and then you will
get them'; 'Delight thyself in the Lord, and He will give thee the
desires of thine heart.' If you want God most you will be sure to get
Him; if your heart's desires are after Him, your heart's desires will
be satisfied. 'The young lions do roar and suffer hunger.' That is the
world's way of getting good; fighting and striving and snarling, and
forcibly seeking to grasp, and there is hunger after all. There is a
better way than that. Instead of striving and struggling to snatch and
to keep a perishable and questionable portion, let us wait upon God and
quiet our hearts, stilling them into the temper of communion and
conformity with Him, and we shall not ask in vain.

He who prays in Christ's name must pray Christ's prayer, 'Not My will,
but Thine be done.' And then, though many wishes may be unanswered, and
many weak petitions unfulfilled, and many desires unsatisfied, the
essential spirit of the prayer will be answered, and, His will being
done in us and on us, our wishes will acquiesce in it and desire
nothing besides. To him who can thus pray in Christ's name in the
deepest sense, and after Christ's pattern, every door in God's
treasure-house flies open, and he may take as much of the treasure as
he desires. The Master bends lovingly over such a soul, and looks him
in the eyes, and with outstretched hand says, 'What wilt thou that I
should do unto thee? Be it unto thee even as thou wilt.'

III. Lastly, the perfect joy which follows upon these two.

'That your joy may be fulfilled.' Again we have a recurrence of a
promise that has appeared in another connection in an earlier part of
this discourse; but the connection here is worthy of notice. The
promise is of joy that comes from the satisfaction of meek desires in
unison with Christ's will. Is it possible then, that, amidst all the
ups and downs, the changes and the sorrows of this fluctuating,
tempest-tossed life of ours we may have a deep and stable joy? 'That
your joy may be full,' says my text, or 'fulfilled,' like some
jewelled, golden cup charged to the very brim with rich and quickening
wine, so that there is no room for a drop more. Can it be that ever, in
this world, men shall be happy up to the very limits of their capacity?
Was anybody ever so blessed that he could not be more so? Was your cup
ever so full that there was no room for another drop in it? Jesus
Christ says that it may be so, and He tells us how it may be so. Bring
your desires into harmony with God's, and you will have none
unsatisfied amongst them; and so you will be blessed to the full; and
though sorrow comes, as of course it will come, still you may be
blessed. There is no contradiction between the presence of this deep,
central joy and a surface and circumference of sorrow. Rather we need
the surrounding sorrow, to concentrate, and so to intensify, the
central joy in God. There are some flowers which only blow in the
night; and white blossoms are visible with startling plainness in the
twilight, when all the flaunting purples and reds are hid. We do not
know the depth, the preciousness, the power of the 'joy of the Lord,'
until we have felt it shining in our hearts in the midst of the thick
darkness of earthly sorrow, and bringing life into the very death of
our human delights. It may be ours on the conditions that my text
describes.

My dear friends! there are only two courses before us. Either we must
have a life with superficial, transitory, incomplete gladness, and an
aching centre of vacuity and pain, or we may have a life which, in its
outward aspects and superficial appearance, has much about it that is
sad and trying, but down in the heart of it is calm and joyful. Which
of the two do you deem best, a superficial gladness and a rooted
sorrow, or a superficial sorrow and a central joy? 'Even in laughter
the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness.' But,
on the other hand, the 'ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to
Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads. They shall obtain
