slily laughed and lured into a better mind.  If by such complaisance 
we can inveigle those dottrels to hearken to us, we may induce them 
to consider farther, and give reason some competent scope, some fair 
play with them.  Good reason may be apparelled in the garb of wit, 
and therein will securely pass whither in its native homeliness it 
could never arrive:  and being come thither, it with especial 
advantage may impress good advice, making an offender more clearly 
to see, and more deeply to feel his miscarriage; being represented 
to his fancy in a strain somewhat rare and remarkable, yet not so 
fierce and frightful.  The severity of reproof is tempered, and the 
reprover's anger disguised thereby.  The guilty person cannot but 
observe that he who thus reprehends him is not disturbed or out of 
humour, and that he rather pitieth than hateth him; which breedeth a 
veneration to him, and imparteth no small efficacy to his wholesome 
suggestions.  Such a reprehension, while it forceth a smile without, 
doth work remorse within; while it seemeth to tickle the ear, doth 
sting the heart.  In fine, many whose foreheads are brazed and 
hearts steeled against all blame, are yet not of proof against 
derision; divers, who never will be reasoned, may be rallied in 
better order:  in which cases raillery, as an instrument of so 
important good, as a servant of the best charity, may be allowed.

4.  Some errors likewise in this way may be most properly and most 
successfully confuted; such as deserve not, and hardly can bear a 
serious and solid confutation.  He that will contest things 
apparently decided by sense and experience, or who disavows clear 
principles of reason, approved by general consent and the common 
sense of men, what other hopeful way is there of proceeding with 
him, than pleasantly to explode his conceits?  To dispute seriously 
with him were trifling; to trifle with him is the proper course.  
Since he rejecteth the grounds of reasoning, 'tis vain to be in 
earnest; what then remains but to jest with him?  To deal seriously 
were to yield too much respect to such a baffler, and too much 
weight to his fancies; to raise the man too high in his courage and 
conceit; to make his pretences seem worthy the considering and 
canvassing.  Briefly, perverse obstinacy is more easily quelled, 
petulant impudence is sooner dashed, sophistical captiousness is 
more safely eluded, sceptical wantonness is more surely confounded 
in this than in the simple way of discourse.

5.  This way is also commonly the best way of defence against unjust 
reproach and obloquy.  To yield to a slanderous reviler a serious 
reply, or to make a formal plea against his charge, doth seem to 
imply that we much consider or deeply resent it; whereas by pleasant 
reflection on it we signify the matter only deserves contempt, and 
that we take ourselves unconcerned therein.  So easily without care 
or trouble may the brunts of malice be declined or repelled.

6.  This may be allowed in way of counterbalancing and in compliance 
to the fashion of others.  It would be a disadvantage unto truth and 
virtue if their defenders were barred from the use of this weapon, 
since it is that especially whereby the patrons of error and vice do 
maintain and propagate them.  They being destitute of good reason, 
do usually recommend their absurd and pestilent notions by a 
pleasantness of conceit and expression, bewitching the fancies of 
shallow hearers, and inveigling heedless persons to a liking of 
them; and if, for reclaiming such people, the folly of those 
seducers may in like manner be displayed as ridiculous and odious, 
why should that advantage be refused?  It is wit that wageth the war 
against reason, against virtue, against religion; wit alone it is 
that perverteth so many, and so greatly corrupteth the world.  It 
may, therefore, be needful, in our warfare for those dearest 
concerns, to sort the manner of our fighting with that of our 
adversaries, and with the same kind of arms to protect goodness, 
whereby they do assail it.  If wit may happily serve under the 
banner of truth and virtue, we may impress it for that service; and 
good it were to rescue so worthy a faculty from so vile abuse.  It 
is the right of reason and piety to command that and all other 
endowments; folly and impiety do only usurp them.  Just and fit 
therefore it is to wrest them out of so bad hands, to revoke them to 
their right use and duty.

It doth especially seem requisite to do it in this age, wherein 
plain reason is deemed a dull and heavy thing.  When the mental 
appetite of men is become like the corporal, and cannot relish any 
food without some piquant sauce, so that people will rather starve 
than live on solid fare; when substantial and sound discourse 
findeth small attention or acceptance; in such a time, he that can, 
may in complaisance, and for fashion's sake, vouchsafe to be 
facetious; an ingenious vein coupled with an honest mind may be a 
good talent; he shall employ wit commendably who by it can further 
the interests of goodness, alluring men first to listen, then 
inducing them to consent unto its wholesome dictates and precepts.

Since men are so irreclaimably disposed to mirth and laughter, it 
may be well to set them in the right pin, to divert their humour 
into the proper channel, that they may please themselves in deriding 
things which deserve it, ceasing to laugh at that which requireth 
reverence or horror.

It may also be expedient to put the world out of conceit that all 
sober and good men are a sort of such lumpish or sour people that 
they can utter nothing but flat and drowsy stuff, by showing them 
that such persons, when they see cause, in condescension, can be as 
brisk and smart as themselves; when they please, can speak 
pleasantly and wittily, as well as gravely and judiciously.  This 
way at least, in respect to the various palates of men, may for 
variety sake be sometimes attempted, when other means do fail; when 
many strict and subtle arguings, many zealous declamations, many 
wholesome serious discourses have been spent, without effecting the 
extirpation of bad principles, or conversion of those who abet them; 
this course may be tried, and some perhaps may be reclaimed thereby.

7.  Furthermore, the warrantableness of this practice in some cases 
may be inferred from a parity of reason, in this manner.  If it be 
lawful (as by the best authorities it plainly doth appear to be), in 
using rhetorical schemes, poetical strains, involutions of sense in 
allegories, fables, parables, and riddles, to discoast from the 
plain and simple way of speech, why may not facetiousness, issuing 
from the same principles, directed to the same ends, serving to like 
purposes, be likewise used blamelessly?  If those exorbitancies of 
speech may be accommodated to instill good doctrine into the head, 
to excite good passions in the heart, to illustrate and adorn the 
truth, in a delightful and taking way, and facetious discourse be 
sometimes notoriously conducible to the same ends, why, they being 
retained, should it be rejected, especially considering how 
difficult often it may be to distinguish those forms of discourse 
from this, or exactly to define the limits which sever rhetoric and 
raillery.  Some elegant figures and trophies of rhetoric (biting 
sarcasms, sly ironies, strong metaphors, lofty hyperboles, 
paronomasies, oxymorons, and the like, frequently used by the best 
speakers, and not seldom even by sacred writers) do lie very near 
upon the confines of jocularity, and are not easily differenced from 
those sallies of wit wherein the lepid way doth consist:  so that 
were this wholly culpable, it would be matter of scruple whether one 
hath committed a fault or no when he meant only to play the orator 
or the poet; and hard surely it would be to find a judge who could 
precisely set out the difference between a jest and a flourish.

8.  I shall only add, that of old even the sagest and gravest 
persons (persons of most rigid and severe virtue) did much affect 
this kind of discourse, and did apply it to noble purposes.  The 
great introducer of moral wisdom among the pagans did practise it so 
much (by it repressing the windy pride and fallacious vanity of 
sophisters in his time), that he thereby got the name of [Greek], 
the droll; and the rest of those who pursued his design do, by 
numberless stories and apophthegms recorded of them, appear well 
skilled and much delighted in this way.  Many great princes (as 
Augustus Caesar, for one, many of whose jests are extant in 
Macrobius), many grave statesmen (as Cicero particularly, who 
composed several books of jests), many famous captains (as Fabius, 
M. Cato the Censor, Scipio Africanus, Epaminondas, Themistocles, 
Phocion, and many others, whose witty sayings together with their 
martial exploits are reported by historians), have pleased 
themselves herein, and made it a condiment of their weighty 
businesses.  So that practising thus (within certain rule and 
compass), we cannot err without great patterns, and mighty patrons.

9.  In fine, since it cannot be shown that such a sportfulness of 
wit and fancy doth contain an intrinsic and inseparable turpitude; 
since it may be so cleanly, handsomely, and innocently used, as not 
to defile or discompose the mind of the speaker, nor to wrong or 
harm the hearer, nor to derogate from any worthy subject of 
discourse, nor to infringe decency, to disturb peace, to violate any 
of the grand duties incumbent on us (piety, charity, justice, 
sobriety), but rather sometimes may yield advantage in those 
respects; it cannot well absolutely and universally be condemned:  
and when not used upon improper matter, in an unfit manner, with 
excessive measure, at undue season, to evil purpose, it may be 
allowed.  It is bad objects, or bad adjuncts, which do spoil its 
indifference and innocence; it is the abuse thereof, to which (as 
all pleasant things are dangerous, and apt to degenerate into baits 
of intemperance and excess) it is very liable, that corrupteth it; 
and seemeth to be the ground why in so general terms it is 
prohibited by the Apostle.  Which prohibition to what cases, or what 
sorts of jesting it extendeth, we come now to declare.


II.  1.  All profane jesting, all speaking loosely and wantonly 
about holy things (things nearly related to God and religion), 
making such things the matters of sport and mockery, playing and 
trifling with them, is certainly prohibited, as an intolerably vain 
and wicked practice.  It is an infallible sign of a vain and light 
spirit, which considereth little, and cannot distinguish things, to 
talk slightly concerning persons of high dignity, to whom especial 
respect is due; or about matters of great importance, which deserve 
very serious consideration.  No man speaketh, or should speak, of 
his prince, that which he hath not weighed whether it will consist 
with that veneration which should be preserved inviolate to him.  
And is not the same, is not much greater care to be used in regard 
to the incomparably great and glorious Majesty of Heaven?  Yes, 
surely, as we should not without great awe think of Him; so we 
should not presume to mention His name, His word, His institutions, 
anything immediately belonging to Him, without profoundest reverence 
and dread.  It is the most enormous sauciness that can be imagined, 
to speak petulantly or pertly concerning Him; especially considering 
that whatever we do say about Him, we do utter it in His presence, 
and to His very face.  "For there is not," as the holy psalmist 
considered, "a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou knowest it 
altogether."  No man also hath the heart to droll, or thinks 
raillery convenient, in cases nearly touching his life, his health, 
his estate, or his fame:  and are the true life and health of our 
soul, are interests in God's favour and mercy, are everlasting glory 
and bliss affairs of less moment? are the treasures and joys of 
paradise, or the damages and torments in hell, more jesting matters?  
No, certainly no:  in all reason therefore it becometh us, and it 
infinitely concerneth us, whenever we think of these things, to be 
in best earnest, always to speak of them in most sober sadness.

The proper objects of common mirth and sportful divertisement are 
mean and petty matters; anything at least is by playing therewith 
made such:  great things are thereby diminished and debased; 
especially sacred things do grievously suffer thence, being with 
extreme indecency and indignity depressed beneath themselves, when 
they become the subjects of flashy wit, or the entertainments of 
frothy merriment:  to sacrifice their honour to our vain pleasure, 
being like the ridiculous fondness of that people which, as AElian 
reporteth, worshipping a fly, did offer up an ox thereto.  These 
things were by God instituted, and proposed to us for purposes quite 
different; to compose our hearts, and settle our fancies in a most 
serious frame; to breed inward satisfaction, and joy purely 
spiritual; to exercise our most solemn thoughts, and employ our 
gravest discourses:  all our speech therefore about them should be 
wholesome, apt to afford good instruction, or to excite good 
affections; "good," as St. Paul speaketh, "for the use of edifying, 
that it may minister grace unto the hearers."

If we must be facetious and merry, the field is wide and spacious; 
there are matters enough in the world besides these most august and 
dreadful things, to try our faculties and please our humour with; 
everywhere light and ludicrous things occur; it therefore doth argue 
a marvellous poverty of wit, and barrenness of invention (no less 
than a strange defect of goodness, and want of discretion), in those 
who can devise no other subjects to frolic upon besides these, of 
all most improper and perilous; who cannot seem ingenious under the 
charge of so highly trespassing upon decency, disclaiming wisdom, 
wounding the ears of others, and their own consciences.  Seem 
ingenious, I say; for seldom those persons really are such, or are 
capable to discover any wit in a wise and manly way.  'Tis not the 
excellency of their fancies, which in themselves are usually sorry 
and insipid enough, but the uncouthness of their presumption; not 
their extraordinary wit, but their prodigious rashness, which is to 
be admired.  They are gazed on, as the doers of bold tricks, who 
dare perform that which no sober man will attempt:  they do indeed 
rather deserve themselves to be laughed at, than their conceits.  
For what can be more ridiculous than we do make ourselves, when we 
thus fiddle and fool with our own souls; when, to make vain people 
merry, we incense God's earnest displeasure; when, to raise a fit of 
present laughter, we expose ourselves to endless wailing and woe; 
when, to be reckoned wits, we prove ourselves stark wild?  Surely to 
this case we may accommodate that of a truly great wit, King 
Solomon:  "I said of laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What doeth 
it?"

2.  All injurious, abusive, scurrilous jesting, which causelessly or 
needlessly tendeth to the disgrace, damage, vexation, or prejudice 
in any kind of our neighbour (provoking his displeasure, grating on 
his modesty, stirring passion in him), is also prohibited.  When 
men, to raise an admiration of their wit, to please themselves, or 
gratify the humours of other men, do expose their neighbour to scorn 
and contempt, making ignominious reflections upon his person and his 
actions, taunting his real imperfections, or fastening imaginary 
ones upon him, they transgress their duty, and abuse their wits; 
'tis not urbanity, or genuine facetiousness, but uncivil rudeness or 
vile malignity.  To do thus, as it is the office of mean and base 
spirits (unfit for any worthy or weighty employments), so it is full 
of inhumanity, of iniquity, of indecency and folly.  For the 
weaknesses of men, of what kind soever (natural or moral, in quality 
or in act), considering whence they spring, and how much we are all 
subject to them, and do need excuse for them, do in equity challenge 
compassion to be had of them; not complacency to be taken in them, 
or mirth drawn from them; they, in respect to common humanity, 
should rather be studiously connived at, and concealed, or mildly 
excused, than wilfully laid open, and wantonly descanted upon; they 
rather are to be deplored secretly, than openly derided.

The reputation of men is too noble a sacrifice to be offered up to 
vainglory, fond pleasure, or ill-humour; it is a good far more dear 
and precious, than to be prostituted for idle sport and 
divertisement.  It becometh us not to trifle with that which in 
common estimation is of so great moment--to play rudely with a thing 
so very brittle, yet of so vast price; which being once broken or 
cracked, it is very hard and scarce possible to repair.  A small, 
transient pleasure, a tickling the ears, wagging the lungs, forming 
the face into a smile, a giggle, or a hum, are not to be purchased 
with the grievous distaste and smart, perhaps with the real damage 
and mischief of our neighbour, which attend upon contempt.  This is 
not jesting, surely, but bad earnest; 'tis wild mirth, which is the 
mother of grief to those whom we should tenderly love; 'tis 
unnatural sport, which breedeth displeasure in them whose delight it 
should promote, whose liking it should procure:  it crosseth the 
nature and design of this way of speaking, which is to cement and 
ingratiate society, to render conversation pleasant and sprightly, 
for mutual satisfaction and comfort.

True festivity is called salt, and such it should be, giving a smart 
but savoury relish to discourse; exciting an appetite, not 
irritating disgust; cleansing sometimes, but never creating a sore:  
and [Greek], (if it become thus insipid), or unsavoury, it is 
therefore good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under 
foot of men.  Such jesting which doth not season wholesome or 
harmless discourse, but giveth a haut gout to putrid and poisonous 
stuff, gratifying distempered palates and corrupt stomachs, is 
indeed odious and despicable folly, to be cast out with loathing, to 
be trodden under foot with contempt.  If a man offends in this sort, 
to please himself, 'tis scurvy malignity; if to delight others, 'tis 
base servility and flattery:  upon the first score he is a buffoon 
to himself; upon the last, a fool to others.  And well in common 
speech are such practisers so termed, the grounds of that practice 
being so vain, and the effect so unhappy.  The heart of fools, saith 
the wise man, is in the house of mirth; meaning, it seems, 
especially such hurtfully wanton mirth:  for it is (as he further 
telleth us) the property of fools to delight in doing harm ("It is 
as sport to a fool to do mischief").  Is it not in earnest most 
palpable folly, for so mean ends to do so great harm; to disoblige 
men in sport; to lose friends and get enemies for a conceit; out of 
a light humour to provoke fierce wrath, and breed tough hatred; to 
engage one's self consequently very far in strife, danger, and 
trouble?  No way certainly is more apt to produce such effects than 
this; nothing more speedily inflameth, or more thoroughly engageth 
men, or sticketh longer in men's hearts and memories, than bitter 
taunts and scoffs:  whence this honey soon turns into gall; these 
jolly comedies do commonly terminate in woeful tragedies.

Especially this scurrilous and scoffing way is then most detestable 
when it not only exposeth the blemishes and infirmities of men, but 
abuseth piety and virtue themselves; flouting persons for their 
constancy in devotion, or their strict adherence to a conscientious 
practice of duty; aiming to effect that which Job complaineth of, 
"The just upright man is laughed to scorn;" resembling those whom 
the psalmist thus describeth, "Who whet their tongue like a sword, 
and bend their arrows, even bitter words, that they may shoot in 
secret at the perfect;" serving good men as Jeremy was served--"The 
word of the Lord," saith he, "was made a reproach unto me, and a 
derision daily."

This practice doth evidently in the highest degree tend to the 
disparagement and discouragement of goodness; aiming to expose it, 
and to render men ashamed thereof; and it manifestly proceedeth from 
a desperate corruption of mind, from a mind hardened and emboldened, 
sold and enslaved to wickedness:  whence they who deal therein are 
in Holy Scripture represented as egregious sinners, or persons 
superlatively wicked, under the name of scorners ([Greek], pests, or 
pestilent men, the Greek translators call them, properly enough in 
regard to the effects of their practice); concerning whom the wise 
man (signifying how God will meet with them in their own way) saith, 
"Surely the Lord scorneth the scorners."  '[Greek] (scoffers, or 
mockers), St. Peter termeth them, who walk according to their own 
lusts; who not being willing to practise, are ready to deride 
virtue; thereby striving to seduce others into their pernicious 
courses.

This offence also proportionably groweth more criminal as it 
presumeth to reach persons eminent in dignity or worth, unto whom 
special veneration is appropriate.  This adjoineth sauciness to 
scurrility, and advanceth the wrong thereof into a kind of 
sacrilege.  'Tis not only injustice, but profaneness, to abuse the 
gods.  Their station is a sanctuary from all irreverence and 
reproach; they are seated on high, that we may only look up to them 
with respect; their defects are not to be seen, or not to be touched 
by malicious or wanton wits, by spiteful or scornful tongues:  the 
diminution of their credit is a public mischief, and the State 
itself doth suffer in their becoming objects of scorn; not only 
themselves are vilified and degraded, but the great affairs they 
manage are obstructed, the justice they administer is disparaged 
thereby.

In fine, no jesting is allowable which is not thoroughly innocent:  
it is an unworthy perverting of wit to employ it in biting and 
scratching; in working prejudice to any man's reputation or 
interest; in needlessly incensing any man's anger or sorrow; in 
raising animosities, dissensions, and feuds among any.

Whence it is somewhat strange that any men from so mean and silly a 
practice should expect commendation, or that any should afford 
regard thereto; the which it is so far from meriting, that indeed 
contempt and abhorrence are due to it.  Men do truly more render 
themselves despicable than others when, without just ground, or 
reasonable occasion, they do attack others in this way.  That such a 
practice doth ever find any encouragement or acceptance, whence can 
it proceed, but from the bad nature and small judgment of some 
persons?  For to any man who is endowed with any sense of goodness, 
and hath a competence of true wit, or a right knowledge of good 
manners (who knows. . . . inurbanum lepido seponere dicto), it 
cannot but be unsavoury and loathsome.  The repute it obtaineth is 
in all respects unjust.  So would it appear, not only were the cause 
to be decided in a court of morality, because it consists not with 
virtue and wisdom; but even before any competent judges of wit 
itself.  For he overthrows his own pretence, and cannot reasonably 
claim any interest in wit, who doth thus behave himself:  he 
prejudgeth himself to want wit, who cannot descry fit matter to 
divert himself or others:  he discovereth a great straitness and 
sterility of good invention, who cannot in all the wide field of 
things find better subjects of discourse; who knows not how to be 
ingenious within reasonable compass, but to pick up a sorry conceit 
is forced to make excursions beyond the bounds of honesty and 
decency.

Neither is it any argument of considerable ability in him that haps 
to please this way:  a slender faculty will serve the turn.  The 
sharpness of his speech cometh not from wit so much as from choler, 
which furnisheth the lowest inventions with a kind of pungent 
expression, and giveth an edge to every spiteful word:  so that any 
dull wretch doth seem to scold eloquently and ingeniously.  Commonly 
also satirical taunts do owe their seeming piquancy, not to the 
speaker or his words, but to the subject, and the hearers; the 
matter conspiring with the bad nature or the vanity of men who love 
to laugh at any rate, and to be pleased at the expense of other 
men's repute; conceiting themselves extolled by the depression of 
their neighbour, and hoping to gain by his loss.  Such customers 
they are that maintain the bitter wits, who otherwise would want 
trade, and might go a-begging.  For commonly they who seem to excel 
this way are miserably flat in other discourse, and most dully 
serious:  they have a particular unaptness to describe any good 
thing, or commend any worthy person; being destitute of right ideas, 
and proper terms answerable to such purposes:  their representations 
of that kind are absurd and unhandsome; their eulogies (to use their 
own way of speaking) are in effect satires, and they can hardly more 
abuse a man than by attempting to commend him; like those in the 
prophet, who were wise to do ill, but to do well had no knowledge.

3.  I pass by that it is very culpable to be facetious in obscene 
and smutty matters.  Such things are not to be discoursed on either 
in jest or in earnest; they must not, as St. Paul saith, be so much 
as named among Christians.  To meddle with them is not to disport, 
but to defile one's self and others.  There is indeed no more 
certain sign of a mind utterly debauched from piety and virtue than 
by affecting such talk.  But further--

4.  All unseasonable jesting is blamable.  As there are some proper 
seasons of relaxation, when we may desipere in loco; so there are 
some times, and circumstances of things, wherein it concerneth and 
becometh men to be serious in mind, grave in demeanour, and plain in 
discourse; when to sport in this way is to do indecently or 
uncivilly, to be impertinent or troublesome.

It comporteth not well with the presence of superiors, before whom 
it becometh us to be composed and modest, much less with the 
performance of sacred offices, which require an earnest attention, 
and most serious frame of mind.
