physically which occurred with the cure.

"Before, her appetite was always disordered, but on the very morning of
the healing it was wholly changed, and her food, which distressed her
formerly, she ate with a relish and without any pain following; and she
so continues. For years before a natural action of the bowels was rare.
From that day since, an unnatural one is equally rare.

"For fifteen years, with few exceptions, she had had severe neuralgic
sick headaches monthly or oftener. From that time she has been natural
and without pain, with no return of the headaches, except a
comparatively slight one once, from overdoing and a cold taken through
carelessness.

"There was also at that time an immediate and radical change in the
action of the kidneys, which had become a source of great trouble
before. Moreover the knee which had been partially stiff for so many
years was made entirely well. In fine, her body, which had been so full
of pain, became at once free from pain, and full of health.

"The week after she was healed she went fifty miles to attend a
camp-meeting, riding five miles in a carriage, the rest by cars. A near
neighbor said, 'She will come back worse than ever.' Though the weather
was especially bad, she came back better than when she went."

These are but few out of many expressions respecting her extraordinary
recovery, which fully satisfy the believing Christian that _the Great_
Physician is with us now, "_healing the lame_," and curing the sick. It
is faith only, unyielding, which the Lord requires ere he gives his
richest blessing.

The unbelieving one simply sees in it "_something strange_," which he
can not understand, but the faith-keeping Christian knows it is the sign
of his _Precious Lord_, in whom he trusts and abides forever.


DR. NEWMAN HALL'S TESTIMONIES TO THE VALUE OF PRAYER.


Dr. Newman Hall, of London, in his wide experience has met with many
incidents of answered prayer, and thus relates several:


A PRAYER FOR THIRTY POUNDS.


"On a recent evangelizing visit to Newport, one of its citizens said to
me, 'In yonder house dwell a man and wife, who recently needed a sum of
L30 to meet some payment the next morning. Having failed in their
efforts to collect it, they earnestly prayed God to provide it. The
store was being closed for the night when a sea-captain knocked at the
door and asked for some seamen's clothes. The gas was relighted, and
various articles were selected; the purchaser then asked for the
account, and the money was paid--_a little more than_ L30. The man and
his wife thanked their Heavenly Father for sending it in this way in
answer to prayer.'"


RECOVERY FROM DANGEROUS ILLNESS.


Dr. Newman Hall was once visiting, on his dying bed, John Cranfield, son
of the great originator of ragged schools, under the ministry of Rowland
Hill.

"We were conversing on prayer. He said, 'A remarkable instance occurred
in connection with my father. The former organist of Surry Chapel, Mr.
Howard, was dangerously ill. He was greatly beloved, and his friends met
for special prayer that God would spare his life. My father on that
occasion was remarkably earnest in asking that the life of his friend
might be lengthened, as in the case of Hezekiah. The next day he began
to recover; and during fifteen years was a blessing to his friends and
the church.'"


A SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHER IN DISTRESS.


"My brother," says Dr. Hall, "told me that when superintendent of a
Sunday school he felt a strong impulse, one Saturday evening, to call at
the home of one of his teachers whom he had never visited before. He
found his mother and sisters in such evident distress that he inquired
the cause. With much reluctance they explained that, being unable to pay
their taxes, their goods were to be taken on the coming Monday, and they
had been asking special help from God to save them from a disaster which
they felt would be a dishonor to religion. By the aid of a few friends
the difficulty was at once met, but the timely succor was regarded as
the divine answer to their prayer."


RESCUED IN PERIL.


"With my brother I was once climbing the _Cirrha di Jazze_, one of the
mountains in the chain of _Mount Rosa_. When nearly at the top, we
entered a dense fog. Presently our guides faced right about and grounded
their axes on the frozen snowed slope. My brother, seeing the slope
still beyond, and not knowing it was merely the cornice overhanging a
precipice of several thousand feet, rushed onward. I shall never forget
their cry of agonized warning. He stood a moment on the very summit, and
then, the snow yielding, he began to fall through. One of the guides, at
great risk, had rushed after him, and seizing him by the coat, drew him
down to a place of safety.

"No one could be nearer death and yet escape. On his return home, an
invalid member of his congregation told him that she had been much in
prayer for his safety, and mentioned a special time when she was
particularly earnest, as if imploring deliverance from some great peril.
_The times corresponded._ His life was saved in answer to her prayer."


A PHYSICAL IMPEDIMENT REMOVED.


"A clergyman, of great scholarship and genius, has told me of a
remarkable answer to prayer, authenticated by three missionaries known
to himself, who are personally acquainted with the facts.

"A Prussian, the master of a hotel in India, was anxious to relinquish
his large income, and labor as a missionary among the Santil tribes.
Objection was made to him on account of an impediment in his speech
which would render him, in speaking a foreign language, incapable of
being understood. Believing in the efficacy of prayer, he called
together his friends, specially to ask that his impediment might be
removed. The next morning, he presented himself again at the Mission
House--_the impediment had gone_! He was accepted, relinquished his
business, and is now preaching the gospel to the Santils in their own
tongue."


RESTORATION FROM DEATH.


"My father, the author of the _Sinner's Friend_, narrates in his
autobiography a circumstance which he often used to speak of with great
emotion.

"My mother was very ill, and apparently dying. The Doctor said that now,
if at all, the children might be brought for her to look at them once
more. One by one we were brought to the bedside, and her hand was placed
on our heads.

"Then my father bade her farewell, and she lay motionless as if soon to
breathe her last.

"He then said to himself, 'There is yet one promise I have not pleaded,
"If ye ask anything in my name I will do it." He stepped aside, and in
an agony of soul exclaimed, '_O, Lord, for the honor of thy dear Son,
give me the life of my wife!'_

"He could say no more, and sank down exhausted. Just then the nurse
called him to the bedside saying, 'She has opened her mouth again as if
for food.' Nourishment was given, and from that time she began to
recover. The doctor said it was miraculous. My father said it was God,
who had heard his prayer."


THE HELP OF THE LORD IN LITTLE THINGS.


The Rev. Dr. Patton, of Chicago, in receiving many letters from
clergymen, received one from Mr. F., a pastor in Massachusetts.

In it he speaks of his unsuccessful search for a valuable knife, prized
as a present from a friend, which he had lost on a hillside covered with
laurels. He paused in prayer, asked to be guided, commenced his search,
and was almost immediately successful thereafter.

The same letter also mentions the case of a friend in a responsible
position under the government, whose accounts failed to balance by
reason of an error, which, after long search, he could not detect.

In great distress he betook himself to prayer, and then opening his
books, _on the very first page_, which he happened to glance at, and at
the top of the column, he saw instantly the looked for error, standing
out so plainly that he wondered he had not seen it before.

The writer also speaks of a rubber shoe being lost and promptly found
after mention in prayer.

These may seem little matters, but they are the privileges of the
righteous to ask "anything" of "Him who careth for them."


A BOY'S FAITH IN PRAYER


In a letter to Dr. W.W. Patton, by Mr. T.I. Goodwin, M.D., of Staten
Island, he describes a little incident which happened to him when only
thirteen years old.

"He lost a choice penknife while collecting and driving several cows
from a pasture covered with grass two inches high. Having read
Huntington's Book of Faith, he thought of prayer, and in childlike trust
he knelt under a tree, outside the bars, and prayed for his lost
treasure; for he was a farmer's boy, and his spending money amounted to
only about fifty cents a year. 'I rose up, cast my eyes down on the
ground, and without planning my course or making any estimate of
probabilities, walked across the meadow centrally to near its farther
edge, saw the penknife down in the grass directly before me, and picked
it up all as readily as I could have done had any one stood there
pointing to the exact place. _Had I gone ten feet to the right or left_
I could not have seen the knife, for the grass was too high.'"


A PRAYER FOR FIVE DOLLARS.


One of the City Home missionaries in New York city received on a certain
day five dollars with special directions that it be given to a certain
poor minister in Amos street. In the evening the missionary called and
gave him the money.

For a moment the good man stood amazed and speechless. Then taking down
a little journal he turned to the record made in his diary of that
morning, and showed it to the missionary. "_Spent two and a half hours
in earnest prayer for five dollars_."

"And now here it is," said the man, with a heart overflowing with
gratitude. "The Lord has sent it." Both giver and receiver had their
faith strengthened by the incident.


GO TO THE POST-OFFICE.


A correspondent of "_The Guiding Hand_" relates this incident:

"In the year 18--, having a brother living in the city of R., I went to
see him. Going to the store where he had been at work, I found that the
firm had suspended, and that he was thrown out of employment, and had
broken up housekeeping, but could not ascertain where he was, only that
he was boarding somewhere out in the suburbs of the city. I searched for
him all day, but in vain.

"It was _absolutely necessary_ that I should find _him_. What MORE to do
I knew not, except to _pray_. Finally, I was impressed to write a line
and drop it into the post-office, and I obeyed the impression, telling
him, if he got it, to meet me at a stated place, the next morning, at
ten o'clock. _I prayed earnestly_ that the Lord would cause him _to go
to the post-office,_ so that he might get my letter. I felt full of
peace, and at rest about the matter. The next morning, at ten o'clock, I
went to the place appointed for him to meet me, _and he soon came in_."

This incident might seem one of ordinary or chance occurrence, but for
the following unusual circumstances:

"As they were returning to their home, his brother said: 'There is
something _very strange_ about my going to the post-office this
morning--_I had my arrangements all made to go with a party, this
morning early, to the bay, fishing; but, when I awoke, I had such an
impression to go down to the post-office, that I had to forgo the
pleasure of going to the bay, and went to the post-office and found your
letter_.'

"I replied, '_It was the Lord_ that impressed you in answer to my
prayer, for I have prayed earnestly for the Lord to send you to the
office this morning,' and, although but young in years and religion, I
gave God the praise for his guidance and His grace."


THE WIDOW'S TREE


Not many years ago a violent storm, with wind and thunder, spread
devastation all through the valley of Yellow Creek, Georgia. For a mile
in width, trees were uprooted, barns and fences were prostrated, and all
the lands were desolated.

Right in the center of the tornado stood a small cabin. Its sole
occupants were an aged widow and her only son. The terrible wind struck
a large tree in front of her humble dwelling, twisting and dashing it
about. If it fell it would lay her home in ruins. Desolation, death
itself, might follow. The storm howled and raged. The great trees fell
in all directions. When it seemed her tree must also fall and there was
no remedy, she knelt in fervent supplication to Him who gathereth the
wind in his fists, that he would spare that tree. Her prayer was heard.
The tree was spared, and was the _only one_ left within a considerable
distance of the widow's cabin.


THE LORD PAID HIS INTEREST.


A most curious answer to prayer occurred in the experience of a home
missionary in Brooklyn. It illustrates how God, in his trials of faith
to see if His people do really cling to the promises, compels them to
march right into the scene of danger, and into the mouth of the cannon,
that apparently is open specially to shoot them down.

The interest on the mortgage of his property was due in a few days. Its
amount was $300. He did not have the money--did not know where to obtain
it. With anxious heart during the day, he kept up his faith and courage
by thinking of the Lord's promises, and, the last night before the
eventful day, was spent in prayer, until the assurance came that all was
well. Often he pleaded, often he reminded the Lord that, as his life was
_His_, to save him from reproach, and not let his trust in the Lord
suffer dishonor before others.

The last moment came--no money--no relief. With sinking heart he went to
the holder of the mortgage to announce his utter inability to meet his
demand. While there, just at the last moment, when he was about to
leave, the gentleman said, "_By the way, here is an envelope I was told
to give you."_

The missionary opened it, _and out came six fifty dollar bills,_ just
the _three hundred dollars prayed for_. The Lord met and delivered him
in the very jaws of the enemy.


WILL THE LORD DELIVER FROM BAD HABITS OF TOBACCO, RUM, LIQUOR,
LICENTIOUSNESS, ETC., IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.


This question having been asked by a clergyman of Brooklyn, Rev. S.H.
Platt, he received a large number of communications, which evidently
prove that the Lord is _willing_ and _does_, either _instantaneously_ or
gradually in answer to prayer, deliver and take away wholly the bad
_habits_ and _appetites_ of those who are willing to forsake their
sinful ways and cleave only to Him. _The Lord's salvation cleanses and
delivers the body as well as the soul_.

We quote a few extracts from his correspondence, which is but a small
portion out of many published in his volume, "_The Power of Grace_."


CURED OF TOBACCO APPETITE.


"A little more than a year has elapsed since I left off the use of
tobacco. This further time has more fully developed the thoroughness of
the case spoken of and the completeness of the victory over an evil
habit. I am filled with wonder, for I expected a terrible fight with an
appetite, strengthened by an indulgence of about thirty-five years, but
the enemy has not shown his head. _Not only has the desire for smoking
been effectually squelched_, but a perfect hatred of smoking has been
developed on account of the offensiveness of the odor of tobacco. I
frequently cross the street, or change my seat in a car to escape the
puff of smoke, or the fetid breath of a smoker. 'Thanks be unto God who
giveth us the victory.'"


BAD HABITS WHOLLY OVERCOME.


"A physician of extended practice was converted and reclaimed while I
had charge of the place in which he lived. He had acquired the habit of
using large quantities of whiskey and brandy, and withal more or less
given to licentiousness. Since that time he has been steadily advancing
in morals and moral power, till he now preaches the gospel as a local
preacher, side by side with the best of the district."


WAS IT INSTANTANEOUS?


"Yes, as respects tobacco; he became convicted of its sinfulness by a
voice saying, 'That is not the way to glorify God: stop, and stop now.'
And from that moment he says he has never used it, neither does he in
any way like the smell, or even the sight of tobacco."


THE LORD DELIVERS FROM BODILY SINS.

"I had used tobacco from my childhood, and the love and use thereof grew
upon me. I became convicted of its sinfulness, went to God and said,
'_Destroy the appetite, and give me power over it_. Save me that I may
glorify thee as a God of power for our present sins, and I will glorify
thee ever more.' I wrote out the contract and signed it, and from that
blessed afternoon have no recollection of ever desiring it even."


ANOTHER DELIVERANCE.


"Tobacco was a great trouble to me; and I had tried a number of times to
leave it off, but could not do so. One night as I was retiring to rest,
I thought I would kneel by my bed and ask _Him_, who never refuses to
answer prayer, to take from me the desire for tobacco, and from that
moment it has been impossible for me to use it.


NOT YOUR OWN STRENGTH CAN BREAK THE HABIT.


"I smoked tobacco excessively for fifteen years, commencing when I was
about twenty years old. I often strove to break off from the use of it;
indeed I determined time and again to desist from it, sometimes
abstaining for a few months or weeks, once for twelve months, _but the
desire never left me_, and whenever I tasted it I was sure to take to it
again. I sometimes vowed whilst upon my knees in prayer, to abstain from
it and never touch it again, but I always attempted to do this in my own
strength; hence I failed, being overcome by the almost irresistible
influences it had upon my appetite, so long accustomed to the use.

"One Sunday morning, I retired to a secluded place, got down upon my
knees, and asked the Lord to help me quit it, determining then and there
that I would, God being my helper, never touch the accursed thing again
by any kind of use in the way of consumption, and from that day to this,
I have never had any desire to smoke or chew tobacco, or to use it in
any way; I lifted my heart to God, imploring his assistance in
abstaining from it. I have now been clear of the desire of it for nearly
twenty-three years."


A DOUBLE CURE.


"At the age of twelve years I commenced to use tobacco, and continued to
use it, both smoking and chewing, till five years ago, when in answer to
prayer the appetite was instantly removed.

"The circumstances were as follows: I had tried many ways to leave off
the use of tobacco, but the appetite was so strong that I could not
withstand it. At one time I left it off for a month, but not a day
passed but I craved it, and when I did begin again it tasted as good as
ever. I found that tobacco was injuring my health. My nervous system was
much deranged.

"For more than a year before I left it off there was scarcely a night
but I lay for two or three hours, before I could go to sleep. I resolved
a great many times I would leave off, but always failed. I had also
acquired the habit of drinking, and became a confirmed drunkard.

"I knew the habits were killing me, but I was powerless to stop. One
evening a prayer-meeting was appointed at my house. The minister in his
remarks spoke about habits, and said that religion would cure all bad
habits, such as tobacco, &c., and that by prayer God would remove all
evil appetites.

"I thought but little about it that night; was very careless and
trifling about it. The next morning I took out my tobacco to take a
chew, and thought of what the minister had said the night before. It was
a new idea to me. I put the tobacco in my pocket again, and said, '_I'll
try it_.'

"_I was alone in my barn; I kneeled down and asked God to remove the
appetite from me. It was done. I was cured_. I felt it. I knew it then.
I have never had a desire for it since. There has been no hankering for
it or for strong drink since. My sins were all forgiven, and I was made
a new man all over, inside and outside.

"When I go into company where they are smoking, I have no desire for it
at all, neither have I for drinking, any more than if I had never had
those habits. _My nervous difficulty was also instantly cured_. No more
trouble about sleeping, and I know that Jesus can heal and remove and
destroy all evil habits."


A SPECIAL WORD TO ALL SEEKING TO ESCAPE EVIL WAYS.


Should these words meet the eye of any one so troubled over any evil way
or bad habit from whose bondage he would gladly escape, let me say to
you these words of good cheer: "_The Lord can save you, the Lord can
