it for five and sixty years.[49] Endued with great energy and of high
celestial origin, this is the best of all bows. Adored among gods and
men, it hath a handsome form. Partha obtained this beautiful bow from
Varuna. This other bow of handsome sides and golden handle is Bhima's
with which that son of Pritha, that chastiser of foes, had conquered the
whole of the eastern regions. This other excellent bow of beautiful
shape, adorned with images of _Indragopakas_, belongeth, O Virata's son,
to king Yudhishthira. This other weapon with golden suns of blazing
splendour shedding a dazzling effulgence around, belongeth to Nakula.
And this bow adorned with golden images of insects and set also with
gems and stones, belongeth to that son of Madri who is called Sahadeva.
These winged arrows, thousand in number, sharp as razors and destructive
as the poison of snakes, belong, O Virata's son, to Arjuna. When
shooting them in battle against foes, these swift arrows blaze forth
more brilliantly and become inexhaustible. And these long and thick
shafts resembling the lunar crescent in shape, keen-edged and capable of
thinning the enemy's ranks, belong to Bhima. And this quiver bearing
five images of tigers, full of yellowish shafts whetted on stone and
furnished with golden wings belong to Nakula. This is the quiver of the
intelligent son of Madri, with which he had conquered in battle the
whole of the western regions. And these arrows, all effulgent as the
sun, painted all over with various colours, and capable of destroying
enemies by thousands are those of Sahadeva. And these short and
well-tempered and thick shafts, furnished with long feathers and golden
heads, and consisting of three knots, belong to king Yudhishthira. And
this sword with blade long and carved with the image of a toad and head
shaped as a toad's mouth, strong and irresistible belongeth to Arjuna.
Cased in a sheath of tiger-skin, of long blade, handsome and
irresistible, and terrible to adversaries, this sword belongeth to
Bhimasena. Of excellent blade and cased in a well-painted sheath, and
furnished with a golden hilt, this handsome sword belongeth to the wise
Kaurava--Yudhishthira the just. And this sword of strong blade,
irresistible and intended for various excellent modes of fight and cased
in a sheath of goat-skin, belongeth to Nakula. And this huge scimitar,
cased in a sheath of cow-skin, strong and irresistible belongeth to
Sahadeva.'"

    [48] From the colour of his steeds.

    [49] Nilakantha spends much learning and ingenuity in making out
    that sixty-five years in this connection means thirty-two years
    of ordinary human computation.


SECTION XLIV

"Uttara said, 'Indeed, these weapons adorned with gold, belonging to the
light-handed and high-souled Partha, look exceedingly beautiful. But
where are that Arjuna, the son of Pritha, and Yudhishthira of the Kuru
race, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhimasena, the sons of Pandu? Having
lost their kingdom at dice, the high-souled Pandavas, capable of
destroying all foes, are no longer heard of. Where also is Draupadi, the
princess of _Panchala_, famed as the gem among women, who followed the
sons of Pandu after their defeat at dice to the forest?'

"Arjuna said, 'I am Arjuna, called also Partha. Thy father's courtier is
Yudhishthira and thy father's cook Vallava is Bhimasena, the groom of
horses is Nakula, and Sahadeva is in the cow-pen. And know thou that the
_Sairindhri_ is Draupadi, for whose sake the Kichakas have been slain.'

"Uttara said, 'I would believe all this if thou canst enumerate the ten
names of Partha, previously heard by me!'

"Arjuna said, 'I will, O son of Virata, tell thee my ten names. Listen
thou and compare them with what thou hadst heard before. Listen to them
with close attention and concentrated mind. They are _Arjuna, Phalguna,
Jishnu, Kiritin, Swetavahana, Vibhatsu, Vijaya, Krishna, Savyasachin_
and _Dhananjaya_.'

"Uttara said, 'Tell me truly why art thou called Vijaya, and why
Swetavahana. Why art thou named Krishna and why Arjuna and Phalguna and
Jishnu and Kiritin and Vibhatsu, and for what art thou Dhananjaya and
Savyasachin? I have heard before about the origin of the several names
of that hero, and can put faith in thy words if thou canst tell me all
about them.'

"Arjuna said, 'They called me Dhananjaya because I lived in the midst of
wealth, having subjugated all the countries and taking away their
treasures. They called me Vijaya because when I go out to battle with
invincible kings, I never return (from the field) without vanquishing
them. I am called Swetavahana because when battling with the foe, white
horses decked in golden armour are always yoked unto my car. They call
me Phalguna because I was born on the breast of the Himavat on a day
when the constellation _Uttara Phalguna_ was on the ascendent. I am
named Kiritin from a diadem, resplendent like the sun, having been
placed of old on my head by Indra during my encounter with the powerful
_Danavas_. I am known as Vibhatsu among gods and men, for my never
having committed a detestable deed on the battle-field. And since both
of my hands are capable of drawing the _Gandiva_, I am known as
Savyasachin among gods and men. They call me Arjuna because my
complexion is very rare within the four boundaries of the earth and
because also my acts are always stainless. I am known among human beings
and celestials by the name of Jishnu, because I am unapproachable and
incapable of being kept down, and a tamer of adversaries and son of the
slayer of Paka. And Krishna, my tenth appellation, was given to me by my
father out of affection towards his black-skinned boy of great purity.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "The son of Virata then, approaching nearer
saluted Partha and said, 'My name is Bhuminjaya, and I am also called
Uttara. It is by good luck, O Partha, that I behold thee. Thou art
welcome, O Dhananjaya. O thou with red eyes, and arms that are mighty
and each like unto the trunk of an elephant, it behoveth thee to pardon
what I said unto thee from ignorance. And as wonderful and difficult
have been the feats achieved by thee before, my fears have been
dispelled, and indeed the love I bear to thee is great.'"


SECTION XLV

"Uttara said, 'O hero, mounting on this large car with myself as driver,
which division of the (hostile) army wouldst thou penetrate? Commanded
by thee, I would drive thee thither.'

"Arjuna said, 'I am pleased with thee, O tiger among men. Thou hast no
cause of fear. I will rout all thy foes in battle, O great warrior, And,
O thou of mighty arms, be at thy ease. Accomplishing great and terrible
feats in the melee, I will fight with thy foes. Tie quickly all those
quivers to my car, and take (from among those) a sword of polished blade
and adorned with gold.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Arjuna, Uttara cast off
all inactivity. And he speedily alighted from the tree, bringing with
him Arjuna's weapons. Then Arjuna addressed him, saying, 'Yes, I will
fight with the Kurus and recover thy kine. Protected by me, the top of
this car will be to thee as a citadel. The passages and alleys and other
divisions of this car will be the streets and edifices of that fortified
city. These my arms will be its ramparts and gateways. This treble pole
and my quiver will constitute defensive works inaccessible to the foe.
This my banner--single and grand--will it not alone be equal unto those
of thy city? This my bow-string will constitute the catapults and
cannons for vomiting forth missiles on the besieging host. My excited
wrath will make that fortress formidable, and the clatter of my
car-wheels--will it not resemble the kettle-drums of thy capital? Ridden
by myself wielding the _Gandiva_, this car will be incapable of being
vanquished by the hostile host, O son of Virata, let thy fear be
dispelled.'

"Uttara said, 'I am no longer afraid of these. I know thy steadiness in
battle, which is even like unto that of Kesava or Indra himself. But
reflecting on this, I am continually bewildered. Foolish as I am, I am
incapable of arriving at certain conclusion. By what distressful
circumstances could _a person of such handsome limbs and auspicious
signs become deprived of manhood_! Indeed, thou seemest to me to be
Mahadeva, or Indra, or the chief of the Gandharvas, dwelling in the
guise only of one of the third sex.'

"Arjuna said, 'I tell thee truly that I am only observing this vow for a
whole year agreeable to the behest of my elder brother. O thou of mighty
arms, I am not truly one of the neuter sex, but I have adopted this vow
of eunuchism from subservience to another's will and from desire of
religious merit. O prince, know me now to have completed my vow.'

"Uttara said, 'Thou hast conferred a great favour on me today, for I now
find that my suspicion was not altogether unfounded. Indeed, such a
person as thou, O best of men, cannot be of the neuter sex. I have now
an ally in battle. I can now fight with the celestials themselves. My
fears have been dispelled. What shall I do? Command me now. Trained in
driving cars by a learned preceptor I will, O bull among men, hold the
reins of thy horses that are capable of breaking the ranks of hostile
cars. Know me, O bull among men, to be as competent a charioteer as
Daruka of Vasudeva, or Matali of Sakra. The horse that is yoked unto the
right-hand pole (of thy car) and whose hoofs as they light on the ground
are scarcely visible when running, is like unto _Sugriva_ of Krishna.
This other handsome horse, the foremost of his race, that is yoked unto
the left pole, is, I regard, equal in speed to _Meghapushpa_. This
(third) beautiful horse, clad in golden mail, yoked unto the rear-pole
on the left, is, I regard, _Sivya_ equal in speed to but superior in
strength. And this (fourth) horse, yoked to the rear-pole on the right,
is regarded as superior to _Valahaka_ in speed and strength. This car is
worthy of bearing on the field of battle a bowman like thee, and thou
also art worthy of fighting on this car. This is what I think!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then Arjuna, endued with great energy, took off
the bracelets from his arms and wore on his hands a pair of beautiful
gloves embroidered with gold. And he then tied his black and curling
locks with a piece of white cloth. And seated on that excellent car with
face turned to the east, the mighty-armed hero, purifying his body and
concentrating his soul, recalled to his mind all his weapons. And all
the weapons came, and addressing the royal son of Partha, said, 'We are
here, O illustrious one. We are thy servants, O son of Indra.' And
bowing unto them, Partha received them unto his hands and replied unto
them, saying, 'Dwell ye all in my memory.' And obtaining all his
weapons, the hero looked cheerful. And quickly stringing his bow, the
_Gandiva_, he twanged it. And the twang of that bow was as loud as the
collision of two mighty bulls. And dreadful was the sound that filled
the earth, and violent was the wind that blew on all sides. And thick
was the shower of fallen meteors[50] and all sides were enveloped in
gloom. And the birds began to totter in the skies and large trees began
to shake.[51] And loud as the burst of the thunder, the Kurus knew from
that sound that it was Arjuna that drew with his hands the string of his
best of bows from his car. And Uttara said, 'Thou, O best of Pandavas,
art alone. These mighty car-warriors are many. How wilt thou vanquish in
battle all these that are skilled in every kind of weapon? Thou, O son
of Kunti, art without a follower, while the Kauravas have many. It is
for this, O thou of mighty arms, that I stay beside thee, stricken with
fear.' Bursting out into loud laughter, Partha said unto him, 'Be not
afraid, O hero, what friendly follower had I while fighting with the
mighty _Gandharvas_ on the occasion of the _Ghoshayatra_? Who was my
ally while engaged in the terrific conflict at _Khandava_ against so
many celestials and _Danavas_? Who was my ally when I fought, on behalf
of the lord of the celestials against the mighty _Nivatakavachas_ and
the _Paulomas_! And who was my ally, O child, while I encountered in
battle innumerable kings at the _Swayamvara_ to the princess of
Panchala? Trained in arms by the preceptor Drona, by Sakra, and
Vaisravana, and Yama, and Varuna, and Agni, and Kripa, and Krishna of
Madhu's race, and by the wielder of the _Pinaka_ (Siva), why shall I not
fight with these? Drive thou my car speedily, and let thy heart's fever
be dispelled.'"

    [50] Some texts read,--'One large meteor fell.'

    [51] In some editions read,--_Bharata dwijam_, and _Maha-hardam_
    for _maha-drumam_. The meaning would then be,--'The banners (of
    the hostile army) began to tremble in the sky, and large lakes
    were agitated.'


SECTION XLVI

Vaisampayana said, "Making Uttara his charioteer, and circumambulating
the _Sami_ tree, the son of Pandu set out taking all his weapons with
him. And that mighty car-warrior set out with Uttara as the driver of
his car, having taken down that banner with the lion's figure and
deposited it at the foot of the _Sami_ tree. And he hoisted on that car
his own golden banner bearing the figure of an ape with a lion's tail,
which was a celestial illusion contrived by Viswakarman himself. For, as
soon, indeed, as he had thought of that gift of Agni, than the latter,
knowing his wish, ordered those superhuman creatures (that usually sat
there) to take their place in that banner. And furnished with a
beautiful flag of handsome make, with quivers attached to it, and
adorned with gold, that excellent flag-staff of celestial beauty then
quickly fell from the firmament on his car.[52] And beholding that
banner arrived on his car, the hero circumambulated it (respectively).
And then the ape-bannered Vibhatsu, the son of Kunti, called also
Swetavahana, with fingers cased in leathern fences of the _Iguana_ skin,
and taking up his bow and arrows set out in a northernly direction. And
that grinder of foes, possessed of great strength, then forcibly blew
his large conch-shell, of thundering sound, capable of making the
bristles of foes to stand on their ends. And at the sound of that conch,
those steeds endued with swiftness dropped down on the ground on their
knees. And Uttara also, greatly affrighted, sat down on the car. And
thereupon the son of Kunti took the reins himself and raising the
steeds, placed them in their proper positions. And embracing Uttara, he
encouraged him also, saying, 'Fear not, O foremost of princes, thou art,
O chastiser of foes, a _Kshatriya_ by birth. Why, O tiger among men,
dost thou become so dispirited in the midst of foes? Thou must have
heard before the blare of many conchs and the note of many trumpets, and
the roar also of many elephants in the midst of ranks arrayed for
battled. Why art thou, therefore, so dispirited and agitated and
terrified by the blare of this conch, as if thou wert an ordinary
person?'

    [52] Some texts read _Maharatham_ (incorrectly) for
    _hiranmayan_. Indeed, _Maharatham_ would give no meaning in this
    connection. The incomplete edition of the Roy Press under the
    auspices of the Principal of the Calcutta Sanskrit College
    abounds with such incorrect readings and misprints.

"Uttara said, 'Heard have I the blare of many a conch and many a trumpet
and the roar of many an elephant stationed in the battle-array, but
never have I heard before the blare of such conch. Nor have I ever seen
a banner like this. Never before have I heard also the twang of a bow
such as this. Truly, sir, with the blare of this conch, the twang of
this bow, the superhuman cries of the creatures stationed on this
banner, and the battle of this car, my mind is greatly bewildered. My
perception of the directions also is confused, and my heart is painfully
afflicted. The whole firmament seemeth to me to have been covered by
this banner, and everything seemeth to be hidden from my view! My ears
also have been deafened by the twang of the _Gandiva_!'[53]

    [53] The Roy Press edition adds here a line which looks very
    much like an interpolation.

"Arjuna said, 'Firmly stand thou on the car, pressing thy feet on it,
and tightly catch hold of the bridles, for I will blow the conch
again.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Arjuna then blew his conch again, that conch which
filled foes with grief and enhanced the joy of friends. And the sound
was so loud that it seemed to split hills and mountains, and pierce
mountain-caves and the cardinal points. And Uttara once again sat down
on the car, clinging to it in fear. And with the blare of the conch and
the rattle of the car-wheels, and the twang of the Gandiva, the earth
itself seemed to tremble. And beholding Uttara's fight, Dhananjaya began
to comfort him again.'

"Meanwhile, Drona said, 'From the rattle of the car, and from the manner
in which the clouds have enveloped the sky and the earth itself
trembles, this warrior can be none else than _Savyasachin_. Our weapons
do not shine, our steeds are dispirited, and our fires, though fed with
fuel, do not blare up. All this is ominous. All our animals are setting
up a frightful howl, gazing towards the sun. The crows are perching on
our banners. All this is ominous. Yon vultures and kites on our right
portend a great danger. That jackal also, running through our ranks,
waileth dismally. Lo, it hath escaped unstruck. All this portends a
heavy calamity. The bristles also of ye all are on their ends. Surely,
this forebodes a great destruction of Kshatriyas in battle. Things
endued with light are all pale; beasts and birds look fierce; and there
are to be witnessed many terrific portents indicative of the destruction
of Kshatriyas. And these omens forebode great havoc among ourselves. O
king, thy ranks seem to be confounded by these blazing meteors, and thy
animals look dispirited and seem to be weeping. Vultures and kites are
wheeling all around thy troops. Thou shalt have to repent upon beholding
thy army afflicted by Partha's arrows. Indeed, our ranks seem to have
been already vanquished, for none is eager to go to fight. All our
warriors are of pale face, and almost deprived of their senses. Sending
the kine ahead we should stand here, ready to strike, with all our
warriors arrayed in order of battle.'"


SECTION XLVII

Vaisampayana said, "King Duryodhana then, on the field of battle said
unto Bhishma, and unto Drona--that tiger among warriors, and unto
Kripa--that mighty car-warrior, these words, 'Both myself and Karna had
said this unto the preceptors.[54] I refer to the subject again, for I
am not satisfied with having said it once. Even this was the pledge of
the sons of Pandu that if defeated (at dice) they would reside to our
