may also discern a real link between the thoughts in the
consideration that we owe even to our enemies the exhibition of a
life which a prejudiced hostility will be forced to recognise as
good. The third of these exhortations prescribes unmoved persistence
in friendly regard to all men.

Dealing then, in this sermon only, with the second and third of these
precepts, and postponing the consideration of the first to the
following discourse, we have here the counsel that

I. Hostility is to be met with a holy and beautiful life.

The Authorised Version inadequately translates the significant word
in this exhortation by 'honest.' The Apostle is not simply enjoining
honesty in our modern, narrow sense of the word, which limits it to
the rendering to every man his own. It is a remarkable thing that
'honest,' like many other words expressing various types of goodness,
has steadily narrowed in signification, and it is very characteristic
of England that probity as to money and material goods should be its
main meaning. Here the word is used in the full breadth of its
ancient use, and is equivalent to that which is fair with the moral
beauty of goodness.

A Christian man then is bound to live a life which all men will
acknowledge to be good. In that precept is implied the recognition of
even bad men's notions of morality as correct. The Gospel is not a
new system of ethics, though in some points it brings old virtues
into new prominence, and alters their perspective. It is further
implied that the world's standard of what Christians ought to be may
be roughly taken as a true one. Christian men would learn a great
deal about themselves, and might in many respects heighten their
ideal, if they would try to satisfy the expectations of the most
degraded among them as to what they ought to be. The worst of men has
a rude sense of duty which tops the attainments of the best.
Christian people ought to seek for the good opinion of those around
them. They are not to take that opinion as the motive for their
conduct, nor should they do good in order to be praised or admired
for it; but they are to 'adorn the doctrine,' and to let their light
shine that men seeing their good may be led to think more loftily of
its source, and so to 'glorify their Father which is in heaven.' That
is one way of preaching the Gospel. The world knows goodness when it
sees it, though it often hates it, and has no better ground for its
dislike of a man than that his purity and beauty of character make
the lives of others seem base indeed. Bats feel the light to be
light, though they flap against it, and the winnowing of their
leathery wings and their blundering flight are witnesses to that
against which they strike. Jesus had to say, 'The world hateth Me
because I testify of it that the deeds thereof are evil.' That
witness was the result of His being 'the Light of the world'; and if
His followers are illuminated from Him, they will have the same
effect, and must be prepared for the same response. But none the less
is it incumbent upon them to 'take thought for things honourable in
the sight of all men.'

This duty involves the others of taking care that we have goodness to
show, and that we do not make our goodness repulsive by our additions
to it. There are good people who comfort themselves when men dislike
them, or scoff at them, by thinking that their religion is the cause,
when it is only their own roughness and harshness of character. It is
not enough that we present an austere and repellent virtue; the fair
food should be set on a fair platter. This duty is especially owing
to our enemies. They are our keenest critics. They watch for our
halting. The thought of their hostile scrutiny should ever stimulate
us, and the consciousness that Argus-eyes are watching us, with a
keenness sharpened by dislike, should lead us not only to vigilance
over our own steps, but also to the prayer, 'Lead me in a plain path,
because of those who watch me.' To 'provide things honest in the
sight of all men' is a possible way of disarming some hostility,
conciliating some prejudice, and commending to some hearts the Lord
whom we seek to imitate.

II. Be sure that, if there is to be enmity, it is all on one side.

'As much as in you lieth, be at peace with all.' These words are, I
think, unduly limited when they are supposed to imply that there are
circumstances in which a Christian has a right to be at strife. As if
they meant: Be peaceable as far as you can; but if it be impossible,
then quarrel. The real meaning goes far deeper than that. 'It takes
two to make a quarrel,' says the old proverb; it takes two to make
peace also, does it not? We cannot determine whether our relations
with men will be peaceful or no; we are only answerable for our part,
and for that we are answerable. 'As much as lieth in you' is the
explanation of 'if it be possible.' Your part is to be at peace; it
is not your part up to a certain point and no further, but always,
and in all circumstances, it is your part. It may not be possible to
be at peace with all men; there may be some who _will_ quarrel with
you. You are not to blame for that, but their part and yours are
separate, and your part is the same whatever they do. Be you at peace
with all men whether they are at peace with you or not. Don't you
quarrel with them even if they will quarrel with you. That seems to
me to be plainly the meaning of the words. It would be contrary to
the tenor of the context and the teaching of the New Testament to
suppose that here we had that favourite principle, 'There is a point
beyond which forbearance cannot go,' where it becomes right to
cherish hostile sentiments or to try to injure a man. If there be such
a point, it is very remarkable that there is no attempt made in the
New Testament to define it. The nearest approach to such definition
is 'till seventy times seven,' the two perfect numbers multiplied
into themselves. So I think that this injunction absolutely
prescribes persistent, patient peacefulness, and absolutely
proscribes our taking up the position of antagonism, and under no
circumstances meeting hate with hate. It does not follow that there
is never to be opposition. It may be necessary for the good of the
opponent himself, and for the good of society, that he should be
hindered in his actions of hostility, but there is never to be
bitterness; and we must take care that none of the devil's leaven
mingles with our zeal against evil.

There is no need for enlarging on the enormous difficulty of carrying
out such a commandment in our daily lives. We all know too well how
hard it is; but we may reflect for a moment on the absolute necessity
of obeying this precept to the full. For their own souls' sakes
Christian men are to avoid all bitterness, strife, and malice. Let us
try to remember, and to bring to bear on our daily lives, the solemn
things which Jesus said about God's forgiveness being measured by our
forgiveness. The faithful, even though imperfect, following of this
exhortation would revolutionise our lives. Nothing that we can only
win by fighting with our fellows is worth fighting for. Men will
weary of antagonism which is met only by the imperturbable calm of a
heart at peace with God, and seeking peace with all men. The hot fire
of hatred dies down, like burning coals scattered on a glacier, when
laid against the crystal coldness of a patient, peaceful spirit.
Watch-dogs in farmhouses will bark half the night through because
they hear another barking a mile off. It takes two to make a quarrel;
let me be sure that I am never one of the two!




STILL ANOTHER TRIPLET

   'Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give
   place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine;
   I will repay, saith the Lord. 20. Therefore if thine
   enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink;
   for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his
   head. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
   with good.'--ROMANS xii. 19-21.


The natural instinct is to answer enmity with enmity, and kindliness
with kindliness. There are many people of whom we think well and
like, for no other reason than because we believe that they think
well of and like us. Such a love is really selfishness. In the same
fashion, dislike, and alienation on the part of another naturally
reproduce themselves in our own minds. A dog will stretch its neck to
be patted, and snap at a stick raised to strike it. It requires a
strong effort to master this instinctive tendency, and that effort
the plainest principles of Christian morality require from us all.
The precepts in our text are in twofold form, negative and positive;
and they are closed with a general principle, which includes both
these forms, and much more besides. There are two pillars, and a
great lintel coping them, like the trilithons of Stonehenge.

I. We deal with the negative precept.

'Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto wrath.' Do not
take the law into your own hands, but leave God's way of retribution
to work itself out. By avenging, the Apostle means a passionate
redress of private wrongs at the bidding of personal resentment. We
must note how deep this precept goes. It prohibits not merely
external acts which, in civilised times are restrained by law, but,
as with Christian morality, it deals with thoughts and feelings, and
not only with deeds. It forbids such natural and common thoughts as
'I owe him an ill turn for that'; 'I should like to pay him off.' A
great deal of what is popularly called 'a proper spirit' becomes
extremely improper if tested by this precept. There is an eloquent
word in German which we can only clumsily reproduce, which christens
the ugly pleasure at seeing misfortune and calls it 'joy in others'
disasters.' We have not the word; would that we had not the thing!

A solemn reason is added for the difficult precept, in that
frequently misunderstood saying, 'Give place unto wrath.' The
question is, Whose wrath? And, plainly, the subsequent words of the
section show that it is God's. That quotation comes from Deuteronomy
xxxii. 35. It is possibly unfortunate that 'vengeance' is ascribed to
God; for hasty readers lay hold of the idea of passionate resentment,
and transfer it to Him, whereas His retributive action has in it no
resentment and no passion. Nor are we to suppose that the thought
here is only the base one, _they are sure to be punished, so we
need not trouble_. The Apostle points to the solemn fact of
retribution as an element in the Divine government. It is not merely
automatically working laws which recompense evil by evil,
but it is the face of the Lord which is inexorably and inevitably set
'against them that do evil.' That recompense is not hidden away in
the future behind the curtain of death, but is realised in the
present, as every evil-doer too surely and bitterly experiences.

'Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord.' God only has the
right to recompense the ungodly and the sinner as well as the
righteous. Dwelling in such a system as we do, how dares any one take
that work into his hands? It requires perfect knowledge of the true
evil of an action, which no one has who cannot read the heart; it
requires perfect freedom from passion; it requires perfect immunity
from evil desert on the part of the avenger; in a word, it belongs to
God, and to Him alone. We have nothing to do with apportioning
retribution to desert, either in private actions or in the treatment
of so-called criminals. In the latter our objects should be
reformation and the safety of society. If we add to these
retribution, we transcend our functions.

II. Take the positive,--Follow God's way of meeting hostility with
beneficence.

The hungry enemy is to be fed, the thirsty to be given drink; and the
reason is, that such beneficence will 'heap coals of fire upon his
head.' The negative is not enough. To abstain from vengeance will
leave the heart unaffected, and may simply issue in the cessation of
all intercourse. The reason assigned sounds at first strange. It is
clear that the 'coals of fire' which are to be heaped on the head are
meant to melt and soften the heart, and cause it to glow with love.
There may be also included the burning pangs of shame felt by a man
whose evil is answered by good. But these are secondary and auxiliary
to the true end of kindling the fire of love in his alienated heart.
The great object which every Christian man is bound to have in view
is to win over the enemy and melt away misconceptions and hostility.
It is not from any selfish regard to one's own personal ease that we
are so to act, but because of the sacred regard which Christ has
taught us to cherish for the blessing of peace amongst men, and in
order that we may deliver a brother from the snare, and make him
share in the joys of fellowship with God. The only way to burn up the
evil in his heart is by heaping coals of kindness and beneficence on
his head. And for such an end it becomes us to watch for
opportunities. We have to mark the right moment, and make sure that
we time our offer for food when he is hungry and of drink when he
thirsts; for often _mal-a-propos_ offers of kindness make things
worse. Such is God's way. His thunderbolts we cannot grasp, His love
we can copy. Of the two weapons mercy and judgment which He holds in
His hand, the latter is emphatically His own; the former should be
ours too.

III. In all life meet and conquer evil with good.

This last precept, 'Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good,' is cast into a form which covers not only relations to
enemies, but all contact with evil of every kind. It involves many
great thoughts which can here be only touched. It implies that in all
our lives we have to fight evil, and that it conquers, and we are
beaten when we are led to do it. It is only conquered by being
transformed into good. We overcome our foes when we win them to be
lovers. We overcome our temptations to doing wrong when we make them
occasions for developing virtues; we overcome the evil of sorrow when
we use it to bring us nearer to God; we overcome the men around us
when we are not seduced by their example to evil, but attract them to
goodness by ours.

Evil is only thus transformed by the positive exercise of goodness on
our part. We have seen this in regard to enemies in the preceding
remarks. In regard to other forms of evil, it is often better not to
fight them directly, but to occupy the mind and heart with positive
truth and goodness, and the will and hands with active service. A
rusty knife shall not be cleaned so effectually by much scouring as
by strenuous use. Our lives are to be moulded after the great example
of Him, who at almost the last moment of His earthly course said, 'Be
of good cheer: I have overcome the world.' Jesus seeks to conquer
evil in us all, and counts that He has conquered it when He has
changed it into love.




LOVE AND THE DAY

   'Owe no man anything, but to love one another: for he that
   loveth another hath fulfilled the law. 9. For this, Thou
   shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt
   not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not
   covet; and if there be any other commandment it is briefly
   comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself. 10. Love worketh no ill to his neighbour:
   therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. 11. And that,
   knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
   sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.
   12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us
   therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put
   on the armour of light, 13. Let us walk honestly, as in
   the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
   and wantonness, not in strife and envying: 14. But put ye
   on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
   flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.'--ROMANS xiii. 8-14.


The two paragraphs of this passage are but slightly connected. The
first inculcates the obligation of universal love; and the second
begins by suggesting, as a motive for the discharge of that duty, the
near approach of 'the day.' The light of that dawn draws Paul's eyes
and leads him to wider exhortations on Christian purity as befitting
the children of light.

I. Verses 8-10 set forth the obligation of a love which embraces all
men, and comprehends all duties to them. The Apostle has just been
laying down the general exhortation, 'Pay every man his due' and
applying it especially to the Christian's relation to civic rulers.
He repeats it in a negative form, and bases on it the obligation of
loving every man. That love is further represented as the sum and
substance of the law. Thus Paul brings together two thoughts which
are often dealt with as mutually exclusive,--namely, love and law. He
does not talk sentimentalisms about the beauty of charity and the
like, but lays it down, as a 'hard and fast rule,' that we are bound
to love every man with whom we come in contact; or, as the Greek has
it, 'the other.'

That is the first plain truth taught here. Love is not an emotion
which we may indulge or not, as we please. It is not to select its
objects according to our estimate of their lovableness or goodness.
But we are bound to love, and that all round, without distinction of
beautiful or ugly, good or bad. 'A hard saying; who can hear it?'
Every man is our creditor for that debt. He does not get his due from
us unless he gets love. Note, further, that the debt of love is never
discharged. After all payments it still remains owing. There is no
paying in full of all demands, and, as Bengel says, it is an undying
debt. We are apt to weary of expending love, especially on unworthy
recipients, and to think that we have wiped off all claims, and it
may often be true that our obligations to others compel us to cease
helping one; but if we laid Paul's words to heart, our patience would
be longer-breathed, and we should not be so soon ready to shut hearts
and purses against even unthankful suitors.

Further, Paul here teaches us that this debt (_debitum_, 'duty') of
love includes all duties. It is the fulfilling of the law, inasmuch
as it will secure the conduct which the law prescribes. The Mosaic
law itself indicates this, since it recapitulates the various
commandments of the second table, in the one precept of love to our
neighbour (Lev. xix. 18). Law enjoins but has no power to get its
injunctions executed. Love enables and inclines to do all that law
prescribes, and to avoid all that it prohibits. The multiplicity of
duties is melted into unity; and that unity, when it comes into act,
unfolds into whatsoever things are lovely and of good report. Love is
the mother tincture which, variously diluted and manipulated, yields
all potent and fragrant draughts. It is the white light which the
prism of daily life resolves into its component colours.

But Paul seems to limit the action of love here to negative doing no
ill. That is simply because the commandments are mostly negative, and
that they are is a sad token of the lovelessness natural to us all.
But do we love ourselves only negatively, or are we satisfied with
doing ourselves no harm? That stringent pattern of love to others not
only prescribes degree, but manner. It teaches that true love to men
is not weak indulgence, but must sometimes chastise, and thwart, and
always must seek their good, and not merely their gratification.

Whoever will honestly seek to apply that negative precept of working
no ill to others, will find it positive enough. We harm men when we
fail to help them. If we can do them a kindness, and do it not, we do
them ill. Non-activity for good is activity for evil. Surely, nothing
can be plainer than the bearing of this teaching on the Christian
duty as to intoxicants. If by using these a Christian puts a
stumbling-block in the way of a weak will, then he is working ill to
his neighbour, and that argues absence of love, and that is
dishonest, shirking payment of a plain debt.

II. The great stimulus to love and to all purity is set forth as
being the near approach--of the day (verses 11-14). 'The day,' in
Paul's writing, has usually the sense of the great day of the Lord's
return, and may have that meaning here; for, as Jesus has told us,
'it is not for' even inspired Apostles 'to know the times or the
seasons,' and it is no dishonour to apostolic inspiration to assign
to it the limits which the Lord has assigned.

But, whether we take this as the meaning of the phrase, or regard it
simply as pointing to the time of death as the dawning of heaven's
day, the weight of the motive is unaffected. The language is vividly
picturesque. The darkness is thinning, and the blackness turning
grey. Light begins to stir and whisper. A band of soldiers lies
asleep, and, as the twilight begins to dawn, the bugle call summons
them to awake, to throw off their night-gear,--namely, the works
congenial to darkness,--and to brace on their armour of light. Light
may here be regarded as the material of which the glistering armour
is made; but, more probably, the expression means weapons appropriate
to the light.

Such being the general picture, we note the fact which underlies the
whole representation; namely, that every life is a definite whole
which has a fixed end. Jesus said, 'We must work the works of Him
that sent Me, while it is day: the night cometh.' Paul uses the
opposite metaphors in these verses. But, though the two sayings are
opposite in form, they are identical in substance. In both, the
predominant thought is that of the rapidly diminishing space of
earthly life, and the complete unlikeness to it of the future. We
stand like men on a sandbank with an incoming tide, and every wash of
the waves eats away its edges, and presently it will yield below our
feet. We forget this for the most part, and perhaps it is not well
that it should be ever present; but that it should never be present
is madness and sore loss.

Paul, in his intense moral earnestness, in verse 13, bids us regard
ourselves as already in 'the day,' and shape our conduct as if it
shone around us and all things were made manifest by its light. The
sins to be put off are very gross and palpable. They are for the most
part sins of flesh, such as even these Roman Christians had to be
warned against, and such as need to be manifested by the light even
now among many professing Christian communities.

But Paul has one more word to say. If he stopped without it, he would
have said little to help men who are crying out, 'How am I to strip
off this clinging evil, which seems my skin rather than my clothing?
How am I to put on that flashing panoply?' There is but one way,--put
on the Lord Jesus Christ. If we commit ourselves to Him by faith, and
front our temptations in His strength, and thus, as it were, wrap
ourselves in Him, He will be to us dress and armour, strength and
righteousness. Our old self will fall away, and we shall take no
forethought for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.




SALVATION NEARER

   '... Now is our salvation nearer than
   when we believed.'--ROMANS xiii. 11.


There is no doubt, I suppose, that the Apostle, in common with the
whole of the early Church, entertained more or less consistently the
expectation of living to witness the second coming of Jesus Christ.
There are in Paul's letters passages which look both in the direction
of that anticipation, and in the other one of expecting to taste
death. 'We which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord,'
he says twice in one chapter. 'I am ready to be offered, and the hour
of my departure is at hand,' he says in his last letter.

Now this contrariety of anticipation is but the natural result of
what our Lord Himself said, 'It is not for you to know the times and
the seasons,' and no one, who is content to form his doctrine of the
knowledge resulting from inspiration from the words of Jesus Christ
Himself, need stumble in the least degree in recognising the plain
fact that Paul and his brother Apostles did not know when the Master
was to come. Christ Himself had told them that there was a chamber
locked against their entrance, and therefore we do not need to think
that it militates against the authoritative inspiration of these
early teachers of the Church, if they, too, searched 'what manner of
time the Spirit which was in them did signify when it testified
beforehand ... the glory that should follow.'

Now, my text is evidently the result of the former of these two
anticipations, viz. that Paul and his generation were probably to see
the coming of the Lord from heaven. And to him the thought that' the
night was far spent,' as the context says, 'and the day was at hand,'
underlay his most buoyant hope, and was the inspiration and
motive-spring of his most strenuous effort.

Now, our relation to the closing moments of our own earthly lives, to
the fact of death, is precisely the same as that of the Apostle and
his brethren to the coming of the Lord. We, too, stand in that
position of partial ignorance, and for us practically the words of my
text, and all their parallel words, point to how we should think of,
and how we should be affected by, the end to which we are coming. And
this is the grand characteristic of the Christian view of that last
solemn moment. 'Now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.'
So I would note, first of all, what these words teach us should be
the Christian view of our own end; and, second, to what conduct that
view should lead us.

I. The Christian view of death.

'Now is our salvation nearer.' We have to think away by faith and
hope all the grim externals of death, and to get to the heart of the
thing. And then everything that is repulsive, everything that makes
flesh and blood shrink, disappears and is evaporated, and beneath the
folds of his black garment, there is revealed God's last, sweetest,
most triumphant angel-messenger to Christian souls, the great,
strong, silent Angel of Death, and he carries in his hand the gift of
a full salvation. That is what our Apostle rose to the rapture of
beholding, when he knew that the thought of his surviving till Christ
came again must be put away, and when close to the last moment of his
life, he said, 'The Lord shall deliver me, and save me into His
everlasting kingdom.' What was the deliverance and being saved that
he expected and expresses in these words? Immunity from punishment?
Escape from the headsman's axe? Being 'delivered from the mouth of
the lion,' the persecuting fangs of the bloody Nero? By no means. He
knew that death was at hand, and he said, 'He will save me'--not from
it, but through it--'into His everlasting kingdom.' And so in the
words of my text we may say--though Paul did not mean them so--as we
see the distance between us, and that certain close, dwindling,
dwindling, dwindling: 'Now,' as moment after moment ticks itself into
the past, 'now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.'
Children, when they are getting near their holidays, take strips of
paper, and tear off a piece as each day passes. And as we tear off
the days let us feel that we are drawing closer to our home, and that
the blessedness laid up for us in it is drawing nearer to us. 'Our
salvation,' not our destruction, our fuller life, not in any true
sense of the word our 'death,' is 'nearer than when we believed.'

But some one may say, 'Is a man not saved till after he is dead?' Is
salvation future, not coming till after the grave? No, certainly not.
There are three aspects of that word in Scripture. Sometimes the New
Testament writers treat salvation as past, and represent a Christian
as being invested with the possession of it all at the very moment of
his first faith. That is true, that whatever is yet to be evolved
from what is given to the poorest and foulest sinner, in the moment
of his initial faith in Christ, there is nothing to be added to it.
The salvation which the penitent thief received on the cross is all
the salvation that he was ever to get. But out of it there came
welling and welling and welling, when he had passed into the region
'where beyond these voices there is peace'--there came welling out
from that inexhaustible fountain which was opened in him all the
fullnesses of an eternal progress in the heavens. And so it is with
us. Salvation is a past gift which we received when we believed.

But in another aspect, which is also emphatically stated in
Scripture, it is a progressive process, and not merely a gift
bestowed once for all in the past. I do not dwell upon that thought,
but just remind you of a turn of expression which occurs in various
connections more than once. 'The Lord added to the Church daily such
as were being saved,' says Luke. Still more emphatically in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle puts into antithesis the two
progressive processes, and speaks of the Gospel as being preached,
and being a savour of life unto life 'to them that are being saved,'
and a savour of destruction 'to them that are being lost.' No moral
or spiritual condition is stereotyped or stagnant. It is all
progressive. And so the salvation that is given once for all is ever
being unfolded, and the Christian life on earth is the unfolding of
it.

But in another aspect still, such as is presented in my text, and in
other parallel passages, that salvation is regarded as lying on the
other side of the flood, because the manifestations of it there, the
evolving there of what is in it, and the great gifts that come then,
are so transcendently above all even of our selectest experiences
here, that they are, as it were, new, though still their roots are in
the old. The salvation which culminates in the absolute removal from
our whole being of all manner of evil, whether it be sorrow or sin,
and in the conclusive bestowal upon us of all manner of good, whether
it be righteousness or joy, and which has for its seal 'the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of the body,' so that body, soul, and spirit
'make one music as before, but vaster,' is so far beyond the germs of
itself which here we experience that my text and its like are amply
vindicated. And the man who is most fully persuaded and conscious
that he possesses the salvation of God, and most fully and blessedly
aware that that salvation is gradually gaining power in his life, is
the very man who will most feel that between its highest
manifestation on earth, and its lowest in the heavens there is such a
gulf as that the wine that he will drink there at the Father's table
is indeed new wine. And so 'is our salvation nearer,' though we
already possess it, 'than when we believed.'

Dear brethren, if these things be true, and if to die is to be saved
into the kingdom, do not two thoughts result? The one is that that
blessed consummation should occupy more of our thoughts than I am
afraid it does. As life goes on, and the space dwindles between us
and it, we older people naturally fall into the way, unless we are
fools, of more seriously and frequently turning our thoughts to the
end. I suppose the last week of a voyage to Australia has far more
thoughts in it about the landing next week than the two or three
first days of beating down the English Channel had. I do not want to
put old heads on young shoulders in this or in any other respect. But
sure I am that it does belong very intimately to the strength of our
Christian characters that we should, as the Psalmist says, be 'wise'
to 'consider our latter end.'

The other thought that follows is as plain, viz. that that
anticipation should always be buoyant, hopeful, joyous. We have
nothing to do with the sad aspects of parting from earth. They are
all but non-existent for the Christian consciousness, when it is as
vigorous and God-directed as it ought to be. They drop into the
background, and sometimes are lost to sight altogether. Remember how
this Apostle, when he does think about death, looks at it with--I was
going to quote words which may strike you as being inappropriate--'a
frolic welcome'; how, at all events, he is neither a bit afraid of
it, nor does he see in it anything from which to shrink. He speaks of
being with Christ, which is far better; 'absent from the body,
present with the Lord'; 'the dissolution of the earthly house of this
tabernacle'--the tumbling down of the old clay cottage in order that
a stately palace of marble and precious stones may be reared upon its
site; 'the hour of my departure is at hand; I have finished the
fight.' Peter, too, chimes in with his words: 'My exodus; my
departure,' and both of the two are looking, if not longingly, at all
events without a tremor of the eyelid, into the very eyeballs of the
messenger whom most men feel so hideous. Is it not a wonderful gift
to Christian souls that by faith in Jesus Christ, the realm in which
their hope can expatiate is more than doubled, and annexes the dim
lands beyond the frontier of death? Dear friends, if we are living in
Christ, the thought of the end and that here we are absent from home,
ought to be infinitely sweet, of whatever superficial terrors this
poor, shrinking flesh may still be conscious. And I am sure that the
nearer we get to our Saviour, and the more we realise the joyous
possession of salvation as already ours, and the more we are
conscious of the expanding of that gift in our hearts, the more we
shall be delivered from that fear of death which makes men all their
'lifetime subject to bondage.' So I beseech you to aim at this, that,
when you look forward, the furthest thing you see on the horizon of
earth may be that great Angel of Death coming to save you into the
everlasting kingdom.

Now, just a word about

II. The conduct to which such a hope should incite.

The Apostle puts it very plainly in the context, and we need but
expand in a word or two what he teaches us there. 'And that knowing
the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep, for now is
our salvation nearer than when we believed.' To what does he refer by
'that'? The whole of the practical exhortations to a Christian life
which have been given before. Everything that is duty becomes tenfold
more stringent and imperative when we apprehend the true meaning of
that last moment. They tell us that it is unwholesome to be thinking
about death and the beyond, because to do so takes away interest from
much of our present occupations and weakens energy. If there is
anything from which a man is wrenched away because he steadily
contemplates the fact of being wrenched away altogether from
everything before long, it is something that he had better be
wrenched from. And if there be any occupations which dwindle into
nothingness, and into which a man cannot for the life of him fling
himself with any thoroughgoing enthusiasm or interest, if once the
thought of death stirs in him, depend upon it they are occupations
which are in themselves contemptible and unworthy. All good aims will
gain greater power over us; we shall have a saner estimate of what is
worth living for; we shall have a new standard of what is the
relative importance of things; and if some that looked very great
turn out to be very small when we let that searching light in upon
them, and others which seemed very insignificant spring suddenly up
into dominating magnitude--that new and truer perspective will be all
clear gain. The more we feel that our salvation is sweeping towards
us, as it were, from the throne of God through the blue abysses, the
more diligently we shall 'work while it is called day,' and the more
earnestly we shall seek, when the Saviour and His salvation come, to
be found with loins girt for all strenuous work, and lamps burning in
all the brightness of the light of a Christian character.

Further, says Paul, this hopeful, cheerful contemplation of
approaching salvation should lead us to cast off the evil, and to put
on the good. You will remember the heart-stirring imagery which the
Apostle employs in the context, where he says, 'The day is at hand;
let us therefore fling off the works of darkness'--as men in the
morning, when the daylight comes through the window, and makes them
lift their eyelids, fling off their night-gear--'and let us put on
the armour of light.' We are soldiers, and must be clad in what will
be bullet-proof, and will turn a sword's edge. And where shall steel
of celestial temper be found that can resist the fiery darts shot at
the Christian soldier? His armour must be 'of light.' Clad in the
radiance of Christian character he will be invulnerable. And how can
we, who have robed ourselves in the works of darkness, either cast
them off or array ourselves in sparkling armour of light? Paul tells
us, 'Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh.' The picture is of a camp of sleeping soldiers; the night
wears thin, the streaks of saffron are coming in the dawning east.
One after another the sleepers awake; they cast aside their
night-gear, and they brace on the armour that sparkles in the beams
of the morning sun. So they are ready when the trumpet sounds the
reveille, and with the morning comes the Captain of the Lord's host,
and with the Captain comes the perfecting of the salvation which is
drawing nearer and nearer to us, as our moments glide through our
fingers like the beads of a rosary. Many men think of death and fear;
the Christian should think of death--and hope.




THE SOLDIER'S MORNING-CALL

   'Let us put on the armour of light.'--ROMANS xiii. 12.


It is interesting to notice that the metaphor of the Christian armour
occurs in Paul's letters throughout his whole course. It first
appears, in a very rudimentary form, in the earliest of the Epistles,
that to the Thessalonians. It appears here in a letter which belongs
to the middle of his career, and it appears finally in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, in its fully developed and drawn-out shape, at almost
the end of his work. So we may fairly suppose that it was one of his
familiar thoughts. Here it has a very picturesque addition, for the
picture that is floating before his vivid imagination is that of a
company of soldiers, roused by the morning bugle, casting off their
night-gear because the day is beginning to dawn, and bracing on the
armour that sparkles in the light of the rising sun. 'That,' says
Paul, 'is what you Christian people ought to be. Can you not hear the
notes of the reveille? The night is far spent; the day is at hand;
therefore let us put off the works of darkness--the night-gear that
was fit for those hours of slumber. Toss it away, and put on the
armour that belongs to the day.'

Now, I am not going to ask or try to answer the question of how far
this Apostolic exhortation is based upon the Apostle's expectation
that the world was drawing near its end. That does not matter at all
for us at present, for the fact which he expresses as the foundation
of this exhortation is true about us all, and about our position in
the midst of these fleeting shadows round us. We are hastening to the
dawning of the true day. And so let me try to emphasise the
exhortation here, old and threadbare and commonplace as it is,
because we all need it, at whatever point of life's journey we have
arrived.

Now, the first thing that strikes me is that the garb for the man
expectant of the day is armour.

We might have anticipated something very different in accordance with
the thoughts that Paul's imagery here suggests, about the difference
between the night which is so swiftly passing, and is full of enemies
and dangers, and the day which is going to dawn, and is full of light
and peace and joy. We might have expected that he would have said,
'Let us put on the festal robes.' But no! 'The night is far spent;
the day is at hand.' But the dress that befits the expectant of the
day is not yet the robe of the feast, but it is 'the armour' which,
put into plain words, means just this, that there is fighting, always
fighting, to be done. If you are ever to belong to the day, you have
to equip yourselves _now_ with armour and weapons. I do not need
to dwell upon that, but I do wish to insist upon this fact, that
after all that may be truly said about growth in grace, and the
peaceful approximation towards perfection in the Christian character,
we cannot dispense with the other element in progress, and that is
fighting. We have to struggle for every step. _Growth_ is not enough
to define completely the process by which men become conformed to the
image of the Father, and are 'made meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light.' Growth does express part of it,
but only a part. Conflict is needed to come in, before you have the
whole aspect of Christian progress before your minds. For there will
always be antagonism without and traitors within. There will always
be recalcitrant horses that need to be whipped up, and jibbing horses
that need to be dragged forward, and shying ones that need to be
violently coerced and kept in the traces. Conflict is the law,
because of the enemies, and because of the conspiracy between the
weakness within and the things without that appeal to it.

We hear a great deal to-day about being 'sanctified by faith.' I
believe that as much as any man, but the office of faith is to bring
us the power that cleanses, and the application of that power
requires our work, and it requires our fighting. So it is not enough
to say, 'Trust for your sanctifying as you have trusted for your
justifying and acceptance,' but you have to work out what you get by
your faith, and you will never work it out unless you fight against
your unworthy self, and the temptations of the world. The garb of the
candidate for the day is armour.

And there is another side to that same thought, and that is, the more
vivid our expectations of that blessed dawn the more complete should
be our bracing on of the armour. The anticipation of that future, in
very many instances, in the Christian Church, has led to precisely
the opposite state of mind. It has induced people to drop into mere
fantastic sentiment, or to ignore this contemptible present, and
think that they have nothing to do with it, and are only 'waiting for
the coming of the Lord,' and the like. Paul says, 'Just because, on
your eastern horizon, you can see the pink flush that tells that the
night is gone, and the day is coming, therefore do not be a
sentimentalist, do not be idle, do not be negligent or contemptuous
of the daily tasks; but because you see it, put on the armour of
light, and whether the time between the rising of the whole orb of
the sun on the horizon be long or short, fill the hours with
triumphant conflict. Put on the whole armour of light.'

Again, note here what the armour is. Of course that phrase, 'the
armour of light,' may be nothing more than a little bit of colour put
in by a picturesque imagination, and may suggest simply how the
burnished steel would shine and glitter when the sunbeams smote it,
and the glistening armour, like that of Spenser's Red Cross Knight,
would make a kind of light in the dark cave, into which he went. Or
it may mean 'the armour that befits the light'; as is perhaps
suggested by the antithesis 'the works of darkness,' which are to be
'put off.' These are works that match the darkness, and similarly the
armour is to be the armour that befits the light, and that can flash
back its beams. But I think there is more than that in the
expression. I would rather take the phrase to be parallel to another
of this Apostle's, who speaks in 2nd Corinthians of the 'armour of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left.' 'Light' makes the
armour, 'righteousness' makes the armour. The two phrases say the
same thing, the one in plain English, the other in figure, which
being brought down to daily life is just this, that the true armour
and weapon of a Christian man is Christian character. 'Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report,' these are the pieces of armour, and these are the
weapons which we are to wield. A Christian man fights against evil in
himself by putting on good. The true way to empty the heart of sin is
to fill the heart with righteousness. The lances of the light,
according to the significant old Greek myth, slew pythons. The armour
is 'righteousness on the right hand and on the left.' Stick to plain,
simple, homely duties, and you will find that they will defend your
heart against many a temptation. A flask that is full of rich wine
may be plunged into the saltest ocean, and not a drop will find its
way in. Fill your heart with righteousness; your lives--let them
glisten in the light, and the light will be your armour. God is
light, wherefore God cannot be tempted with evil. 'Walk in the light,
as He is in the light' ... and 'the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth
from all sin.'

But there is another side to that thought, for if you will look, at
your leisure, to the closing words of the chapter, you will find the
Apostle's own exposition of what putting on the armour of light
means. 'Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ'--that is his explanation of
putting on 'the armour of light.' For 'once ye were darkness, but now
are ye light in the Lord,' and it is in the measure in which we are
united to Him, by the faith which binds us to Him, and by the love
which works obedience and conformity, that we wear the invulnerable
armour of light. Christ Himself is, and He supplies to all, the
separate graces which Christian men can wear. We may say that He is
'the panoply of God,' as Paul calls it in Ephesians, and when we wear
Him, and only in the measure in which we do wear Him, in that measure
are we clothed with it. And so the last thing that I would point out
here is that the obedience to these commands requires continual
effort.

The Christians in Rome, to whom Paul was writing, were no novices in
the Christian life. Long ago many of them had been brought to Him.
But the oldest Christian amongst them needed the exhortation as much
as the rawest recruit in the ranks. Continual renewal day by day is
what we need, and it will not be secured without a great deal of
work. Seeing that there is a 'putting off' to go along with the
'putting on,' the process is a very long one. ''Tis a lifelong task
till the lump be leavened.' It is a lifelong task till we strip off
all the rags of this old self; and 'being clothed,' are not 'found
naked.' It takes a lifetime to fathom Jesus; it takes a lifetime to
appropriate Jesus, it takes a lifetime to be clothed with Jesus. And
the question comes to each of us, have we 'put off the old man with
his deeds'? Are we daily, as sure as we put on our clothes in the
morning, putting on Christ the Lord?

For notice with what solemnity the Apostle gives the master His full,
official, formal title here, 'put ye on the _Lord Jesus Christ_.' Do
we put Him on as _Lord_; bowing our whole wills to Him, and accepting
Him, His commandments, promises, providences, with glad submission?
Do we put on _Jesus_, recognising in His manhood as our Brother not
only the pattern of our lives, but the pledge that the pattern, by
