for which thou longest.  Is not Holy communion his own pledge that
he will do so?  Is not that God's own sign to thee, that though thou
canst not feed and strengthen thine own soul, he can and will feed
and strengthen it; and feed it--mystery of mysteries--with himself;
that God may dwell in thee, and thou in God.  And if God and Christ
live in thee, and work in thee to will and to do of their own good
pleasure, that shall be enough for thee, and thou shall be
satisfied.

And just so, again, with that same thirst after truth.  That, too,
can only be satisfied by God, and in God.  Not by the reading of
books, however true; not by listening to sermons, however clever;
can we see light:  but only in the light of God.  Know God.  Know
that he is justice itself, order itself, love itself, patience
itself, pity itself.  In the light of that, all things will become
light and bright to thee.  Matters which seemed to have nothing to
do with God, the thought of God will explain to thee, if thou
thinkest aright concerning God; and the true knowledge of him will
be the key to all other true knowledge in heaven and earth.  For the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and a good
understanding have all they that do thereafter.  Must it not be so?
How can it be otherwise?  For in God all live and move and have
their being; and all things which he has made are rays from off his
glory, and patterns of his perfect mind.  As the Maker is, so is his
work; if, therefore, thou wouldest judge rightly of the work,
acquaint thyself with the Maker of it, and know first, and know for
ever, that his name is Love.

Thus, sooner or later, in God the Father's good time, will thy
thirst for truth be satisfied, and thou shalt see the light of God.
He may keep thee long waiting for full truth.  He may send thee by
strange and crooked paths.  He may exercise and strain thy reason by
doubts, mistakes, and failures; but sooner or later, if thou dost
not faint and grow weary, he will show to thee the thing which thou
knewest not; for he is thy Father, and wills that all his children,
each according to their powers, should share not only in his
goodness, but in his wisdom also.

Do any of you say, 'These are words too deep for us; they are for
learned people, clever, great saints?'  I think not.

I have seen poor people, ignorant people, sick people, poor old
souls on parish pay, satisfied with the plenteousness of God's
house, and drinking so freely of God's pleasure, that they knew no
thirst, fretted not, never were discontented.  All vain longings
after this and that were gone from their hearts.  They had very
little; but it seemed to be enough.  They had nothing indeed, which
we could call pleasure in this world; but somehow what they had
satisfied them, because it came from God.  They had a hidden
pleasure, joy, content, and peace.

They had found out that with God was the well of life; that in God
they lived and moved, and had their being.  And as long as their
souls lived in God, full of the eternal life and goodness, obeying
his laws, loving the thing which he commanded, and desiring what he
promised, they could trust him for their poor worn-out dying bodies,
that he would not let them perish, but raise them up again at the
last day.  They knew very little; but what they did know was full of
light.  Cheerful and hopeful they were always; for they saw all
things in the light of God.  They knew that God was light, and God
was love; that his love was shining down on them and on all around
them, warming, cheering, quickening into life all things which he
had made; so that when the world should have looked most dark to
them, it looked most bright, because they saw it lightened up by the
smile of their Father in heaven.

O may God bring us all to such an old age, that, as our mortal
bodies decay, our souls may be renewed day by day; that as the life
of our bodies grows cold and feeble, the life of our souls may grow
richer, warmer, stronger, more useful to all around us, for ever and
ever; that as the light of this life fades, the light of our souls
may grow brighter, fuller, deeper; till all is clear to us in the
everlasting light of God, in that perfect day for which St. Paul
thirsted through so many weary years; when he should no more see
through a glass darkly, or prophesy in part, and talk as a child,
but see face to face, and know even as he was known.



SERMON III.  THE TRANSFIGURATION



(Preached before the Queen.)

Matthew xvii. 2 and 9.  And he was transfigured before them. . . .
And he charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the
Son of Man be risen again from the dead.

Any one who will consider the gospels, will see that there is a
peculiar calm, a soberness and modesty about them, very different
from what we should have expected to find in them.  Speaking, as
they do, of the grandest person who ever trod this earth, of the
grandest events which ever happened upon this earth--of the events,
indeed, which settled the future of this earth for ever,--one would
not be surprised at their using grand words--the grandest they could
find.  If they had gone off into beautiful poetry; if they had
filled pages with words of astonishment, admiration, delight; if
they had told us their own thoughts and feelings at the sight of our
Lord; if they had given us long and full descriptions of our Lord's
face and figure, even (as forged documents have pretended to do) to
the very colour of his hair, we should have thought it but natural.

But there is nothing of the kind in either of the four gospels, even
when speaking of the most awful matters.  Their words are as quiet
and simple and modest as if they were written of things which might
be seen every day.  When they tell of our Lord's crucifixion, for
instance, how easy, natural, harmless, right, as far as we can see,
it would have been to have poured out their own feelings about the
most pitiable and shameful crime ever committed upon earth; to have
spoken out all their own pity, terror, grief, indignation; and to
have stirred up ours thereby.  And yet all they say is,--'And they
crucified him.'  They feel that is enough.  The deed is too dark to
talk about.  Let it tell its own story to all human hearts.

So with this account of the Lord's transfiguration.  'And he took
Peter, and James, and John, his brother, up into a high mountain,
apart, and was transfigured before them; and his face did shine as
the sun; and his raiment was white as the light; . . . and while he
yet spake a bright cloud overshadowed them; and, behold, a voice out
of the cloud, which said:  This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.  Hear ye him.'

How soberly, simply, modestly, they tell this strange story.  How
differently they might have told it.  A man might write whole poems,
whole books of philosophy, about that transfiguration, and yet never
reach the full depth of its beauty and of its meaning.  But the
evangelists do not even try to do that.  As with the crucifixion, as
with all the most wonderful passages of our Lord's life, they simply
say what happened, and let the story bring its own message home to
our hearts.

What may we suppose is the reason of this great stillness and
soberness of the gospels?  I believe that it may be explained thus.
The men who wrote them were too much _awed_ by our Lord, to make
more words about him than they absolutely needed.

Our Lord was too utterly _beyond_ them.  They felt that they could
not understand him; could not give a worthy picture of him.  He was
too noble, too awful, in spite of all his tenderness, for any words
of theirs, however fine.  We all know that the holiest things, the
deepest feelings, the most beautiful sights, are those about which
we talk least, and least like to hear others talk.  Putting them
into words seems impertinent, profane.  No one needs to gild gold,
or paint the lily.  When we see a glorious sunset; when we hear the
rolling of the thunder-storm; we do not _talk_ about them; we do not
begin to cry, How awful, how magnificent; we admire them in silence,
and let them tell their own story.  Who that ever truly loved his
wife talked about his love to her?  Who that ever came to Holy
Communion in spirit and in truth, tried to put into words what he
felt as he knelt before Christ's altar?  When God speaks, man had
best keep silence.

So it was, I suppose, with the writers of the gospels.  They had
been in too grand company for them to speak freely of what they felt
there.  They had seen such sights, and heard such words, that they
were inclined to be silent, and think over it all, and only wrote
because they must write.  They felt that our Lord, as I say, was
utterly beyond them, too unlike any one whom they had ever met
before; too perfect, too noble, for them to talk about him.  So they
simply set down his words as he spoke them, and his works as he did
them, as far as they could recollect, and left them to tell their
own story.  Even St. John, who was our Lord's beloved friend, who
seems to have caught and copied exactly his way of speaking, seems
to feel that there was infinitely more in our Lord than he could put
into words, and ends with confessing,--'And there are also many more
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every
one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the
books that should be written.'

The first reason then, I suppose, for the evangelists' modesty, was
their awe and astonishment at our Lord.  The next, I think, may have
been that they wished to copy him, and so to please him.  It surely
must have been so, if, as all good Christians believe, they were
inspired to write our Lord's life.  The Lord would inspire them to
write as he would like his life to be written, as he would have
written it (if it be reverent to speak of such a thing) himself.
They were inspired by Christ's Spirit; and, therefore, they wrote
according to the Spirit of Christ, soberly, humbly, modestly,
copying the character of Christ.

Think upon that word _modestly_.  I am not sure that it is the best;
I only know that it is the best which I can find, to express one
excellence which we see in our Lord, which is like what we call
modesty in common human beings.

We all know how beautiful and noble modesty is; how we all admire
it; how it raises a man in our eyes to see him afraid of boasting;
never showing off; never requiring people to admire him; never
pushing himself forward; or, if his business forces him to go into
public, not going for the sake of display, but simply because the
thing has to be done; and then quietly withdrawing himself when the
thing is done, content that none should be staring at him or
thinking of him.  This is modesty; and we admire it not only in
young people, or those who have little cause to be proud:  we admire
it much more in the greatest, the wisest, and the best; in those who
have, humanly speaking, most cause to be proud.  Whenever, on the
other hand, we see in wise and good men any vanity, boasting,
pompousness of any kind, we call it a weakness in them, and are
sorry to see them lowering themselves by the least want of divine
modesty.

Now, this great grace and noble virtue should surely be in our Lord,
from whom all graces and virtues come; and I think we need not look
far through the gospels to find it.

See how he refused to cast himself down from the temple, and make
himself a sign and a wonder to the Jews.  How he refused to show the
Pharisees a sign.  How, in this very text, when it seemed good to
him to show his glory, he takes only three favourite apostles, and
commands them to tell no man till he be risen again.  See, again,
how when the Jews wanted to take him by force, and make him a king,
he escaped out of their hands.  How when He had been preaching to,
or healing the multitude, so that they crowded on him, and became
excited about him, he more than once immediately left them, and
retired into a desert place to pray.

See, again, how when he did tell the Jews who he was, in words most
awfully unmistakeable, the confession was, as it were, drawn from
him, at the end of a long argument, when he was forced to speak out
for truth's sake.  And, even then, how simple, how modest (if I dare
so speak), are his words.  'Before Abraham was, I am.'  The most
awful words ever spoken on earth; and yet most divine in their very
simplicity.  The Maker of the world telling his creatures that he is
their God!  What might he _not_ have said at such a moment?  What
might we not fancy his saying?  What words, grand enough, awful
enough, might not the evangelists have put into his mouth, if they
had not been men full of the spirit of truth?  And yet what does the
Lord say?  'Before Abraham was, I am.'   Could he say more?  If you
think of the matter, No.  But could he say less?  If you think of
the manner, No, likewise.

Truly, 'never man spake as he spake:' because never man was like
him.  Perfect strength, wisdom, determination, endurance; and yet
perfect meekness, simplicity, sobriety.  Zeal and modesty.  They are
the last two virtues which go together most seldom.  In him they
went together utterly; and were one, as he was one in spirit.

Him some of the evangelists saw, and by him all were inspired; and,
therefore, they toned their account of him to his likeness, and, as
it were, took their key-note from him, and made the very manner and
language of their gospels a pattern of his manners and his life.

And, if we wanted a fresh proof (as, thank God, needs not) that the
gospels are true, I think we might find it in this.  For when a man
is inventing a wonderful story out of his own head, he is certain to
dress it up in fine words, fancies, shrewd reflections of his own,
in order to make people see, as he goes on, how wonderful it all is.
Whereas, no books on earth which describe wonderful events, true or
false, are so sober and simple as the gospels, which describe the
most wonderful of all events.  And this is to me a plain proof (as I
hope it will be to you) that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were not
inventing but telling a plain and true story, and dared not alter it
in the least; and, again, a story so strange and beautiful, that
they dared not try to make it more strange, or more beautiful, by
any words of their own.

They had seen a person, to describe whom passed all their powers of
thought and memory, much more their power of words.  A person of
whom even St. Paul could only say, 'that he was the brightness of
his Father's glory, and the express image of his person.'

Words in which to write of him failed them; for no words could
suffice.  But the temper of mind in which to write of him did not
fail them; for, by gazing on the face of the Lord, they had been
changed, more or less, into the likeness of his glory; into that
temper, simplicity, sobriety, gentleness, modesty, which shone forth
in him, and shines forth still in their immortal words about him.
God grant that it may shine forth in us.  God grant it truly.  May
we read their words till their spirit passes into us.  May we (as
St. Paul expresses it) looking on the face of the Lord, as into a
glass, be changed into his likeness, from glory to glory.  May he
who inspired them to write, inspire us to think and work, like our
Lord, soberly, quietly, simply.  May God take out of us all pride
and vanity, boasting and forwardness; and give us the true courage
which shows itself by gentleness; the true wisdom which show itself
by simplicity; and the true power which show itself by modesty.
Amen.



SERMON IV.  A SOLDIER'S TRAINING



Luke vii. 2-9.  And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto
him, was sick, and ready to die.  And when he heard of Jesus, he
sent unto him the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would
come and heal his servant.  And when they came to Jesus, they
besought him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he
should do this:  For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a
synagogue.  Then Jesus went with them.  And when he was now not far
from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him,
Lord, trouble not thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldest
enter under my roof:  Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to
come unto thee:  but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers,
and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.  When Jesus
heard these things he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and
said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

There is something puzzling in this speech of the centurion's.  One
must think twice, and more than twice, to understand clearly what he
had in his mind.  _I_, indeed, am not quite sure that I altogether
understand it.  But I may, perhaps, help you to understand it, by
telling you what this centurion was.

He was not a Jew.  He was a Roman, and a heathen; a man of our race,
very likely.  And he was a centurion, a captain in the army; and
one, mind, who had risen from the ranks, by good conduct, and good
service.  Before he got his vine-stock, which was the mark of his
authority over a hundred men, he had, no doubt, marched many a weary
mile under a heavy load, and fought, probably, many a bloody battle
in foreign parts.  That had been his education, his training,
namely, discipline, and hard work.  And because he had learned to
obey, he was fit to rule.  He was helping now to keep in order those
treacherous, unruly Jews, and their worthless puppet-kings, like
Herod; much as our soldiers in India are keeping in order the
Hindoos, and their worthless puppet-kings.

Whether the Romans had any _right_ to conquer and keep down the Jews
as they did, is no concern of ours just now.  But we have proof that
what this centurion did, he did wisely and kindly.  The elders of
the Jews said of him, that he loved the Jews, and had built them a
synagogue, a church.  I suppose that what he had heard from them
about a one living God, who had made all things in heaven and earth,
and given them a law, which cannot be broken, so that all things
obey him to this day--I suppose, I say, that this pleased him better
than the Roman stories of many gods, who were capricious, and
fretful, and quarrelled with each other in a fashion which ought to
have been shocking to the conscience and reason of a disciplined
soldier.

There was a great deal, besides, in the Old Testament, which would,
surely, come home to a soldier's heart, when it told him of a God of
law, and order, and justice, and might, who defended the right in
battle, and inspired the old Jews to conquer the heathen, and to
fight for their own liberty.  For what was it, which had enabled the
Romans to conquer so many great nations?  What was it which enabled
them to keep them in order, and, on the whole, make them happier,
more peaceable, more prosperous, than they had ever been?  What was
it which had made him, the poor common soldier, an officer, and a
wealthy man, governing, by his little garrison of a hundred
soldiers, this town of Capernaum, and the country round?

It was this.  Discipline; drill; obedience to authority.  That Roman
army was the most admirably disciplined which the world till then
had ever seen.  So, indeed, was the whole Roman Government.  Every
man knew his place, and knew his work.  Every man had been trained
to obey orders; if he was told to go, to go; if he was told to do,
to do, or to die in trying to do, what he was bidden.

This was the great and true thought which had filled this good man's
mind--duty, order, and obedience.  And by thinking of order, and
seeing how strength, and safety, and success lie in order, and by
giving himself up to obey orders, body and soul, like a good
soldier, had that plain man (who had certainly no scholarship,
perhaps could barely read or write) caught sight of a higher, wider,
deeper order than even that of a Roman army.  He had caught sight of
that divine and wonderful order, by which God has constituted the
services of men, and angels, and all created things; that divine and
wonderful order by which sun and stars, fire and hail, wind and
vapour, cattle and creeping things fulfil his word.

Fulfil God's word.  That was the thought, surely, which was in the
good soldier's mind, and which he was trying to speak out; clumsily,
perhaps, but truly enough.  I suppose, then, that he thought in his
own mind somewhat in this way.  'There is a word of command among us
soldiers.  Has God, then, no word of command likewise?  And that
word of command is enough.  Is not God's word of command enough
likewise?  I merely speak, and I am obeyed.  I am merely spoken to,
and I obey.  Shall not God merely speak, and be obeyed likewise?
There is discipline and order among men, because it is necessary.
An Army cannot be manoeuvred, a Government cannot be carried on,
without it.  Is there not a discipline and order in all heaven and
earth?  And that discipline is carried out by simple word of
command.  A word from me will make a man rush upon certain death.  A
word from certain other men will make me rush on certain death.  For
I am a man under authority.  I have my tribune (colonel, as we
should say) over me; and he, again, the perfect (general of brigade)
over him.  Their word is enough for me.  If they want me to do a
thing, they do not need to come under my roof, to argue with me, to
persuade me, much less to thrust me about, and make me obey them by
force.  They say to me, 'Go,' and I go; and I say to those under me,
'Go,' and they go likewise.

And if I can work by a word, cannot this Jesus work by a word
likewise?  He is a messenger of God, with commission and authority
from God, to work his will on his creatures.  Are not God's
creatures as well ordered, disciplined, obedient, as we soldiers
are?  Are they not a hundred times better ordered?  A messenger from
God?  Is he not a God himself; a God in goodness and mercy; a God in
miraculous power?  Cannot he do his work by a word, far more
certainly than I can do mine?  If my word can send a man to death,
cannot his word bring a man back to life?  Surely it can.  'Lord,
thou needest not to come under my roof; speak the word only, and my
servant shall be healed.'

By some such thoughts as these, I suppose, had this good soldier
gained his great faith; his faith that all God's creatures were in a
divine, and wonderful order, obedient to the will of God who made
them; and that Jesus Christ was God's viceroy and lieutenant (I
speak so, because I suppose that is what he, as a soldier, would
have thought), to carry out God's commands on earth.

Now remember that he was the first heathen man of whom we read, that
he acknowledged Christ.  Remember, too, that the next heathen of
whom we read, that he acknowledged Christ, was also a Roman
centurion, he whom the old legends call Longinus, who, when he saw
our Lord upon the cross, said, 'Truly this _was_ the Son of God.'
Remember, again, that the next heathen of whom we read as having
acknowledged Christ, he to whom St. Peter was sent, at Joppa, who is
often called the first fruits of the heathen, was a Roman centurion
likewise.

Surely, there must have been a reason for this.  There must be a
lesson in this; and this, I think, is the lesson.  That the
soldierlike habit of mind is one which makes a man ready to receive
the truth of Christ.  And why?  Because the good soldier's first and
last thought is Duty.  To do his duty by those who are set over him,
and to learn to do his duty to those who are set under him.  To turn
his whole mind and soul to doing, not just what he fancies, but to
what must be done, because it is his duty.  This is the character
which makes a good soldier, and a good Christian likewise.  If we be
undisciplined and undutiful, and unruly; if we be fanciful, self-
willed, disobedient; then we shall not understand Christ, or
Christ's rule on earth and in heaven.  If there be no order within
us, we shall not see his divine and wonderful order all around us.
If there be no discipline and obedience within us, we shall never
believe really that Christ disciplines all things, and that all
things obey him.  If there be no sense of duty in us, governing our
whole lives and actions, we shall never perceive the true beauty and
glory of Christ's character, who sacrificed himself for his duty,
which was to do his Father's will.

I tell you, my friends, that nothing prevents a man from gaining
