[310:2] When, however, the Church obtained possession of the throne of
the empire, she soon ignored these lessons of toleration; and, snatching
the weapons of her tormentors, she attempted, in her turn, to subjugate
the soul by the dungeon, the sword, and the faggot. For at least
thirteen centuries after the establishment of Christianity by
Constantine, it was taken for granted almost everywhere that those
branded with the odious name of heretics were unworthy the protection of
the laws; and that, though good and loyal citizens, they ought to be
punished by the civil magistrate. This doctrine, so alien to the spirit
of the New Testament, has often spread desolation and terror throughout
whole provinces; and has led to the deliberate murder of a hundredfold
more Christians than were destroyed by pagan Rome. Even the fathers of
the Reformation did not escape from the influence of an intolerant
training; but that Bible which they brought forth from obscurity has
been gradually imparting a milder tone to earthly legislation; and
various providences have been illustrating the true meaning of the
proposition that Christ's kingdom is "not of this world." [311:1] In all
free countries it is now generally admitted that the weapons of the
Church are not carnal, and that the jurisdiction of the magistrate is
not spiritual. "God alone is Lord of the conscience;" and it is only by
the illumination of His Word that the monitor within can be led to
recognise His will, and submit to His authority.





CHAPTER III.

FALSE BRETHREN AND FALSE PRINCIPLES IN THE CHURCH: SPIRIT AND CHARACTER
OF THE CHRISTIANS.


Some have an idea that the saintship of the early Christians was of a
type altogether unique and transcendental. In primitive times the Spirit
was, no doubt, poured out in rich effusion, and the subjects of His
grace, when contrasted with the heathen around them, often exhibited
most attractively the beauty of holiness; but the same Spirit still
dwells in the hearts of the faithful, and He is now as able, as He ever
was, to enlighten and to save. As man, wherever he exists, possesses
substantially the same organic conformation, so the true children of
God, to whatever generation they belong, have the same divine
lineaments. The age of miracles has passed away, but the reign of grace
continues, and, at the present day, there may, perhaps, be found amongst
the members of the Church as noble examples of vital godliness as in the
first or second century.

There was a traitor among the Twelve, and it is apparent from the New
Testament that, in the Apostolic Church, there were not a few unworthy
members. "_Many_ walk," says Paul, "of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you, even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things." [312:1] In the second
and third centuries the number of such false brethren did not diminish.
To those who are ignorant of its saving power, Christianity may commend
itself, by its external evidences, as a revelation from God; and many,
who are not prepared to submit to its authority, may seek admission to
its privileges. The superficial character of much of the evangelism now
current appeared in times of persecution; for, on the first appearance
of danger, multitudes abjured the gospel, and returned to the heathen
superstitions. It is, besides, a fact which cannot be disputed that, in
the third century, the more zealous champions of the faith felt it
necessary to denounce the secularity of many of the ministers of the
Church. Before the Decian persecution not a few of the bishops were mere
worldlings, and such was their zeal for money-making, that they left
their parishes neglected, and travelled to remote districts where, at
certain seasons of the year, they might carry on a profitable traffic
[313:1]. If we are to believe the testimony of the most distinguished
ecclesiastics of the period, crimes were then perpetrated to which it
would be difficult to find anything like parallels in the darkest pages
of the history of modern Christianity. The chief pastor of the largest
Church in the Proconsular Africa tells, for instance, of one of his own
presbyters who robbed orphans and defrauded widows, who permitted his
father to die of hunger and treated his pregnant wife with horrid
brutality. [313:2] Another ecclesiastic, of still higher position,
speaks of three bishops in his neighbourhood who engaged, when
intoxicated, in the solemn rite of ordination. [313:3] Such excesses
were indignantly condemned by all right-hearted disciples, but the fact,
that those to whom they were imputed were not destitute of partisans,
supplies clear yet melancholy proof that neither the Christian people
nor the Christian ministry, even in the third century, possessed an
unsullied reputation.

Meanwhile the introduction of a false standard of piety created much
mischief. It had long been received as a maxim, among certain classes of
philosophers, that bodily abstinence is necessary to those who would
attain more exalted wisdom; and the Gentile theology, especially in
Egypt and the East, had endorsed the principle. It was not without
advocates among the Jews, as is apparent from the discipline of the
Essenes and the Therapeutae. At an early period its influence was felt
within the pale of the Church, and before the termination of the second
century, individual members here and there were to be found who eschewed
certain kinds of food and abstained from marriage. [314:1] The pagan
literati, who now joined the disciples in considerable numbers, did much
to promote the credit of this adulterated Christianity. Its votaries,
who were designated _ascetics_ and _philosophers_ [314:2] did not
withdraw themselves from the world, but, whilst adhering to their own
regimen, still remained mindful of their social obligations. Their
self-imposed mortification soon found admirers, and an opinion gradually
gained ground that these abstinent disciples cultivated a higher form of
piety. The adherents of the new discipline silently increased, and by
the middle of the third century, a class of females who led a single
life, and who, by way of distinction, were called virgins, were in some
places regarded by the other Church members with special veneration.
[314:3] Among the clergy also celibacy was now considered a mark of
superior holiness. [314:4] But, in various places, pietism about this
time assumed a form which disgusted all persons of sober judgment and
ordinary discretion. The unmarried clergy and the virgins deemed it
right to cultivate the communion of saints after a new fashion, alleging
that, in each other's society, they enjoyed peculiar advantages for
spiritual improvement. It was not, therefore, uncommon to find a single
ecclesiastic and one of the sisterhood of virgins dwelling in the same
house and sharing the same bed! [315:1] All the while the parties
repudiated the imputation of any improper intercourse, but in some cases
the proofs of profligacy were too plain to be concealed, and common
sense refused to credit the pretensions of such an absurd and suspicious
spiritualism. The ecclesiastical authorities felt it necessary to
interfere, and compel the professed virgins and the single clergy to
abstain from a degree of intimacy which was unquestionably not free from
the appearance of evil.

About the time that the advocates of "whatsoever things are of good
report" were protesting against the improprieties of these spiritual
brethren and sisters, Paul and Antony, the fathers and founders of
Monachism, commenced to live as hermits. Paul was a native of Egypt, and
the heir of a considerable fortune; but, driven at first by persecution
from the abodes of men, he ultimately adopted the desert as the place of
his chosen residence. Antony, in another part of the same country,
guided by a mistaken spirit of self-renunciation, divested himself of
all his property; and also retired into a wilderness. The biographies of
these two well-meaning but weak-minded visionaries, which have been
written by two of the most eminent divines of the fourth century,
[316:1] are very humiliating memorials of folly and fanaticism. These
solitaries spent each a long life in a cave, macerating the body with
fasting, and occupying the mind with the reveries of a morbid
imagination. In an age of growing superstition their dreamy pietism was
mistaken by many for sanctity of uncommon excellence; and the admiration
bestowed on them, tempted others, in the beginning of the following
century, to imitate their example. Soon afterwards, societies of these
sons of the desert were established; and, in the course of a few years,
a taste for the monastic life spread, like wild-fire, over the whole
Church.

It is a curious fact that the figure of the instrument of torture on
which our Lord was put to death, occupied a prominent place among the
symbols of the ancient heathen worship. From the most remote antiquity
the cross was venerated in Egypt and Syria; it was held in equal honour
by the Buddhists of the East, [316:2] and, what is still more
extraordinary, when the Spaniards first visited America, the well-known
sign was found among the objects of worship in the idol temples of
Anahuac. [316:3] It is also remarkable that, about the commencement of
our era, the pagans were wont to make the sign of a cross upon the
forehead in the celebration of some of their sacred mysteries. [317:1] A
satisfactory explanation of the origin of such peculiarities in the
ritual of idolatry can now scarcely be expected; but it certainly need
not excite surprise if the early Christians were impressed by them, and
if they viewed them as so many unintentional testimonies to the truth of
their religion. The disciples displayed, indeed, no little ingenuity in
their attempts to discover the figure of a cross in almost every object
around them. They could recognise it in the trees and the flowers, in
the fishes and the fowls, in the sails of a ship and the structure of
the human body; [317:2] and if they borrowed from their heathen
neighbours the custom of making a cross upon the forehead, they would of
course be ready to maintain that they thus only redeemed the holy sign
from profanation. Some of them were, perhaps, prepared, on prudential
grounds, to plead for its introduction. Heathenism was, to a
considerable extent, a religion of bowings and genuflexions; its
votaries were, ever and anon, attending to some little rite or form;
and, because of the multitude of these diminutive acts of outward
devotion, its ceremonial was at once frivolous and burdensome. When the
pagan passed into the Church, he, no doubt, often felt, for a time, the
awkwardness of the change; and was frequently on the point of repeating,
as it were automatically, the gestures of his old superstition. It may,
therefore, have been deemed expedient to supersede more objectionable
forms by something of a Christian complexion; and the use of the sign of
the cross here probably presented itself as an observance equally
familiar and convenient. [318:1] But the disciples would have acted more
wisely had they boldly discarded all the puerilities of paganism; for
credulity soon began to ascribe supernatural virtue to this vestige of
the repudiated worship. As early as the beginning of the third century,
it was believed to operate like a charm; and it was accordingly employed
on almost all occasions by many of the Christians. "In all our travels
and movements," says a writer of this period, "as often as we come in or
go out, when we put on our clothes or our shoes, when we enter the bath
or sit down at table, when we light our candles, when we go to bed, or
recline upon a couch, or whatever may be our employment, we mark our
forehead with the sign of the cross." [318:2]

But whilst not a few of the Christians were beginning to adopt some of
the trivial rites of paganism, they continued firmly to protest against
its more flagrant corruptions. They did not hesitate to assail its gross
idolatry with bold and biting sarcasms. "Stone, or wood, or silver,"
said they, "becomes a god when man chooses that it should, and dedicates
it to that end. With how much more truth do dumb animals, such as mice,
swallows, and kites, judge of your gods? They know that your gods feel
nothing; they gnaw them, they trample and sit on them; and if you did
not drive them away, they would make their nests in the very mouth of
your deity." [319:1] The Church of the first three centuries rejected
the use of images in worship, and no pictorial representations of the
Saviour were to be found even in the dwellings of the Christians. They
conceived that such visible memorials could convey no idea whatever of
the ineffable glory of the Son of God; and they held that it is the duty
of His servants to foster a spirit of devotion, not by the contemplation
of His material form, but by meditating on His holy and divine
attributes as they are exhibited in creation, providence, and
redemption. So anxious were they to avoid even the appearance of
anything like image-worship, that when they wished to mark articles of
dress or furniture with an index of their religious profession, they
employed the likeness of an anchor, or a dove, or a lamb, or a cross, or
some other object of an emblematical character. [319:2] "We must not,"
said they, "cling to the sensuous but rise to the spiritual. The
familiarity of daily sight lowers the dignity of the divine, and to
pretend to worship a spiritual essence through earthly matter, is to
degrade that essence to the world of sense." [319:3] Even so late as the
beginning of the fourth century the practice of displaying paintings in
places of worship was prohibited by ecclesiastical authority. A canon
which bears upon this subject, and which was enacted by the Council of
Elvira held about A.D. 305, is more creditable to the pious zeal than to
the literary ability of the assembled fathers. "We must not," said they,
"have pictures in the church, lest that which is worshipped and adored
be painted on the walls." [320:1]

It has been objected to the Great Reformation of the sixteenth century
that it exercised a prejudicial influence on the arts of painting and
statuary. The same argument might have been urged against the gospel
itself in the days of its original promulgation. Whilst the early Church
entirely discarded the use of images in worship, its more zealous
members looked with suspicion upon all who assisted in the fabrication
of these objects of the heathen idolatry. [320:2] The excuse that the
artists were labouring for subsistence, and that they had themselves no
idea of bowing down to the works of their own hands, did not by any
means satisfy the scruples of their more consistent and conscientious
brethren. "Assuredly," they exclaimed, "you are a worshipper of idols
when you help to promote their worship. It is true you bring to them no
outward victim, but you sacrifice to them, your mind. Your sweat is
their drink-offering. You kindle for them the light of your skill."
[320:3] By denouncing image-worship the early Church, no doubt, to some
extent interfered with the profits of the painter and the sculptor; but,
in another way, it did much to purify and elevate the taste of the
public. In the second and third centuries the playhouse in every large
town was a centre of attraction; and whilst the actors were generally
persons of very loose morals, their dramatic performances were
perpetually pandering to the depraved appetites of the age. It is not,
therefore, wonderful that all true Christians viewed the theatre with
disgust. Its frivolity was offensive to their grave temperament; they
recoiled from its obscenity; and its constant appeals to the gods and
goddesses of heathenism outraged their religious convictions. [321:1] In
their estimation, the talent devoted to its maintenance was miserably
prostituted; and whilst every actor was deemed unworthy of
ecclesiastical fellowship, every church member was prohibited, by
attendance or otherwise, from giving any encouragement to the stage. The
early Christians were also forbidden to frequent the public shows, as
they were considered scenes of temptation and pollution. Every one at
his baptism was required to renounce "the devil, his pomp, and his
angels" [321:2]--a declaration which implied that he was henceforth to
absent himself from the heathen spectacles. At this time, statesmen,
poets, and philosophers were not ashamed to appear among the crowds who
assembled to witness the combats of the gladiators, though, on such
occasions, human life was recklessly sacrificed. But here the Church,
composed chiefly of the poor of this world, was continually giving
lessons in humanity to heathen legislators and literati. It protested
against cruelty, as well to the brute creation as to man; and condemned
the taste which could derive gratification from the shedding of the
blood either of lions or of gladiators. All who sanctioned by their
presence the sanguinary sports of the amphitheatre incurred a sentence
of excommunication. [322:1]

At this time, though an increasing taste for inactivity and solitude
betokened the growth of a bastard Christianity, and though various other
circumstances were indicative of tendencies to adulterate religion,
either by reducing it to a system of formalism, or by sublimating it
into a life of empty contemplation, there were still abundant proofs of
the existence of a large amount of healthy and vigorous piety. The
members of the Church, as a body, were distinguished by their exemplary
morals; and about the beginning of the third century, one of their
advocates, when pleading for their toleration, could venture to assert
that, among the numberless culprits brought under the notice of the
magistrates, none were Christians. [322:2] Wherever the gospel spread,
its social influence was most salutary. Its first teachers applied
themselves discreetly to the redress of prevalent abuses; and time
gradually demonstrated the effectiveness of their plans of reformation.
When they appeared, polygamy was common; [322:3] and had they assailed
it in terms of unmeasured severity, they would have defeated their own
object by rousing up a most formidable and exasperated opposition. It
would have been argued by the Jews that they were reflecting on the
patriarchs; and it would have been said by the Roman governors that they
were interfering with matters which belonged to the province of the
civil magistrate. They were obliged, therefore, to proceed with extreme
caution. In the first place, they laid it down as a principle that every
bishop and deacon must be "the husband of one wife," [323:1] or, in
other words, that no polygamist could hold office in their society. They
thus, in the most pointed way, inculcated sound views respecting the
institution of marriage; for they intimated that whoever was the husband
of more than one wife was not, in every respect, "a pattern of good
works," and was consequently unfit for ecclesiastical promotion. In the
second place, in all their discourses they proceeded on the assumption
that the union of one man and one woman is the divine arrangement.
[323:2] Throughout the whole of the New Testament, wherever marriage is
mentioned, no other idea is entertained. It is easy to see what must
have been the effect of this method of procedure. It soon came to be
understood that no good Christian could have at one time more than one
wife; and at length the polygamist was excluded from communion by a
positive enactment. [323:3]

Every disciple who married a heathen was cut off from Church privileges.
The apostles had condemned such an alliance, [323:4] and it still
continued to be spoken of in terms of the strongest reprobation.
Nothing, it was said, but discomfort and danger could be anticipated
from the union; as parties related so closely, and yet differing so
widely on the all-important subject of religion, could not permanently
hold cordial intercourse. A writer of this period has given a vivid
description of the trials of the female who made such an ill-assorted
match. Whilst she is about to be engaged in spiritual exercises, her
husband will probably contrive some scheme for her annoyance; and her
zeal may be expected to awaken his jealousy, and provoke his opposition.
"If there be a prayer-meeting, the husband will devote this day to the
use of the bath; if a fast is to be observed, the husband has a feast at
which he entertains his friends; if a religious ceremony is to be
attended, never does household business fall more upon her hands. And
who would allow his wife, for the sake of visiting the brethren, to go
from street to street the round of strange and especially of the poorer
class of cottages? ... If a stranger brother come to her, what lodging
in an alien's house? If a present is to be made to any, the barn, the
storehouse are closed against her." [324:1]

The primitive heralds of the gospel acted with remarkable prudence in
reference to the question of slavery. According to some high
authorities, bondsmen constituted one-half [324:2] of the entire
population of the Roman Empire; and as the new religion was designed to
promote the spiritual good of man, rather than the improvement of his
civil or political condition, the apostles did not deem it expedient, in
the first instance, to attempt to break up established relations. They
did not refuse to receive any one as a member of the Church because he
happened to be a slave-owner; neither did they reject any applicant for
admission because he was a slave. The social position of the individual
did not at all affect his ecclesiastical standing; for bond and free are
"all one in Christ Jesus." [324:3] In the Church the master and the
servant were upon a footing of equality; they joined in the same
prayers; they sat down, side by side, at the same communion table; and
they saluted each other with the kiss of Christian recognition. A
slave-owner might belong to a congregation of which his slave was the
teacher; and thus, whilst in the household, the servant was bound to
obey his master according to the flesh, in the Church the master was
required to remember that his minister was "worthy of double honour."
[325:1]

The spirit of the gospel is pre-eminently a spirit of freedom; but the
inspired founders of our religion did not fail to remember that we may
be partakers of the glorious liberty of the children of God, whilst we
are under the yoke of temporal bondage. Whilst, therefore, they did not
hesitate to speak of emancipation as a blessing, and whilst they said to
the slave--"If thou mayest be made free, use it rather;" [325:2] they at
the same time declared it to be his duty to submit cheerfully to the
restraints of his present condition. "Let every man," said they, "abide
in the same calling wherein he was called; for he that is called in the
Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's freeman." [325:3] They were most
careful to teach converted slaves that they were not to presume upon
their church membership; and that they were not to be less respectful
and obedient when those to whom they were in bondage were their brethren
in the Lord. "Let as many servants as are under the yoke," says the
apostle, "count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of
God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. And they that have believing
masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren, but
rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers
of the benefit." [325:4]

The influence of Christianity on the condition of the slave was soon
felt. The believing master was more humane than his pagan neighbour;
[325:5] his bearing was more gentle, conciliatory, and considerate; and
the domestics under his care were more comfortable. [325:6] There was a
disposition among pious slave-owners to let the oppressed go free, and
when they performed such an act of mercy, and both parties were in
communion with the Church, the congregation was assembled to witness the
consummation of the happy deliverance. [326:1] Thus, multitudes of
bondsmen in all parts of the Roman Empire were soon taught to regard the
gospel as their best benefactor.

Whilst Christianity, in the spirit of its Great Founder, was labouring
to improve the tone of public sentiment, and to undo heavy burdens, it
exhibited other most attractive characteristics. Wherever a disciple
travelled, if a church existed in the district, he felt himself at home.
The ecclesiastical certificate which he carried along with him, at once
introduced him to the meetings of his co-religionists, and secured for
him all the advantage of membership. The heathen were astonished at the
cordiality with which the believers among whom they resided greeted a
Christian stranger. He was saluted with the kiss of peace; ushered into
their assembly; and invited to share the hospitality of the domestic
board. If he was sick, they visited him; if he was in want, they made
provision for his necessities. The poor widows were supported at the
expense of the Church; and if any of the brethren were carried captive
by predatory bands of the barbarians who hovered upon the borders of the
Empire, contributions were made to purchase their liberation from
servitude. [326:2] To those who were without the Church, its members
appeared as one large and affectionate family. The pagan could not
comprehend what it was that so closely cemented their brotherhood; for
he did not understand how they could be attracted to each other by love
to a common Saviour. He was almost induced to believe that they held
intercourse by certain mysterious signs, and that they were affiliated
by something like the bond of freemasonry. Even statesmen observed with
uneasiness the spirit of fraternity which reigned among the Christians;
and, though the disciples could never be convicted of any political
designs, suspicions were often entertained that, after all, they might
form a secret association, on an extensive scale, which might one day
prove dangerous to the established government.

But Christianity, like the sun, shines on the evil and the good; and
opportunities occurred for shewing that its charities were not confined
within the limits of its own denomination. There were occasions on which
its very enemies could not well refuse to admit its excellence; for in
seasons of public distress, its adherents often signalised themselves as
by far the most energetic, benevolent, and useful citizens. At such
times its genial philanthropy appeared to singular advantage when
contrasted with the cold and selfish spirit of polytheism. Thus, in the
reign of the Emperor Gallus, when a pestilence spread dismay throughout
North Africa, [327:1] and when the pagans shamefully deserted their
nearest relatives in the hour of their extremity, the Christians stepped
forward, and ministered to the wants of the sick and dying without
distinction. [327:2] Some years afterwards, when the plague appeared in
Alexandria, and when the Gentile inhabitants left the dead unburied and
cast out the dying into the streets, the disciples vied with each other
in their efforts to alleviate the general suffering. [327:3] The most
worthless men can scarcely forget acts of kindness performed under such
circumstances. Forty years afterwards, when the Church in the capital of
Egypt was overtaken by the Diocletian persecution, their pagan
neighbours concealed the Christians in their houses, and submitted to
fines and imprisonment rather than betray the refugees. [328:1]

The fact that the heathen were now ready to shelter the persecuted
members of the Church is itself of importance as a sign of the times.
When the disciples first began to rise into notice in the great towns,
they were commonly regarded with aversion; and, when the citizens were
assembled in thousands at the national spectacles, no cry was more
vociferously repeated than that of "The Christians to the lions." But
this bigoted and intolerant spirit was fast passing away; and when the
state now set on foot a persecution, it could not reckon so extensively
on the support of popular antipathy. The Church had attained such a
position that the calumnies once repeated to its prejudice could no
longer obtain credence; the superior excellence of its system of morals
was visible to all; and it could point on every side to proofs of the
blessings it communicated. It could demonstrate, by a reference to its
history, that it produced kind masters and dutiful servants,
affectionate parents and obedient children, faithful friends and
benevolent citizens. On all classes, whether rich or poor, learned or
unlearned, its effects were beneficial. It elevated the character of the
working classes, it vastly improved the position of the wife, it
comforted the afflicted, and it taught even senators wisdom. Its
doctrines, whether preached to the half-naked Picts or the polished
Athenians, to the fierce tribes of Germany or the literary coteries of
Alexandria, exerted the same holy and happy influence. It promulgated a
religion obviously fitted for all mankind. There had long since been a
prediction that its dominion should extend "from sea to sea and from the
river unto the ends of the earth;" and its progress already indicated
that the promise would receive a glorious accomplishment.





CHAPTER IV.

THE CHURCH OF ROME IN THE SECOND CENTURY.


The great doctrines of Christianity are built upon _the facts_ of the
life of our Lord. These facts are related by the four evangelists with
singular precision, and yet with a variety of statement, as to details,
which proves that each writer delivered an independent testimony. The
witnesses all agree when describing the wonderful history of the Captain
of our Salvation; and they dwell upon the narrative with a minuteness
apparently corresponding to the importance of the _doctrine_ which the
facts establish or illustrate. Hence it is that, whilst they scarcely
notice, or altogether omit, several items of our Saviour's biography,
they speak particularly of His birth and of His miracles, of His death
and of His resurrection. Thus, all the great facts of the gospel are
most amply authenticated.

It is not so with the system of Romanism; as nothing can be weaker than
the historical basis on which it rests. The New Testament demonstrates
that Peter was _not_ the Prince of the Apostles; for it records the
rebuke which our Lord delivered to the Twelve when they strove among
themselves "which of them should be accounted the greatest." [329:1] It
also supplies evidence that neither Peter nor Paul founded the Church of
Rome; as, before that Church had been visited by the Apostle of the
Gentiles, its faith was "spoken of throughout the whole world;" [329:2]
and the apostle of the circumcision was meanwhile labouring in another
part of the Empire. [330:1] When writing to the Romans in A.D. 57, Paul
greets many members of the Church, and mentions the names of a great
variety of individuals; [330:2] but, throughout his long epistle, Peter
is not once noticed. Had he been connected with that Christian
community, he would, beyond doubt, have been prominently recognised.

There is, indeed, a sense in which Peter may, perhaps, be said to have
founded the great Church of the West; for it is possible that some of
the "strangers of Rome," [330:3] who heard his celebrated sermon on the
day of Pentecost, were then converted by his ministry; and it may be
that these converts, on their return home, proceeded to disseminate the
truth, and to organize a Christian society, in the chief city of the
Empire. This, however, is mere matter of conjecture; and it is now
useless to speculate upon the subject; as, in the absence of historical
materials to furnish us with information, the question must remain
involved in impenetrable mystery. It is certain that the Roman Church
was established long before it was visited by an apostle; and it is
equally clear that its members were distinguished, at an early period,
by their Christian excellence. When Paul was prisoner for the first time
in the great city, he was freely permitted to exercise his ministry;
but, subsequently, when there during the Neronian persecution, he was,
according to the current tradition, seized and put to death. [330:4]
Peter's martyrdom took place, as we have seen, [330:5] perhaps about a
year afterwards; but the legend describing it contains very improbable
details, and the facts have obviously been distorted and exaggerated.

For at least seventy years after the death of the apostle of the
circumcision, nothing whatever is known of the history of the Roman
Church, except the names of some of its leading ministers. It was
originally governed, like other Christian communities, by the common
council of the presbyters, who, as a matter of order, must have had a
chairman; but though, about a hundred years after the martyrdom of
Peter, when the presidents began to be designated _bishops_, an attempt
was made to settle their order of succession, [331:1] the result was by
no means satisfactory. Some of the earliest writers who touch
incidentally upon the question are inconsistent with themselves; [331:2]
whilst they flatly contradict each other. [331:3] In fact, to this day,
what is called the episcopal succession in the ancient Church of Rome is
an historical riddle. At first no one individual seems to have acted for
life as the president, or moderator, of the presbytery; but as it was
well known that, at an early date, several eminent pastors had belonged
to it, the most distinguished names found their way into the catalogues,
and each writer appears to have consulted his own taste or judgment in
regulating the order of succession. Thus, it has probably occurred that
their lists are utterly irreconcileable. All such genealogies are,
indeed, of exceedingly dubious credit, and those who deem them of
importance must always be perplexed by the candid acknowledgment of the
father of ecclesiastical history. "How many," says he, "and who,
prompted by a kindred spirit, were judged fit to feed the churches
established by the apostles, it _is not easy to say, any farther than
may be gathered from the statements of Paul_." [331:4]

About A.D. 139, Telesphorus, who was then at the head of the Roman
presbytery, is said to have been put to death for his profession of the
gospel; but the earliest authority for this fact is a Christian
controversialist who wrote upwards of forty years afterwards; [332:1]
and we are totally ignorant of all the circumstances connected with the
martyrdom. The Church of the capital, which had hitherto enjoyed
internal tranquillity, began in the time of Hyginus, who succeeded
Telesphorus, to be disturbed by false teachers. Valentine, Cerdo, and
other famous heresiarchs, now appeared in Rome; [332:2] and laboured
with great assiduity to disseminate their principles. The distractions
created by these errorists seem to have suggested the propriety of
placing additional power in the hands of the _presiding presbyter_.
[332:3] Until this period every teaching elder had been accustomed to
baptize and administer the Eucharist on his own responsibility; but it
appears to have been now arranged that henceforth none should act
without the sanction of the president, who was thus constituted the
centre of ecclesiastical unity. According to the previous system, some
of the presbyters, who were themselves, perhaps, secretly tainted with
unsound doctrine, might have continued to hold communion with the
heretics; and it might have been exceedingly difficult to convict them
of any direct breach of ecclesiastical law; but now their power was
curtailed; and a broad line of demarcation was established between true
and false churchmen. Thus, Rome was the city in which what has been
called the Catholic system was first organized. Every one who was in
communion with the president, or bishop, was a catholic; [332:4] every
one who allied himself to any other professed teacher of the Christian
faith was a sectary, a schismatic, or a heretic. [333:1]

The study of the best forms of government was peculiarly congenial to
the Roman mind; and the peace enjoyed under the Empire, as contrasted
with the miseries of the civil wars in the last days of the Republic,
pleaded, no doubt, strongly in favour of a change in the ecclesiastical
constitution. But though this portion of the history of the Church is
involved in much obscurity, there are indications that the transference
of power from the presbyters to their president was not accomplished
without a struggle. Until this period the Roman elders appear to have
generally succeeded each other as moderators of presbytery in the order
of their seniority; [333:2] but it was now deemed necessary to adopt
another method of appointment; and it is not improbable that, at this
time, a division of sentiment as to the best mode of filling up the
presidential chair, was the cause of an unusually long vacancy.
According to some, no less than four years [333:3] passed away between
the death of Hyginus and the choice of his successor Pius; and even
those who object to this view of the chronology admit that there was an
interval of a twelvemonth. [333:4] The plan now adopted seems to have
been to choose the bishop by lot out of a leet of selected candidates.
[333:5] Thus, to use the phraseology current towards the end of the
second century, the new chief pastor "obtained _the lot_ of the
episcopacy." [334:1]

The changes introduced at Rome were probably far from agreeable to many
of the other Churches throughout the Empire; and Polycarp, the venerable
pastor of Smyrna, who was afterwards martyred, and who was now nearly
eighty years of age, appears to have been sent to the imperial city on a
mission of remonstrance. The design of this remarkable visit is still
enveloped in much mystery, for with the exception of an allusion to a
question confessedly of secondary consequence, [334:2] ecclesiastical
writers have passed over the whole subject in suspicious silence; but
there is every reason to believe that Polycarp was deputed to complain
of the incipient assumptions of Roman prelacy. [334:3] Anicetus, who
then presided over the Church of the capital, prudently bestowed very
flattering attentions on the good old Asiatic pastor; and, though there
is no evidence that his scruples were removed, he felt it to be his duty
to assist in opposing the corrupt teachers who were seeking to propagate
their errors among the Roman disciples. The testimony to primitive truth
delivered by so aged and eminent a minister produced a deep impression,
and gave a decided check to the progress of heresy in the metropolis of
the Empire. [334:4]

But though the modified prelacy now established encountered opposition,
the innovation thus inaugurated in the great city was sure to exert a
most extensive influence. Rome was then, not only the capital, but the
mistress of a large portion of the world. She kept up a constant
communication with every part of her dominions in Asia, Africa, and
Europe; strangers from almost every clime were to be found among her
teeming population; and intelligence of whatever occurred within her
walls soon found its way to distant cities and provinces. The Christians
in other countries would be slow to believe that their brethren at
head-quarters had consented to any unwarrantable distribution of Church
power, for they had hitherto displayed their zeal for the faith by most
decisive and illustrious testimonies. Since the days of Nero they had
sustained the first shock of every persecution, and nobly led the van of
the army of martyrs. Telesphorus, the chairman of the presbytery, had
recently paid for his position with his life; their presiding pastor was
always specially obnoxious to the spirit of intolerance; and if they
were anxious to strengthen his hands, who could complain? The Roman
Church had the credit of having enjoyed the tuition of Peter and Paul;
its members had long been distinguished for intelligence and piety; and
it was not to be supposed that its ministers would sanction any step
which they did not consider perfectly capable of vindication. There were
other weighty reasons why Christian societies in Italy, as well as
elsewhere, should regard the acts of the Church of the imperial city
with peculiar indulgence. It was the sentinel at the seat of government
to give them notice of the approach of danger, [335:1] and the kind
friend to aid them in times of difficulty. The wealth of Rome was
prodigious; and though as yet "not many mighty" and "not many noble" had
joined the proscribed sect, it had been making way among the middle
classes; and there is cause to think that at this time a considerable
number of the rich merchants of the capital belonged to its communion.
It was known early in the second century as a liberal benefactor; and,
from a letter addressed to it about A.D. 170, it would appear that even
the Church of Corinth was then indebted to its munificence. "It has ever
been your habit," says the writer, "to confer benefits in various ways,
and to send assistance to the Churches in every city. You have relieved
the wants of the poor, and afforded help to the brethren condemned to
the mines. By a succession of these gifts, Romans, you preserve the
customs of your Roman ancestors." [336:1]

The influence of the Roman Church throughout the West soon became
conspicuous. Here, as in many other instances, commerce was the pioneer
of religion; and as the merchants of the capital traded with all the
ports of their great inland sea, it is not improbable that their sailors
had a share in achieving some of the early triumphs of the gospel.
Carthage, now one of the most populous cities in the Empire, is said to
have been indebted for Christianity to Rome; [336:2] and by means of the
constant intercourse kept up between these two commercial marts, the
mother Church contrived to maintain an ascendancy over her African
daughter. Thus it was that certain Romish practices and pretensions so
soon found advocates among the Carthaginian clergy. [336:3] In other
quarters we discover early indications of the extraordinary deference
paid to the Church of the city "sitting upon many waters." Towards the
close of the second century, Irenaeus, a disciple of Polycarp, was
pastor of Lyons; and from this some have rather abruptly drawn the
inference that the Christian congregations then existing in the south of
France were established by missionaries from the East; but it is at
least equally probable that the young minister from Asia Minor was in
Rome before he passed to the more distant Gaul; and it is certain that
he is the first father who speaks of the superior importance of the
Church of the Italian metropolis. His testimony to the position which it
occupied about eighty years after the death of the Apostle John shews
clearly that it stood already at the head of the Western Churches. The
Church of Rome, says he, is "very great and very ancient, and known to
all, founded and established by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and
Paul." [337:1] "To this Church in which Catholics [337:2] have always
preserved apostolic tradition, every Catholic Church should, because it
is more potentially apostolical, [337:3] repair." [337:4]

The term _Catholic_, which occurs for the first time in a document
written about this period, [337:5] was probably coined at Rome, and
implied, as already intimated, that the individual so designated was in
communion with the bishop. The presiding pastors in the great city began
now, in token of fraternity and recognition, to send the Eucharist to
their brethren elsewhere by trusty messengers, [337:6] and thus the name
was soon extended to all who maintained ecclesiastical relations with
these leading ministers. Sectaries were almost always the minority; and
in many places, where Christianity was planted, they were utterly
unknown. The orthodox might, therefore, not inappropriately be styled
members of the _Catholic_ or _general_ Church, inasmuch as they formed
the bulk of the Christian population, and were to be found wherever the
new religion had made converts. And though the heretics pleaded
tradition in support of their peculiar dogmas, it was clear that their
statements could not stand the test of examination. Irenaeus, in the
work from which the words just quoted are extracted, very fairly argues
that no such traditions as those propagated by the sectaries were to be
found in the most ancient and respectable Churches. No Christian
community in Western Europe could claim higher antiquity than that of
Rome; and as it had been taught by Paul and Peter, none could be
supposed to be better acquainted with the original gospel. Because of
its extent it already required a larger staff of ministers than perhaps
any other Church; and thus there were a greater number of individuals to
quicken and correct each other's recollections. It might be accordingly
inferred that the traditions of surrounding Christian societies, if
true, should correspond to those of Rome; as the great metropolitan
Church might, for various reasons, be said to be more potentially
primitive or apostolical, and as its traditions might be expected to be
particularly accurate. The doctrines of the heretics, which were
completely opposed to the testimony of this important witness, should be
discarded as entirely destitute of authority.

We can only conjecture the route by which Irenaeus travelled to the
south of France when he first set out from Asia Minor; but we have
direct evidence that he had paid a visit to the capital shortly before
he wrote this memorable eulogium on the Roman Church. About the close of
the dreadful persecution endured in A.D. 177 by the Christians of Lyons
and Vienne, he had been commissioned to repair to Italy with a view to a
settlement of the disputes created by the appearance of the Montanists.
As he was furnished with very complimentary credentials, [339:1] we may
presume that he was handsomely treated by his friends in the metropolis;
and if he returned home laden with presents to disciples whose
sufferings had recently so deeply moved the sympathy of their brethren,
it is not strange that he gracefully seized an opportunity of extolling
the Church to which he owed such obligations. His account of its
greatness is obviously the inflated language of a panegyrist; but in due
time its hyperbolic statements received a still more extravagant
interpretation; and, on the authority of this ancient father, the Church
of Rome was pompously announced as the mistress and the mother of all
Churches.

It has been mentioned in a former chapter [339:2] that the celebrated
Marcia who, until shortly before his death, possessed almost absolute
control over the Emperor Commodus, made a profession of the faith. Her
example, no doubt, encouraged other personages of distinction to connect
themselves with the Roman Church; and, through the medium of these
members of his flock, the bishop Eleutherius must have had an influence
such as none of his predecessors possessed. It is beyond doubt that
Marcia, after consulting with Victor, the successor of Eleutherius,
induced the Emperor to perform acts of kindness to some of her
co-religionists. [339:3] The favour of the court seems to have puffed up
the spirit of this naturally haughty churchman; and though, as we have
seen, there is cause to suspect that certain ecclesiastical movements in
the chief city had long before excited much ill-suppressed
dissatisfaction, the Christian commonwealth was now startled for the
first time by a very flagrant exhibition of the arrogance of a Roman
prelate. [340:1] Because the Churches of Asia Minor celebrated the
Paschal feast in a way different from that observed in the metropolis,
[340:2] Victor cut them off from his communion. But this attempt of the
bishop of the great city to act as lord over God's heritage was
premature. Other churches condemned the rashness of his procedure; his
refusal to hold fellowship with the Asiatic Christians threatened only
to isolate himself; and he seems to have soon found it expedient to
cultivate more pacific councils.

At this time the jurisdiction of Victor did not properly extend beyond
the few ministers and congregations to be found in the imperial city. A
quarter of a century afterwards even the bishop of Portus, a seaport
town at the mouth of the Tiber about fifteen miles distant from the
capital, acknowledged no allegiance to the Roman prelate. [340:3] The
boldness of Victor in pronouncing so many foreign brethren unworthy of
Catholic communion may at first, therefore, appear unaccountable. But it
is probable that he acted, in this instance, in conjunction with many
other pastors. Among the Churches of Gentile origin there was a deep
prejudice against what was considered the judaizing of the Asiatic
Christians in relation to the Paschal festival, and a strong impression
that the character of the Church was compromised by any very marked
diversity in its religious observances. There is, however, little reason
to doubt that Victor was to some extent prompted by motives of a
different complexion. Fifty years before, the remarkable words addressed
to the apostle of the circumcision--"Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
I will build my Church" [341:1]--were interpreted at Rome in the way in
which they are now understood commonly by Protestants; for the brother
of the Roman bishop Pius, [341:2] writing about A.D. 150, teaches that
the Rock on which the Church is built is the Son of God; [341:3] but
ingenuity was already beginning to discover another exposition, and the
growing importance of the Roman bishopric suggested the startling
thought that the Church was built on Peter! [341:4] The name of the
Galilean fisherman was already connected with the see of Victor; and it
was thus easy for ambition or flattery to draw the inference that Victor
himself was in some way the heir and representative of the great
apostle. The doctrine that the bishop was necessary as the centre of
Catholic unity had already gained currency; and if a centre of unity for
the whole Church was also indispensable, who had a better claim to the
pre-eminence than the successor of Peter? When Victor fulminated his
sentence of excommunication against the Asiatic Christians he probably
acted under the partial inspiration of this novel theory. He made an
abortive attempt to speak in the name of the whole Church--to assert a
position as the representative or president of all the bishops of the
Catholic world [342:1]--and to carry out a new system of ecclesiastical
unity. The experiment was a failure, simply because the idea looming in
the imagination of the Roman bishop had not yet obtained full possession
of the mind of Christendom.

Prelacy had been employed as the cure for Church divisions, but the
remedy had proved worse than the disease. Sects meanwhile continued to
multiply; and they were, perhaps, nowhere so abundant as in the very
city where the new machinery had been first set up for their
suppression. Towards the close of the second century their multitude was
one of the standing reproaches of Christianity. What was called the
Catholic Church was now on the brink of a great schism; and the very
man, who aspired to be the centre of Catholic unity, threatened to be
the cause of the disruption. It was becoming more and more apparent
that, when the presbyters consented to surrender any portion of their
privileges to the bishop, they betrayed the cause of ecclesiastical
freedom; and even now indications were not wanting that the Catholic
system was likely to degenerate into a spiritual despotism.





CHAPTER V.

THE CHURCH OF ROME IN THE THIRD CENTURY.


Though very few of the genuine productions of the ministers of the
ancient Church of Rome are still extant, [343:1] multitudes of spurious
epistles attributed to its early bishops have been carefully preserved.
It is easy to account for this apparent anomaly. The documents now known
as the false Decretals, [343:2] and ascribed to the Popes of the first
and immediately succeeding centuries, were suited to the taste of times
of ignorance, and were then peculiarly grateful to the occupants of the
Roman see. As evidences of its original superiority they were
accordingly transmitted to posterity, and ostentatiously exhibited among
the papal title-deeds. But the real compositions of the primitive
pastors of the great city supplied little food for superstition; and
must have contained startling and humiliating revelations which laid
bare the absurdity of claims subsequently advanced. These unwelcome
witnesses were, therefore, quietly permitted to pass into oblivion.

It has been said, however, that Truth is the daughter of Time, and the
discovery of monuments long since forgotten, or of writings supposed to
have been lost, has often wonderfully verified and illustrated the
apologue. The reappearance, within the last three hundred years, of
various ancient records and memorials, has shed a new light upon the
history of antiquity. Other testimonies equally valuable will, no doubt,
yet be forthcoming for the settlement of existing controversies.

In A.D. 1551, as some workmen in the neighbourhood of Rome were employed
in clearing away the ruins of a dilapidated chapel, they found a broken
mass of sculptured marble among the rubbish. The fragments, when put
together, proved to be a statue representing a person of venerable
