that of ordinary men."[667]

The Emperor became furious when he read the memorial and wished to
execute its author on the spot. But Han-Yu's many friends saved him
and the sentence was commuted to honourable banishment as governor of
a distant town. Shortly afterwards the Emperor died, not of Buddhism,
but of the elixir of immortality which made him so irritable that his
eunuchs put him out of the way. Han-Yu was recalled but died the next
year. Among his numerous works was one called Yuan Tao, much of which
was directed against non-Confucian forms of religion. It is still a
thesaurus of arguments for the opponents of Buddhism and, let it be
added, of Christianity.

It is not surprising that the prosperity of the Buddhist church should
have led to another reaction, but it came not so much from the
literary and sceptical class as from Taoism which continued to enjoy
the favour of the T'ang Emperors, although they died one after another
of drinking the elixir. The Emperor Wu-Tsung was more definitely
Taoist than his predecessors. In 843 he suppressed Manichaeism and in
845, at the instigation of his Taoist advisers, he dealt Buddhism the
severest blow which it had yet received. In a trenchant edict[668] he
repeated the now familiar arguments that it is an alien and maleficent
superstition, unknown under the ancient and glorious dynasties and
injurious to the customs and morality of the nation. Incidentally he
testifies to its influence and popularity for he complains of the
crowds thronging the temples which eclipse the imperial palaces in
splendour and the innumerable monks and nuns supported by the
contributions of the people. Then, giving figures, he commands that
4600 great temples and 40,000 smaller rural temples be demolished,
that their enormous[669] landed property be confiscated, that 260,500
monks and nuns be secularized and 150,000 temple slaves[670] set free.
These statistics are probably exaggerated and in any case the Emperor
had barely time to execute his drastic orders, though all despatch
was used on account of the private fortunes which could be amassed
incidentally by the executive.

As the Confucian chronicler of his doings observes, he suppressed
Buddhism on the ground that it is a superstition but encouraged Taoism
which is no better. Indeed the impartial critic must admit that it is
much worse, at any rate for Emperors. Undeterred by the fate of his
predecessors Wu-Tsung began to take the elixir of immortality. He
suffered first from nervous irritability, then from internal pains,
which were explained as due to the gradual transformation of his
bones, and at the beginning of 846 he became dumb. No further
explanation of his symptoms was then given him and his uncle Hsuan
Tsung was raised to the throne. His first act was to revoke the
anti-Buddhist edict, the Taoist priests who had instigated it were put
to death, the Emperor and his ministers vied in the work of
reconstruction and very soon things became again much as they were
before this great but brief tribulation. Nevertheless, in 852 the
Emperor received favourably a memorial complaining of the Buddhist
reaction and ordered that all monks and nuns must obtain special
permission before taking orders. He was beginning to fall under Taoist
influence and it is hard to repress a smile on reading that seven
years later he died of the elixir. His successor I-Tsung (860-874),
who died at the age of 30, was an ostentatious and dissipated
Buddhist. In spite of the remonstrances of his ministers he again sent
for the sacred bone from Fa-men and received it with even more respect
than his predecessor had shown, for he met it at the Palace gate and
bowed before it.

During the remainder of the T'ang dynasty there is little of
importance to recount about Buddhism. It apparently suffered no
reverses, but history is occupied with the struggle against the
Tartars. The later T'ang Emperors entered into alliance with various
frontier tribes, but found it hard to keep them in the position of
vassals. The history of China from the tenth to the thirteenth
centuries is briefly as follows. The T'ang dynasty collapsed chiefly
owing to the incapacity of the later Emperors and was succeeded by a
troubled period in which five short dynasties founded by military
adventurers, three of whom were of Turkish race, rose and fell in 53
years.[671] In 960 the Sung dynasty united the Chinese elements in
the Empire, but had to struggle against the Khitan Tartars in the
north-east and against the kingdom of Hsia in the north-west. With the
twelfth century appeared the Kins or Golden Tartars, who demolished
the power of the Khitans in alliance with the Chinese but turned
against their allies and conquered all China north of the Yang-tze and
continually harassed, though they did not capture, the provinces to
the south of it which constituted the reduced empire of the Sungs. But
their power waned in its turn before the Mongols, who, under Chinggiz
Khan and Ogotai, conquered the greater part of northern Asia and
eastern Europe. In 1232 the Sung Emperor entered into alliance with
the Mongols against the Kins, with the ultimate result that though the
Kins were swept away, Khubilai, the Khan of the Mongols, became
Emperor of all China in 1280.

The dynasties of T'ang and Sung mark two great epochs in the history
of Chinese art, literature and thought, but whereas the virtues and
vices of the T'ang may be summed up as genius and extravagance, those
of the Sung are culture and tameness. But this summary judgment does
not do justice to the painters, particularly the landscape painters,
of the Sung and it is noticeable that many of the greatest masters,
including Li Lung-Mien,[672] were obviously inspired by Buddhism. The
school which had the greatest influence on art and literature was the
Ch'an[673] or contemplative sect better known by its Japanese name
Zen. Though founded by Bodhidharma it did not win the sympathy and
esteem of the cultivated classes until the Sung period. About this
time the method of block-printing was popularized and there began a
steady output of comprehensive histories, collected works,
encyclopaedias and biographies which excelled anything then published
in Europe. Antiquarian research and accessible editions of classical
writers were favourable to Confucianism, which had always been the
religion of the literati.

It is not surprising that the Emperors of this literary dynasty were
mostly temperate in expressing their religious emotions. T'ai-Tsu, the
founder, forbade cremation and remonstrated with the Prince of T'ang,
who was a fervent Buddhist. Yet he cannot have objected to religion in
moderation, for the first printed edition of the Tripitaka was
published in his reign (972) and with a preface of his own. The early
and thorough application of printing to this gigantic Canon is a
proof--if any were needed--of the popular esteem for Buddhism.

Nor did this edition close the work of translation: 275 later
translations, made under the Northern Sung, are still extant and
religious intercourse with India continued. The names and writings of
many Hindu monks who settled in China are preserved and Chinese
continued to go to India. Still on the whole there was a decrease in
the volume of religious literature after 900 A.D.[674] In the twelfth
century the change was still more remarkable. Nanjio does not record a
single translation made under the Southern Sung and it is the only
great dynasty which did not revise the Tripitaka.

The second Sung Emperor also, T'ai Tsung, was not hostile, for he
erected in the capital, at enormous expense, a stupa 360 feet high to
contain relics of the Buddha. The fourth Emperor, Jen-tsung, a
distinguished patron of literature, whose reign was ornamented by a
galaxy of scholars, is said to have appointed 50 youths to study
Sanskrit but showed no particular inclination towards Buddhism.
Neither does it appear to have been the motive power in the projects
of the celebrated social reformer, Wang An-Shih. But the dynastic
history says that he wrote a book full of Buddhist and Taoist fancies
and, though there is nothing specifically Buddhist in his political
and economic theories, it is clear from the denunciations against him
that his system of education introduced Buddhist and Taoist subjects
into the public examinations.[675] It is also clear that this system
was favoured by those Emperors of the Northern Sung dynasty who were
able to think for themselves. In 1087 it was abolished by the
Empress Dowager acting as regent for the young Che Tsung, but as soon
as he began to reign in his own right he restored it, and it
apparently remained in force until the collapse of the dynasty in
1127.

The Emperor Hui-Tsung (1101-1126) fell under the influence of a Taoist
priest named Lin Ling-Su.[676] This young man had been a Buddhist
novice in boyhood but, being expelled for misconduct, conceived a
hatred for his old religion. Under his influence the Emperor not only
reorganized Taoism, sanctioning many innovations and granting many new
privileges, but also endeavoured to suppress Buddhism, not by
persecution, but by amalgamation. By imperial decree the Buddha and
his Arhats were enrolled in the Taoist pantheon: temples and
monasteries were allowed to exist only on condition of describing
themselves as Taoist and their inmates had the choice of accepting
that name or of returning to the world.

But there was hardly time to execute these measures, so rapid was the
reaction. In less than a year the insolence of Lin Ling-Su brought
about his downfall: the Emperor reversed his edict and, having begun
by suppressing Buddhism, ended by oppressing Taoism. He was a painter
of merit and perhaps the most remarkable artist who ever filled a
throne. In art he probably drew no distinction between creeds and
among the pictures ascribed to him and preserved in Japan are some of
Buddhist subjects. But like Hsuan Tsung he came to a tragic end, and
in 1126 was carried into captivity by the Kin Tartars among whom he
died.

Fear of the Tartars now caused the Chinese to retire south of the
Yang-tse and Hang-chow was made the seat of Government. The century
during which this beautiful city was the capital did not produce the
greatest names in Chinese history, but it witnessed the perfection of
Chinese culture, and the background of impending doom heightens the
brilliancy of this literary and aesthetic life. Such a society was
naturally eclectic in religion but Buddhism of the Ch'an school
enjoyed consideration and contributed many landscape painters to the
roll of fame. But the most eminent and perhaps the most characteristic
thinker of the period was Chu-Hsi (1130-1200), the celebrated
commentator on Confucius who reinterpreted the master's writings
to the satisfaction of succeeding ages though in his own life he
aroused opposition as well as enthusiasm. Chu-Hsi studied Buddhism in
his youth and some have detected its influence in his works, although
on most important points he expressly condemned it. I do not see that
there is much definite Buddhism in his philosophy, but if Mahayanism
had never entered China this new Confucianism would probably never
have arisen or would have taken another shape. Though the final result
may be anti-Buddhist yet the topics chosen and the method of treatment
suggest that the author felt it necessary to show that the Classics
could satisfy intellectual curiosity and supply spiritual ideals just
as well as this Indian religion. Much of his expositions is occupied
with cosmology, and he accepts the doctrine of world periods,
recurring in an eternal series of growth and decline: also he teaches
not exactly transmigration but the transformation of matter into
various living forms.[677] His accounts of sages and saints point to
ideals which have much in common with Arhats and Buddhas and, in
dealing with the retribution of evil, he seems to admit that when the
universe is working properly there is a natural _Karma_ by which good
or bad actions receive even in this life rewards in kind, but that in
the present period of decline nature has become vitiated so that vice
and virtue no longer produce appropriate results.

Chu-Hsi had a celebrated controversy with Lu Chiu-Yuan,[678] a thinker
of some importance who, like himself, is commemorated in the tablets
of Confucian temples, although he was accused of Buddhist tendencies.
He held that learning was not indispensable and that the mind could in
meditation rise above the senses and attain to a perception of the
truth. Although he strenuously denied the charge of Buddhist leanings,
it is clear that his doctrine is near in spirit to the mysticism of
Bodhidharma and sets no store on the practical ethics and studious
habits which are the essence of Confucianism.

The attitude of the Yuan or Mongol dynasty (1280-1368) towards
Buddhism was something new. Hitherto, whatever may have been the
religious proclivities of individual Emperors, the Empire had been
a Confucian institution. A body of official and literary opinion
always strong and often overwhelmingly strong regarded imperial
patronage of Buddhism or Taoism as a concession to the whims of the
people, as an excrescence on the Son of Heaven's proper faith or even
a perversion of it. But the Mongol Court had not this prejudice and
Khubilai, like other members of his house[679] and like Akbar in
India, was the patron of all the religions professed by his subjects.
His real object was to encourage any faith which would humanize his
rude Mongols. Buddhism was more congenial to them than Confucianism
and besides, they had made its acquaintance earlier. Even before
Khubilai became Emperor, one of his most trusted advisers was a
Tibetan lama known as Pagspa, Bashpa or Pa-ssu-pa.[680] He received
the title of Kuo-Shih, and after his death his brother succeeded to
the same honours.

Khubilai also showed favour to Mohammedans, Christians, Jews and
Confucianists, but little to Taoists. This prejudice was doubtless due
to the suggestions of his Buddhist advisers, for, as we have seen,
there was often rivalry between the two religions and on two occasions
at least (in the reigns of Hui Tsung and Wu Tsung) the Taoists made
determined, if unsuccessful, attempts to destroy or assimilate
Buddhism. Khubilai received complaints that the Taoists represented
Buddhism as an offshoot of Taoism and that this objectionable
perversion of truth and history was found in many of their books,
particularly the Hua-Hu-Ching.[681] An edict was issued ordering all
Taoist books to be burnt with the sole exception of the Tao-Te-Ching
but it does not appear that the sect was otherwise persecuted.

The Yuan dynasty was consistently favourable to Buddhism. Enormous
sums were expended on subventions to monasteries, printing books and
performing public ceremonies. Old restrictions were removed and no new
ones were imposed. But the sect which was the special recipient of the
imperial favour was not one of the Chinese schools but Lamaism,
the form of Buddhism developed in Tibet, which spread about this time
to northern China, and still exists there. It does not appear that in
the Yuan period Lamaism and other forms of Buddhism were regarded as
different sects.[682] A lamaist ecclesiastic was the hierarchical head
of all Buddhists, all other religions being placed under the
supervision of a special board.

The Mongol Emperors paid attention to religious literature. Khubilai
saw to it that the monasteries in Peking were well supplied with books
and ordered the bonzes to recite them on stated days. A new collection
of the Tripitaka (the ninth) was published 1285-87. In 1312, the
Emperor Jen-tsung ordered further translations to be made into Mongol
and later had the whole Tripitaka copied in letters of gold. It is
noticeable that another Emperor, Cheng Tsung, had the Book of Filial
Piety translated into Mongol and circulated together with a brief
preface by himself.

It is possible that the Buddhism of the Yuan dynasty was tainted with
Saktism from which the Lama monasteries of Peking (in contrast to
all other Buddhist sects in China) are not wholly free. The last
Emperor, Shun-ti, is said to have witnessed indecent plays and dances
in the company of Lamas and created a scandal which contributed to the
downfall of the dynasty.[683] In its last years we hear of some
opposition to Buddhism and of a reaction in favour of Confucianism, in
consequence of the growing numbers and pretensions of the Lamas.

Whole provinces were under their control and Chinese historians dwell
bitterly on their lawlessness. It was a common abuse for wealthy
persons to induce a Lama to let their property be registered in his
name and thus avoid all payment of taxes on the ground that priests
were exempt from taxation by law.[684]

The Mongols were driven out by the native Chinese dynasty known as
Ming, which reigned from 1368 to 1644. It is not easy to point out
any salient features in religious activity or thought during this
period, but since the Ming claimed to restore Chinese civilization
interrupted by a foreign invasion, it was natural that they should
encourage Confucianism as interpreted by Chu-Hsi. Yet Buddhism,
especially Lamaism, acquired a new political importance. Both for the
Mings and for the earlier Manchu Emperors the Mongols were a serious
and perpetual danger, and it was not until the eighteenth century that
the Chinese Court ceased to be preoccupied by the fear that the tribes
might unite and again overrun the Empire. But the Tibetan and
Mongolian hierarchy had an extraordinary power over these wild
horsemen and the Government of Peking won and used their goodwill by
skilful diplomacy, the favours shown being generally commensurate to
the gravity of the situation. Thus when the Grand Lama visited Peking
in 1652 he was treated as an independent prince: in 1908 he was made
to kneel.

Few Ming Emperors showed much personal interest in religion and most
of them were obviously guided by political considerations. They wished
on the one hand to conciliate the Church and on the other to prevent
the clergy from becoming too numerous or influential. Hence very
different pictures may be drawn according as we dwell on the
favourable or restrictive edicts which were published from time to
time. Thus T'ai-Tsu, the founder of the dynasty, is described by one
authority as always sympathetic to Buddhists and by another as a
crowned persecutor.[685] He had been a bonze himself in his youth but
left the cloister for the adventurous career which conducted him to
the throne. It is probable that he had an affectionate recollection of
the Church which once sheltered him, but also a knowledge of its
weaknesses and this knowledge moved him to publish restrictive edicts
as to the numbers and qualifications of monks. On the other hand he
attended sermons, received monks in audience and appointed them as
tutors to his sons. He revised the hierarchy and gave appropriate
titles to its various grades. He also published a decree ordering that
all monks should study three sutras (Lankavatara, Prajnaparamita
and Vajracchedika), and that three brief commentaries on these works
should be compiled (see Nanjio's Catalogue, 1613-15).

It is in this reign that we first hear of the secular clergy, that is
to say, persons who acted as priests but married and did not live in
monasteries. Decrees against them were issued in 1394 and 1412, but
they continued to increase. It is not clear whether their origin
should be sought in a desire to combine the profits of the priesthood
with the comforts of the world or in an attempt to evade restrictions
as to the number of monks. In later times this second motive was
certainly prevalent, but the celibacy of the clergy is not strictly
insisted on by Lamaists and a lax observance of monastic rules[686]
was common under the Mongol dynasty.

The third Ming Emperor, Ch'eng-tsu,[687] was educated by a Buddhist
priest of literary tastes named Yao Kuang-Hsiao,[688] whom he greatly
respected and promoted to high office. Nevertheless he enacted
restrictions respecting ordination and on one occasion commanded that
1800 young men who presented themselves to take the vows should be
enrolled in the army instead. His prefaces and laudatory verses were
collected in a small volume and included in the eleventh collection of
the Tripitaka,[689] called the Northern collection, because it was
printed at Peking. It was published with a preface of his own
composition and he wrote another to the work called the Liturgy of
Kuan-yin,[690] and a third introducing selected memoirs of various
remarkable monks.[691] His Empress had a vision in which she imagined
a sutra was revealed to her and published the same with an
introduction. He was also conspicuously favourable to the Tibetan
clergy. In 1403 he sent his head eunuch to Tibet to invite the
presence of Tson-kha-pa, who refused to come himself but sent a
celebrated Lama called Halima.[692] On arriving at the capital Halima
was ordered to say masses for the Emperor's relatives. These
ceremonies were attended by supernatural manifestations and he
received as a recognition of his powers the titles of Prince of the
Great Precious Law and Buddha of the Western Paradise.[693] His three
principal disciples were styled Kuo Shih, and, agreeably to the
precedent established under the Yuan dynasty, were made the chief
prelates of the whole Buddhist Church. Since this time the Red or
Tibetan Clergy have been recognized as having precedence over the Grey
or Chinese.

In this reign the Chinese made a remarkable attempt to assert their
authority in Ceylon. In 1405 a mission was sent with offerings to the
Sacred Tooth and when it was ill received a second mission despatched
in 1407 captured the king of Ceylon and carried him off as a prisoner
to China. Ceylon paid tribute for fifty years, but it does not appear
that these proceedings had much importance for religion.[694]

In the reigns of Ying Tsung and Ching-Ti[695] (1436-64) large numbers
of monks were ordained, but, as on previous occasions, the great
increase of candidates led to the imposition of restrictions and in
1458 an edict was issued ordering that ordinations should be held only
once a year. The influence of the Chief Eunuchs during this period was
great, and two successive holders of this post, Wang-Chen and
Hsing-An,[696] were both devoted Buddhists and induced the Emperors
whom they served to expend enormous sums on building monasteries and
performing ceremonies at which the Imperial Court were present.

The end of the fifteenth century is filled by two reigns, Hsien
Tsung and Hsiao Tsung. The former fell under the influence of his
favourite concubine Wan and his eunuchs to such an extent that, in the
latter part of his life, he ceased to see his ministers and the chief
eunuch became the real ruler of China. It is also mentioned both in
1468 and 1483 that he was in the hands of Buddhist priests who
instructed him in secret doctrines and received the title of Kuo-Shih
and other distinctions. His son Hsiao Tsung reformed these abuses: the
Palace was cleansed: the eunuchs and priests were driven out and some
were executed: Taoist books were collected and burnt. The celebrated
writer Wang Yang Ming[697] lived in this reign. He defended and
illustrated the doctrine of Lu Chin-Yuan, namely that truth can be
obtained by meditation. To express intuitive knowledge, he used the
expression _Liang Chih_[698] (taken from Mencius). _Liang Chih_ is
inherent in all human minds, but in different degrees, and can be
developed or allowed to atrophy. To develop it should be man's
constant object, and in its light when pure all things are understood
and peace is obtained. The phrases of the Great Learning "to complete
knowledge," "investigate things," and "rest in the highest
excellence," are explained as referring to the _Liang Chih_ and the
contemplation of the mind by itself. We cannot here shut our eyes to
the influence of Bodhidharma and his school, however fervently Wang
Yang Ming may have appealed to the Chinese Classics.

The reign of Wu-tsung (1506-21) was favourable to Buddhism. In 1507
40,000 men became monks, either Buddhist or Taoist. The Emperor is
said to have been learned in Buddhist literature and to have known
Sanskrit[699] as well as Mongol and Arabic, but he was in the hands of
a band of eunuchs, who were known as the eight tigers. In 1515 he sent
an embassy to Tibet with the object of inducing the Grand Lama to
visit Peking, but the invitation was refused and the Tibetans expelled
the mission with force. The next Emperor, Shih-T'sung (1522-66),
inclined to Taoism rather than Buddhism. He ordered the images of
Buddha in the Forbidden City to be destroyed, but still appears to
have taken part in Buddhist ceremonies at different periods of his
reign. Wan Li (1573-1620), celebrated in the annals of porcelain
manufacture, showed some favour to Buddhism. He repaired many
buildings at P'u-t'o and distributed copies of the Tripitaka to the
monasteries of his Empire. In his edicts occurs the saying that
Confucianism and Buddhism are like the two wings of a bird: each
requires the co-operation of the other.

European missionaries first arrived during the sixteenth century, and,
had the Catholic Church been more flexible, China might perhaps have
recognized Christianity, not as the only true religion but as standing
on the same footing as Buddhism and Taoism. The polemics of the early
missionaries imply that they regarded Buddhism as their chief rival.
Thus Ricci had a public controversy with a bonze at Hang-Chou, and his
principal pupil Hsu Kuang-Ch'i[700] wrote a tract entitled "The errors
of the Buddhists exposed." Replies to these attacks are preserved in
the writings of the distinguished Buddhist priest Shen Chu-Hung.[701]

In 1644 the Ming dynasty collapsed before the Manchus and China was
again under foreign rule. Unlike the Mongols, the Manchus had little
inclination to Buddhism. Even before they had conquered China, their
prince, T'ai Tsung, ordered an inspection of monasteries and limited
the number of monks. But in this edict he inveighs only against the
abuse of religion and admits that "Buddha's teaching is at bottom pure
and chaste, true and sincere: by serving him with purity and piety,
one can obtain happiness."[702] Shun-Chih, the first Manchu Emperor,
wrote some prefaces to Buddhist works and entertained the Dalai Lama
at Peking in 1652.[703] His son and successor, commonly known as
K'ang-Hsi (1662-1723), dallied for a while with Christianity, but the
net result of his religious policy was to secure to Confucianism all
that imperial favour can give. I have mentioned above his Sacred Edict
and the partial favour which he showed to Buddhism. He gave
donations to the monasteries of P'u-t'o, Hang-chou and elsewhere: he
published the Kanjur with a preface of his own[704] and the twelfth
and last collection of the Tripitaka was issued under the auspices of
his son and grandson. The latter, the Emperor Ch'ien Lung, also
received the Teshu Lama not only with honour, but with interest and
sympathy, as is clear from the inscription preserved at Peking, in
which he extols the Lama as a teacher of spiritual religion.[705] He
also wrote a preface to a sutra for producing rain[706] in which he
says that he has ordered the old editions to be carefully corrected
and prayer and worship to be offered, "so that the old forms which
have been so beneficial during former ages might still be blessed to
the desired end." Even the late Empress Dowager accepted the
ministrations of the present Dalai Lama when he visited Peking in
1908, although, to his great indignation she obliged him to kneel at
Court.[707] Her former colleague, the Empress Tzu-An was a devout
Buddhist. The statutes of the Manchu dynasty (printed in 1818) contain
regulations for the celebration of Buddhist festivals at Court, for
the periodical reading of sutras to promote the imperial welfare, and
for the performance of funeral rites.

Still on the whole the Manchu dynasty showed less favour to Buddhism
than any which preceded it and its restrictive edicts limiting the
number of monks and prescribing conditions for ordination were
followed by no periods of reaction. But the vitality of Buddhism is
shown by the fact that these restrictions merely led to an increase of
the secular clergy, not legally ordained, who in their turn claimed
the imperial attention. Ch'ien Lung began in 1735 by giving them the
alternative of becoming ordinary laymen or of entering a monastery but
this drastic measure was considerably modified in the next few years.
Ultimately the secular clergy were allowed to continue as such, if
they could show good reason, and to have one disciple each.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 591: See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1910, Le Songe et l'Ambassade de
l'Empereur Ming Ti, par M. H. Maspero, where the original texts are
translated and criticized. It is a curious coincidence that Ptolemy
Soter is said to have introduced the worship of Serapis to Egypt from
Sinope in consequence of a dream.]

[Footnote 592: [Chinese: ] No doubt then pronounced something like
Vut-tha.]

[Footnote 593: [Chinese: ] or [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 594: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 595: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 596: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 597: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 598: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 599: See Chavannes, _Les documents Chinois decouverts par
Aurel Stein_, 1913, Introduction. The earliest documents are of 98
B.C.]

[Footnote 600: The Wei-lueh or Wei-lio [Chinese: ], composed between
239 and 265 A.D., no longer exists as a complete work, but a
considerable extract from it dealing with the countries of the West is
incorporated in the San Kuo Chih [Chinese: ] of P'ei-Sung-Chih
[Chinese: ] (429 A.D.). See Chavannes, translation and notes in
_T'oung Pao_, 1905, pp. 519-571.]

[Footnote 601: [Chinese: ] See Chavannes, _l.c._ p. 550.]

[Footnote 602: See Francke, _Zur Frage der Einfuhrung des Buddhismus
in China_, 1910, and Maspero's review in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1910, p. 629.
Another Taoist legend is that Dipankara Buddha or Jan Teng, described
as the teacher of Sakyamuni was a Taoist and that Sakyamuni
visited him in China. Giles quotes extracts from a writer of the
eleventh century called Shen Kua to the effect that Buddhism had been
flourishing before the Ch'in dynasty but disappeared with its advent
and also that eighteen priests were imprisoned in 216 B.C. But the
story adds that they recited the Prajnaparamita which is hardly
possible at that epoch.]

[Footnote 603: Sam. Nik. v. 10. 6. Cf. for a similar illustration in
Chuang-tzu, _S.B.E._ XL. p. 126.]

[Footnote 604: I may say, however, that I think it is a compilation
containing very ancient sayings amplified by later material which
shows Buddhist influence. This may be true to some extent of the
Essays of Chuang-tzu as well.]

[Footnote 605: See Legge's translation in _S.B.E._ Part I. pp. 176,
257, II. 46, 62; _ib._ I. pp. 171, 192, II. 13; _ib._ II. p. 13; _ib._
II. p. 9, I. p. 249; _ib._ pp. 45, 95, 100, 364, II. p. 139; _ib._ II.
p. 139; _ib._ II. p. 129.]

[Footnote 606: _Ib._ I. p. 202; cf. the Buddha's conversation with
Vaccha in Maj. Nik. 72.]

[Footnote 607: Kumarajiva and other Buddhists actually wrote
commentaries on the Tao-Te-Ching.]

[Footnote 608: [Chinese: ] It speaks, however, in section 36 of being
born in the condition or family of a Bodhisattva (P'u-sa-chia), where
the word seems to be used in the late sense of a devout member of the
Buddhist Church.]

[Footnote 609: But the Emperor Huan is said to have sacrificed to
Buddha and Lao-tzu. See Hou Han Shu in _T'oung Pao_, 1907, p. 194.
For early Buddhism see "Communautes et Moines Bouddhistes Chinois au
II et au III siecles," by Maspero in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1910, p. 222. In the
second century lived Mou-tzu [Chinese: ] a Buddhist author with a
strong spice of Taoism. His work is a collection of questions and
answers, somewhat resembling the Questions of Milinda. See translation
by Pelliot (in _T'oung Pao_, vol. XIX. 1920) who gives the date
provisionally as 195 A.D.]

[Footnote 610: Accounts of these and the later translators are found
in the thirteen catalogues of the Chinese Tripitaka (see Nanjio, p.
xxvii) and other works such as the Kao Sang-Chuan (Nanjio, No. 1490).]

[Footnote 611: [Chinese: ]. He worked at translations in Loyang
148-170.]

[Footnote 612: Dharmakala, see Nanjio, p. 386. The Vinaya used in
these early days of Chinese Buddhism was apparently that of the
Dharmagupta school. See _J.A._ 1916, II. p. 40. An Shih-kao (_c_. A.D.
150) translated a work called The 3000 Rules for Monks (Nanjio, 1126),
but it is not clear what was the Sanskrit original.]

[Footnote 613: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 614: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 615: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 616: [Chinese: ] He was a remarkable man and famous in his
time, for he was credited not only with clairvoyance and producing
rain, but with raising the dead. Remusat's account of him, based on
the Tsin annals, may still be read with interest. See _Nouv. Melanges
Asiatiques_, II. 1829, pp. 179 ff. His biography is contained in chap.
95 of the Tsin [Chinese: ] annals.]

[Footnote 617: [Chinese: ] Died 363 A.D.]

[Footnote 618: Ts'in [Chinese: ] must be distinguished from Tsin
[Chinese: ], the name of three short but legitimate dynasties.]

[Footnote 619: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 620: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 621: See Nanjio, Catalogue, p. 406.]

[Footnote 622: [Chinese: ] For this title see Pelliot in _T'oung
Pao_, 1911, p. 671.]

[Footnote 623: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 624: [Chinese: ] He was canonized under the name of Wu
[Chinese: ], and the three great persecutions of Buddhism are
sometimes described as the disasters of the three Wu, the others being
Wu of the North Chou dynasty (574) and Wu of the T'ang (845).]

[Footnote 625: [Chinese: ] For the 25 pilgrims see Nanjio, p. 417.]

[Footnote 626: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 627: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 628: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 629: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ]. See Chavannes, "Voyage de Song
Yun dans l'Udyana et le Gandhara, 518-522," p. E in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1903,
pp. 379-441. For an interesting account of the Dowager Empress see pp.
384-5.]

[Footnote 630: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 631: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 632: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 633: See chap. XXIII. p. 95, and chap. XLV below (on schools
of Chinese Buddhism), for more about Bodhidharma. The earliest Chinese
accounts of him seem to be those contained in the Liang and Wei
annals. But one of the most popular and fullest accounts is to be
found in the Wu Teng Hui Yuan (first volume) printed at Kushan near
Fuchow.]

[Footnote 634: His portraits are also frequent both in China and Japan
(see _Ostasiat. Ztsft_ 1912, p. 226) and the strongly marked features
attributed to him may perhaps represent a tradition of his personal
appearance, which is entirely un-Chinese. An elaborate study of
Bodhidharma written in Japanese is noticed in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1911, p.
457.]

[Footnote 635: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 636: The legend does not fit in well with chronology since
Sung-Yun is said to have returned from India in 522.]

[Footnote 637: See Takakusu in _J.R.A.S._ 1905, p. 33.]

[Footnote 638: Mailla, _Hist. Gen. de la Chine_, p. 369.]

[Footnote 639: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 640: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 641: See Biot, _Hist, de l'instruction publique en Chine_,
pp. 289, 313.]

[Footnote 642: [Chinese: ] Is celebrated in Chinese history as one
of the greatest opponents of Buddhism. He collected all the objections
to it in 10 books and warned his son against it on his death bed.
Giles, _Biog. Dict_. 589.]

[Footnote 643: [Chinese: ] An important minister and apparently a
man of talent but of ungovernable and changeable temper. In 639 he
obtained the Emperor's leave to become a priest but soon left his
monastery. The Emperor ordered him to be canonized under the name Pure
but Narrow. Giles, _Biog. Dict._ 722. The monk Fa-Lin [Chinese: ]
also attacked the views of Fu I in two treatises which have been
incorporated in the Chinese Tripitaka. See Nanjio, Cat. Nos. 1500,
1501.]

[Footnote 644: Subsequently a story grew up that his soul had visited
hell during a prolonged fainting fit after which he recovered and
became a devout Buddhist. See chap. XI of the Romance called
Hsi-yu-chi, a fantastic travesty of Hsuan Chuang's travels, and
Wieger, _Textes Historiques_, p. 1585.]

[Footnote 645: [Chinese: ] This name has been transliterated in an
extraordinary number of ways. See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1905, pp. 424-430.
Giles gives Hsuan Chuang in his _Chinese Dictionary_, but Hsuan Tsang
in his _Biographical Dictionary_. Probably the latter is more correct.
Not only is the pronunciation of the characters variable, but the
character [Chinese: ] was tabooed as being part of the Emperor K'ang
Hsi's personal name and [Chinese: ] substituted for it. Hence the
spelling Yuan Chuang.]

[Footnote 646: [Chinese: ] See Vincent Smith, _Early History of
India_, pp. 326-327, and Giles, _Biog. Dict._, _s.v._ Wang Hsuan-T'se.
This worthy appears to have gone to India again in 657 to offer robes
at the holy places.]

[Footnote 647: [Chinese: ] Some of the principal statues in the caves
of Lung-men were made at her expense, but other parts of these caves
seem to date from at least 500 A.D. Chavannes, _Mission Archeol._ tome
I, deuxieme partie.]

[Footnote 648: [Chinese: ] Ta-Yun-Ching. See _J.A._ 1913, p. 149.
The late Dowager Empress also was fond of masquerading as Kuan-yin but
it does not appear that the performance was meant to be taken
seriously.]

[Footnote 649: "That romantic Chinese reign of Genso (713-756) which
is the real absolute culmination of Chinese genius." Fenollosa,
_Epochs of Chinese and Japanese art_ I. 102.]

[Footnote 650: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 651: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 652: [Chinese: ] The meaning of this name appears to vary
at different times. At this period it is probably equivalent to Kapisa
or N.E. Afghanistan.]

[Footnote 653: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 654: See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, p. 161. This does not exclude
the possibility of an opposite current, _viz._ Chinese Buddhism
flowing into Burma.]

[Footnote 655: Wu-Tsung, 841-847.]

[Footnote 656: "Liu-Tsung-Yuan has left behind him much that for
purity of style and felicity of expression has rarely been surpassed,"
Giles, _Chinese Literature_, p. 191.]

[Footnote 657: Apparently in 783 A.D. See Waddell's articles on
Ancient Historical Edicts at Lhasa in _J.R.A.S._ 1909, 1910, 1911.]

[Footnote 658: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 659: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 660: See Eitel, _Handbook of Chinese Buddhism_, p. 185
_s.v._ Ullambana, a somewhat doubtful word, apparently rendered into
Chinese as Yu-lan-p'en.]

[Footnote 661: Sec Nanjio Catalogue, pp. 445-448.]

[Footnote 662: He is also said to have introduced the images of the
Four Kings which are now found in every temple. A portrait of him by
Li Chien is reproduced in Tajima's _Masterpieces_, vol. viii, plate
ix. The artist was perhaps his contemporary.]

[Footnote 663: _E.g._ Sacki, _The Nestorian Monument in China_, 1916.
See also above, p. 217.]

[Footnote 664: See Khuddaka-Patha, 7; Peta Vatthu, 1, 5 and the
commentary; Milinda Panha, iv. 8, 29; and for modern practices my
chapter on Siam, and Copleston, _Buddhism_, p. 445.]

[Footnote 665: [Chinese: ] Some native critics, however, have doubted
the authenticity of the received text and the version inserted in the
Official History seems to be a summary. See Wieger, _Textes
Historiques_, vol. iii. pp. 1726 ff., and Giles, _Chinese Literature_,
pp. 200 ff.]

[Footnote 666: The officials whose duty it was to remonstrate with the
Emperor if he acted wrongly.]

[Footnote 667: Giles, _Chinese Literature_, pp. 201, 202--somewhat
abbreviated.]

[Footnote 668: See Wieger, _Textes Historiques_, vol. III. pp. 1744
ff.]

[Footnote 669: "Thousands of ten-thousands of Ch'ing." A Ch'ing =
15.13 acres.]

[Footnote 670: Presumably similar to the temple slaves of Camboja,
etc.]

[Footnote 671: One Emperor of this epoch, Shih-Tsung of the later Chou
dynasty, suppressed monasteries and coined bronze images into
currency, declaring that Buddha, who in so many births had sacrificed
himself for mankind, would have no objection to his statues being made
useful. But in the South Buddhism nourished in the province of Fukien
under the princes of Min [Chinese: ] and the dynasty which called
itself Southern T'ang.]

[Footnote 672: [Chinese: ] See Kokka No. 309, 1916.]

[Footnote 673: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 674: The decrease in translations is natural for by this
time Chinese versions had been made of most works which had any claim
to be translated.]

[Footnote 675: See Biot, _L'instruction publique en Chine_, p. 350.]

[Footnote 676: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 677: See Le Gall, _Varietes Sinologiques_, No. 6 Tchou-Hi:
Sa doctrine Son influence. Shanghai, 1894, pp. 90, 122.]

[Footnote 678: [Chinese: ] Compare the similar doctrines of Wang
Yang-Ming.]

[Footnote 679: _E.g._ his elder brother Mangku who showed favour to
Buddhists, Mohammedans and Nestorians alike. He himself wished to
obtain Christian teachers from the Pope, by the help of Marco Polo,
but probably merely from curiosity.]

[Footnote 680: More accurately hPhags-pa. It is a title rather than a
name, being the Tibetan equivalent of Arya. Khubilai seems to be the
correct transcription of the Emperor's name. The Tibetan and Chinese
transcriptions are Hvopilai and Hu-pi-lieh.]

[Footnote 681: For this curious work see _B.E.F.E.O._ 1908, p. 515,
and _J.A._ 1913, I, pp. 116-132. For the destruction of Taoist books
see Chavannes in _T'oung Pao_, 1904, p. 366.]

[Footnote 682: At the present day an ordinary Chinese regards a Lama
as quite different from a Hoshang or Buddhist monk.]

[Footnote 683: The Yuan Emperors were no doubt fond of witnessing
religious theatricals in the Palace. See for extracts from Chinese
authors, _New China Review_, 1919, pp. 68 ff. Compare the performances
of the T'ang Emperor Su Tsung mentioned above.]

[Footnote 684: For the ecclesiastical abuses of the time see Koppen,
II. 103, and de Mailla, _Histoire de la Chine_, IX. 475, 538.]

[Footnote 685: See Wieger, _Textes Historiques_, III. p. 2013, and De
Groot, _Sectarianism and Religious Persecution in China_, I. p. 82. He
is often called Hung Wu which is strictly speaking the title of his
reign. He was certainly capable of changing his mind, for he degraded
Mencius from his position in Confucian temples one year and restored
him the next.]

[Footnote 686: See de Mailla, _Histoire de la Chine_, IX. p. 470.]

[Footnote 687: Often called Yung-Lo which is strictly the title of his
reign.]

[Footnote 688: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 689: See Nanjio, Cat. 1613-16.]

[Footnote 690: See Beal, _Catena of Buddhist Scriptures_, p. 398. The
Emperor says: "So we, the Ruler of the Empire ... do hereby bring
before men a mode for attaining to the condition of supreme Wisdom. We
therefore earnestly exhort all men ... carefully to study the
directions of this work and faithfully to follow them."]

[Footnote 691: Nanjio, Cat. 1620. See also _ib._ 1032 and 1657 for the
Empress's sutra.]

[Footnote 692: Or Kalima [Chinese: ] In Tibetan Karma de bshin
gshegs-pa. He was the fifth head of the Karma-pa school. See Chandra
Das's dictionary, _s.v._, where a reference is given to
kLong-rdol-gsung-hbum. It is noticeable that the Karma-pa is one of
the older and more Tantric sects.]

[Footnote 693: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ] Yuan Shih K'ai prefixed to
this latter the four characters [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 694: See Yule, _Cathay and the Way Thither_, pp. 75 ff.]

[Footnote 695: When Ying Tsung was carried away by the Mongols in 1449
his brother Ching-Ti was made Emperor. Though Ying Tsung was sent back
in 1450, he was not able to oust Ching-Ti from the throne till 1457.]

[Footnote 696: [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 697: [Chinese: ] His real name was Wang Shou Jen
[Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 698: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 699: Though the ecclesiastical study of Sanskrit decayed
under the Ming dynasty, Yung-lo founded in 1407 a school of language
for training interpreters at which Sanskrit was taught among other
tongues.]

[Footnote 700: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 701: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 702: De Groot, _l.c._ p. 93.]

[Footnote 703: Some authorities say that he became a monk before he
died, but the evidence is not good. See Johnston in _New China
Review_, Nos. 1 and 2, 1920.]

[Footnote 704: See _T'oung Pao_, 1909, p. 533.]

[Footnote 705: See E. Ludwig, _The visit of the Tcshoo Lama to
Peking_, Tien Tsin Press, 1904.]

[Footnote 706: The Ta-yun-lung-ch'ing-yu-ching. Nanjio's Catalogue,
Nos. 187-8, 970, and see Beal, _Catena of Buddhist Scriptures_, pp.
417-9.]

[Footnote 707: See for an account of his visit "The Dalai Lamas and
their relations with the Manchu Emperor of China" in _T'oung Pao_,
1910, p. 774.]




CHAPTER XLIV

CHINA (_continued_)

THE CANON


The Buddhist scriptures extant in the Chinese language are known
collectively as San Tsang[708] or the three store-houses, that is to
say, Tripitaka. Though this usage is justified by both eastern and
European practice, it is not altogether happy, for the Chinese
thesaurus is not analogous to the Pali Canon or to any collection of
sacred literature known in India, being in spite of its name arranged
in four, not in three, divisions. It is a great _Corpus Scriptorum
Sanctorum_, embracing all ages and schools, wherein translations of
the most diverse Indian works are supplemented by original
compositions in Chinese. Imagine a library comprising Latin
translations of the Old and New Testaments with copious additions from
the Talmud and Apocryphal literature; the writings of the Fathers,
decrees of Councils and Popes, together with the _opera omnia_ of the
principal schoolmen and the early protestant reformers and you will
have some idea of this theological miscellany which has no claim to be
called a canon, except that all the works included have at some time
or other received a certain literary or doctrinal hall-mark.

1


The collection is described in the catalogue compiled by Bunyiu
Nanjio.[709] It enumerates 1662 works which are classified in four
great divisions, (_a_) Sutra, (_b_) Vinaya, (_c_) Abhidharma, (_d_)
Miscellaneous. The first three divisions contain translations only;
the fourth original Chinese works as well.

The first division called Ching or Sutras amounts to nearly two-thirds
of the whole, for it comprises no less than 1081 works and is
subdivided as follows: (_a_) Mahayana Sutras, 541, (_b_) Hinayana
Sutras, 240, (_c_) Mahayana and Hinayana Sutras, 300 in number,
admitted into the canon under the Sung and Yuan dynasties, A.D.
960-1368. Thus whereas the first two subdivisions differ in doctrine,
the third is a supplement containing later translations of both
schools. The second subdivision, or Hinayana Sutras, which is less
numerous and complicated than that containing the Mahayana Sutras,
shows clearly the character of the whole collection. It is divided
into two classes of which the first is called A-han, that is,
Agama.[710] This comprises translations of four works analogous to the
Pali Nikayas, though not identical with the texts which we possess,
and also numerous alternative translations of detached sutras. All
four were translated about the beginning of the fifth century whereas
the translations of detached sutras are for the most part earlier.
This class also contains the celebrated Sutra of Forty-two Sections,
and works like the Jataka-nidana. The second class is styled Sutras of
one translation.[711] The title is not used rigorously, but the works
bearing it are relatively obscure and it is not always clear to what
Sanskrit texts they correspond. It will be seen from the above that
the Chinese Tripitaka is a literary and bibliographical collection
rather than an ecclesiastical canon. It does not provide an authorized
version for the edification of the faithful, but it presents for the
use of the learned all translations of Indian works belonging to a
particular class which possess a certain age and authority.

The same characteristic marks the much richer collection of Mahayana
Sutras, which contains the works most esteemed by Chinese Buddhists.
It is divided into seven classes:

    1. [Chinese: ] Pan-jo (Po-jo) or Prajnaparamita.[712]

    2. [Chinese: ] Pao-chi or Ratnakuta.

    3. [Chinese: ] Ta-chi or Mahasannipata.

    4. [Chinese: ] Hua-yen or Avatamsaka.

    5. [Chinese: ] Nieh-pan or Parinirvana.

    6. [Chinese: ] Sutras in more than one translation
    but not falling into any of the above five
    classes.

    7. [Chinese: ] Other sutras existing in only one translation.

Each of the first five classes probably represents a collection of sutras
analogous to a Nikaya and in one sense a single work but translated into
Chinese several times, both in a complete form and in extracts. Thus the
first class opens with the majestic Mahaprajnaparamita in 600 fasciculi
and equivalent to 200,000 stanzas in Sanskrit. This is followed by
several translations of shorter versions including two of the little
sutras called the Heart of the Prajnaparamita, which fills only one leaf.
There are also six translations of the celebrated work known as the
Diamond-cutter,[713] which is the ninth sutra in the Mahaprajnaparamita
and all the works classed under the heading Pan-jo seem to be alternative
versions of parts of this great Corpus.

The second and third classes are collections of sutras which no longer
exist as collections in Sanskrit, though the Sanskrit text of some
individual sutras is extant. That called Pao-chi or Ratnakuta opens
with a collection of forty-nine sutras which includes the longer
version of the Sukhavativyuha. This collection is reckoned as one
work, but the other items in the same class are all or nearly all of
them duplicate translations of separate sutras contained in it. This
is probably true of the third class also. At least seven of the works
included in it are duplicate translations of the first, which is
called Mahasannipata, and the sutras called Candragarbha, Kshitig.,
Sumerug., and Akasag., appear to be merely sections, not separate
compositions, although this is not clear from the remarks of Nanjio
and Wassiljew.

The principal works in class 4 are two translations, one fuller than
the other, of the Hua-yen or Avatamsaka Sutra,[714] still one of the
most widely read among Buddhist works, and at least sixteen of the
other items are duplicate renderings of parts of it. Class 5
consists of thirteen works dealing with the death of the Buddha and
his last discourses. The first sutra, sometimes called the northern
text, is imperfect and was revised at Nanking in the form of the
southern text.[715] There are two other incomplete versions of the
same text. To judge from a specimen translated by Beal[716] it is a
collection of late discourses influenced by Vishnuism and does not
correspond to the Mahaparinibbanasutta of the Pali Canon.

Class 6 consists of sutras which exist in several translations, but
still do not, like the works just mentioned, form small libraries in
themselves. It comprises, however, several books highly esteemed and
historically important, such as the Saddharmapundarika (six
translations), the Suvarnaprabhasa, the Lalitavistara, the
Lankavatara, and the Shorter Sukhavativyuha,[717] all extant in three
translations. In it are also included many short tracts, the originals
of which are not known. Some of them are Jatakas, but many[718] deal
with the ritual of image worship or with spells. These characteristics
are still more prominent in the seventh class, consisting of sutras
which exist in a single translation only. The best known among them
are the Surangama and the Mahavairocana (Ta-jih-ching), which is
the chief text of the Shin-gon or Mantra School.[719]

The Lu-tsang or Vinaya-pitaka is divided into Mahayana and Hinayana
texts, neither very numerous. Many of the Mahayana texts profess to be
revelations by Maitreya and are extracts of the Yogacaryabhumisastra[720]
or similar to it. For practical purposes the most important is the
Fan-wang-ching[721] or net of Brahma. The Indian original of this work is
not known, but since the eighth century it has been accepted in China as
the standard manual for the monastic life.[722]

The Hinayana Vinaya comprises five very substantial recensions of
the whole code, besides extracts, compendiums, and manuals. The five
recensions are: (_a_) Shih-sung-lu in sixty-five fasciculi, translated
