The individual divine Self called Indra perceiving by means of
/ri/shi-like intuition[131]--the existence of which is vouched for by
Scripture--its own Self to be identical with the supreme Self, instructs
Pratardana (about the highest Self) by means of the words 'Know me
only.'

By intuition of the same kind the /ri/shi Vamadeva reached the knowledge
expressed in the words, 'I was Manu and Surya;' in accordance with the
passage, 'Whatever deva was awakened (so as to know Brahman) he indeed
became that' (B/ri/. Up. I, 4, 10). The assertion made above (in the
purvapaksha of the preceding Sutra) that Indra after saying, 'Know me
only,' glorifies himself by enumerating the slaying of Tvash/tri/'s son
and other deeds of strength, we refute as follows. The death of
Tvash/tri/'s son and similar deeds are referred to, not to the end of
glorifying Indra as the object of knowledge--in which case the sense of
the passage would be, 'Because I accomplished such and such deeds,
therefore know me'--but to the end of glorifying the cognition of the
highest Self. For this reason the text, after having referred to the
slaying of Tvash/tri/'s son and the like, goes on in the clause next
following to exalt knowledge, 'And not one hair of me is harmed there.
He who knows me thus by no deed of his is his life harmed.'--(But how
does this passage convey praise of knowledge?)--Because, we reply, its
meaning is as follows: 'Although I do such cruel deeds, yet not even a
hair of mine is harmed because I am one with Brahman; therefore the life
of any other person also who knows me thus is not harmed by any deed of
his.' And the object of the knowledge (praised by Indra) is nothing else
but Brahman which is set forth in a subsequent passage, 'I am pra/n/a,
the intelligent Self.' Therefore the entire chapter refers to Brahman.

31. If it be said (that Brahman is) not (meant), on account of
characteristic marks of the individual soul and the chief vital air
(being mentioned); we say no, on account of the threefoldness of devout
meditation (which would result from your interpretation); on account of
(the meaning advocated by us) being accepted (elsewhere); and on account
of (characteristic marks of Brahman) being connected (with the passage
under discussion).

Although we admit, the purvapakshin resumes, that the chapter about the
pra/n/a does not furnish any instruction regarding some outward deity,
since it contains a multitude of references to the interior Self; still
we deny that it is concerned with Brahman.--For what reason?--Because it
mentions characteristic marks of the individual soul on the one hand,
and of the chief vital air on the other hand. The passage, 'Let no man
try to find out what speech is, let him know the speaker,' mentions a
characteristic mark of the individual soul, and must therefore be held
to point out as the object of knowledge the individual soul which rules
and employs the different organs of action such as speech and so on. On
the other hand, we have the passage, 'But pra/n/a alone, the intelligent
Self, having laid hold of this body makes it rise up,' which points to
the chief vital air; for the chief attribute of the vital air is that it
sustains the body. Similarly, we read in the colloquy of the vital airs
(Pra. Up. II, 3), concerning speech and the other vital airs, 'Then
pra/n/a (the chief vital air) as the best said to them: Be not deceived;
I alone dividing myself fivefold support this body and keep it.' Those,
again, who in the passage quoted above read 'this one (masc.), the
body[132]' must give the following explanation, Pra/n/a having laid hold
of this one, viz. either the individual soul or the aggregate of the
sense organs, makes the body rise up. The individual soul as well as the
chief vital air may justly be designated as the intelligent Self; for
the former is of the nature of intelligence, and the latter (although
non-intelligent in itself) is the abode of other pra/n/as, viz. the
sense organs, which are the instruments of intelligence. Moreover, if
the word pra/n/a be taken to denote the individual soul as well as the
chief vital air, the pra/n/a and the intelligent Self may be spoken of
in two ways, either as being non-different on account of their mutual
concomitance, or as being different on account of their (essentially
different) individual character; and in these two different ways they
are actually spoken of in the two following passages, 'What is pra/n/a
that is praj/n/a, what is praj/n/a that is pra/n/a;' and, 'For together
do these two live in the body and together do they depart.' If, on the
other hand, pra/n/a denoted Brahman, what then could be different from
what? For these reasons pra/n/a does not denote Brahman, but either the
individual soul or the chief vital air or both.

All this argumentation, we reply, is wrong, 'on account of the
threefoldness of devout meditation.' Your interpretation would involve
the assumption of devout meditation of three different kinds, viz. on
the individual soul, on the chief vital air, and on Brahman. But it is
inappropriate to assume that a single sentence should enjoin three kinds
of devout meditation; and that all the passages about the pra/n/a really
constitute one single sentence (one syntactical whole) appears from the
beginning and the concluding part. In the beginning we have the clause
'Know me only,' followed by 'I am pra/n/a, the intelligent Self,
meditate on me as Life, as Immortality;' and in the end we read, 'And
that pra/n/a indeed is the intelligent Self, blessed, imperishable,
immortal.' The beginning and the concluding part are thus seen to be
similar, and we therefore must conclude that they refer to one and the
same matter. Nor can the characteristic mark of Brahman be so turned as
to be applied to something else; for the ten objects and the ten
subjects (subjective powers)[133] cannot rest on anything but Brahman.
Moreover, pra/n/a must denote Brahman 'on account of (that meaning)
being accepted,' i.e. because in the case of other passages where
characteristic marks of Brahman are mentioned the word pra/n/a is taken
in the sense of 'Brahman.' And another reason for assuming the passage
to refer to Brahman is that here also, i.e. in the passage itself there
is 'connexion' with characteristic marks of Brahman, as, for instance,
the reference to what is most beneficial for man. The assertion that the
passage, 'Having laid hold of this body it makes it rise up,' contains a
characteristic mark of the chief vital air, is untrue; for as the
function of the vital air also ultimately rests on Brahman it can
figuratively be ascribed to the latter. So Scripture also declares, 'No
mortal lives by the breath that goes up and by the breath that goes
down. We live by another in whom these two repose' (Ka. Up. II, 5, 5).
Nor does the indication of the individual soul which you allege to occur
in the passage, 'Let no man try to find out what speech is, let him know
the speaker,' preclude the view of pra/n/a denoting Brahman. For, as the
passages, 'I am Brahman,' 'That art thou,' and others, prove, there is
in reality no such thing as an individual soul absolutely different from
Brahman, but Brahman, in so far as it differentiates itself through the
mind (buddhi) and other limiting conditions, is called individual soul,
agent, enjoyer. Such passages therefore as the one alluded to, (viz.
'let no man try to find out what speech is, let him know the speaker,')
which, by setting aside all the differences due to limiting conditions,
aim at directing the mind on the internal Self and thus showing that the
individual soul is one with Brahman, are by no means out of place. That
the Self which is active in speaking and the like is Brahman appears
from another scriptural passage also, viz. Ke. Up. I, 5, 'That which is
not expressed by speech and by which speech is expressed that alone know
as Brahman, not that which people here adore.' The remark that the
statement about the difference of pra/n/a and praj/n/a (contained in the
passage, 'Together they dwell in this body, together they depart') does
not agree with that interpretation according to which pra/n/a is
Brahman, is without force; for the mind and the vital air which are the
respective abodes of the two powers of cognition and action, and
constitute the limiting conditions of the internal Self may be spoken of
as different. The internal Self, on the other hand, which is limited by
those two adjuncts, is in itself non-differentiated, so that the two may
be identified, as is done in the passage 'pra/n/a is praj/n/a.'

The second part of the Sutra is explained in a different manner
also[134], as follows: Characteristic marks of the individual soul as
well as of the chief vital air are not out of place even in a chapter
whose topic is Brahman. How so? 'On account of the threefoldness of
devout meditation.' The chapter aims at enjoining three kinds of devout
meditation on Brahman, according as Brahman is viewed under the aspect
of pra/n/a, under the aspect of praj/n/a, and in itself. The passages,
'Meditate (on me) as life, as immortality. Life is pra/n/a,' and 'Having
laid hold of this body it makes it rise up. Therefore let man worship it
alone as uktha,' refer to the pra/n/a aspect. The introductory passage,
'Now we shall explain how all things become one in that praj/n/a,' and
the subsequent passages, 'Speech verily milked one portion thereof; the
word is its object placed outside;' and, 'Having by praj/n/a taken
possession of speech he obtains by speech all words &c.,' refer to the
praj/n/a aspect. The Brahman aspect finally is referred to in the
following passage, 'These ten objects have reference to praj/n/a, the
ten subjects have reference to objects. If there were no objects there
would be no subjects; and if there were no subjects there would be no
objects. For on either side alone nothing could be achieved. But that is
not many. For as in a car the circumference of the wheel is set on the
spokes and the spokes on the nave, thus are these objects set on the
subjects and the subjects on the pra/n/a.' Thus we see that the one
meditation on Brahman is here represented as threefold, according as
Brahman is viewed either with reference to two limiting conditions or in
itself. In other passages also we find that devout meditation on Brahman
is made dependent on Brahman being qualified by limiting adjuncts; so,
for instance (Ch. Up. III, 14, 2), 'He who consists of mind, whose body
is pra/n/a.' The hypothesis of Brahman being meditated upon under three
aspects perfectly agrees with the pra/n/a chapter[135]; as, on the one
hand, from a comparison of the introductory and the concluding clauses
we infer that the subject-matter of the whole chapter is one only, and
as, on the other hand, we meet with characteristic marks of pra/n/a,
praj/n/a, and Brahman in turns. It therefore remains a settled
conclusion that Brahman is the topic of the whole chapter.

Notes:

[Footnote 32: The subject is the universal Self whose nature is
intelligence (/k/u); the object comprises whatever is of a
non-intelligent nature, viz. bodies with their sense organs, internal
organs, and the objects of the senses, i.e. the external material
world.]

[Footnote 33: The object is said to have for its sphere the notion of
the 'thou' (yushmat), not the notion of the 'this' or 'that' (idam), in
order better to mark its absolute opposition to the subject or Ego.
Language allows of the co-ordination of the pronouns of the first and
the third person ('It is I,' 'I am he who,' &c.; ete vayam, ame vayam
asmahe), but not of the co-ordination of the pronouns of the first and
second person.]

[Footnote 34: Adhyasa, literally 'superimposition' in the sense of
(mistaken) ascription or imputation, to something, of an essential
nature or attributes not belonging to it. See later on.]

[Footnote 35: Natural, i.e. original, beginningless; for the modes of
speech and action which characterise transmigratory existence have
existed, with the latter, from all eternity.]

[Footnote 36: I.e. the intelligent Self which is the only reality and
the non-real objects, viz. body and so on, which are the product of
wrong knowledge.]

[Footnote 37: 'The body, &c. is my Self;' 'sickness, death, children,
wealth, &c., belong to my Self.']

[Footnote 38: Literally 'in some other place.' The clause 'in the form
of remembrance' is added, the Bhamati remarks, in order to exclude those
cases where something previously observed is recognised in some other
thing or place; as when, for instance, the generic character of a cow
which was previously observed in a black cow again presents itself to
consciousness in a grey cow, or when Devadatta whom we first saw in
Pa/t/aliputra again appears before us in Mahishmati. These are cases of
recognition where the object previously observed again presents itself
to our senses; while in mere remembrance the object previously perceived
is not in renewed contact with the senses. Mere remembrance operates in
the case of adhyasa, as when we mistake mother-of-pearl for silver which
is at the time not present but remembered only.]

[Footnote 39: The so-called anyathakhyativadins maintain that in the act
of adhyasa the attributes of one thing, silver for instance, are
superimposed on a different thing existing in a different place,
mother-of-pearl for instance (if we take for our example of adhyasa the
case of some man mistaking a piece of mother-of-pearl before him for a
piece of silver). The atmakhyativadins maintain that in adhyasa the
modification, in the form of silver, of the internal organ and action
which characterise transmigratory existence have existed, with the
latter, from all eternity.]

[Footnote 40: This is the definition of the akhyativadins.]

[Footnote 41: Some anyathakhyativadins and the Madhyamikas according to
Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 42: The pratyagatman is in reality non-object, for it is
svayampraka/s/a, self-luminous, i.e. the subjective factor in all
cognition. But it becomes the object of the idea of the Ego in so far as
it is limited, conditioned by its adjuncts which are the product of
Nescience, viz. the internal organ, the senses and the subtle and gross
bodies, i.e. in so far as it is jiva, individual or personal soul. Cp.
Bhamati, pp. 22, 23: '/k/idatmaiva svayampraka/s/oszpi
buddhyadivishayavi/kkh/ura/n/at katha/mk/id asm
upratyayavishayoszha/m/karaspada/m/ jiva iti /k/a jantur iti /k/a
ksheuajna iti /k/akhyayate.']

[Footnote 43: Translated according to the Bhamati. We deny, the objector
says, the possibility of adhyasa in the case of the Self, not on the
ground that it is not an object because self-luminous (for that it may
be an object although it is self-luminous you have shown), but on the
ground that it is not an object because it is not manifested either by
itself or by anything else.--It is known or manifest, the Vedantin
replies, on account of its immediate presentation (aparokshatvat), i.e.
on account of the intuitional knowledge we have of it. Ananda Giri
construes the above clause in a different way:
asmatpratyayavishayatveszpy aparokshatvad ekantenavishayatvabbavat
tasminn aha@nkaradyadhyasa ity artha/h/. Aparokshatvam api kai/sk/id
atmano nesh/t/am ity asa@nkyaha pratyagatmeti.]

[Footnote 44: Tatraiva/m/ sati evambhutavastutattvavadhara/n/e sati.
Bha. Tasminn adhyase uktarityazvidyavmake sati. Go. Yatratmani
buddhyadau va yasya buddhyader atmano vadhyasa/h/ tena
buddhyadi-nasztmana va k/ri/tenasz/s/anayadidoshe/n/a /k/aitanyagu/n/ena
/k/atmanatma va vastuto na svalpenapi yujyate. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 45: Whether they belong to the karmaka/nd/a, i.e. that part of
the Veda which enjoins active religious duty or the j/n/anaka/nd/a, i.e.
that part of the Veda which treats of Brahman.]

[Footnote 46: It being of course the function of the means of right
knowledge to determine Truth and Reality.]

[Footnote 47: The Bhamati takes adhish/th/anam in the sense of
superintendence, guidance. The senses cannot act unless guided by a
superintending principle, i.e. the individual soul.]

[Footnote 48: If activity could proceed from the body itself,
non-identified with the Self, it would take place in deep sleep also.]

[Footnote 49: I.e. in the absence of the mutual superimposition of the
Self and the Non-Self and their attributes.]

[Footnote 50: The Mima/m/sa, i.e. the enquiry whose aim it is to show
that the embodied Self, i.e. the individual or personal soul is one with
Brahman. This Mima/m/sa being an enquiry into the meaning of the
Vedanta-portions of the Veda, it is also called Vedanta mima/m/sa.]

[Footnote 51: Nadhikarartha iti. Tatra hetur brahmeti. Asyartha/h/, kam
ayam atha/s/abdo brahmaj/n/ane/kkh/ya/h/ kim vantar/n/itavi/k/arasya
athave/kkh/avi/s/esha/n/aj/n/anasyarambhartha/h/. Nadya/h/ tasya
mima/m/sapravartikayas tadapravartyatvad anarabhyatvat tasya/s/
/k/ottaratra pratyadhikara/n/am apratipadanat. Na
dvitiyoztha/s/abdenanantaryoktidvara vi/s/ish/t/adhikaryasamarpa/n/e
sadhana/k/atush/t/ayasampannana/m/ brahmadhitadvi/k/arayor anarthitvad
vi/k/aranarambhan na /k/a vi/k/aravidhiva/s/ad adhikari kalpya/h/
prarambhasyapi tulyatvad adhikari/n/a/s/ /k/a vidhyapekshitopadhitvan na
t/ri/tiya/h/ brahmaj/n/anasyanandasakshatkaratvenadhikaryatve z
pyapradhanyad atha/s/abdasambandhat tasman narambharthateti. Ananda
Giri.]

[Footnote 52: Any relation in which the result, i.e. here the enquiry
into Brahman may stand to some antecedent of which it is the effect may
be comprised under the relation of anantarya.]

[Footnote 53: He cuts off from the heart, then from the tongue, then
from the breast.]

[Footnote 54: Where one action is subordinate to another as, for
instance, the offering of the prayajas is to the
dar/s/apur/n/amasa-sacrifice, or where one action qualifies a person for
another as, for instance, the offering of the dar/s/apur/n/amasa
qualifies a man for the performance of the Soma-sacrifice, there is
unity of the agent, and consequently an intimation of the order of
succession of the actions is in its right place.]

[Footnote 55: The 'means' in addition to /s/ama and dama are
discontinuance of religious ceremonies (uparati), patience in suffering
(titiksha), attention and concentration of the mind (samadhana), and
faith (/s/raddha).]

[Footnote 56: According to Pa/n/ini II, 3, 50 the sixth (genitive) case
expresses the relation of one thing being generally supplementary to, or
connected with, some other thing.]

[Footnote 57: In the case of other transitive verbs, object and result
may be separate; so, for instance, when it is said 'grama/m/
ga/kkh/ati,' the village is the object of the action of going, and the
arrival at the village its result. But in the case of verbs of desiring
object and result coincide.]

[Footnote 58: That Brahman exists we know, even before entering on the
Brahma-mima/m/sa, from the occurrence of the word in the Veda, &c., and
from the etymology of the word we at once infer Brahman's chief
attributes.]

[Footnote 59: The three last opinions are those of the followers of the
Nyaya, the Sa@nkhya, and the Yoga-philosophy respectively. The three
opinions mentioned first belong to various materialistic schools; the
two subsequent ones to two sects of Bauddha philosophers.]

[Footnote 60: As, for instance, the passages 'this person consists of
the essence of food;' 'the eye, &c. spoke;' 'non-existing this was in
the beginning,' &c.]

[Footnote 61: So the compound is to be divided according to An. Gi. and
Go.; the Bha. proposes another less plausible division.]

[Footnote 62: According to Nirukta I, 2 the six bhavavikara/h/ are:
origination, existence, modification, increase, decrease, destruction.]

[Footnote 63: The pradhana, called also prak/ri/ti, is the primal causal
matter of the world in the /S/a@nkhya-system. It will be fully discussed
in later parts of this work. To avoid ambiguities, the term pradhana has
been left untranslated. Cp. Sa@nkhya Karika 3.]

[Footnote 64: Ke/k/it tu hira/n/yagaroha/m/ sa/m/sari/n/am evagamaj
jagaddhetum a/k/akshate. Ananada Giri.]

[Footnote 65: Viz. the Vai/s/eshikas.]

[Footnote 66: Atmana/h/ /s/ruter ity artha/h/. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 67: Text (or direct statement), suggestive power (linga),
syntactical connection (vakya), &c., being the means of proof made use
of in the Purva Mima/m/sa.]

[Footnote 68: The so-called sakshatkara of Brahman. The &c. comprises
inference and so on.]

[Footnote 69: So, for instance, the passage 'he carves the sacrificial
post and makes it eight-cornered,' has a purpose only as being
supplementary to the injunction 'he ties the victim to the sacrificial
post.']

[Footnote 70: If the fruits of the two /s/astras were not of a different
nature, there would be no reason for the distinction of two /s/astras;
if they are of a different nature, it cannot be said that the knowledge
of Brahman is enjoined for the purpose of final release, in the same way
as sacrifices are enjoined for the purpose of obtaining the heavenly
world and the like.]

[Footnote 71: The first passage shows that the Self is not joined to the
gross body; the second that it is not joined to the subtle body; the
third that is independent of either.]

[Footnote 72: Ananda Giri omits 'ata/h/.' His comment is:
p/ri/thagjij/n/asavishayatva/k/ /k/a dharmadyasp/ri/sh/t/atva/m/
brahma/n/o yuktam ityaha; tad iti; ata/h/ /s/abdapa/th/e dharmadyasparse
karmaphalavailaksba/n/ya/m/ hetuk/ri/tam.--The above translation follows
Govindananda's first explanation. Tat kaivalyam brahmaiva
karmaphalavilaksha/n/atvad ity artha/h/.]

[Footnote 73: Sampat. Sampan namalpe vastuny alambane samanyena
kena/k/in mahato vastuna/h/ sampadanam. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 74: In which passage the mind, which may be called endless on
account of the infinite number of modifications it undergoes, is
identified with the Vi/s/vedevas, which thereby constitute the chief
object of the meditation; the fruit of the meditation being immortality.
The identity of the Self with Brahman, on the other hand, is real, not
only meditatively imagined, on account of the attribute of intelligence
being common to both.]

[Footnote 75: Adhyasa/h/ /s/astratoitasmi/m/s taddhi/h/. Sampadi
sampadyamanasya pradhanyenanudhyanam, adhyase tu alambanasyeti
vi/s/esha/h/. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 76: Air and breath each absorb certain things, and are,
therefore, designated by the same term 'absorber.' Seya/m/
sa/m/vargad/ri/sh/t/ir vayau pra/n/e /k/a da/s/a/s/agata/m/ jagad
dar/s/ayati yatha jivatmani b/rim/ha/n/akriyaya
brahmad/ri/sh/t/iram/ri/tatvayaphalayakalpata iti. Bhamati.]

[Footnote 77: The butter used in the upa/ms/uyaja is ceremonially
purified by the wife of the sacrificer looking at it; so, it might be
said, the Self of him who meditates on Brahman (and who as
kart/ri/--agent--stands in a subordinate anga-relation to the karman of
meditation) is merely purified by the cognition of its being one with
Brahman.]

[Footnote 78: An hypothesis which might be proposed for the purpose of
obviating the imputation to moksha of non-eternality which results from
the two preceding hypotheses.]

[Footnote 79: Viz. things to be originated (for instance, gha/t/a/m/
karoti), things to be obtained (grama/m/ ga/kkh/ati), things to be
modified (suvar/n/a/m/ ku/nd/ala/m/ karoti), and things to be
ceremonially purified (vrihin prokshati).]

[Footnote 80: Whence it follows that it is not something to be avoided
like transitory things.]

[Footnote 81: That, for instance, in the passage 'he is to sacrifice
with Soma,' the word 'soma,' which does not denote an action, is devoid
of sense.]

[Footnote 82: I.e. for the purpose of showing that the passages
conveying information about Brahman as such are justified. You have (the
objector maintains) proved hitherto only that passages containing
information about existent things are admissible, if those things have a
purpose; but how does all this apply to the information about Brahman of
which no purpose has been established?]

[Footnote 83: It is 'naturally established' because it has natural
motives--not dependent on the injunctions of the Veda, viz. passion and
the like.]

[Footnote 84: Elsewhere, i.e. outside the Veda.]

[Footnote 85: The above discussion of the prohibitory passages of the
Veda is of a very scholastic nature, and various clauses in it are
differently interpreted by the different commentators. /S/a@nkara
endeavours to fortify his doctrine, that not all parts of the Veda refer
to action by an appeal to prohibitory passages which do not enjoin
action but abstinence from action. The legitimacy of this appeal might
be contested on the ground that a prohibitory passage also, (as, for
instance, 'a Brahma/n/a is not to be killed,') can be explained as
enjoining a positive action, viz. some action opposed in nature to the
one forbidden, so that the quoted passage might be interpreted to mean
'a determination, &c. of not killing a Brahma/n/a is to be formed;' just
as we understand something positive by the expression 'a
non-Brahma/n/a,' viz. some man who is a kshattriya or something else. To
this the answer is that, wherever we can, we must attribute to the word
'not' its primary sense which is the absolute negation of the word to
which it is joined; so that passages where it is joined to words
denoting action must be considered to have for their purport the entire
absence of action. Special cases only are excepted, as the one alluded
to in the text where certain prohibited actions are enumerated under the
heading of vows; for as a vow is considered as something positive, the
non-doing of some particular action must there be understood as
intimating the performance of some action of an opposite nature. The
question as to the various meanings of the particle 'not' is discussed
in all treatises on the Purva Mima/m/sa; see, for instance,
Arthasamgraha, translation, p. 39 ff.]

[Footnote 86: The Self is the agent in a sacrifice, &c. only in so far
as it imagines itself to be joined to a body; which imagination is
finally removed by the cognition of Brahman.]

[Footnote 87: The figurative Self, i.e. the imagination that wife,
children, possessions, and the like are a man's Self; the false Self,
i.e. the imagination that the Self acts, suffers, enjoys, &c.]

[Footnote 88: I.e. the apparent world with all its distinctions.]

[Footnote 89: The words in parentheses are not found in the best
manuscripts.]

[Footnote 90: The most exalted of the three constituent elements whose
state of equipoise constitutes the pradhana.]

[Footnote 91: Knowledge can arise only where Goodness is predominant,
not where the three qualities mutually counterbalance one another.]

[Footnote 92: The excess of Sattva in the Yogin would not enable him to
rise to omniscience if he did not possess an intelligent principle
independent of Sattva.]

[Footnote 93: Ananda Giri comments as follows: paroktanupapatlim
nirasitum p/rikkh/ati idam iti. Prak/ri/tyarthabhavat pratyayarthabhavad
va brahma/n/o sarvaj/n/ateti pra/s/nam eva praka/t/ayati katham iti.
Prathama/m/ pratyaha yasyeti. Ukta/m/ vyatirckadvara viyz/rin/oti
anityatve hiti. Dvitiya/m/ /s/a@nkate j/n/aneti. Svato nityasyapi
j/n/anasya tattadarthava/kkh/innasya karyatvat tatra svatantryam
pratyayartho brahma/n/a/h/ sidhyatity aha.--The knowledge of Brahman is
eternal, and in so far Brahman is not independent with regard to it, but
it is independent with regard to each particular act of knowledge; the
verbal affix in 'janati' indicating the particularity of the act.]

[Footnote 94: In the second Kha/nd/a of the sixth Prapa/th/aka of the
Ch. Up. 'aikshata' is twice used in a figurative sense (with regard to
fire and water); it is therefore to be understood figuratively in the
third passage also where it occurs.]

[Footnote 95: So that, on this latter explanation, it is unnecessary to
assume a figurative sense of the word 'thinking' in any of the three
passages.]

[Footnote 96: A wicked man meets in a forest a blind person who has lost
his way, and implores him to lead him to his village; instead of doing
so the wicked man persuades the blind one to catch hold of the tail of
an ox, which he promises would lead him to his place. The consequence is
that the blind man is, owing to his trustfulness, led even farther
astray, and injured by the bushes, &c., through which the ox drags him.]

[Footnote 97: Cp. above, p. 30.]

[Footnote 98: So according to the commentators, not to accept whose
guidance in the translation of scholastic definitions is rather
hazardous. A simpler translation of the clause might however be given.]

[Footnote 99: With reference to Ch. Up. VI, 8, 2.]

[Footnote 100: The wise one, i.e. the highest Self; which as jivatman is
conversant with the names and forms of individual things.]

[Footnote 101: I.e. it is looked upon as the object of the devotion of
the individual souls; while in reality all those souls and Brahman are
one.]

[Footnote 102: Qualities, i.e. the attributes under which the Self is
meditated on; limiting conditions, i.e. the localities--such as the
heart and the like--which in pious meditation are ascribed to the Self.]

[Footnote 103: Ananda Giri reads avish/t/asya for avishk/ri/tasya.]

[Footnote 104: Cp. the entire passage. All things are manifestations of
the highest Self under certain limiting conditions, but occupying
different places in an ascending scale. In unsentient things, stones,
&c. only the satta, the quality of being manifests itself; in plants,
animals, and men the Self manifests itself through the vital sap; in
animals and men there is understanding; higher thought in man alone.]

[Footnote 105: Ananda Giri on the preceding passage beginning from 'thus
here also:' na kevala/m/ dvaividhyam brahma/n/a/h/ /s/rutism/ri/tyor eva
siddha/m/ ki/m/ tu sutrak/ri/to api matam ity aha, evam iti,
/s/rutism/ri/tyor iva prak/ri/te pi /s/astre dvairupyam brahma/n/o
bhavati; tatra sopadhikabrahmavishayam antastaddharmadhikara/n/am
udaharati adityeti; uktanyaya/m/ tulyade/s/eshu prasarayati evam iti;
sopadhikopade/s/avan nirupadhikopade/s/a/m/ dar/s/ayati evam ityadina,
atmaj/n/@ana/m/ nir/n/etavyam iti sambandha/h/; ayaprasa@ngam aha
pareti; annamayadyupadhidvarokasya katham paravidyavishayatva/m/ tatraha
upadhiti; nir/n/ayakramam aha vakyeti, uktartham adhikara/n/a/m/
kvastity asa@nkyokta/m/ yatheti.]

[Footnote 106: After which no other Self is mentioned.]

[Footnote 107: The previous proofs were founded on li@nga; the argument
which is now propounded is founded on prakara/n/a.]

[Footnote 108: While, in the case of the Selfs consisting of food and so
on, a further inner Self is duly mentioned each time. It cannot,
therefore, be concluded that the Selfs consisting of food, &c., are
likewise identical with the highest Self referred to in the mantra.]

[Footnote 109: Yadi labdha na labdhavya/h/ katha/m/ tarhi paramatmano
vastutobhinnena jivatmana paramatma labhyata ity artha/h/. Bhamati.]

[Footnote 110: Yatha paramesvarad bhinno jivatma drash/t/a na bhavaty
evam givatmanozpi drash/t/ur na bhinna/h/ parame/s/vara iti,
jivasyanirva/k/yarve parame/s/varozpy anirva/k/ya/h/ syad ity ata aha
parame/s/varas tv avidyakalpitad iti. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 111: The explanation of the anandamaya given hitherto is here
recalled, and a different one given. The previous explanation is
attributed by Go. An. to the v/ri/ttikara.]

[Footnote 112: In which sense, as shown above, the word anandamaya must
be taken if understood to denote Brahman.]

[Footnote 113: I.e. the word translated hitherto by abundance.]

[Footnote 114: See I, 1, 15-19. ]

[Footnote 115: The preceding adhikara/n/a had shown that the five Selfs
(consisting of food, mind, and so on), which the Taitt. Up. enumerates,
are introduced merely for the purpose of facilitating the cognition of
Brahman considered as devoid of all qualities; while that Brahman itself
is the real object of knowledge. The present adhikara/n/a undertakes to
show that the passage about the golden person represents the savi/s/esha
Brahman as the object of devout meditation.]

[Footnote 116: So that the real giver of the gifts bestowed by princes
on poets and singers is Brahman.]

[Footnote 117: Or else 'that which is within forms and names.']

[Footnote 118: Viz. as intimating it. Thus An. Gi. and Go. An. against
the accent of /rik/a/h/. Saya/n/a explains /rik/a/h/ as genitive.]

[Footnote 119: O/m/karasya pratikatvena va/k/akatvena lakshakatvena va
brahmatvam uktam, om iti, ka/m/ sukha/m/ tasyarthendriyayogajatva/m/
varayitu/m/ kham iti, tasya bhutaka/s/atva/m/ vyaseddhum pura/n/am ity
uktam. An. Gi.]

[Footnote 120: The doubt about the meaning of a word is preferably to be
decided by means of a reference to preceding passages; where that is not
possible (the doubtful word occurring at the beginning of some new
chapter) complementary, i.e. subsequent passages have to be taken into
consideration.]

[Footnote 121: The v/ri/ttikara, the commentators say.]

[Footnote 122: I.e. which has not been mixed with water and earth,
according to Ch. Up. VI, 3, 3. Before that mixture took place light was
entriely separated from the other elements, and therefore bounded by the
latter.]

[Footnote 123: So as to justify the assumption that such a thing as
non-tripartite light exists at all.]

[Footnote 124: Brahma/n/o vyava/kkh/idya teja/h/samarpakatva/m/
vi/s/eshakatvam, tadabhavozvi/s/eshakatvam. An. Gi.]

[Footnote 125: If we strictly follow the order of words in the
original.]

[Footnote 126: Svasamarthyena sarvanamna/h/
sannihitaparamar/s/itvava/s/ena.]

[Footnote 127: The v/ri/ttikara according to Go. An. in his /t/ika on
the bhashya to the next Sutra.]

[Footnote 128: Concerning the difficulty involved in this
interpretation, cp. Deussen, p. 183, note.]

[Footnote 129: The text runs, 'astitve /k/a pra/n/ana/m/ ni/hs/reyasam,'
and Go. An. explains 'astitve pra/n/asthitau pra/n/ana/m/ indriya/n/am
sthitir ity arthata/h/ /s/rutim aha.' He as well as An. Gi. quotes as
the text of the scriptural passage referred to 'athato ni/hs/reyasadanam
ity adi.' But if instead of 'astitve /k/a' we read 'asti tv eva,' we get
the concluding clause of Kau. Up. III, 2, as given in Cowell's
edition.].

[Footnote 130: Whence we know that the interior Self referred to in the
Kau. Up. is Brahman.]

[Footnote 131: I.e. spontaneous intuition of supersensible truth,
rendered possible through the knowledge acquired in former existences.]

[Footnote 132: Ima/m/ /s/ariram instead of ida/m/ /s/ariram.]

[Footnote 133: Pa/nk/a /s/abdadaya/h/ pa/nk/a p/ri/thivyadaya/s/ /k/a
da/s/a bhutamatra/h/ pa/nk/a buddhindriya/n/i pa/nk/a buddhaya iti
da/s/a praj/n/amatra/h/. Yadva j/n/anendriyartha/h/ pa/nk/a
karzmendriyartha/s/ /ka/ pa/nk/eti da/s/a bhutamatra/h/
dvividhanindriya/n/i praj/n/amatra da/s/eti bhava/h/. An. Gi.]

[Footnote 134: Viz. by the v/ri/ttikara.]

[Footnote 135: Ihapi tad yujyate explaining the 'iha tadyogat' of the
Sutra.]




SECOND PADA.
