
PAUL BEFORE FELIX AND DRUSILLA

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


Jacques Saurin, the famous French Protestant preacher of the
seventeenth century, was born at Nismes in 1677. He studied at Geneva
and was appointed to the Walloon Church in London in 1701. The scene
of his great life work was, however, the Hague, where he settled in
1705. He has been compared with Bossuet, tho he never attained the
graceful style and subtilty which characterize the "Eagle of Meaux."
The story is told of the famous scholar Le Clerc that he long refused
to hear Saurin preach, on the ground that he gave too much attention
to mere art. One day he consented to hear him on the condition that he
should be permitted to sit behind the pulpit where he could not see
his oratorical action. At the close of the sermon he found himself in
front of the pulpit, with tears in his eyes. Saurin died in 1730.




SAURIN

1677--1730

PAUL BEFORE FELIX AND DRUSILLA

_And before certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla,
which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the
faith of Christ. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this
time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee_.--Acts
xxiv., 24, 25.


My brethren, tho the kingdoms of the righteous be not of this world,
they present, however, amidst their meanness, marks of dignity and
power. They resemble Jesus Christ. He humbled Himself so far as to
take the form of a servant, but frequently exercised the rights of a
sovereign. From the abyss of humiliation to which He condescended,
emanations of the Godhead were seen to proceed. Lord of nature, He
commanded the winds and seas. He bade the storm and tempest subside.
He restored health to the sick, and life to the dead. He imposed
silence on the rabbis; He embarrassed Pilate on the throne; and
disposed of Paradise at the moment He Himself was pierced with the
nails, and fixt on the cross. Behold the portrait of believers! "They
are dead. Their life is hid with Christ in God." (Col. iii., 3.) "If
they had hope only in this life, they were of all men most miserable."
(I Cor. xv., 19.) Nevertheless, they show I know not what superiority
of birth. Their glory is not so concealed but we sometimes perceive
its luster! just as the children of a king, when unknown and in
a distant province, betray in their conversation and carriage
indications of illustrious descent.

We might illustrate this truth by numerous instances. Let us attend to
that in our text. There we shall discover that association of humility
and grandeur, of reproach and glory, which constitutes the condition
of the faithful while on earth. Behold St. Paul, a Christian, an
apostle, a saint. See him hurried from tribunal to tribunal, from
province to province; sometimes before the Romans, sometimes before
the Jews, sometimes before the high-priest of the synagog, and
sometimes before the procurator of Caesar. See him conducted from
Jerusalem to Caesarea, and summoned to appear before Felix. In all
these traits, do you not recognize the Christian walking in the narrow
way, the way of tribulation, marked by his Master's feet? But consider
him nearer still. Examine his discourse, look at his countenance;
there you will see a fortitude, a courage, and a dignity which
constrain you to acknowledge that there was something really grand in
the person of St. Paul. He preached Jesus Christ at the very moment
he was persecuted for having preached Him. He preached even when in
chains. He did more; he attacked his judge on the throne. He reasoned,
he enforced, he thundered. He seemed already to exercise the function
of judging the world, which God has reserved for His saints. He made
Felix tremble. Felix felt himself borne away by a superior force.
Unable to hear St. Paul any longer without appalling fears, he sent
him away. "After certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla,
he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ," etc.

We find here three considerations which claim our attention: An
enlightened preacher, who discovers a very peculiar discernment in the
selection of his subject; a conscience appalled and confounded on the
recollection of its crimes and of that awful judgment where they must
be weighed, a sinner alarmed, but not converted; a sinner who desires
to be saved, but delays his conversion: a case, alas! of but too
common occurrence.

You perceive already, my brethren, the subject of this discourse:
first, that St. Paul reasoned before Felix and Drusilla of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come; second, that Felix
trembled; third, that he sent the apostle away; three considerations
which shall divide this discourse. May it produce on your hearts, on
the hearts of Christians, the same effects St. Paul produced on the
soul of this heathen; but may it have a happier influence on your
lives. Amen.

Paul preached before Felix and Drusilla "on righteousness, temperance,
and judgment to come." This is the first subject of discussion.
Before, however, we proceed further with our remarks, we must first
sketch the character of this Felix and this Drusilla, which will serve
as a basis to the first proposition.

After the scepter was departed from Judah, and the Jewish nation
subjugated by Pompey, the Roman emperors governed the country by
procurators. Claudius filled the imperial throne while St. Paul was
at Caesarea. This emperor had received a servile education from his
grandmother Lucia, and from his mother Antonia; and having been
brought up in obsequious meanness, evinced, on his elevation to the
empire, marks of the inadequate care which had been bestowed on his
infancy. He had neither courage nor dignity of mind. He who was raised
to sway the Roman scepter, and consequently to govern the civilized
world, abandoned his judgment to his freedmen, and gave them a
complete ascendency over his mind. Felix was one of those freedmen.
"He exercised in Judea the imperial functions with a mercenary soul."
Voluptuousness and avarice were the predominant vices of his heart. We
have a proof of his avarice immediately after our text, where it is
said he sent for Paul,--not to hear him concerning the truth of the
gospel which this apostle had preached with so much power; not to
inquire whether this religion, against which the Jews raised the
standard, was contrary to the interest of the State; but because he
hoped to have received money for his liberation. Here is the effect of
avarice.

Josephus recited an instance of his voluptuousness. It is his marriage
with Drusilla. She was a Jewess, as is remarked in our text. King
Azizus, her former husband, was a heathen; and in order to gain her
affections, he had conformed to the most rigorous ceremonies of
Judaism. Felix saw her, and became enamored of her beauty. He
conceived for her a violent passion; and in defiance of the sacred
ties which had united her to her husband, he resolved to become master
of her person. His addresses were received. Drusilla violated her
former engagements, and chose rather to contract with Felix an
illegitimate marriage than to adhere to the chaste ties which united
her to Azizus. Felix the Roman, Felix the procurator of Judea and the
favorite of Caesar appeared to her a noble acquisition. It is indeed a
truth, we may here observe, that grandeur and fortune are charms which
mortals find the greatest difficulty to resist, and against which the
purest virtue has need to be armed with all its constancy. Recollect
these two characters of Felix and Drusilla. St. Paul, before those
two personages, treated concerning "The faith in Christ"; that is,
concerning the Christian religion, of which Jesus Christ is the sum
and substance, the author and the end: and from the numerous doctrines
of Christianity, he selected "righteousness, temperance, and judgment
to come."

Here is, my brethren, an admirable text; but a text selected with
discretion. Fully to comprehend it, recollect the character we have
given of Felix. He was covetous, luxurious, and governor of Judea. St.
Paul selected three subjects, correspondent to the characteristics.
Addressing an avaricious man, he treated of righteousness. Addressing
the governor of Judea, one of those persons who think themselves
independent and responsible to none but themselves for their conduct,
he treated of "judgment to come."

But who can here supply the brevity of the historian, and report the
whole of what the apostle said to Felix on these important points? It
seems to me that I hear him enforcing those important truths he has
left us in his works, and placing in the fullest luster those divine
maxims interspersed in our Scriptures. "He reasoned of righteousness."
There he maintained the right of the widow and the orphan. There he
demonstrated that kings and magistrates are established to maintain
the rights of the people, and not to indulge their own caprice; that
the design of the supreme authority is to make the whole happy by the
vigilance of one, and not to gratify one at the expense of all; that
it is meanness of mind to oppress the wretched, who have no defense
but cries and tears; and that nothing is so unworthy of an enlightened
man as that ferocity with which some are inspired by dignity, and
which obstructs their respect for human nature, when undisguised by
worldly pomp; that nothing is so noble as goodness and grandeur,
associated in the same character; that this is the highest felicity;
that in some sort it transforms the soul into the image of God; who,
from the high abodes of majesty in which He dwells, surrounded with
angels and cherubim, deigns to look down on this mean world which we
inhabit, and "Leaves not Himself without witness, doing good to all."

"He reasoned of temperance." There he would paint the licentious
effects of voluptuousness. There he would demonstrate how opposite is
this propensity to the spirit of the gospel; which everywhere enjoins
retirement, mortification, and self-denial. He would show how it
degrades the finest characters who have suffered it to predominate.
Intemperance renders the mind incapable of reflection. It debases
the courage. It debilitates the mind. It softens the soul. He would
demonstrate the meanness of a man called to preside over a great
people, who exposes his foibles to public view; not having resolution
to conceal, much less to vanquish them. With Drusilla, he would make
human motives supply the defects of divine; with Felix, he would
make divine motives supply the defects of human. He would make this
shameless woman feel that nothing on earth is more odious than a woman
destitute of honor, that modesty is an attribute of the sex; that an
attachment, uncemented by virtue, can not long subsist; that those who
receive illicit favors are the first, according to the fine remark of
a sacred historian, to detest the indulgence: "The hatred wherewith
'Ammon, the son of David,' hated his sister, after the gratification
of his brutal passion, was greater than the love wherewith he had
loved her" (II Sam. xiii., 15). He would make Felix perceive that,
however the depravity of the age might seem to tolerate a criminal
intercourse with persons of the other sex, with God, who has called us
all to equal purity, the crime was not less heinous.

"He reasoned," in short, "of judgment to come." And here he would
magnify his ministry. When our discourses are regarded as connected
only with the present period, their force, I grant, is of no avail.
We speak for a Master who has left us clothed with infirmities, which
discover no illustrious marks of Him by whom we are sent. We have only
our voice, only our exhortations, only our entreaties. Nature is not
averted at our pleasure. The visitations of Heaven do not descend at
our command to punish your indolence and revolts: that power was
very limited, even to the apostle. The idea of a future state, the
solemnities of a general judgment, supply our weakness, and St. Paul
enforced this motive; he proved its reality, he delineated its luster,
he displayed its pomp. He resounded in the ears of Felix the noise,
the voices, the trumpets. He showed him the small and the great, the
rich man and Lazarus, Felix the favorite of Caesar, and Paul the
captive of Felix, awakened by that awful voice: "Arise, ye dead, and
come to judgment."

But not to be precipitate in commending the apostle's preaching. Its
encomiums will best appear by attending to its effects on the mind of
Felix. St. Jerome wished, concerning a preacher of his time, that the
tears of his audience might compose the eulogy of his sermons. We
shall find in the tears of Felix occasion to applaud the eloquence
of our apostle. We shall find that his discourses were thunder and
lightning in the congregation, as the Greeks used to say concerning
one of their orators. While St. Paul preached, Felix felt I know not
what agitations in his mind. The recollection of his past life; the
sight of his present sins; Drusilla, the object of his passion and
subject of his crime; the courage of St. Paul--all terrified him.
His heart burned while that disciple of Jesus Christ expounded the
Scriptures. The word of God was quick and powerful. The apostle,
armed with the two-edged sword, divided the soul, the joints, and the
marrow, carried conviction to the heart. Felix trembled, adds
our historian, Felix trembled! The fears of Felix are our second
reflection.

What a surprizing scene, my brethren, is here presented to your view.
The governor trembled, and the captive spoke without dismay. The
captive made the governor tremble. The governor shuddered in the
presence of the captive. It would not be surprizing, brethren, if we
should make an impression on your hearts (and we shall do so, indeed,
if our ministry is not, as usual, a sound of empty words); it would
not be surprizing if we should make some impression on the hearts of
our hearers. This sanctuary, these solemnities, these groans, this
silence, these arguments, these efforts,--all aid our ministry, and
unite to convince and persuade you. But here is an orator destitute of
these extraneous aids: behold him without any ornament but the truth
he preached. What do I say? that he was destitute of extraneous aids?
See him in a situation quite the reverse,--a captive, loaded with
irons, standing before his judge. Yet he made Felix tremble. Felix
trembled! Whence proceeded this fear, and this confusion? Nothing is
more worthy of your inquiry. Here we must stop for a moment: follow
us while we trace this fear to its source. We shall consider the
character of Felix under different views; as a heathen, imperfectly
acquainted with a future judgment, and the life to come; as a prince,
or governor, accustomed to see every one humble at his feet; as an
avaricious magistrate, loaded with extortions and crimes; in short, as
a voluptuous man, who has never restricted the gratification of his
senses. These are so many reasons of Felix's fears.

First, we shall consider Felix as a heathen, imperfectly acquainted
with a future judgment and the life to come: I say, imperfectly
acquainted, and not as wholly ignorant, the heathens having the "work
of the law written in their hearts" (Rom. ii., 15). The force of habit
had corrupted nature, but had not effaced its laws. They acknowledged
a judgment to come, but their notions were confused concerning its
nature.

Such were the principles of Felix, or rather such were the
imperfections of his principles, when he heard this discourse of St.
Paul. You may infer his fears from his character. Figure to
yourselves a man hearing for the first time the maxims of equity and
righteousness inculcated in the gospel. Figure to yourselves a man who
heard corrected the immorality of pagan theology; what was doubtful,
illustrated; and what was right, enforced. See a man who knew of no
other God but the incestuous Jupiter, the lascivious Venus, taught
that he must appear before Him, in whose presence the seraphim veil
their faces, and the heavens are not clean. Behold a man, whose
notions were confused concerning the state of souls after death,
apprized that God shall judge the world in righteousness. See a man
who saw described the smoke, the fire, the chains of darkness, the
outer darkness, the lake of fire and brimstone; and who saw them
delineated by one animated by the Spirit of God. What consternation
must have been excited by these terrific truths!

This we are incapable adequately of comprehending. We must surmount
the insensibility acquired by custom. It is but too true that our
hearts--instead of being imprest by these truths, in proportion to
their discussion--become more obdurate. We hear them without alarm,
having so frequently heard them before. But if, like Felix, we had
been brought up in the darkness of paganism, and if another Paul had
come and opened our eyes, and unveiled those sacred terrors, how
exceedingly should we have feared! This was the case with Felix. He
perceived the bandage which conceals the sight of futurity drop in a
moment. He heard St. Paul, that herald of grace and ambassador to the
Gentiles, he heard him reason on temperance and a judgment to come.
His soul was amazed; his heart trembled; his knees smote one against
another.

Amazing effects, my brethren, of conscience! Evident argument of the
vanity of those gods whom idolatry adorns after it has given them
form! Jupiter and Mercury, it is true, had their altars in the temples
of the heathens; but the God of heaven and earth has His tribunal in
the heart: and, while idolatry presents its incense to sacrilegious
and incestuous deities, the God of heaven and earth reveals His
terrors to the conscience, and there loudly condemns both incest and
sacrilege.

Secondly, consider Felix as a prince; and you will find in this second
office a second cause of his fear. When we perceive the great men of
the earth devoid of every principle of religion, and even ridiculing
those very truths which are the objects of our faith, we feel that
faith to waver. They excite a certain suspicion in the mind that our
sentiments are only prejudices, which have become rooted in man,
brought up in the obscurity of humble life. Here is the apology of
religion. The Caligulas, the Neros, those potentates of the universe,
have trembled in their turn as well as the meanest of their subjects.
This independence of mind, so conspicuous among libertines, is
consequently an art,--not of disengaging themselves from prejudices,
but of shutting their eyes against the light, and of extinguishing the
purest sentiments of the heart. Felix, educated in a court fraught
with the maxims of the great instantly ridicules the apostle's
preaching. St. Paul, undismayed, attacks him, and finds a conscience
concealed in his bosom: the very dignity of Felix is constrained to
aid our apostle by adding weight to his ministry. He demolishes
the edifice of Felix's pride. He shows that if a great nation was
dependent on his pleasure, he himself was dependent on a Sovereign in
whose presence the kings of the earth are as nothing. He proves that
dignities are so very far from exempting men from the judgment of God
that, for this very reason, their account becomes the more weighty,
riches being a trust which Heaven has committed to the great: and
"where much is given, much is required." He makes him feel this awful
truth, that princes are responsible, not only for their own souls,
but also for those of their subjects; their good or bad example
influencing, for the most part, the people committed to their care.

See then Felix in one moment deprived of his tribunal. The judge
became a party. He saw himself rich and in need of nothing; and yet he
was "blind, and naked, and poor." He heard a voice from the God of the
whole earth, saying unto him, "Thou profane and wicked prince, remove
the diadem and take off the crown. I will overturn, overturn, overturn
it, and it shall be no more" (Ezekiel xxi., 25-27). "Tho thou exalt
thyself as the eagle, and tho thou set thy nest among the stars,
thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord" (Obadiah, 4). Neither
the dignity of governor, nor the favor of Caesar, nor all the glory of
empire shall deliver thee out of My hand.

Thirdly, I restrict myself, my brethren, as much as possible in order
to execute without exceeding my limits the plan I have conceived;
and proceed to consider Felix as an avaricious man: to find in this
disposition a further cause of his fear. Felix was avaricious, and St.
Paul instantly transported him into a world in which avarice shall
receive its appropriate and most severe punishment. For you know that
the grand test by which we shall be judged is charity. "I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat"; and of all the constructions of charity
covetousness is the most obstinate and insurmountable.

This unhappy propensity renders us insensible of our neighbor's
necessities. It magnifies the estimate of our wants; it diminishes the
wants of others. It persuades us that we have need of all, that others
have need of nothing. Felix began to perceive the iniquity of this
passion, and to feel that he was guilty of double idolatry: idolatry,
in morality, idolatry in religion; idolatry in having offered incense
to gods, who were not the makers of heaven and earth; idolatry in
having offered incense to Mammon. For the Scriptures teach, and
experience confirms, that "covetousness is idolatry." The covetous man
is not a worshiper of the true God. Gold and silver are the divinities
he adores. His heart is with his treasure. Here then is the portrait
of Felix: a portrait drawn by St. Paul in the presence of Felix, and
which reminded this prince of innumerable prohibitions, innumerable
frauds, innumerable extortions; of the widow and the orphan he
opprest. Here is the cause of Felix's fears. According to an
expression of St. James, the "rust of his gold and silver began to
witness against him, and to eat his flesh as with fire" (James v., 3).

Fourthly, consider Felix as a voluptuous man. Here is the final cause
of his fear. Without repeating all we have said on the depravity of
this passion, let one remark suffice, that, if the torments of hell
are terrible at all, they must especially be so to the voluptuous. The
voluptuous man never restricts his sensual gratification; his soul
dies on the slightest approach of pain. What a terrific impression
must not the thought of judgment make on such a character. Shall I,
accustomed to indulgence and pleasure, become a prey to the worm that
dieth not and fuel to the fire which is not quenched? Shall I, who
avoid pain with so much caution, be condemned to eternal torments?
Shall I have neither delicious meats nor voluptuous delights? This
body, my idol, which I habituate to so much delicacy, shall it be
"cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, whose smoke ascendeth up
forever and ever?" And this effeminate habit I have of refining on
pleasure, will it render me only the more sensible of my destruction
and anguish?

Such are the traits of Felix's character; such are the causes of
Felix's fear. Happy, if his fear had produced that "godly sorrow, and
that repentance unto salvation not to be repented of." Happy if the
fear of hell had induced him to avoid its torments. But, ah no! he
feared, and yet persisted in the causes of his fear. He trembled,
yet said to St. Paul, "Go thy way for this time." This is our last
reflection.

How preposterous, my brethren, is the sinner! What absurdities does
he cherish in his heart! For, in short, had the doctrines St. Paul
preached to Felix been the productions of his brain:--had the thought
of a future judgment been a chimera, whence proceeded the fears of
Felix? Why was he so weak as to admit this panic of terror? If, on the
contrary, Paul had truth and argument on his side, why did Felix send
him away? Such are the contradictions of the sinner. He wishes; he
revolts; he denies; he grants; he trembles; and says, "Go thy way for
this time." Speak to him concerning the truths of religion, open hell
to his view, and you will see him affected, devout, and appalled:
follow him in life, and you will find that these truths have no
influence whatever on his conduct.

But are we not mistaken concerning Felix? Did not the speech of St.
Paul make a deeper impression upon him than we seem to allow? He sent
the apostle away, it is true, but it was "for this time" only. And
who can censure this delay? The infirmities of human nature require
relaxation and repose. Felix could afterward recall him. "Go thy way
for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will send for thee."

It pains me, I confess, my brethren, in entering on this head of my
discourse, that I should exhibit to you in the person of Felix the
portrait of whom? Of wicked men? Alas! of nearly the whole of this
assembly; most of whom seem to us living in negligence and vice,
running with the children of this world "to the same excess of riot."
One would suppose that they had already made their choice, having
embraced one or the other of these notions: either that religion is
a fantom, or that, all things considered, it is better to endure the
torments of hell than to be restricted to the practise of virtue. Oh
no! that is not their notion. Ask the worse among them. Ask whether
they have renounced their salvation. You will not find an individual
who will say that he has renounced it. Ask them again whether they
think it attainable by following this way of life. They will answer,
No. Ask them afterward how they reconcile things so opposite as their
life and their hopes. They will answer that they are resolved to
reform, and by and by they will enter on the work. They will say,
as Felix said to St. Paul, "Go thy way for this time; when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee." Nothing is less wise than
this delay. At a future period I will reform. But who has assured me
that at a future period I shall have opportunities of conversion? Who
has assured me that God will continue to call me, and that another
Paul shall thunder in my ears?

I will reform at a future period. But who has told me that God at a
future period will accompany His word with the powerful aids of grace?
While Paul may plant and Apollos may water, is it not God who gives
the increase? How then can I flatter myself that the Holy Spirit
will continue to knock at the door of my heart after I shall have so
frequently obstructed His admission?

I will reform in future. But who has told me that I shall ever desire
to be converted? Do not habits become confirmed in proportion as they
are indulged? And is not an inveterate evil very difficult to cure? If
I can not bear the excision of a slight gangrene, how shall I sustain
the operation when the wound is deep?

I will reform in future! But who has told me that I shall live to
a future period? Does not death advance every moment with gigantic
strides? Does he not assail the prince in his palace and the peasant
in his cottage? Does he not send before him monitors and messengers:
acute pains, which wholly absorb the soul; deliriums, which render
reason of no avail; deadly stupors, which benumb the brightest and
most piercing geniuses? And what is still more awful, does He not
daily come without either warning or messenger? Does He not snatch
away this man without allowing him time to be acquainted with the
essentials of religion; and that man, without the restitution of
riches ill acquired; and the other, before he is reconciled to his
enemy?

Instead of saying "Go thy way for this time" we should say, Stay for
this time. Stay, while the Holy Spirit is knocking at the door of my
heart; stay, while my conscience is alarmed; stay, while I yet live;
"while it is called to-day." The arguments confounded my conscience:
no matter. "Thy hand is heavy upon me": no matter still. Cut, strike,
consume; provided it procure my salvation.

But, however criminal this delay may be, we seem desirous to excuse
it. "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will
call for thee." It was Felix's business then which induced him to
put off the apostle. Unhappy business! Awful occupation! It seems
an enviable situation, my brethren, to be placed at the head of a
province; to speak in the language of majesty; to decide on the
fortunes of a numerous people; and in all cases to be the ultimate
judge. But those situations, so happy and so dazzling in appearance,
are in the main dangerous to the conscience. Those innumerable
concerns, this noise and bustle, entirely dissipate the soul. While so
much engaged on earth, we can not be mindful of heaven. When we have
no leisure we say to St. Paul, "Go thy way for this time; when I have
a convenient season, I will call for thee."

Happy he who, amid the tumult of the most active life, has hours
consecrated to reflection, to the examination of his conscience, and
to insure the "one thing needful." Or, rather, happy he who, in the
repose of the middle classes of society,--places between indigence and
affluence, far from the courts of the great, having neither poverty
nor riches according to Agur's wish,--can in retirement and quietness
see life sweetly glide away, and make salvation, if not the sole, yet
his principal, concern.

Felix not only preferred his business to his salvation, but he
mentions it with evasive disdain. "When I have a convenient season, I
will call for thee." "When I have a convenient season!" Might we not
thence infer that the truths discust by St. Paul were not of serious
importance? Might we not infer that the soul of Felix was created
for the government of Judea; and that the grand doctrines of
righteousness, temperance, and a judgment to come ought to serve
at most but to pass away the time, or merely to engross one's
leisure--"when I have a convenient season?" ...

Yes, Christians, this is the only moment on which we can reckon. It
is, perhaps, the only acceptable time. It is, perhaps, the last day of
our visitation. Let us improve a period so precious. Let us no
longer say by and by--at another time; but let us say to-day--this
moment--even now. Let the pastor say: I have been insipid in my
sermons, and remiss in my conduct; having been more solicitous, during
the exercise of my ministry, to advance my family than to build up the
Lord's house, I will preach hereafter with fervor and zeal. I will be
vigilant, sober, rigorous, and disinterested. Let the miser say: I
have riches ill acquired. I will purge my house of illicit wealth. I
will overturn the altar of Mammon and erect another to the supreme
Jehovah. Let the prodigal say: I will extinguish the unhappy fires by
which I am consumed and kindle in my bosom the flame of divine love.
Ah, unhappy passions, which war against my soul; sordid attachments;
irregular propensities; emotions of concupiscence; law in the
members,--I will know you no more. I will make with you an eternal
divorce, I will from this moment open my heart to the eternal Wisdom,
who condescends to ask it.

If we are in this happy disposition, if we thus become regenerate, we
shall enjoy from this moment foretastes of the glory which God has
prepared. From this moment the truths of religion, so far from casting
discouragement and terror on the soul, shall heighten its consolation
and joy; from this moment heaven shall open to this audience, paradise
shall descend into your hearts, and the Holy Spirit shall come and
dwell there. He will bring that peace, and those joys, which pass all
understanding.




EDWARDS

SPIRITUAL LIGHT

