by virtue of ascetic meditation preceded by vows, delivered their people
from heavy afflictions. Therefore, O virtuous one, as thou art purified
by the acts do thou likewise, entering upon a file of austerities. O
Bharata, virtuously support the regenerate ones.'"

Janamejaya said, "How did that bull among the Kurus, king Yudhishthira,
for the sake of the Brahmanas adore the sun of wonderful appearance?"

Vaisampayana said, "Listen attentively, O king, purifying thyself and
withdrawing thy mind from every other thing. And, O king of kings,
appoint thou a time. I will tell thee everything in detail, And, O
illustrious one, listen to the one hundred and eight names (of the sun)
as they were disclosed of old by Dhaumya to the high-souled son of
Pritha. Dhaumya said, 'Surya, Aryaman, Bhaga, Twastri, Pusha, Arka,
Savitri, Ravi, Gabhastimat, Aja, Kala, Mrityu, Dhatri, Prabhakara,
Prithibi, Apa, Teja, Kha, Vayu, the sole stay, Soma, Vrihaspati, Sukra,
Budha, Angaraka, Indra, Vivaswat, Diptanshu, Suchi, Sauri, Sanaichara,
Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Vaisravana, Yama, Vaidyutagni,
Jatharagni, Aindhna, Tejasampati, Dharmadhwaja, Veda-karttri, Vedanga,
Vedavahana, Krita, Treta, Dwapara, Kali, full of every impurity, Kala,
Kastha, Muhurtta, Kshapa, Yama, and Kshana; Samvatsara-kara, Aswattha,
Kalachakra, Bibhavasu, Purusha, Saswata, Yogin, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana,
Kaladhyaksha, Prajadhyaksha, Viswakarma, Tamounda, Varuna, Sagara, Ansu,
Jimuta, Jivana, Arihan, Bhutasraya, Bhutapati, Srastri, Samvartaka,
Vanhi, Sarvadi, Alolupa, Ananta, Kapila, Bhanu, Kamada, Sarvatomukha,
Jaya, Visata, Varada, Manas, Suparna, Bhutadi, Sighraga, Prandharana,
Dhanwantari, Dhumaketu, Adideva, Aditisuta, Dwadasatman, Aravindaksha,
Pitri, Matri, Pitamaha, Swarga-dwara, Prajadwara, Mokshadwara,
Tripistapa, Dehakarti, Prasantatman, Viswatman, Viswatomukha,
Characharatman, Sukhsmatman, the merciful Maitreya. These are the
hundred and eight names of Surya of immeasurable energy, as told by the
self-create (Brahma). For the acquisition of prosperity, I bow down to
thee, O Bhaskara, blazing like unto gold or fire, who is worshipped of
the gods and the _Pitris_ and the Yakshas, and who is adored by Asuras,
Nisacharas, and Siddhas. He that with fixed attention reciteth this hymn
at sunrise, obtaineth wife and offspring and riches and the memory of
his former existence, and by reciting this hymn a person attaineth
patience and memory. Let a man concentrating his mind, recite this hymn.
By doing so, he shall be proof against grief and forest-fire and ocean
and every object of desire shall be his.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having heard from Dhaumya these words suitable
to the occasion, Yudhishthira the just, with heart concentrated within
itself and purifying it duly, became engaged in austere meditation,
moved by the desire of supporting the Brahmanas. And worshipping the
maker of day with offerings of flowers and other articles, the king
performed his ablutions. And standing in the stream, he turned his face
towards the god of day. And touching the water of the Ganges the
virtuous Yudhishthira with senses under complete control and depending
upon air alone for his sustenance, stood there with rapt soul engaged in
_pranayama_.[7] And having purified himself and restrained his speech,
he began to sing the hymn of praise (to the sun).

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou art, O sun, the eye of the universe. Thou art
the soul of all corporeal existences. Thou art the origin of all things.
Thou art the embodiment of the acts of all religious men. Thou art the
refuge of those versed in the _Sankhya_ philosophy (the mysteries of the
soul), and thou art the support of the _Yogins_. Thou art a door
unfastened with bolts. Thou art the refuge of those wishing for
emancipation. Thou sustainest and discoverest the world, and sanctifiest
and supportest it from pure compassion. Brahmanas versed in the _Vedas_
appearing before thee, adore thee in due time, reciting the hymns from
the respective branches (of the _Vedas_) they refer. Thou art the adored
of the _Rishis_. The _Siddhas_, and the _Charanas_ and the _Gandharvas_
and the _Yakshas_, and the _Guhyakas_, and the _Nagas_, desirous of
obtaining boons follow thy car coursing through the skies. The
thirty-three gods[8] with Upendra (Vishnu) and Mahendra, and the order
of Vaimanikas[9] have attained success by worshipping thee. By offering
thee garlands of the celestial _Mandaras_[10] the best of the
_Vidyadharas_ have obtained all their desires. The _Guhyas_ and the
seven orders of the _Pitris_--both divine and human--have attained
superiority by adoring thee alone. The _Vasus_, the _Manilas_, and the
_Rudras_, the _Sadhyas_, the _Marichipas_, the _Valikhilyas_, and the
_Siddhas_, have attained pre-eminence by bowing down unto thee. There is
nothing that I know in the entire seven worlds, including that of Brahma
which is beyond thee. There are other beings both great and endued with
energy; but none of them hath thy lustre and energy. All light is in
thee, indeed, thou art the lord of all light. In thee are the (five)
elements and all intelligence, and knowledge and asceticism and the
ascetic properties.[11] The discus by which the wielder of the
_Saranga_[12] humbleth the pride of Asuras and which is furnished with a
beautiful nave, was forged by Viswakarman with thy energy. In summer
thou drawest, by thy rays, moisture from all corporeal existences and
plants and liquid substances, and pourest it down in the rainy season.
Thy rays warm and scorch, and becoming as clouds roar and flash with
lightning and pour down showers when the season cometh. Neither fire nor
shelter, nor woolen cloths give greater comfort to one suffering from
chilling blasts than thy rays. Thou illuminest by thy rays the whole
Earth with her thirteen islands. Thou alone are engaged in the welfare
of the three worlds. If thou dost not rise, the universe becometh blind
and the learned cannot employ themselves in the attainment of virtue,
wealth and profit. It is through thy grace that the (three) orders of
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas are able to perform their various
duties and sacrifices.[13] Those versed in chronology say that thou art
the beginning and thou the end of a day of Brahma, which consisteth of a
full thousand _Yugas_. Thou art the lord of Manus and of the sons of the
Manus, of the universe and of man, of the _Manwantaras_, and their
lords. When the time of universal dissolution cometh, the fire
_Samvartaka_ born of thy wrath consumeth the three worlds and existeth
alone. And clouds of various hues begotten of thy rays, accompanied by
the elephant Airavata and the thunderbolt, bring about the appointed
deluges. And dividing thyself into twelve parts and becoming as many
suns, thou drinkest up the ocean once more with thy rays. Thou art
called Indra, thou art Vishnu, thou art Brahma, thou art Prajapati. Thou
art fire and thou art the subtle mind. And thou art lord and the eternal
_Brahma_. Thou art _Hansa_, thou art _Savitri_, thou art _Bhanu_,
_Ansumalin_, and _Vrishakapi_. Thou art _Vivaswan, Mihira, Pusha, Mitra_,
and _Dharma_. Thou art thousand-rayed, thou art _Aditya_, and _Tapana_,
and the lord of rays. Thou art _Martanda_, and _Arka_, and _Ravi_, and
_Surya_ and _Saranya_ and maker of day, and _Divakara_ and
_Suptasaspti_, and _Dhumakeshin_ and _Virochana_. Thou art spoken of as
swift of speed and the destroyer of darkness, and the possessor of
yellow steeds. He that reverentially adoreth thee on the sixth or the
seventh lunar day with humility and tranquillity of mind, obtaineth the
grace of Lakshmi. They that with undivided attention adore and worship
thee, are delivered from all dangers, agonies, and afflictions. And they
that hold that thou art everywhere (being the soul of all things) living
long, freed from sin and enjoying an immunity from all diseases. O lord
of all food, it behoveth thee to grant food in abundance unto me who am
desirous of food even for entertaining all my guests with reverence. I
bow also to all those followers of thine that have taken refuge at thy
feet--_Mathara_ and _Aruna_ and _Danda_ and others, including _Asani_
and _Kshuva_ and the others. And I bow also to the celestial mothers of
all creatures, _viz_., Kshuva and _Maitri_ and the others of the class.
O, let them deliver me their supplicant.'"

    [7] A form of _Yoga_ that is said to consist in the mingling of
    some of the air supposed to exist in every animal body. These
    airs are five: _Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana_, and _Vyana_.

    [8] The 8 _Vasus_, the 11 _Rudras_, the 12 _Adityas_,
   _Prajapati_, and _Vashatkara_.

    [9] An order of celestials.

    [10] Celestial flowers of much fragrance.

    [11] The ascetic properties are _Anima_, _Laghima_, etc.

    [12] The bow of Vishnu, as that of Siva is called _Pinaka_.

    [13] The words of the text are _Adhana_, _Pashubandha_, _Ishti
    Mantra_, _Yajana_ and _Tapa-kriya_.

Vaisampayana said, "Thus, O great king, was the sun that purifier of the
world, adored (by Yudhishthira). And pleased with the hymn, the maker of
day, self-luminous, and blazing like fire showed himself to the son of
Pandu. And Vivaswan said, 'Thou shall obtain all that thou desirest. I
shall provide thee with food for five and seven years together. And, O
king, accept this copper-vessel which I give unto thee. And, O thou of
excellent vows, as long as Panchali will hold this vessel, without
partaking of its contents fruits and roots and meat and vegetables
cooked in thy kitchen, these four kinds of food shall from this day be
inexhaustible. And, on the fourteenth year from this, thou shall regain
thy kingdom.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having said this, the god vanished away. He
that, with the desire of obtaining a boon, reciteth this hymn
concentrating his mind with ascetic abstraction, obtaineth it from the
sun, however difficult of acquisition it may be that he asketh for. And
the person, male or female, that reciteth or heareth this hymn day after
day, if he or she desireth for a son, obtaineth one, and if riches,
obtaineth them, and if learning acquireth that too. And the person male
or female, that reciteth this hymn every day in the two twilights, if
overtaken by danger, is delivered from it, and if bound, is freed from
the bonds. Brahma himself had communicated this hymn to the illustrious
Sakra, and from Sakra was it obtained by Narada and from Narada, by
Dhaumya. And Yudhishthira, obtaining it from Dhaumya, attained all his
wishes. And it is by virtue of this hymn that one may always obtain
victory in war, and acquire immense wealth also. And it leadeth the
reciter from all sins, to the solar region."

Vaisampayana continued, "Having obtained the boon, the virtuous son of
Kunti, rising from the water, took hold of Dhaumya's feet and then
embraced his brother's. And, O exalted one, wending then with Draupadi
to the kitchen, and adored by her duly, the son of Pandu set himself to
cook (their day's) food. And the clean food, however little, that was
dressed, furnished with the four tastes, increased and became
inexhaustible. And with it Yudhishthira began to feed the regenerate
ones. And after the Brahmanas had been fed, and his younger brothers
also, Yudhishthira himself ate of the food that remained, and which is
called _Vighasa_. And after Yudhishthira had eaten, the daughter of
Prishata took what remained. And after she had taken her meal, the day's
food became exhausted.

"And having thus obtained the boon from the maker of day, the son of
Pandu, himself as resplendent as that celestial, began to entertain the
Brahmanas agreeably to their wishes. And obedient to their priest, the
sons of Pritha, on auspicious lunar days and constellations and
conjunctions, performed sacrifices according to the ordinance, the
scriptures, and the _Mantras_. After the sacrifices, the sons of Pandu,
blessed by the auspicious rites performed by Dhaumya and accompanied by
him, and surrounded also by the Brahmanas set out for the woods of
_Kamyaka_."


SECTION IV

Vaisampayana said,--"After the Pandavas had gone to the forest,
Dhritarashtra the son of Amvika, whose knowledge was his eye,[14] became
exceedingly sorrowful. And seated at his ease the king addressed these
words to the virtuous Vidura of profound intelligence, 'Thy
understanding is as clear as that of Bhargava.[15] Thou knowest also all
the subtleties of morality, and thou lookest on all the Kauravas with an
equal eye. O, tell me what is proper for me and them. O Vidura, things
having thus taken their course, what should we do now? How may I secure
the goodwill of the citizens so that they may not destroy us to the
roots? O, tell us all, since thou art conversant with every excellent
expedient.'

    [14] Dhritarashtra being blind is described as _Pragnachakshu,
    i.e._ having knowledge for his eye. It may also mean. "Of the
    prophetic eye."

    [15] The great preceptor of the Asuras, _viz., Sukra_,
    possessing the highest intelligence as evidenced by his various
    works on all manner of subjects particularly, the _Sukra-niti_.

"Vidura said, 'The three-fold purposes, O king (_viz_., profit,
pleasure, and salvation), have their foundations in virtue, and the
sages say that a kingdom also standeth on virtue as its basis.
Therefore, O monarch, according to the best of thy power, cherish thou
virtuously thy own sons and those of Pandu. That virtue had been
beguiled by wicked souls with Suvala's son at their head, when thy sons
invited the righteous Yudhishthira and defeated him in the match at
dice. O king, of this deed of utter iniquity I behold this expiation
whereby, O chief of the Kurus, thy son, freed from sin, may win back his
position among good men. Let the sons of Pandu, obtain that which was
given unto them by thee. For, verily, even this is the highest morality
that a king should remain content with his own, and never covet
another's possessions. Thy good name then would not suffer nor would
family dissensions ensue, nor unrighteousness be thine. This then is thy
prime duty now,--to gratify the Pandavas and disgrace Sakuni. If thou
wishest to restore to thy sons the good fortune they have lost, then, O
king, do thou speedily adopt this line of conduct. If thou dost not act
so, the Kurus will surely meet with destruction, for neither Bhimasena
nor Arjuna, if angry, will leave any of their foes unslain. What is
there in the world which is unattainable to those who cannot among their
warriors _Savyasachin_ skilled in arms; who have the Gandiva, the most
powerful of all weapons in the world, for their bow; and who have
amongst them the mighty Bhima also as a warrior? Formerly, as soon as
thy son was born, I told thee,--_Forsake thou this inauspicious child of
thine. Herein lieth the good of thy race._--But thou didst not then act
accordingly. Nor also, O king, have I pointed out to thee the way of thy
welfare. If thou doest as I have counselled, thou shalt not have to
repent afterwards. If thy son consent to reign in peace jointly with the
sons of Pandu, passing thy days in joy thou shalt not have to repent.
Should it be otherwise, abandon thou thy child for thy own happiness.
Putting Duryodhana aside, do thou install the son of Pandu in the
sovereignty, and let, O king, Ajatasatru, free from passion, rule the
earth virtuously. All the kings of the earth, then, like Vaisyas, will,
without delay, pay homage unto us. And, O king, let Duryodhana and
Sakuni and Karna with alacrity wait upon the Pandavas. And let
Dussasana, in open court, ask forgiveness of Bhimasena and of the
daughter of Drupada also. And do thou pacify Yudhishthira by placing him
on the throne with every mark of respect. Asked by thee, what else can I
counsel thee to do? By doing this, O monarch, thou wouldst do what was
proper.'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'These words, O Vidura, then thou hast spoken in
this assembly, with reference to the Pandavas and myself, are for their
good but not for ours. My mind doth not approve them. How hast thou
settled all this in thy mind now? When thou hast spoken all this on
behalf of the Pandavas, I perceive that thou art not friendly to me. How
can I abandon my son for the sake of the sons of Pandu? Doubtless they
are my sons, but Duryodhana is sprung from my body. Who then, speaking
with impartiality, will ever counsel me to renounce my own body for the
sake of others? O Vidura, all that thou sayest is crooked, although I
hold thee in high esteem. Stay or go as thou likest. However much may
she be humoured, an unchaste will forsaketh her husband.'"

Vaisampayana said, "O king, saying this Dhritarashtra rose suddenly and
went into the inner apartments. And Vidura, saying 'This race is doomed'
went away to where the sons of Pritha were."


SECTION V

Vaisampayana said, "Desirous of living in the forest, those bulls of the
Bharata race, the Pandavas, with their followers, setting out from the
banks of the Ganges went to the field of Kurukshetra. And performing
their ablutions in the Saraswati, the Drisadwati and the Yamuna, they
went from one forest to another, travelling in an westernly direction.
And at length they saw before them the woods, Kamyaka, the favourite
haunt of _Munis_, situated by a level and wild plain on the banks of the
Saraswati. And in those woods, O Bharata, abounding in birds and deer,
those heroes began to dwell, entertained and comforted by the Munis. And
Vidura always longing to see the Pandavas, went in a single car to the
Kamyaka woods abounding in every good thing. And arriving at Kamyaka on
a car drawn by swift steeds, he saw Yudhishthira the just, sitting with
Draupadi at a retired spot, surrounded by his brothers and the
Brahmanas. And seeing Vidura approach from a distance with swift steps,
the virtuous king addressed brother Bhimasena, saying, 'With what
message doth Kshatta come to us? Doth he come hither, despatched by
Sakuni, to invite us again to a game of dice? Doth the little-minded
Sakuni intend to win again our weapons at dice? O Bhimasena, challenged
by any one addressing me,--Come, I am unable to stay. And if our
possession of the _Gandiva_ becomes doubtful, will not the acquisition
of our kingdom also be so.'"

Vaisampayana said, "O king, the Pandavas then rose up and welcomed
Vidura. And received by them, that descendant of the Ajamida line
(Vidura) sat in their midst and made the usual enquiries. And after
Vidura had rested awhile, those bulls among men asked him the reason of
his coming. And Vidura began to relate unto them in detail everything
connected with the bearing of Dhritarashtra the son of Amvika.

"Vidura said, 'O Ajatasatru, Dhritarashtra called me, his dependant,
before him and honouring me duly said, "Things have fared thus. Now, do
thou tell me what is good for the Pandavas as well as for me." I pointed
out what was beneficial to both the Kauravas and Dhritarashtra. But what
I said was not relished by him, nor could I hit upon any other course.
What I advised was, O Pandavas, highly beneficial, but the son of Amvika
heeded me not. Even as medicine recommendeth itself not to one that is
ill, so my words failed to please the king. And, O thou without a foe,
as all unchaste wile in the family of a man of pure descent cannot be
brought back to the path of virtue, so I failed to bring Dhritarashtra
back. Indeed, as a young damsel doth not like a husband of three score,
even so Dhritarashtra did not like my words. Surely, destruction will
overtake the Kuru race, surely Dhritarashtra will never acquire good
fortune. For, as water dropped on a lotus-leaf doth not remain there, my
counsels will fail to produce any effect to Dhritarashtra. The incensed
Dhritarashira told me, O Bharata, go thou thither where thou likest.
Never more shall I seek thy aid in ruling the earth or my capital,--O
best of monarchs, forsaken by king Dhritarashtra, I come to thee for
tendering good counsel. What I had said in the open court, I will now
repeat unto thee. Listen, and bear my words in mind,--that wise man who
bearing all the gross wrong heaped upon him by his enemies, patiently
bideth his time, and multiplieth his resources even as men by degrees
turn a small fire into a large one, ruleth alone this entire earth. He
that (in prosperity) enjoyeth his substance with his adherents findeth
in them sharers of his adversity,--this is the best means of securing
adherents, and it is said that he that hath adherents, winneth the
sovereignty of the world! And, O Pandava, dividing thy prosperity with
thy adherents, behave truthfully towards them, and converse with them
agreeably! Share also your food with them! And never boast thyself in
their presence! This behaviour increaseth the prosperity of kings!'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Having recourse to such high intelligence,
undisturbed by passion, I will do as thou counsellest! And whatever else
thou mayst counsel in respect of time and place, I will carefully follow
entirely.'"


SECTION VI

Vaisampayana said, "O king, after Vidura had gone to the abode of the
Pandavas, Dhritarashtra, O Bharata, of profound wisdom, repented of his
action. And thinking of the great intelligence of Vidura in matters
connected with both war and peace, and also of the aggrandisement of the
Pandavas in the future, Dhritarashtra, pained at the recollection of
Vidura, having approached the door of the hall of state fell down
senseless in the presence of the monarchs (in waiting). And regaining
consciousness, the king rose from the ground and thus addressed Sanjaya
standing by, 'My brother and friend is even like the god of justice
himself! Recollecting him today, my heart burneth in grief! Go, bring
unto me without delay my brother well-versed in morality!' Saying this,
the monarch wept bitterly. And burning in repentance, and overwhelmed
with sorrow at the recollection of Vidura, the king, from brotherly
affection, again addressed Sanjaya saying, 'O Sanjaya, go thou and
ascertain whether my brother, expelled by my wretched self through
anger, liveth still! That wise brother of mine of immeasurable
intelligence hath never been guilty of even the slightest transgression,
but, on the other hand, he it is who hath come by grievous wrong at my
hands! Seek him, O wise one, and bring him hither; else, O Sanjaya, I
will lay down my life!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of the king, Sanjaya
expressed his approbation, and saying 'So be it,' went in the direction
of the Kamyaka woods. And arriving without loss of time at the forest
where the sons of Pandu dwelt, he beheld Yudhishthira clad in deer-skin,
seated with Vidura, in the midst of Brahmanas by thousands and guarded
by his brothers, even like Purandara in the midst of the celestials! And
approaching Yudhishthira, Sanjaya worshipped him duly and was received
with due respect by Bhima and Arjuna and the twins. And Yudhishthira
made the usual enquiries about his welfare and when he had been seated
at his ease, he disclosed the reason of his visit, in these words, 'King
Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, hath, O Kshatta! remembered thee!
Returning unto him without loss of time, do thou revive the king! And, O
thou best of men, with the permission of these Kuru princes--these
foremost of men--it behoveth thee, at the command of that lion among
kings, to return unto him!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Sanjaya, the intelligent
Vidura, ever attached to his relatives, with the permission of
Yudhishthira returned to the city named after the elephant. And after he
had approached the king, Dhritarashtra of great energy, the son of
Amvika, addressed him, saying, 'From my good luck alone, O Vidura, thou,
O sinless one, of conversant with morality, hast come here remembering
me! And, O thou bull of the Bharata race, in thy absence I was beholding
myself, sleepless through the day and the night, as one that hath been
lost on earth!' And the king then took Vidura on his lap and smelt his
head, and said, 'Forgive me, O sinless one, the words in which thou wert
addressed by me!' And Vidura said, 'O king, I have forgiven thee. Thou
art my superior, worthy of the highest reverence! Here am I, having come
back, eagerly wishing to behold thee! All virtuous men, O tiger among
men, are (instinctively) partial towards those that are distressed!
This, O king, is scarcely the result of deliberation! (My partiality to
the Pandavas proceedeth from this cause)! O Bharata, thy sons are as
dear to me as the sons of Pandu, but as the latter are now in distress,
my heart yearneth after them!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And addressing each other thus in apologetic
speeches, the two illustrious brothers, Vidura and Dhritarashtra, felt
themselves greatly happy!"


SECTION VII

Vaisampayana said, "Hearing that Vidura had returned, and that the king
had consoled him, the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra began to burn in
grief. His understanding clouded by ignorance, he summoned the son of
Suvala, and Karna and Dussasana, and addressed them saying, 'The learned
Vidura, the minister of the wise Dhritarashtra, hath returned! The
friend of the sons of Pandu, he is ever engaged in doing what is
beneficial to them. So long as this Vidura doth not succeed in inducing
the king to bring them back, do ye all think of what may benefit me! If
ever I behold the sons of Pritha return to the city, I shall again be
emaciated by renouncing food and drink, even though there be no obstacle
in my path! And I shall either take poison or hang myself, either enter
the pyre or kill myself with my own weapons. But I shall never be able
to behold the sons of Pandu in prosperity!'

"Sakuni said, 'O king, O lord of the earth, what folly hath taken
possession of thee! The Pandavas have gone to the forest, having given a
particular pledge, so that what thou apprehendest can never take place!
O bull of the Bharata race, the Pandavas ever abide by the truth. They
will never, therefore, accept the words of thy father! If however,
accepting the commands of the king, they come back to the capital,
violating their vow, even this would be our conduct, viz., assuming, an
aspect of neutrality, and in apparent obedience to the will of the
monarch, we will closely watch the Pandavas, keeping our counsels!'

"Dussasana said, 'O uncle of great intelligence, it is even as thou
sayest! The words of wisdom thou utterest always recommend themselves to
me!' Karna said, 'O Duryodhana, all of us seek to accomplish thy will
and, O king, I see that unanimity at present prevaileth among us! The
sons of Pandu, with passions under complete control, will never return
without passing away the promised period. If, however, they do return
from failing sense, do thou defeat them again at dice.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Thus addressed by Karna, king Duryodhana with
cheerless heart, averted his face from his counsellors. Marking all
this, Karna expanding his beautiful eyes, and vehemently gesticulating
in anger, haughtily addressed Duryodhana and Dussasana and Suvala's son
saying, 'Ye princes, know ye my opinion! We are all servants of the king
(Duryodhana) waiting upon him with joined palms! We should, therefore,
do what is agreeable to him! But we are not always able to seek his
welfare with promptness and activity (owing to our dependence on
Dhritarashtra)! But let us now, encased in mail and armed with our
weapons, mount our cars and go in a body to slay the Pandavas now living
in the forest! After the Pandavas have been quieted and after they have
gone on the unknown journey, both ourselves and the sons of
Dhritarashtra will find peace! As long as they are in distress, as long
as they are in sorrow, as long as they are destitute of help, so long
are we a match for them! This is my mind!'

"Hearing those words of the charioteer's son, they repeatedly applauded
him, and at last exclaimed, 'Very well!' And saying this each of them
mounted his car, and sanguine of success, they rushed in a body to slay
the sons of Pandu. And knowing by his spiritual vision that they had
gone out, the master Krishna-Dwaipayana of pure soul came upon them, and
commanded them to desist. And sending them away, the holy one,
worshipped by all the worlds, quickly appeared before the king whose
intelligence served the purposes of eye-sight, and who was then seated
(at his ease). And the holy one addressed the monarch thus."


SECTION VIII

