officiating Mid[-e]/ finally station themselves with their backs toward
the westernmost degree post, and face the door at the end of the
structure. The candidate continues round to the western end, faces the
Mid[-e]/ priests, and all sit down. The following song is then sung,
which may be the individual production of the candidate (Pl. XIII, C).
A song is part of the ritual, though it is not necessary that the
candidate should sing it, as the preceptor may do so for him. In the
instance under my observation the song was an old one (which had been
taught the candidate), as the archaic form of pronunciation indicates.
Each of the lines is repeated as often as the singer may desire, the
prolongation of the song being governed by his inspired condition. The
same peculiarity governs the insertion, between words and at the end of
lines, of apparently meaningless vowel sounds, to reproduce and prolong
the last notes sounded. This may be done ad libitum, rythmical
accentuation being maintained by gently tapping upon the Mid[-e]/ drum.

  [Illustration]
  H[)i]a/-ni-de h[)e]n/-da man/-i-d[-o], h[-o]/,
  ni/-sha-bon/-de man/-i-d[-o]/-en-d[^a]t.
  Where is the spirit lodge? I go through it.
    [The oblong structure represents the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, the arm upon
    the left indicating the course of the path leading through it, the
    latter being shown by a zigzag line.]

  [Illustration]
  Nin-g[-o]/-sa m[)i]-d[-e]/-kwe ni-ka/ na/-ska-wa/.
  I am afraid of the "grand medicine" woman; I go to her.
    [A leg is shown to signify locomotion. The singer fears the
    opposition of a Mid[-e]/ priestess and will conciliate her.]

  [Illustration]
  Ka-ni-sa/ hi/-a-tshi/-m[)i]n-d[-e]/ man/-ski-k[-i]/,
  d[-e]/, h[-e]/, h[-e]/.
  Kinsmen who speak of me, they see the striped sky.
    [A person of superior power, as designated by the horns attached to
    the head. The lines from the mouth signify voice or speech, while
    the horizontal lines denote the stratus clouds, the height above the
    earth of which illustrates the direction of the abode of the spirit
    whose conversation, referring to the singer, is observed crossing
    them as short vertical zigzag lines; i.e., voice lines.]

  [Illustration]
  Ke/-na-nan/-do-m[-e]/ ko-n[-o]/-ne-nak
  ka-ne-h[-e]/ nin-ko/-tshi nan/-no-me/.
  The cloud looks to me for medicine.
    [The speaker has become so endowed with the power of magic influence
    that he has preference with the superior Man/id[-o]s. The magic
    influence is shown descending to the hand which reaches beyond
    the cloud indicated by the oblong square upon the forearm.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest, after which dancing begins.

  [Illustration]
  Wa-tshu/-a-n[-e]/ ke/-ba-bing/-e-on/, wa-dzh[-u].
  Going into the mountains.
    [The singer's thoughts go to the summit to commune with Ki/tshi
    Man/id[-o]. He is shown upon the summit.]

  [Illustration]
  Hi/-m[)e]-de/-wa hen/-d[)e]-a he/-na.
  The grand medicine affects me.
    [In his condition he appeals to Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] for aid. The arms
    represent the act of supplication.]

  [Illustration]
  Hai/-an-go ho/-ya o/-g[)e]-ma, ha/.
  The chief goes out.
    [The arms grasp a bear--the Bear Man/id[-o]--and the singer
    intimates that he desires the aid of that powerful spirit, who is
    one of the guardians of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.]

  [Illustration]
  Nish/-o-w[-e]/ ni-m[-e]/-hi-g[-o]/, h[-e]/,
  ni-g[-o]/-tshi-mi/-go-we, h[-e]/.
  Have pity on me wherever I have medicine.
    [The speaker is filled with magic influence, upon the strength of
    which he asks the Bear to pity and to aid him.]

  [Illustration]
  Wi/-so-mi/-ko-w[-e]/ h[)e]-a-za-we/-ne-ne-g[-o]/, h[-o]/.
  I am the beaver; have pity on me.
    [This is said to indicate that the original maker of the mnemonic
    song was of the Beaver totem or gens.]

  [Illustration]
  H[-e]n/-ta-no-wik/-ko-we/ de-w[)e]n/-da [)e]n-da-[^a]/-d[^a]n.
  I wish to know what is the matter with me.
    [The singer feels peculiarly impressed by his surroundings in the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, because the sacred man/id[-o]s have filled his
    body with magic powers. These are shown by the zigzag or waving
    lines descending to the earth.]

As each of the preceding lines or verses is sung in such a protracted
manner as to appear like a distinct song, the dancers, during the
intervals of rest, always retire to their places and sit down. The
dancing is not so energetic as many of those commonly indulged in for
amusement only. The steps consist of two treading movements made by each
foot in succession. Keeping time with the drum-beats, at the same time
there is a shuffling movement made by the dancer forward, around and
among his companions, but getting back toward his place before the verse
is ended. The attitude during these movements consists in bending the
body forward, while the knees are bent, giving one the appearance of
searching for a lost object. Those who do not sing give utterance to
short, deep grunts, in accordance with the alternate heavier strokes
upon the drum.

As the dancing ceases, and all are in their proper seats, the preceptor,
acting for the candidate, approaches the pile of tobacco and distributes
a small quantity to each one present, when smoking is indulged in,
preceded by the usual offering to the east, the south, the west, the
north, the sky and the earth.

After the completion of this ceremonial an attendant carries the
Mid[-e]/ drum to the southeast angle of the inclosure, where it is
delivered to the drummer; then the officiating priests rise and approach
within two or three paces of the candidate as he gets upon his knees.
The preceptor and the assistant who is called upon by him take their
places immediately behind and to either side of the candidate, and the
Mid[-e]/ priest lowest in order of precedence begins to utter quick,
deep tones, resembling the sound h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/,
at the same time grasping his mid[-e]/ sack with both hands, as if it
were a gun, and moving it in a serpentine and interrupted manner toward
one of the large joints of the candidate's arms or legs. At the last
utterance of this sound he produces a quick puff with the breath and
thrusts the bag forward as if shooting, which he pretends to do, the
missile being supposed to be the invisible sacred m[-i]/gis. The other
priests follow in order from the lowest to the highest, each selecting a
different joint, during which ordeal the candidate trembles more and
more violently until at last he is overcome with the magic influence and
falls forward upon the ground unconscious. The Mid[-e]/ priests then lay
their sacks upon his back, when the candidate begins to recover and spit
out the m[-i]/gis shell which he had previously hidden within his mouth.
Then the chief Mid[-e]/ takes it up between the tips of the forefinger
and thumb and goes through the ceremony described in connection with the
initiation into the first degree, of holding it toward the east, south,
west, north, and the sky, and finally to the mouth of the candidate,
when the latter, who has partly recovered from his apparently insensible
condition, again relapses into that state. The eight priests then place
their sacks to the respective joints at which they previously directed
them, which fully infuses the body with the magic influence as desired.
Upon this the candidate recovers, takes up the m[-i]/gis shell and,
placing it upon his left palm, holds it forward and swings it from side
to side, saying he! he! he! he! he! and pretends to swallow it, this
time only reeling from its effects. He is now restored to a new life for
the second time; and as the priests go to seek seats he is left on the
southern side and seats himself. After all those who have been occupied
with the initiation have hung up their mid[-e]/ sacks on available
projections against the wall or branches, the new member goes forward to
the pile of tobacco, blankets, and other gifts and divides them among
those present, giving the larger portions to the officiating priests. He
then passes around once more, stopping before each one to pass his hands
over the sides of the priests/ heads, and says:

  Mi-gw[)e]tsh/ ga-shi-t[-o]/-win   bi-m[^a]/-d[)i]-si-w[)i]n,
  Thanks     for giving to me life,

after which he retreats a step, and clasping his hands and bowing toward
the priest, says:

  Ni-ka/-ni    ni-ka/ni     ni-ka/-ni ka-nia/,
  fellow mid[-e]/ fellow mid[-e]/ fellow mid[-e]/,

to which each responds hau/, [-e][n]. The word hau/ is a term of
approbation, [-e][n] signifying yes, or affirmation, the two thus used
together serving to intensify the expression. Those of the Mid[-e]/
present who are of the second, or even some higher degree, then indulge
in the ceremony of passing around to the eastern part of the inclosure,
where they feign coughing and gagging, so as to produce from the mouth
the m[-i]/gis shell, as already narrated in connection with the first
degree, p. 192.

This manner of thanking the officiating Mid[-e]/ for their services in
initiating the candidate into a higher degree is extended also to those
members of the Mid[-e]/wiwin who are of the first degree only, in
acknowledgment of the favor of their presence at the ceremony, they
being eligible to attend ceremonial rites of any degree higher than the
class to which they belong, because such men are neither benefited nor
influenced in any way by merely witnessing such initiation, but they
must themselves take the principal part in it to receive the favor of a
renewed life and to become possessed of higher power and increased magic
influence.

Various members of the society indulge in short harangues, recounting
personal exploits in the performance of magic and exorcism, to which the
auditors respond in terms of gratification and exclamations of approval.
During these recitals the ushers, appointed for the purpose, leave the
inclosure by the western door to return in a short time with kettles of
food prepared for the mid[-e]/ feast. The ushers make four circuits of
the interior, giving to each person present a quantity of the contents
of the several vessels, so that all receive sufficient to gratify their
desires. When the last of the food has been consumed, or removed, the
mid[-e]/ drum is heard, and soon a song is started, in which all who
desire join. After the first two or three verses of the song are
recited, a short interval of rest is taken, but when it is resumed
dancing begins and is continued to the end. In this manner they indulge
in singing and dancing, interspersed with short speeches, until the
approach of sunset, when the members retire to their own wig/iwams,
leaving the Mid[-e]/-wig[^a]n by the western egress.

The ushers, assisted by the chief Mid[-e]/, then remove the sacred post
from the inclosure and arrange the interior for new initiations, either
of a lower or higher class, if candidates have prepared and presented
themselves. In case there is no further need of meeting again at once,
the members of the society and visitors return upon the following day to
their respective homes.

DESCRIPTIVE NOTES.

The m[-i]/gis shell employed in the second degree initiation is of the
same species as those before mentioned. At White Earth, however, some of
the priests claim an additional shell as characteristic of this advanced
degree, and insist that this should be as nearly round as possible,
having a perforation through it by which it may be secured with a strand
or sinew. In the absence of a rounded white shell a bead may be used as
a substitute. On Pl. XI, No. 4, is presented an illustration of the bead
(the second-degree m[-i]/gis) presented to me on the occasion of my
initiation.

With reference to the style of facial decoration resorted to in this
degree nearly all of the members now paint the face according to their
own individual tastes, though a few old men still adhere to the
traditional method previously described (pp. 180, 181). The candidate
usually adopts the style practiced by his preceptor, to which he is
officially entitled; but if the preceptor employed in the preparatory
instruction for the second degree be not the same individual whose
services were retained for the first time, then the candidate has the
privilege of painting his face according to the style of the preceding
degree. If he follow his last preceptor it is regarded as an exceptional
token of respect, and the student is not expected to follow the method
in his further advancement.

A Mid[-e]/ of the second degree is also governed by his tutelary daimon;
e.g., if during the first fast and vision he saw a bear, he now prepares
a necklace of bear-claws, which is worn about the neck and crosses the
middle of the breast. He now has the power of changing his form into
that of a bear; and during that term of his disguise he wreaks vengeance
upon his detractors and upon victims for whose destruction he has been
liberally rewarded. Immediately upon the accomplishment of such an act
he resumes his human form and thus escapes identification and detection.
Such persons are termed by many "bad medicine men," and the practice of
thus debasing the sacred teachings of the Mid[-e]/wiwin is
discountenanced by members of the society generally. Such pretensions
are firmly believed in and acknowledged by the credulous and are
practiced by that class of Shamans here designated as the
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/.

In his history[15] Rev. Mr. Jones says:

  As the powwows always unite witchcraft with the application of their
  medicines I shall here give a short account of this curious art.

  Witches and wizards are persons supposed to possess the agency of
  familiar spirits from whom they receive power to inflict diseases on
  their enemies, prevent good luck of the hunter and the success of the
  warrior. They are believed to fly invisibly at pleasure from place to
  place; to turn themselves into bears, wolves, foxes, owls, bats, and
  snakes. Such metamorphoses they pretend to accomplish by putting on
  the skins of these animals, at the same time crying and howling in
  imitation of the creature they wish to represent. Several of our
  people have informed me that they have seen and heard witches in the
  shape of these animals, especially the bear and the fox. They say that
  when a witch in the shape of a bear is being chased all at once she
  will run round a tree or a hill, so as to be lost sight of for a time
  by her pursuers, and then, instead of seeing a bear they behold an old
  woman walking quietly along or digging up roots, and looking as
  innocent as a lamb. The fox witches are known by the flame of fire
  which proceeds out of their mouths every time they bark.

  Many receive the name of witches without making any pretensions to the
  art, merely because they are deformed or ill-looking. Persons esteemed
  witches or wizards are generally eccentric characters, remarkably
  wicked, of a ragged appearance and forbidding countenance. The way in
  which they are made is either by direct communication with the
  familiar spirit during the days of their fasting, or by being
  instructed by those skilled in the art.

    [Footnote 15: History of the Ojebway Indians, etc., London (1843?),
    pp. 145, 146.]

A Mid[-e]/ of the second degree has the reputation of superior powers on
account of having had the m[-i]/gis placed upon all of his joints, and
especially because his heart is filled with magic power, as is shown in
Pl. III, No. 48. In this drawing the disk upon the breast denotes where
the m[-i]/gis has been "shot" into the figure, the enlarged size of the
circle signifying "greater abundance," in contradistinction to the
common designation of a m[-i]/gis shown only by a simple spot or small
point. One of this class is enabled to hear and see what is transpiring
at a remote distance, the lines from the hands indicating that he is
enabled to grasp objects which are beyond the reach of a common person,
and the lines extending from the feet signifying that he can traverse
space and transport himself to the most distant points. Therefore he is
sought after by hunters for aid in the discovery and capture of game,
for success in war, and for the destruction of enemies, however remote
may be their residence.

When an enemy or a rival is to be dealt with a course is pursued similar
to that followed when preparing hunting charts, though more powerful
magic medicines are used. In the following description of a pictograph
recording such an occurrence the Mid[-e]/, or rather the
W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, was of the fourth degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. The
indication of the grade of the operator is not a necessary part of the
record, but in this instance appears to have been prompted from motives
of vanity. The original sketch, of which Fig. 24 is a reproduction, was
drawn upon birch-bark by a Mid[-e]/, in 1884, and the ceremony detailed
actually occurred at White Earth, Minnesota. By a strange coincidence
the person against whom vengeance was aimed died of pneumonia the
following spring, the disease having resulted from cold contracted
during the preceding winter. The victim resided at a camp more than a
hundred miles east of the locality above named, and his death was
attributed to the Mid[-e]/'s power, a reputation naturally procuring for
him many new adherents and disciples. The following is the explanation
as furnished by a Mid[-e]/ familiar with the circumstances:

  [Illustration: Fig. 24.--Mid[-e]/ destroying an enemy.]

  No. 1 is the author of the chart, a Mid[-e]/ who was called upon to
    take the life of a man living at a distant camp. The line extending
    from the mid[-e]/ to the figure at No. 9, signifies that his
    influence will reach to that distance.

  No. 2, the applicant for assistance.

  Nos. 3, 4, 5, and 6, represent the four degrees of the Mid[-e]/wiwin
    (of which the operator, in this instance, was a member). The degrees
    are furthermore specifically designated by short vertical strokes.

  No. 7 is the mid[-e]/ drum used during the ceremony of preparing the
    charm.

  No. 8 represents the body of the intended victim. The heart is
    indicated, and upon this spot was rubbed a small quantity of
    vermilion.

  No. 9 is the outline of a lake, where the subject operated upon
    resided.

War parties are not formed at this time, but mnemonic charts of songs
used by priests to encourage war parties, are still extant, and a
reproduction of one is given on Pl. XIII, D. This song was used by the
Mid[-e]/ priest to insure success to the parties. The members who
intended participating in the exhibition would meet on the evening
preceding their departure, and while listening to the words, some would
join in the singing while others would dance. The lines may be repeated
ad libitum so as to lengthen the entire series of phrases according to
the prevalent enthusiasm and the time at the disposal of the performers.
The war drum was used, and there were always five or six drummers so as
to produce sufficient noise to accord with the loud and animated singing
of a large body of excited men. This drum is, in size, like that
employed for dancing. It is made by covering with rawhide an old kettle,
or wooden vessel, from 2 to 3 feet in diameter. The drum is then
attached to four sticks, or short posts, so as to prevent its touching
the ground, thus affording every advantage for producing full and
resonant sounds, when struck. The drumsticks are strong withes, at the
end of each of which is fastened a ball of buckskin thongs. The
following lines are repeated ad libitum:

  [Illustration: Plate XIV.
  Mnemonic Songs.]

  [Illustration]
  Hu/-na-wa/-na ha/-w[-a],
  un-do/-dzhe-na/ ha-we/-n[)e].
  I am looking [feeling] for my paint.
    [The Mid[-e]'s hands are at his medicine sack searching for his war
    paint.]

  [Illustration]
  H[)i]a/-dzhi-m[)i]n-de/ non/-da-k[-o]/, h[-o]/,
  They hear me speak of legs.
    [Refers to speed in the expedition. To the left of the leg is the
    arm of a spirit, which is supposed to infuse magic influence so as
    to give speed and strength.]

  [Illustration]
  Hu/-wa-ke/, na/, ha/,
  He said,
    [The Turtle Man/id[-o] will lend his aid in speed. The turtle was
    one of the swiftest man/id[-o]s, until through some misconduct,
    Min/ab[-o]/zho deprived him of his speed.]

  [Illustration]
  Wa/-tshe, ha/, hw[-e], wa/-ka-te/, h[-e]/, wa/-tshe, ha/, hw[-e]/.
  Powder, he said.
    [The modern form of Wa/-ka-te/, he/, hw[-a]/, is ma/-ka-d[-e]/-hwa;
    other archaic words occur also in other portions of this song. The
    phrase signifies that the Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o] favors good results
    from the use of powder. His form projects from the top of the
    Mid[-e]/ structure.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest. A smoke is indulged in after which the song is resumed,
  accompanied with dancing.

  [Illustration]
  Sin-go/-na wa-k[-i]/ na-ha/-ka
  I made him cry.
    [The figure is that of a turkey buzzard which the speaker shot.]

  [Illustration]
  Te-wa/-tshi-me-kwe/-na, ha/, na-ke/-nan.
  They tell of my powers.
    [The people speak highly of the singer's magic powers; a charmed
    arrow is shown which terminates above with feather-web ornament,
    enlarged to signify its greater power.]

  [Illustration]
  He/-w[)e]-ne-nis/-sa ma-he/-ka-n[)e]n/-na.
  What have I killed, it is a wolf.
    [By aid of his magic influence the speaker has destroyed a bad
    man/id[-o] which had assumed the form of a wolf.]

  [Illustration]
  Sun/-gu-we/-wa, ha/, n[-i]n-d[-e]n/, tshi/-man-da/-kwa
  ha/na-n[)i]n-d[-e]n/.
  I am as strong as the bear.
    [The Mid[-e]/ likens his powers to those of the Bear Man/id[-o], one
    of the most powerful spirits; his figure protrudes from the top of
    the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n while his spirit form is indicated by the short
    lines upon the back.]

  [Illustration]
  Wa/-ka-na/-ni, h[-e]/, wa/-ka-na/-ni.
  I wish to smoke.
    [The pipe used is that furnished by the promoter or originator of
    the war party, termed a "partisan." The Mid[-e]/ is in full accord
