neither sin, place, nor person: not sin, he removed all abominations;
not place, from all places, towns of his inheritance, and of his
conquest; not person, he deposed his mother, or rather grandmother from
her state for her idolatry. 2. Joash, or his covenanters. Indeed the
people of the land, (for such usually are most zealous) they ruined the
altars, house and all. They broke down all the monuments of idolatry,
all to pieces, thoroughly, to some purpose, priest and all. They slew
Matthan priest of Baal with the sword. 3. Josiah purged the whole
kingdom: and Nehemiah with zeal, extirpated the strange wives Here is a
covenant that rooted out idolatry, popery, the Baalistical prelate
Matthan, and all his prelatical faction the Chemarim, and all this, for
this end, that the Lord might be one, and His name one.

The third is, the preservation of the liberties of the kingdom and the
king, for matters merely civil. Such was that covenant that Jehoiada
established, after their engagements for spirituals to God. He made a
covenant between the king and people, that he should preserve their
liberties, they his authority, and both each other mutually.

The fourth, for the discovery and punishment of malignants, that
increase or continue our division. Without a covenant such a discovery
did Mordecai make of Bigthan and Teresh, the king's eunuchs. Such a
discovery made the Jews of Sanballat, and his fellows to Nehemiah.
Josiah was not without his informers. But with a covenant was the
punishment of such varlets settled. Whosoever would not seek the Lord
God of their fathers, should be slain without sparing, be he whom he
would be, small or great, man or woman. For why should not every one
value the public above the private, the common good before his own?

The fifth, the preservation of the union, and of the pacification
between the two kingdoms. This is the matter of all civil leagues. Such
a league made Isaac with Abimelech, Jacob with Laban, David with Hiram.
But chiefly such a pacification doth God promise to make between Israel
and Judah. They should both live under one king, so do the English and
Scots: and both dwell in one land, so do the English and Scots: they
shall have the same ministry and religion; so do labour the English and
Scots: and a pacification will God make between them, and that by
covenant, and such a covenant, as should never be forgotten or broken;
such a thing are we doing now, and then God's sanctuary shall be placed
among us, the sanctuary of His presence, service, protection, which is
our expectation and our hope.

Lastly, The firm adhering to this covenant, and continuance in the same
notwithstanding all opposition, contradiction, dissuasion to the
contrary whatsoever. All the people stood to the covenant. This was
Josiah's care not only for himself, but for his people; "He made all
that were found in Judah and Benjamin to stand to it; so all his days
they turned not back from the Lord God of their Fathers." This is the
covenant, and this is a general view of the general matter; this is
according to the aim of those that made it, take it, swear to it. Who
but an atheist can refuse the first? who but a papist the second? who
but an oppressor, or a rebel, the third? who but the guilty, the fourth?
who but men of fortune, desperate cavaliers, the fifth? who but light
and empty men, unstable as water, the sixth? In a word, the duty is
such, that God hath ordained; the matter is such, as God approveth; the
taking such, as God observeth; and the consequences such, as God hath
promised. And in them stands my third caution, to which I now come.

III. To the consequences. For the consequences, and issues that do or
must follow upon the taking, be also cautelous; take heed that after
this heart-engagement to God, none start back like a broken bow. See
that you neither, 1. Falsify the oath; or, 2. Profane the oath.

I. Do not falsify the oath, making the actions of the outward man
contrary to this action of the heart. An oath is one of the two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie; not
fitting, that man should. The people's forementioned example teaches
constancy, they stood to it. The covenants ordinary epithet
[everlasting] implies continuance: neither can God, nor should man play
the children, say and unsay. All our covenants in Him should be yea; not
yea, and nay. If we prove loose, we prove false, and lie unto God that
made us. Take heed to your covenant. This stone, these walls, these
pillars, these seats shall witness against you, that ye denied Him: to
falsify the engagement, is to deny our God; His power, His revenging
justice, His word, His presence, and the like; if you wilfully falsify
this oath wherewith you are bound, as much as in you lies, you make God
any thing but a God. Keep truth and fidelity for ever.

II. Do not profane it by a slight esteem, by an irreverent taking, by an
unholy life.

_First_, By a slight esteem, as a matter of no moment. Can that be a
trifle, which is the fruit of the judicious consultations of the agents
of both kingdoms, as the only means to perpetuate the union? Can that be
a trifle, which was produced by such, who had merely the glory of God
before their eyes as conducing much thereto? Can that be a trifle, which
is published as the main and sole preventive of all the bloody plots of
God's enemies against the truth? Can that be a trifle, which is now
cleaved to as a means more effectual, and a degree above supplications,
remonstrances, protestations, to preserve ourselves, and our religion?
All this and more the preamble speaks.

_Second_, By irreverent taking. It was resolved on after mature
deliberation. It is a lifting up of the hand to the most high God, and a
swearing by His name, and God's name must not be taken in vain: such
will God not hold guiltless. But of this before.

_Third_, By an unholy life. Such a thing would mar all we have done;
though defiled with former sins, yet now sin no more: our covenant
forbids it: our state now stands thus. Either by our sins we shall make
a breach into our covenant, or by our covenant make a breach from our
sins. In the close of the covenant, we resolve on the endeavour that
this covenant may have its desired fruit. We desire to be humbled for
our own sins, the land's sins, undervaluing the gospel, neglecting the
power, and purity of it, no endeavour to receive Christ into our hearts,
no care to walk worthy of Him in our lives. Such and the like sins a
godly covenanter must shun, lest he profane it. Let us then prize it as
an effectual means of good, take it with a reverend fear of God, honour
it in holiness of life for ever. Let us both verify it, and sanctify it
by continuing to stand in it, by endeavouring to live by it to God's
glory, that this taken covenant may be for the name, the honour, the
praise of the great Jehovah for ever.

II. _Hortatory._ These cautions being observed; come all, and let us
enter into an everlasting covenant with the Lord; come on, and let us
engage our hearts unto our God: we have a propensity to keep off; let a
covenant keep us close: our hearts would be wandering; let a covenant
bind them. Will you trust yourselves without a tie? Do you know
yourselves? Come to this work, with a heart, with a heart lifted up, as
well as a hand, as high as a hand; "Let us lift up our hearts to our
hands;" let the ardency of our affection raise up our spirit to meet the
Lord, to whom we adjoin ourselves for ever. To you I cry, to whom the
order speaks, to every one of you I call, come engage your hearts.

_First_, Nobles, both greater and lesser, think not the duty below you,
too mean for you. There is but one way to heaven for all. Scorn not to
join with inferiors in this work. In Christ there is neither male nor
female, no respect of persons. The same way that the soul of the poorest
is refreshed, is the soul of the richest. Poor men pray, and princes
must pray; common men humble their souls, and repent, and crowned kings
must do so too. The people of God, they walk aright, and all men, great
and small, must follow them alike: the eye of every ordinary man must be
towards the Lord. So as the tribes of Israel are, and the same way must
Tyre and Sidon look, though they be very wise. No largeness of parts,
greatness of place, eminency in gifts, of wisdom, learning, wit, not
amplitude of rule, nor any high thoughts can exempt; but he must subject
himself to the condition and courses of the lowest sort. Heaven regards
not the goodliness of the person, looks not as man looks; for God
regards the heart.

_Second_, Soldiers, for you also are engagers. This says, you have a
noble pattern; but I hope I may say, you outwrite your copy. They came
to John Baptist, and to the place, where he baptized. You come to the
presence of God, and the place, where the heart is to be engaged. They
came to be directed what to do; you to do what has been directed. Ride
you on prosperously in this righteous truth. It lies mainly upon you to
be holy, yea, more than upon others. Your adventures are more hazardous,
your dangers more probable; yea, your deaths perhaps more near.
Therefore,

1. You must remove from you wickedness, and wicked men. Wickedness from
your hearts, wicked men from your armies. Let both your persons be holy,
and your companies holy. God Himself commands the former, the prophet
from God the latter. "When the host goeth forth, then, and then chiefly,
thou shalt keep thee from every evil thing." When Judah's king marched
out, assisted with Israelitish auxiliaries, which were idolaters; let
not (saith the prophet) "the men of Israel go with thee, for God is not
with Israel:" if thou do, thou shalt not prosper. If there were no evil
sin in your hearts, no evil man in your hosts, God would be with you,
with a shout, even the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.

And 2. Your success depends on God's presence. When thou seest
multitudes of armies encircling thee, fear not, for God is with thee,
and God is with thee to save thee; He walks with thee to fight for thee,
and to prosper thee. We shall be cast back, yea, quite off, if God go
not forth with our armies; or, in our armies; the word bears either:
when God goes not in our armies, rules not in our hearts, lives,
conversations, by holiness; then He goes not forth with our armies by
victory and success.

3. The want of godly agents, to manage a godly cause, a great
lamentation. "Help, Lord, save, O God, for the godly fail, and the
faithful cease from among men:" were there any such in being, they would
bear rule with God, and be faithful for the saints, their persons and
prayers would gain prevalency with God, their endeavours and constancy
would show fidelity to the saints, and then in Judah, our land, would
things go well: and as once Ezekiel of the scarcity of fit governors to
rule, so we of fit men to fight, when corruption and looseness hath so
possessed the hearts, and lives of our men of war, that there remains no
sanctified and godly man to make a soldier; "This is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation."

4. What ground have we to expect good? When the sons of darkness go to
cast out the prince of darkness, is this possible? Can Satan cast out
Satan? It is a satisfactory answer, that we rest in, and stops the
mouths of all not incurably blinded, when we hear of protestations, and
promises to maintain the protestant religion and laws of the land; when
we see, that the effecting of the one is by the sword of papists, of the
other, by the hand of delinquents; except we should think, that man can
(as God) work happy ends by contrary means. For we say, how can Satan
cast out Satan? So to ourselves, 'tis not very likely, that, if Satan
keep the hold he hath of our souls, you should dispossess him of that
strong hold he hath of our land. But you know so much, and therefore by
engaging your heart this day to God you first endeavour to expel Satan
out of your own consciences; and then shall you see clearly to drive him
from our kingdom.

_Third_, Our brethren of Scotland, come you, and enter into this sure
covenant. Lay the foundation of such an eternal league and peace, that
the sun shall never see broken: all your countrymen, your kingdom are
not here. Let your forwardness to this work tell us, what they would do,
if they were. Some having nothing else to say, yet cannot withhold to
question, whether the Scots will enter into it or no? As the question is
without any ground, so shall it be without any other answer for the
present, than this; all of that nation in town have been ready to this
great work. Can you instance in any that have been backward to swear
unto the Lord? If in none, then put away prejudicate thoughts, and
entertain in their place earnest desires, that this covenant now by both
kingdoms entered into, may be like Ezekiel's sticks, which resembled the
divided houses of Judah and Israel; which, as the prophet held them,
became one in his hand. So this national covenant taken into the hand of
God's merciful approbation, may this day, this year become one, and for
ever remain one: so that (as Israel and Judah after this typical union
in two sticks) England and Scotland after this religious union in one
covenant, may for ever be one people in this island of Great Britain;
and that one king may continue king to them both; and that henceforth
they may no more be two peoples, nor divided into kingdoms; that our
religion be corrupted no more, as of late; but being cleansed, we may be
the Lord's people, and He may be our God for ever: that Jesus Christ may
bear rule, and we both may have one ministry, and enjoy that truth,
which Christ, when He ascended up on high, gave as a gift to men, during
our days, and the days of our posterity; we, and our sons, and our sons'
sons, from this time forth, and for evermore: that the Lord would plant
His sanctuary among us, and make these two people His dwelling-place
continually: that this covenant may be a covenant of peace, and a
covenant of truth, and a covenant for everlasting. And let all that
desire it, daily pray for it, and now express it, and with cheerfulness
of heart say, Amen, Amen.

_Fourth_, You, my brethren of the ministry, your hearts are to be
engaged too, that you also may gain God by the engagement: be not you
behind the very forwardest of the Lord's people; you are not an
inconsiderable party in this land. The joy and happiness of Israel was
because of the Levites that waited, that were diligent in their duties,
and diligently attended upon the Lord. "I will cause the horn of Israel
to flourish, saith God:" by what means? "I will give thee, Ezekiel, an
open mouth." That God may give you a heart to teach knowledge, come,
engage your hearts as a gift to God. O, saith Moses, "that all the
Lord's people were prophets!" O, say we, that all this land's people had
prophets, but prophets of the Lord, that might feed them with wisdom and
understanding, that they all might know the Lord, from the greatest to
the least of them! But ah? Lord God, the eye of this kingdom is
distempered, dim, and dark; and then how great is this darkness! our
prophets have prophesied lies, and our priests have pleaded for Baal,
and they have rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them?
Instead of standing for God, they have stood against Him; and instead of
being the best, they are become the basest: the prophet that teacheth
lies, he is the tail. If God should come, as once, to seek for a man,
that should stand in the gap, and make up the breach; among these He
would find the fewest: in this respect our state may be like that which
we find described. Christ comes to make a perfect description of His
church, and so consequently, a comfortable expression of Himself to His
church: and whereas the eyes are the chiefest seat of beauty, and
therefore likeliest to be stood upon, he begins thus. "Turn away thine
eyes from me, for they have overcome me." By eyes, understand the
ministry; I come to speak comfortable things to My people, but set away
the ministers out of My sight, for they have overcome My patience, and
filled Me with fury: now these being removed, the description doth
lovingly go on. Thy hair, thy young professors, are like a flock of
goats; thy teeth, thy civil officers, like a flock of sheep; thy
temples, thy ordinary and common Christians. All right but the eyes, the
eyes I cannot endure. But let none of us provoke this complaint, nor
hold off any longer from the Lord that invites. What say you? Are you
willing to this engagement? Will you bind yourselves to the Lord? Let me
extend my speech to all, and dispatch the remains of this point, and my
meaning thus: that you may be encouraged to engage, consider two things.

_First_, The seasonableness.

_Secondly_, The success of such engagements.

_First_, The seasonableness: there is a time for all purposes, and every
word and action is beautiful in his own time. A public engagement is
then seasonable, 1. When a land hath been full of troubles: God by such
troubles prepares a people for Him in this duty. "I will cause you to
pass under the rod, and so I will bring you into the bond of the
covenant." And we know, we feel God hath chastised us sore of late; but
in them He hath not given us over to death, that by them He might
prepare us for Himself. When a land hath been full of corruptions, and a
shrewd decay hath been in spirituals: by a covenant hath such a people
recovered themselves, and regained their God. After the great apostasy
by Athaliah, Jehoiada renewed their interest by a covenant. When
Manasses and his son had suffered destruction from God, and advanced
idolatry with or above God; Josiah purged all by a covenant. Our decays
are evident, our corruptions destructive; our covenant therefore
seasonable. Come, let us engage our hearts to approach to God. 3. When
the enemy begins to fall, and God begins to shine upon His own. Asa
returning from a victory, called his land to a covenant. When Athaliah
was slain, the league was sworn, by Joash and his kingdom. Since this
motion of a covenant is come among us, God hath, as it were, begun to
draw near, in the siege of Gloucester raised, in the success at Newbery,
gained. God is worming out His and our adversaries, which He will do by
little and little, till they be consumed. The covenant is seasonable.

_Second_, The success. Come and see the works of the Lord, what wonders
He hath wrought, when a people hath thus bound themselves to be His. 1.
A king injuriously put from his right by an usurping hand, after such a
covenant was re-established, "He sat him down on the throne of the
kings." 2. A land miserably put from its peace, after such a covenant,
was re-settled, peace was re-obtained; and that as a fruit of prayer,
and so acknowledged, "Israel had sworn, and sought God; God was found of
them: and the Lord gave them rest round about." 3. Religion craftily,
and wickedly put from its purity after such a covenant, was reformed;
after such a reformation continued. The engagement being made, "all
Josiah's days they returned not back from the Lord God of their
fathers." 4. Rebels and rebellion, basely and bloodily backed and
managed against the Lord and His ways, against His people and their
practices; after such a covenant, have been overthrown and subdued, "I
will bring you into the bond of the covenant." Then I will sever from
among you the rebels; I will chase them from their own land, and hinder
that they shall not enter into the land of Israel. The Lord give this
success concerning Ireland, sever out the rebels there from true
subjects; chase them from their own land; and yet keep them from ever
entering into our land, the land of the inheritance of the Lord.

Now these successful effects of covenanting well minded,

_First_, May hint to us a satisfactory reason, in case peace comes not
presently. God hath some more adversaries to overthrow, to worm out; His
sword hath not eaten flesh enough; neither are His arrows drunk with
blood yet; with the blood of such earthly men, whom He hath appointed to
destruction. The hearts of the Philistines were so hardened, that they
never sought after peace, "For it came of the Lord, to the intent that
they might be utterly destroyed." Who knows, whether our peace hath been
denied; our propositions cast out; our treaties fruitless, for such an
end as this? It was of the Lord, who hath a purpose to destroy more. God
lays afflictions on His people, and they continue upon them; but in the
mean space to quiet their spirits, He teacheth them out of His law, that
these troubles must stay only "till a pit be digged for the wicked."

_Second_, May encourage us to go on. You have now armour of proof, such
armour as is not ordinary, armed with a covenant: Go, saith the angel to
Gideon, in this thy might. Go (say I, to every one) in this thy might,
the strength of this thy covenant, and the effect will be such, as is
not ordinary. When the Philistines perceived that the Israelites had
brought the ark of the covenant into the battle, they cried out, "Woe
unto us; for it hath not been so heretofore: woe unto us; who shall
deliver us out of the hands of these mighty gods?" When your enemies
shall perceive, that you come armed with the armour of a covenant with
God, I hope they, struck with amazement, shall cry, "Woe unto us; we
were never so opposed before: woe unto us; who shall deliver us out of
the power of this mighty prevailer?" If it will thus daunt, take it with
you, be strong. Again, I say, Go in the might thereof, and God shall
prosper thee for ever.

III. _Satisfactory._ According to the condition of the person, such is
the nature of the objection. One out of the malignity of his spirit,
cavils against the work; another out of tenderness of conscience,
scruples the taking. I shall briefly touch upon one or two, and wind up
all in a few words. The queries I have met with, are such as these: two
objections when I was designed to this service, were sent me in writing,
which, when thoroughly viewed, I perceived nothing at all to concern our
case, or covenant.

_Obj._ 1. Whether by any law, divine or human, may reformation of
religion be brought in by arms? _Ans._ 1. What is this at all to the
covenant, where there is no mention of arms at all? 2. What is this to
our present condition, where reforming by arms is not at all the
question? For if reformation of religion be the case of our affairs;
then either the parliament are they that do it, or the cavaliers: not
the cavaliers, for they are on the defensive: witness all their
declarations. Not the parliament, for then the cavaliers will be found
fighters against religion, and resisters of God. 3. I answer negatively,
it is not. The sword is not the means which God hath ordained to
propagate the gospel: "Go and teach all nations;" not, go and subdue all
nations, is our Master's precept.

_Obj._ 2. Whether to swear to a government that shall be, or to swear
not to dissent from such a future government, be not to swear upon an
implicit faith? _Ans._ 1. This is nothing to the covenant, neither can I
see upon what ground any should raise such an impertinent scruple. 2. It
is, he that so swears, swears upon an implicit faith: for one reason
against the articles of the prelates was, that they forced us to swear
to the homilies that shall be set out. But these things are extravagant.

Other objections by word of mouth have been propounded, some whereof I
will here touch upon.

_Obj._ 1. One would make a stand at the phrase, [in our callings,] as if
some politic mystery were therein involved, and would have it changed,
[according to our callings, or so far forth as they extend.] There is an
identity in the phrase, an action enjoined to be done in such a place,
every corner, as far as that place extends, is that place, and no other.
All is one.

_Obj._ How if the parliament should hereafter see a convenience in
prelacy for this kingdom, were not this oath then prejudicial, either to
the parliament's liberty, or kingdom's felicity? _Ans._ This objection
supposes,

_First_, That the most wicked antichristian government may be a lawful
government in point of conscience.

_Second_, That it is possible, that this prelatical government may be
convenient for a state or kingdom. When as 1. They have been burdensome
in all ages; what opposites in England have they been to our kings, till
their interests were changed? 2. All reformed religions in the world
have expelled them, as incompatible with reformation. 3. They have set
three kingdoms together by the ears, for the least, and worst of causes,
which now lie weltering in their own blood, ready to expire. 4.
Experience now shows, there is no inconvenience in their want; either in
Scotland, or in England.

_Obj._ But what, if the exorbitances be purged away, may not I,
notwithstanding my oath, admit of a regulated prelacy? _Ans._ 1. We
swear not against a government that is not. 2. We swear against the
evils of every government; and doubtless many materials of prelacy must
of necessity be retained, as absolutely necessary. 3. Taking away the
exorbitances, the remaining will be a new government, and no prelacy.

_Obj._ For the discovery of all malignants, all that have been; whether,
if I have a friend, that hath been a malignant, and is now converted, am
I bound to discover him? _Ans._ This his malignity, was either before
the covenant, or since; if before, no. For then this league had no
being, and a _non-ens_ can have no contrariety. If since, the discovery
must be at the first appearance of malignity, whilst he is so.

_Obj._ What if one make a party to uphold prelacy, whilst it stands by
law, must I oppose him, or discover him by virtue of this oath? Doth the
oath bind me to oppose legal acts? _Ans._ i. Quer. Whether there be any
particular law for prelacy? 2. Quer. Whether the making a party be
legal? 3. Quer. Whether any thing, the extirpation of which is sworn by
an ordinance of parliament, can be said to stand by law?

These are some queries I have met with. I heartily wish that the same
tenderness of conscience in all things may be seen, which if not, it
will hardly be called a scruple of tenderness, but a cavil of malignity.
What now remains but only prayers, that the great God of our judgments
and consciences, would so clear and satisfy our souls in these leagues
and bonds, that without reluctancy we may all swear to God, and, having
sworn, we may have a care to keep the oath inviolable; that as once
Israel, so all England may rejoice because of the oath: and God may be
established, and His kingdom settled; that His presence may dwell among
men, and His protection among the sons of men; that He may be near in
our covenanting, found in our prayers, and give us rest; and that we
being engaged, may live to Him, and not to others, henceforth and for
ever.




THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT:

SERMON AT WESTMINSTER.

_BY JOSEPH CARYL.[12]_

"And because of all this, we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our
princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it."

--_Nehemiah_ ix. 38.


The general subject of this verse, is the special business of this day.
