(1) Whether it was fitting that John should baptize?

(2) Whether that baptism was from God?

(3) Whether it conferred grace?

(4) Whether others besides Christ should have received that baptism?

(5) Whether that baptism should have ceased when Christ was baptized?

(6) Whether those who received John's baptism had afterwards to
receive Christ's baptism?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting That John Should Baptize?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting that John should
baptize. For every sacramental rite belongs to some law. But John did
not introduce a new law. Therefore it was not fitting that he should
introduce the new rite of baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, John "was sent by God . . . for a witness" (John
1:6, 7) as a prophet; according to Luke 1:76: "Thou, child, shalt be
called the prophet of the Highest." But the prophets who lived before
Christ did not introduce any new rite, but persuaded men to observe
the rites of the Law. as is clearly stated Malachi 4:4: "Remember the
law of Moses My servant." Therefore neither should John have
introduced a new rite of baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, when there is too much of anything, nothing should
be added to it. But the Jews observed a superfluity of baptisms; for
it is written (Mk. 7:3, 4) that "the Pharisees and all the Jews eat
not without often washing their hands . . . and when they come from
the market, unless they be washed, they eat not; and many other
things there are that have been delivered to them to observe, the
washings of cups and of pots, and of brazen vessels, and of beds."
Therefore it was unfitting that John should baptize.

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture (Matt. 3:5, 6), which,
after stating the holiness of John, adds many went out to him, "and
were baptized in the Jordan."

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for John to baptize, for four
reasons: first, it was necessary for Christ to be baptized by John,
in order that He might sanctify baptism; as Augustine observes, super
Joan. (Tract. xiii in Joan.).

Secondly, that Christ might be manifested. Whence John himself says
(John 1:31): "That He," i.e. Christ, "may be made manifest in Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water." For he announced Christ to
the crowds that gathered around him; which was thus done much more
easily than if he had gone in search of each individual, as
Chrysostom observes, commenting on St. John (Hom. x in Matth.).

Thirdly, that by his baptism he might accustom men to the baptism of
Christ; wherefore Gregory says in a homily (Hom. vii in Evang.) that
therefore did John baptize, "that, being consistent with his office
of precursor, as he had preceded our Lord in birth, so he might also
by baptizing precede Him who was about to baptize."

Fourthly, that by persuading men to do penance, he might prepare men
to receive worthily the baptism of Christ. Wherefore Bede [*Cf. Scot.
Erig. in Joan. iii, 24] says that "the baptism of John was as
profitable before the baptism of Christ, as instruction in the faith
profits the catechumens not yet baptized. For just as he preached
penance, and foretold the baptism of Christ, and drew men to the
knowledge of the Truth that hath appeared to the world, so do the
ministers of the Church, after instructing men, chide them for their
sins, and lastly promise them forgiveness in the baptism of Christ."

Reply Obj. 1: The baptism of John was not a sacrament properly so
called (_per se_), but a kind of sacramental, preparatory to the
baptism of Christ. Consequently, in a way, it belonged to the law of
Christ, but not to the law of Moses.

Reply Obj. 2: John was not only a prophet, but "more than a prophet,"
as stated Matt. 11:9: for he was the term of the Law and the
beginning of the Gospel. Therefore it was in his province to lead
men, both by word and deed, to the law of Christ rather than to the
observance of the Old Law.

Reply Obj. 3: Those baptisms of the Pharisees were vain, being
ordered merely unto carnal cleanliness. But the baptism of John was
ordered unto spiritual cleanliness, since it led men to do penance,
as stated above.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 2]

Whether the Baptism of John Was from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the baptism of John was not from God.
For nothing sacramental that is from God is named after a mere man:
thus the baptism of the New Law is not named after Peter or Paul, but
after Christ. But that baptism is named after John, according to
Matt. 21:25: "The baptism of John . . . was it from heaven or from
men?" Therefore the baptism of John was not from God.

Obj. 2: Further, every doctrine that proceeds from God anew is
confirmed by some signs: thus the Lord (Ex. 4) gave Moses the power
of working signs; and it is written (Heb. 2:3, 4) that our faith
"having begun to be declared by the Lord, was confirmed unto us by
them that heard Him, God also bearing them witness by signs and
wonders." But it is written of John the Baptist (John 10:41) that
"John did no sign." Therefore it seems that the baptism wherewith he
baptized was not from God.

Obj. 3: Further, those sacraments which are instituted by God are
contained in certain precepts of Holy Scripture. But there is no
precept of Holy Writ commanding the baptism of John. Therefore it
seems that it was not from God.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 1:33): "He who sent me to
baptize with water said to me: 'He upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit,'" etc.

_I answer that,_ Two things may be considered in the baptism of
John--namely, the rite of baptism and the effect of baptism. The rite
of baptism was not from men, but from God, who by an interior
revelation of the Holy Ghost sent John to baptize. But the effect of
that baptism was from man, because it effected nothing that man could
not accomplish. Wherefore it was not from God alone, except in as far
as God works in man.

Reply Obj. 1: By the baptism of the New Law men are baptized inwardly
by the Holy Ghost, and this is accomplished by God alone. But by the
baptism of John the body alone was cleansed by the water. Wherefore
it is written (Matt. 3:11): "I baptize you in water; but . . . He
shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost." For this reason the baptism of
John was named after him, because it effected nothing that he did not
accomplish. But the baptism of the New Law is not named after the
minister thereof, because he does not accomplish its principal
effect, which is the inward cleansing.

Reply Obj. 2: The whole teaching and work of John was ordered unto
Christ, who, by many miracles confirmed both His own teaching and
that of John. But if John had worked signs, men would have paid equal
attention to John and to Christ. Wherefore, in order that men might
pay greater attention to Christ, it was not given to John to work a
sign. Yet when the Jews asked him why he baptized, he confirmed his
office by the authority of Scripture, saying: "I am the voice of one
crying in the wilderness," etc. as related, John 1:23 (cf. Isa.
40:3). Moreover, the very austerity of his life was a commendation of
his office, because, as Chrysostom says, commenting on Matthew (Hom.
x in Matth.), "it was wonderful to witness such endurance in a human
body."

Reply Obj. 3: The baptism of John was intended by God to last only
for a short time, for the reasons given above (A. 1). Therefore it
was not the subject of a general commandment set down in Sacred Writ,
but of a certain interior revelation of the Holy Ghost, as stated
above.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 3]

Whether Grace Was Given in the Baptism of John?

Objection 1: It would seem that grace was given in the baptism of
John. For it is written (Mk. 1:4): "John was in the desert baptizing
and preaching the baptism of penance unto remission of sins." But
penance and remission of sins are the effect of grace. Therefore the
baptism of John conferred grace.

Obj. 2: Further, those who were about to be baptized by John
"confessed their sins," as related Matt. 3:6 and Mk. 1:5. But the
confession of sins is ordered to their remission, which is effected
by grace. Therefore grace was conferred in the baptism of John.

Obj. 3: Further, the baptism of John was more akin than circumcision
to the baptism of Christ. But original sin was remitted through
circumcision: because, as Bede says (Hom. x in Circumcis.), "under
the Law, circumcision brought the same saving aid to heal the wound
of original sin as baptism is wont to bring now that grace is
revealed." Much more, therefore, did the baptism of John effect the
remission of sins, which cannot be accomplished without grace.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 3:11): "I indeed baptize you
in water unto penance." Which words Gregory thus expounds in a
certain homily (Hom. vii in Evang.): "John baptized, not in the
Spirit, but in water: because he could not forgive sins." But grace
is given by the Holy Ghost, and by means thereof sins are taken away.
Therefore the baptism of John did not confer grace.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2, ad 2), the whole teaching and
work of John was in preparation for Christ: just as it is the duty of
the servant and of the under-craftsman to prepare the matter for the
form which is accomplished by the head-craftsman. Now grace was to be
conferred on men through Christ, according to John 1:17: "Grace and
truth came through Jesus Christ." Therefore the baptism of John did
not confer grace, but only prepared the way for grace; and this in
three ways: first, by John's teaching, which led men to faith in
Christ; secondly, by accustoming men to the rite of Christ's baptism;
thirdly, by penance, preparing men to receive the effect of Christ's
baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: In these words, as Bede says (on Mk. 1:4), a twofold
baptism of penance may be understood. One is that which John
conferred by baptizing, which is called "a baptism of penance," etc.,
by reason of its inducing men to do penance, and of its being a kind
of protestation by which men avowed their purpose of doing penance.
The other is the baptism of Christ, by which sins are remitted, and
which John could not give, but only preach, saying: "He will baptize
you in the Holy Ghost."

Or it may be said that he preached the "baptism of penance," i.e.
which induced men to do penance, which penance leads men on to "the
remission of sins."

Or again, it may be said with Jerome [*Another author on Mk. 1 (inter
op. Hier.)] that "by the baptism of Christ grace is given, by which
sins are remitted gratis; and that what is accomplished by the
bridegroom is begun by the bridesman," i.e. by John. Consequently it
is said that "he baptized and preached the baptism of penance unto
remission of sins," not as though he accomplished this himself, but
because he began it by preparing the way for it.

Reply Obj. 2: That confession of sins was not made unto the remission
of sins, to be realized immediately through the baptism of John, but
to be obtained through subsequent penance and through the baptism of
Christ, for which that penance was a preparation.

Reply Obj. 3: Circumcision was instituted as a remedy for original
sin. Whereas the baptism of John was not instituted for this purpose,
but was merely in preparation for the baptism of Christ, as stated
above; whereas the sacraments attain their effect through the force
of their institution.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Alone Should Have Been Baptized with the Baptism of
John?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ alone should have been
baptized with the baptism of John. For, as stated above (A. 1), "the
reason why John baptized was that Christ might receive baptism," as
Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. xiii). But what is proper to
Christ should not be applicable to others. Therefore no others should
have received that baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever is baptized either receives something from
the baptism or confers something on the baptism. But no one could
receive anything from the baptism of John, because thereby grace was
not conferred, as stated above (A. 3). On the other hand, no one
could confer anything on baptism save Christ, who "sanctified the
waters by the touch of His most pure flesh" [*Mag. Sent. iv, 3].
Therefore it seems that Christ alone should have been baptized with
the baptism of John.

Obj. 3: Further, if others were baptized with that baptism, this was
only in order that they might be prepared for the baptism of Christ:
and thus it would seem fitting that the baptism of John should be
conferred on all, old and young, Gentile and Jew, just as the baptism
of Christ. But we do not read that either children or Gentiles were
baptized by the latter; for it is written (Mk. 1:5) that "there went
out to him . . . all they of Jerusalem, and were baptized by him."
Therefore it seems that Christ alone should have been baptized by
John.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 3:21): "It came to pass, when
all the people were baptized, that Jesus also being baptized and
praying, heaven was opened."

_I answer that,_ For two reasons it behooved others besides Christ to
be baptized with the baptism of John. First, as Augustine says (Super
Joan., Tract. iv, v), "if Christ alone had been baptized with the
baptism of John, some would have said that John's baptism, with which
Christ was baptized, was more excellent than that of Christ, with
which others are baptized."

Secondly, because, as above stated, it behooved others to be prepared
by John's baptism for the baptism of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: The baptism of John was instituted not only that Christ
might be baptized, but also for other reasons, as stated above (A.
1). And yet, even if it were instituted merely in order that Christ
might be baptized therewith, it was still necessary for others to
receive this baptism, in order to avoid the objection mentioned above.

Reply Obj. 2: Others who approached to be baptized by John could not,
indeed, confer anything on his baptism: yet neither did they receive
anything therefrom, save only the sign of penance.

Reply Obj. 3: This was the baptism of "penance," for which children
were not suited; wherefore they were not baptized therewith. But to
bring the nations into the way of salvation was reserved to Christ
alone, who is the "expectation of the nations," as we read Gen.
49:10. Indeed, Christ forbade the apostles to preach the Gospel to
the Gentiles before His Passion and Resurrection. Much less fitting,
therefore, was it for the Gentiles to be baptized by John.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 5]

Whether John's Baptism Should Have Ceased After Christ Was Baptized?

Objection 1: It would seem that John's baptism should have ceased
after Christ was baptized. For it is written (John 1:31): "That He
may be made manifest in Israel, therefore am I come baptizing in
water." But when Christ had been baptized, He was made sufficiently
manifest, both by the testimony of John and by the dove coming down
upon Him, and again by the voice of the Father bearing witness to
Him. Therefore it seems that John's baptism should not have endured
thereafter.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. iv): "Christ was
baptized, and John's baptism ceased to avail." Therefore it seems
that, after Christ's baptism, John should not have continued to
baptize.

Obj. 3: Further, John's baptism prepared the way for Christ's. But
Christ's baptism began as soon as He had been baptized; because "by
the touch of His most pure flesh He endowed the waters with a
regenerating virtue," as Bede asserts (Mag. Sent. iv, 3). Therefore
it seems that John's baptism ceased when Christ had been baptized.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 3:22, 23): "Jesus . . . came
into the land of Judea . . . and baptized: and John also was
baptizing." But Christ did not baptize before being baptized.
Therefore it seems that John continued to baptize after Christ had
been baptized.

_I answer that,_ It was not fitting for the baptism of John to cease
when Christ had been baptized. First, because, as Chrysostom says
(Hom. xxix in Joan.), "if John had ceased to baptize" when Christ had
been baptized, "men would think that he was moved by jealousy or
anger." Secondly, if he had ceased to baptize when Christ baptized,
"he would have given His disciples a motive for yet greater envy."
Thirdly, because, by continuing to baptize, "he sent his hearers to
Christ" (Hom. xxix in Joan.). Fourthly, because, as Bede [*Scot.
Erig. Comment. in Joan.] says, "there still remained a shadow of the
Old Law: nor should the forerunner withdraw until the truth be made
manifest."

Reply Obj. 1: When Christ was baptized, He was not as yet fully
manifested: consequently there was still need for John to continue
baptizing.

Reply Obj. 2: The baptism of John ceased after Christ had been
baptized, not immediately, but when the former was cast into prison.
Thus Chrysostom says (Hom. xxix in Joan.): "I consider that John's
death was allowed to take place, and that Christ's preaching began in
a great measure after John had died, so that the undivided allegiance
of the multitude was transferred to Christ, and there was no further
motive for the divergence of opinions concerning both of them."

Reply Obj. 3: John's baptism prepared the way not only for Christ to
be baptized, but also for others to approach to Christ's baptism: and
this did not take place as soon as Christ was baptized.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 38, Art. 6]

Whether Those Who Had Been Baptized with John's Baptism Had to Be
Baptized with the Baptism of Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that those who had been baptized with
John's baptism had not to be baptized with the baptism of Christ. For
John was not less than the apostles, since of him is it written
(Matt. 11:11): "There hath not risen among them that are born of
women a greater than John the Baptist." But those who were baptized
by the apostles were not baptized again, but only received the
imposition of hands; for it is written (Acts 8:16, 17) that some were
"only baptized" by Philip "in the name of the Lord Jesus": then the
apostles--namely, Peter and John--"laid their hands upon them, and
they received the Holy Ghost." Therefore it seems that those who had
been baptized by John had not to be baptized with the baptism of
Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, the apostles were baptized with John's baptism,
since some of them were his disciples, as is clear from John 1:37.
But the apostles do not seem to have been baptized with the baptism
of Christ: for it is written (John 4:2) that "Jesus did not baptize,
but His disciples." Therefore it seems that those who had been
baptized with John's baptism had not to be baptized with the baptism
of Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, he who is baptized is less than he who baptizes. But
we are not told that John himself was baptized with the baptism of
Christ. Therefore much less did those who had been baptized by John
need to receive the baptism of Christ.

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Acts 19:1-5) that "Paul . . . found
certain disciples; and he said to them: Have you received the Holy
Ghost since ye believed? But they said to him: We have not so much as
heard whether there be a Holy Ghost. And he said: In what then were
you baptized? Who said: In John's baptism." Wherefore "they were"
again "baptized in the name of our [Vulg.: 'the'] Lord Jesus Christ."
Hence it seems that they needed to be baptized again, because they
did not know of the Holy Ghost: as Jerome says on Joel 2:28 and in an
epistle (lxix De Viro unius uxoris), and likewise Ambrose (De Spiritu
Sancto). But some were baptized with John's baptism who had full
knowledge of the Trinity. Therefore these had no need to be baptized
again with Christ's baptism.

Obj. 5: Further, on Rom. 10:8, "This is the word of faith, which we
preach," the gloss of Augustine says: "Whence this virtue in the
water, that it touches the body and cleanses the heart, save by the
efficacy of the word, not because it is uttered, but because it is
believed?" Whence it is clear that the virtue of baptism depends on
faith. But the form of John's baptism signified the faith in which we
are baptized; for Paul says (Acts 19:4): "John baptized the people
with the baptism of penance, saying: That they should believe in Him
who was to come after him--that is to say, in Jesus." Therefore it
seems that those who had been baptized with John's baptism had no
need to be baptized again with the baptism of Christ.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. v): "Those who
were baptized with John's baptism needed to be baptized with the
baptism of our Lord."

_I answer that,_ According to the opinion of the Master (Sent. iv, D,
2), "those who had been baptized by John without knowing of the
existence of the Holy Ghost, and who based their hopes on his
baptism, were afterwards baptized with the baptism of Christ: but
those who did not base their hope on John's baptism, and who believed
in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were not baptized afterwards, but
received the Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands made over them by
the apostles."

And this, indeed, is true as to the first part, and is confirmed by
many authorities. But as to the second part, the assertion is
altogether unreasonable. First, because John's baptism neither
conferred grace nor imprinted a character, but was merely "in water,"
as he says himself (Matt. 3:11). Wherefore the faith or hope which
the person baptized had in Christ could not supply this defect.
Secondly, because, when in a sacrament, that is omitted which belongs
of necessity to the sacrament, not only must the omission be
supplied, but the whole must be entirely renewed. Now, it belongs of
necessity to Christ's baptism that it be given not only in water, but
also in the Holy Ghost, according to John 3:5: "Unless a man be born
of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God." Wherefore in the case of those who had been baptized with
John's baptism in water only, not merely had the omission to be
supplied by giving them the Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands,
but they had to be baptized wholly anew "in water and the Holy Ghost."

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. v): "After John,
baptism was administered, and the reason why was because he gave not
Christ's baptism, but his own . . . That which Peter gave . . . and
if any were given by Judas, that was Christ's. And therefore if Judas
baptized anyone, yet were they not rebaptized . . . For the baptism
corresponds with him by whose authority it is given, not with him by
whose ministry it is given." For the same reason those who were
baptized by the deacon Philip, who gave the baptism of Christ, were
not baptized again, but received the imposition of hands by the
apostles, just as those who are baptized by priests are confirmed by
bishops.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says to Seleucianus (Ep. cclxv), "we deem
that Christ's disciples were baptized either with John's baptism, as
some maintain, or with Christ's baptism, which is more probable. For
He would not fail to administer baptism so as to have baptized
servants through whom He baptized others, since He did not fail in
His humble service to wash their feet."

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth. [*From the
supposititious Opus Imperfectum]): "Since, when John said, 'I ought to
be baptized by Thee,' Christ answered, 'Suffer it to be so now': it
follows that afterwards Christ did baptize John." Moreover, he
asserts that "this is distinctly set down in some of the apocryphal
books." At any rate, it is certain, as Jerome says on Matt. 3:13,
that, "as Christ was baptized in water by John, so had John to be
baptized in the Spirit by Christ."

Reply Obj. 4: The reason why these persons were baptized after being
baptized by John was not only because they knew not of the Holy
Ghost, but also because they had not received the baptism of Christ.

Reply Obj. 5: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), our sacraments
are signs of present grace, whereas the sacraments of the Old Law
were signs of future grace. Wherefore the very fact that John
baptized in the name of one who was to come, shows that he did not
give the baptism of Christ, which is a sacrament of the New Law.
_______________________

QUESTION 39

OF THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST
(In Eight Articles)

   We have now to consider the baptizing of Christ, concerning which
   there are eight points of inquiry:

   (1) Whether Christ should have been baptized?

   (2) Whether He should have been baptized with the baptism of John?

   (3) Of the time when He was baptized;

   (4) Of the place;

   (5) Of the heavens being opened unto Him;

   (6) Of the apparition of the Holy Ghost under the form of a dove;

   (7) Whether that dove was a real animal?

   (8) Of the voice of the Father witnessing unto Him.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting That Christ Should Be Baptized?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting for Christ to be
baptized. For to be baptized is to be washed. But it was not fitting
for Christ to be washed, since there was no uncleanness in Him.
Therefore it seems unfitting for Christ to be baptized.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ was circumcised in order to fulfil the law.
But baptism was not prescribed by the law. Therefore He should not
have been baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, the first mover in every genus is unmoved in regard
to that movement; thus the heaven, which is the first cause of
alteration, is unalterable. But Christ is the first principle of
baptism, according to John 1:33: "He upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is that baptizeth."
Therefore it was unfitting for Christ to be baptized.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 3:13) that "Jesus cometh from
Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be baptized by him."

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for Christ to be baptized. First,
because, as Ambrose says on Luke 3:21: "Our Lord was baptized because
He wished, not to be cleansed, but to cleanse the waters, that, being
purified by the flesh of Christ that knew no sin, they might have the
virtue of baptism"; and, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth.),
"that He might bequeath the sanctified waters to those who were to be
baptized afterwards." Secondly, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in
Matth.), "although Christ was not a sinner, yet did He take a sinful
nature and 'the likeness of sinful flesh.' Wherefore, though He
needed not baptism for His own sake, yet carnal nature in others had
need thereof." And, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xxxix) "Christ
was baptized that He might plunge the old Adam entirely in the
water." Thirdly, He wished to be baptized, as Augustine says in a
sermon on the Epiphany (cxxxvi), "because He wished to do what He had
commanded all to do." And this is what He means by saying: "So it
becometh us to fulfil all justice" (Matt. 3:15). For, as Ambrose says
(on Luke 3:21), "this is justice, to do first thyself that which thou
wishest another to do, and so encourage others by thy example."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ was baptized, not that He might be cleansed, but
that He might cleanse, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: It was fitting that Christ should not only fulfil what
was prescribed by the Old Law, but also begin what appertained to the
New Law. Therefore He wished not only to be circumcised, but also to
be baptized.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ is the first principle of baptism's spiritual
effect. Unto this He was not baptized, but only in water.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 2]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Be Baptized with John's Baptism?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was unfitting for Christ to be
baptized with John's baptism. For John's baptism was the "baptism of
penance." But penance is unbecoming to Christ, since He had no sin.
Therefore it seems that He should not have been baptized with John's
baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, John's baptism, as Chrysostom says (Hom. de Bapt.
Christi), "was a mean between the baptism of the Jews and that of
Christ." But "the mean savors of the nature of the extremes"
(Aristotle, De Partib. Animal.). Since, therefore, Christ was not
baptized with the Jewish baptism, nor yet with His own, on the same
grounds He should not have been baptized with the baptism of John.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is best in human things should be ascribed
to Christ. But John's baptism does not hold the first place among
baptisms. Therefore it was not fitting for Christ to be baptized with
John's baptism.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 3:13) that "Jesus cometh to
the Jordan, unto John, to be baptized by him."

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. xiii): "After
being baptized, the Lord baptized, not with that baptism wherewith He
was baptized." Wherefore, since He Himself baptized with His own
baptism, it follows that He was not baptized with His own, but with
John's baptism. And this was befitting: first, because John's baptism
was peculiar in this, that he baptized, not in the Spirit, but only
"in water"; while Christ did not need spiritual baptism, since He was
filled with the grace of the Holy Ghost from the beginning of His
conception, as we have made clear above (Q. 34, A. 1). And this is
the reason given by Chrysostom (Hom. de Bapt. Christi). Secondly, as
Bede says on Mk. 1:9, He was baptized with the baptism of John, that,
"by being thus baptized, He might show His approval of John's
baptism." Thirdly, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xxxix), "by going
to John to be baptized by him, He sanctified baptism."

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (A. 1), Christ wished to be baptized in
order by His example to lead us to baptism. And so, in order that He
might lead us thereto more efficaciously, He wished to be baptized
with a baptism which He clearly needed not, that men who needed it
might approach unto it. Wherefore Ambrose says on Luke 3:21: "Let
none decline the laver of grace, since Christ did not refuse the
laver of penance."

Reply Obj. 2: The Jewish baptism prescribed by the law was merely
figurative, whereas John's baptism, in a measure, was real, inasmuch
as it induced men to refrain from sin; but Christ's baptism is
efficacious unto the remission of sin and the conferring of grace.
Now Christ needed neither the remission of sin, which was not in Him,
nor the bestowal of grace, with which He was filled. Moreover, since
He is "the Truth," it was not fitting that He should receive that
which was no more than a figure. Consequently it was more fitting
that He should receive the intermediate baptism than one of the
extremes.

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is a spiritual remedy. Now, the more perfect a
thing is, the less remedy does it need. Consequently, from the very
fact that Christ is most perfect, it follows that it was fitting that
He should not receive the most perfect baptism: just as one who is
healthy does not need a strong medicine.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Was Baptized at a Fitting Time?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was baptized at an unfitting
time. For Christ was baptized in order that He might lead others to
baptism by His example. But it is commendable that the faithful of
Christ should be baptized, not merely before their thirtieth year,
but even in infancy. Therefore it seems that Christ should not have
been baptized at the age of thirty.

Obj. 2: Further, we do not read that Christ taught or worked miracles
before being baptized. But it would have been more profitable to the
world if He had taught for a longer time, beginning at the age of
twenty, or even before. Therefore it seems that Christ, who came for
man's profit, should have been baptized before His thirtieth year.

Obj. 3: Further, the sign of wisdom infused by God should have been
especially manifest in Christ. But in the case of Daniel this was
manifested at the time of his boyhood; according to Dan. 13:45: "The
Lord raised up the holy spirit of a young boy, whose name was
Daniel." Much more, therefore, should Christ have been baptized or
have taught in His boyhood.

Obj. 4: Further, John's baptism was ordered to that of Christ as to
its end. But "the end is first in intention and last in execution."
Therefore He should have been baptized by John either before all the
others, or after them.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 3:21): "It came to pass, when
all the people were baptized, that Jesus also being baptized, and
praying;" and further on (Luke 3:23): "And Jesus Himself was
beginning about the age of thirty years."

_I answer that,_ Christ was fittingly baptized in His thirtieth year.
First, because Christ was baptized as though for the reason that He
was about forthwith to begin to teach and preach: for which purpose
perfect age is required, such as is the age of thirty. Thus we read
(Gen. 41:46) that "Joseph was thirty" years old when he undertook the
government of Egypt. In like manner we read (2 Kings 5:4) that "David
was thirty years old when he began to reign." Again, Ezechiel began
to prophesy in "his thirtieth year," as we read Ezech. 1:1.

Secondly, because, as Chrysostom says (Hom. x in Matth.), "the law
was about to pass away after Christ's baptism: wherefore Christ came
to be baptized at this age which admits of all sins; in order that by
His observing the law, no one might say that because He Himself could
not fulfil it, He did away with it."

Thirdly, because by Christ's being baptized at the perfect age, we
are given to understand that baptism brings forth perfect men,
according to Eph. 4:13: "Until we all meet into the unity of faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ." Hence the very property
of the number seems to point to this. For thirty is product of three
and ten: and by the number three is implied faith in the Trinity,
while ten signifies the fulfilment of the commandments of the Law: in
which two things the perfection of Christian life consists.

Reply Obj. 1: As Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xl), Christ was
baptized, not "as though He needed to be cleansed, or as though some
peril threatened Him if He delayed to be baptized. But no small
danger besets any other man who departs from this life without being
clothed with the garment of incorruptibility"--namely, grace. And
though it be a good thing to remain clean after baptism, "yet is it
still better," as he says, "to be slightly sullied now and then than
to be altogether deprived of grace."

Reply Obj. 2: The profit which accrues to men from Christ is
chiefly through faith and humility: to both of which He conduced by
beginning to teach not in His boyhood or youth, but at the perfect
age. To faith, because in this manner His human nature is shown to be
real, by its making bodily progress with the advance of time; and lest
this progress should be deemed imaginary, He did not wish to show His
wisdom and power before His body had reached the perfect age: to
humility, lest anyone should presume to govern or teach others before
attaining to perfect age.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ was set before men as an example to all.
Wherefore it behooved that to be shown forth in Him, which is becoming
to all according to the common law--namely, that He should teach
after reaching the perfect age. But, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat.
xxxix), that which seldom occurs is not the law of the Church; as
"neither does one swallow make the spring." For by special
dispensation, in accordance with the ruling of Divine wisdom, it has
been granted to some, contrary to the common law, to exercise the
functions of governing or teaching, such as Solomon, Daniel, and
Jeremias.

Reply Obj. 4: It was not fitting that Christ should be baptized by
John either before or after all others. Because, as Chrysostom says
(Hom. iv in Matth. [*From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum]), for
this was Christ baptized, "that He might confirm the preaching and
the baptism of John, and that John might bear witness to Him." Now,
men would not have had faith in John's testimony except after many
had been baptized by him. Consequently it was not fitting that John
should baptize Him before baptizing anyone else. In like manner,
neither was it fitting that he should baptize Him last. For as he
(Chrysostom) says in the same passage: "As the light of the sun does
not wait for the setting of the morning star, but comes forth while
the latter is still above the horizon, and by its brilliance dims its
shining: so Christ did not wait till John had run his course, but
appeared while he was yet teaching and baptizing."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Should Have Been Baptized in the Jordan?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have been baptized
in the Jordan. For the reality should correspond to the figure. But
baptism was prefigured in the crossing of the Red Sea, where the
Egyptians were drowned, just as our sins are blotted out in baptism.
Therefore it seems that Christ should rather have been baptized in
the sea than in the river Jordan.

Obj. 2: Further, "Jordan" is interpreted a "going down." But by
baptism a man goes up rather than down: wherefore it is written
(Matt. 3:16) that "Jesus being baptized, forthwith came up [Douay:
'out'] from the water." Therefore it seems unfitting that Christ
should be baptized in the Jordan.

Obj. 3: Further, while the children of Israel were crossing, the
waters of the Jordan "were turned back," as it is related Jos. 4, and
as it is written Ps. 113:3, 5. But those who are baptized go forward,
not back. Therefore it was not fitting that Christ should be baptized
in the Jordan.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Mk. 1:9) that "Jesus was baptized
by John in the Jordan."

_I answer that,_ It was through the river Jordan that the children of
Israel entered into the land of promise. Now, this is the prerogative
of Christ's baptism over all other baptisms: that it is the entrance
to the kingdom of God, which is signified by the land of promise;
wherefore it is said (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." To this
also is to be referred the dividing of the water of the Jordan by
Elias, who was to be snatched up into heaven in a fiery chariot, as
it is related 4 Kings 2: because, to wit, the approach to heaven is
laid open by the fire of the Holy Ghost, to those who pass through
the waters of baptism. Therefore it was fitting that Christ should be
baptized in the Jordan.

Reply Obj. 1: The crossing of the Red Sea foreshadowed baptism in
this--that baptism washes away sin: whereas the crossing of the
Jordan foreshadows it in this--that it opens the gate to the heavenly
kingdom: and this is the principal effect of baptism, and
accomplished through Christ alone. And therefore it was fitting that
Christ should be baptized in the Jordan rather than in the sea.

Reply Obj. 2: In baptism we "go up" by advancing in grace: for which
we need to "go down" by humility, according to James 4:6: "He giveth
grace to the humble." And to this "going down" must the name of the
Jordan be referred.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says in a sermon for the Epiphany (x): "As
of yore the waters of the Jordan were held back, so now, when Christ
was baptized, the torrent of sin was held back." Or else this may
signify that against the downward flow of the waters the river of
blessings flowed upwards.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 5]

Whether the Heavens Should Have Been Opened Unto Christ at His
Baptism?

Objection 1: It would seem that the heavens should not have been
opened unto Christ at His baptism. For the heavens should be opened
unto one who needs to enter heaven, by reason of his being out of
heaven. But Christ was always in heaven, according to John 3:13: "The
Son of Man who is in heaven." Therefore it seems that the heavens
should not have been opened unto Him.

Obj. 2: Further, the opening of the heavens is understood either in a
corporal or in a spiritual sense. But it cannot be understood in a
corporal sense: because the heavenly bodies are impassible and
indissoluble, according to Job 37:18: "Thou perhaps hast made the
heavens with Him, which are most strong, as if they were of molten
brass." In like manner neither can it be understood in a spiritual
sense, because the heavens were not previously closed to the eyes of
the Son of God. Therefore it seems unbecoming to say that when Christ
was baptized "the heavens were opened."

Obj. 3: Further, heaven was opened to the faithful through Christ's
Passion, according to Heb. 10:19: "We have [Vulg.: 'Having'] a
confidence in the entering into the holies by the blood of Christ."
Wherefore not even those who were baptized with Christ's baptism, and
died before His Passion, could enter heaven. Therefore the heavens
should have been opened when Christ was suffering rather than when He
was baptized.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 3:21): "Jesus being baptized
and praying, heaven was opened."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1; Q. 38, A. 1), Christ wished
to be baptized in order to consecrate the baptism wherewith we were
to be baptized. And therefore it behooved those things to be shown
forth which belong to the efficacy of our baptism: concerning which
efficacy three points are to be considered. First, the principal
power from which it is derived; and this, indeed, is a heavenly
power. For which reason, when Christ was baptized, heaven was opened,
to show that in future the heavenly power would sanctify baptism.

Secondly, the faith of the Church and of the person baptized conduces
to the efficacy of baptism: wherefore those who are baptized make a
profession of faith, and baptism is called the "sacrament of faith."
Now by faith we gaze on heavenly things, which surpass the senses and
human reason. And in order to signify this, the heavens were opened
when Christ was baptized.

Thirdly, because the entrance to the heavenly kingdom was opened to
us by the baptism of Christ in a special manner, which entrance had
been closed to the first man through sin. Hence, when Christ was
baptized, the heavens were opened, to show that the way to heaven is
open to the baptized.

Now after baptism man needs to pray continually, in order to enter
heaven: for though sins are remitted through baptism, there still
remain the fomes of sin assailing us from within, and the world and
the devils assailing us from without. And therefore it is said
pointedly (Luke 3:21) that "Jesus being baptized and praying, heaven
was opened": because, to wit, the faithful after baptism stand in
need of prayer. Or else, that we may be led to understand that the
very fact that through baptism heaven is opened to believers is in
virtue of the prayer of Christ. Hence it is said pointedly (Matt.
3:16) that "heaven was opened to Him"--that is, "to all for His
sake." Thus, for example, the Emperor might say to one asking a favor
for another: "Behold, I grant this favor, not to him, but to
thee"--that is, "to him for thy sake," as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in
Matth. [*From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum]).

Reply Obj. 1: According to Chrysostom (Hom. iv in Matth.; from the
supposititious Opus Imperfectum), as Christ was baptized for man's
sake, though He needed no baptism for His own sake, so the heavens
were opened unto Him as man, whereas in respect of His Divine Nature
He was ever in heaven.

Reply Obj. 2: As Jerome says on Matt. 3:16, 17, the heavens were
opened to Christ when He was baptized, not by an unfolding of the
elements, but by a spiritual vision: thus does Ezechiel relate the
opening of the heavens at the beginning of his book. And Chrysostom
proves this (Hom. iv in Matth.; from the supposititious Opus
Imperfectum) by saying that "if the creature"--namely, heaven--"had
been sundered he would not have said, 'were opened to Him,' since
what is opened in a corporeal sense is open to all." Hence it is said
expressly (Mk. 1:10) that Jesus "forthwith coming up out of the
water, saw the heavens opened"; as though the opening of the heavens
were to be considered as seen by Christ. Some, indeed, refer this to
the corporeal vision, and say that such a brilliant light shone round
about Christ when He was baptized, that the heavens seemed to be
opened. It can also be referred to the imaginary vision, in which
manner Ezechiel saw the heavens opened: since such a vision was
formed in Christ's imagination by the Divine power and by His
rational will, so as to signify that the entrance to heaven is opened
to men through baptism. Lastly, it can be referred to intellectual
vision: forasmuch as Christ, when He had sanctified baptism, saw that
heaven was opened to men: nevertheless He had seen before that this
would be accomplished.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion is the common cause of the opening of
heaven to men. But it behooves this cause to be applied to each one,
in order that he enter heaven. And this is effected by baptism,
according to Rom. 6:3: "All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus are
baptized in His death." Wherefore mention is made of the opening of
the heavens at His baptism rather than at His Passion.

Or, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth.; from the supposititious
Opus Imperfectum): "When Christ was baptized, the heavens were merely
opened: but after He had vanquished the tyrant by the cross; since
gates were no longer needed for a heaven which thenceforth would be
never closed, the angels said, not 'open the gates,' but 'Take them
away.'" Thus Chrysostom gives us to understand that the obstacles
which had hitherto hindered the souls of the departed from entering
into heaven were entirely removed by the Passion: but at Christ's
baptism they were opened, as though the way had been shown by which
men were to enter into heaven.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 6]

Whether It Is Fitting to Say That When Christ Was Baptized the Holy
Ghost Came Down on Him in the Form of a Dove?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not fitting to say that when
Christ was baptized the Holy Ghost came down on Him in the form of a
dove. For the Holy Ghost dwells in man by grace. But the fulness of
grace was in the Man-Christ from the beginning of His conception,
because He was the "Only-begotten of the Father," as is clear from
what has been said above (Q. 7, A. 12; Q. 34, A. 1). Therefore the
Holy Ghost should not have been sent to Him at His baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ is said to have "descended" into the world in
the mystery of the Incarnation, when "He emptied Himself, taking the
form of a servant" (Phil. 2:7). But the Holy Ghost did not become
incarnate. Therefore it is unbecoming to say that the Holy Ghost
"descended upon Him."

Obj. 3: Further, that which is accomplished in our baptism should
have been shown in Christ's baptism, as in an exemplar. But in our
baptism no visible mission of the Holy Ghost takes place. Therefore
neither should a visible mission of the Holy Ghost have taken place
in Christ's baptism.

Obj. 4: Further, the Holy Ghost is poured forth on others through
Christ, according to John 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have
received." But the Holy Ghost came down on the apostles in the form,
not of a dove, but of fire. Therefore neither should He have come
down on Christ in the form of a dove, but in the form of fire.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 3:22): "The Holy Ghost
descended in a bodily shape as a dove upon Him."

_I answer that,_ What took place with respect to Christ in His
baptism, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth. [*From the
supposititious Opus Imperfectum]), "is connected with the mystery
accomplished in all who were to be baptized afterwards." Now, all
those who are baptized with the baptism of Christ receive the Holy
Ghost, unless they approach unworthily; according to Matt. 3:11: "He
shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost." Therefore it was fitting that
when our Lord was baptized the Holy Ghost should descend upon Him.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De Trin. xv): "It is most absurd to
say that Christ received the Holy Ghost, when He was already thirty
years old: for when He came to be baptized, since He was without sin,
therefore was He not without the Holy Ghost. For if it is written of
John that 'he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's
womb,' what must we say of the Man-Christ, whose conception in the
flesh was not carnal, but spiritual? Therefore now," i.e. at His
baptism, "He deigned to foreshadow His body," i.e. the Church, "in
which those who are baptized receive the Holy Ghost in a special
manner."

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Trin. ii), the Holy Ghost is said
to have descended on Christ in a bodily shape, as a dove, not because
the very substance of the Holy Ghost was seen, for He is invisible:
nor as though that visible creature were assumed into the unity of
the Divine Person; since it is not said that the Holy Ghost was the
dove, as it is said that the Son of God is man by reason of the
union. Nor, again, was the Holy Ghost seen under the form of a dove,
after the manner in which John saw the slain Lamb in the Apocalypse
(5:6): "For the latter vision took place in the spirit through
spiritual images of bodies; whereas no one ever doubted that this
dove was seen by the eyes of the body." Nor, again, did the Holy
Ghost appear under the form of a dove in the sense in which it is
said (1 Cor. 10:4): "'Now, the rock was Christ': for the latter had
already a created existence, and through the manner of its action was
called by the name of Christ, whom it signified: whereas this dove
came suddenly into existence, to fulfil the purpose of its
signification, and afterwards ceased to exist, like the flame which
appeared in the bush to Moses."

Hence the Holy Ghost is said to have descended upon Christ, not by
reason of His being united to the dove: but either because the dove
itself signified the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as it "descended" when it
came upon Him; or, again, by reason of the spiritual grace, which is
poured out by God, so as to descend, as it were, on the creature,
according to James 1:17: "Every best gift and every perfect gift is
from above, coming down from the Father of lights."

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xii in Matth.): "At the
beginning of all spiritual transactions sensible visions appear,
for the sake of them who cannot conceive at all an incorporeal
nature . . . so that, though afterwards no such thing occur, they may
shape their faith according to that which has occurred once for all."
And therefore the Holy Ghost descended visibly, under a bodily shape,
on Christ at His baptism, in order that we may believe Him to descend
invisibly on all those who are baptized.

Reply Obj. 4: The Holy Ghost appeared over Christ at His baptism,
under the form of a dove, for four reasons. First, on account of the
disposition required in the one baptized--namely, that he approach in
good faith: since, as it is written (Wis. 1:5): "The holy spirit of
discipline will flee from the deceitful." For the dove is an animal
of a simple character, void of cunning and deceit: whence it is said
(Matt. 10:16): "Be ye simple as doves."

Secondly, in order to designate the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which are signified by the properties of the dove. For the dove
dwells beside the running stream, in order that, on perceiving the
hawk, it may plunge in and escape. This refers to the gift of wisdom,
whereby the saints dwell beside the running waters of Holy Scripture,
in order to escape the assaults of the devil. Again, the dove prefers
the more choice seeds. This refers to the gift of knowledge, whereby
the saints make choice of sound doctrines, with which they nourish
themselves. Further, the dove feeds the brood of other birds. This
refers to the gift of counsel, with which the saints, by teaching and
example, feed men who have been the brood, i.e. imitators, of the
devil. Again, the dove tears not with its beak. This refers to the
gift of understanding, wherewith the saints do not rend sound
doctrines, as heretics do. Again, the dove has no gall. This refers
to the gift of piety, by reason of which the saints are free from
unreasonable anger. Again, the dove builds its nest in the cleft of a
rock. This refers to the gift of fortitude, wherewith the saints
build their nest, i.e. take refuge and hope, in the death wounds of
Christ, who is the Rock of strength. Lastly, the dove has a plaintive
song. This refers to the gift of fear, wherewith the saints delight
in bewailing sins.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost appeared under the form of a dove on account
of the proper effect of baptism, which is the remission of sins and
reconciliation with God: for the dove is a gentle creature.
Wherefore, as Chrysostom says, (Hom. xii in Matth.), "at the Deluge
this creature appeared bearing an olive branch, and publishing the
tidings of the universal peace of the whole world: and now again the
dove appears at the baptism, pointing to our Deliverer."

Fourthly, the Holy Ghost appeared over our Lord at His baptism in the
form of a dove, in order to designate the common effect of
baptism--namely, the building up of the unity of the Church. Hence it
is written (Eph. 5:25-27): "Christ delivered Himself up . . . that He
might present . . . to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing . . . cleansing it by the laver of water
in the word of life." Therefore it was fitting that the Holy Ghost
should appear at the baptism under the form of a dove, which is a
creature both loving and gregarious. Wherefore also it is said of the
Church (Cant 6:8): "One is my dove."

But on the apostles the Holy Ghost descended under the form of fire,
for two reasons. First, to show with what fervor their hearts were to
be moved, so as to preach Christ everywhere, though surrounded by
opposition. And therefore He appeared as a fiery tongue. Hence
Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. vi): Our Lord "manifests" the
Holy Ghost "visibly in two ways"--namely, "by the dove coming upon
the Lord when He was baptized; by fire, coming upon the disciples
when they were met together . . . In the former case simplicity is
shown, in the latter fervor . . . We learn, then, from the dove, that
those who are sanctified by the Spirit should be without guile: and
from the fire, that their simplicity should not be left to wax cold.
Nor let it disturb anyone that the tongues were cloven . . . in the
dove recognize unity."

Secondly, because, as Chrysostom says (Gregory, Hom. xxx in Ev.):
"Since sins had to be forgiven," which is effected in baptism,
"meekness was required"; this is shown by the dove: "but when we have
obtained grace we must look forward to be judged"; and this is
signified by the fire.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 7]

Whether the Dove in Which the Holy Ghost Appeared Was Real?

Objection 1: It would seem that the dove in which the Holy Ghost
appeared was not real. For that seems to be a mere apparition which
appears in its semblance. But it is stated (Luke 3:22) that the "Holy
Ghost descended in a bodily shape as a dove upon Him." Therefore it
was not a real dove, but a semblance of a dove.

Obj. 2: Further, just as "Nature does nothing useless, so neither
does God" (De Coelo i). Now since this dove came merely "in order to
signify something and pass away," as Augustine says (De Trin. ii), a
real dove would have been useless: because the semblance of a dove
was sufficient for that purpose. Therefore it was not a real dove.

Obj. 3: Further, the properties of a thing lead us to a knowledge of
that thing. If, therefore, this were a real dove, its properties
would have signified the nature of the real animal, and not the
effect of the Holy Ghost. Therefore it seems that it was not a real
dove.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Agone Christ. xxii): "Nor do we
say this as though we asserted that our Lord Jesus Christ alone had a
real body, and that the Holy Ghost appeared to men's eyes in a
fallacious manner: but we say that both those bodies were real."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 5, A. 1), it was unbecoming that
the Son of God, who is the Truth of the Father, should make use of
anything unreal; wherefore He took, not an imaginary, but a real
body. And since the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Truth, as
appears from John 16:13, therefore He too made a real dove in which
to appear, though He did not assume it into unity of person.
Wherefore, after the words quoted above, Augustine adds: "Just as it
behooved the Son of God not to deceive men, so it behooved the Holy
Ghost not to deceive. But it was easy for Almighty God, who created
all creatures out of nothing, to frame the body of a real dove
without the help of other doves, just as it was easy for Him to form
a true body in Mary's womb without the seed of a man: since the
corporeal creature obeys its Lord's command and will, both in the
mother's womb in forming a man, and in the world itself in forming a
dove."

Reply Obj. 1: The Holy Ghost is said to have descended in the shape
or semblance of a dove, not in the sense that the dove was not real,
but in order to show that He did not appear in the form of His
substance.

Reply Obj. 2: It was not superfluous to form a real dove, in which
the Holy Ghost might appear, because by the very reality of the dove
the reality of the Holy Ghost and of His effects is signified.

Reply Obj. 3: The properties of the dove lead us to understand the
dove's nature and the effects of the Holy Ghost in the same way.
Because from the very fact that the dove has such properties, it
results that it signifies the Holy Ghost.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 39, Art. 8]

Whether It Was Becoming, When Christ Was Baptized That the Father's
Voice Should Be Heard, Bearing Witness to the Son?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was unbecoming when Christ was
baptized for the Father's voice to be heard bearing witness to the
Son. For the Son and the Holy Ghost, according as they have appeared
visibly, are said to have been visibly sent. But it does not become
the Father to be sent, as Augustine makes it clear (De Trin. ii).
Neither, therefore, (does it become Him) to appear.

Obj. 2: Further, the voice gives expression to the word conceived in
the heart. But the Father is not the Word. Therefore He is
unfittingly manifested by a voice.

Obj. 3: Further, the Man-Christ did not begin to be Son of God at His
baptism, as some heretics have stated: but He was the Son of God from
the beginning of His conception. Therefore the Father's voice should
have proclaimed Christ's Godhead at His nativity rather than at His
baptism.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 3:17): "Behold a voice from
heaven, saying: This is My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 5), that which is accomplished
in our baptism should be manifested in Christ's baptism, which was
the exemplar of ours. Now the baptism which the faithful receive is
hallowed by the invocation and the power of the Trinity; according to
Matt. 28:19: "Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Wherefore, as
Jerome says on Matt. 3:16, 17: "The mystery of the Trinity is shown
forth in Christ's baptism. Our Lord Himself is baptized in His human
nature; the Holy Ghost descended in the shape of a dove: the Father's
voice is heard bearing witness to the Son." Therefore it was becoming
that in that baptism the Father should be manifested by a voice.

Reply Obj. 1: The visible mission adds something to the apparition,
to wit, the authority of the sender. Therefore the Son and the Holy
Ghost who are from another, are said not only to appear, but also to
be sent visibly. But the Father, who is not from another, can appear
indeed, but cannot be sent visibly.

Reply Obj. 2: The Father is manifested by the voice, only as
producing the voice or speaking by it. And since it is proper to the
Father to produce the Word--that is, to utter or to speak--therefore
was it most becoming that the Father should be manifested by a voice,
because the voice designates the word. Wherefore the very voice to
which the Father gave utterance bore witness to the Sonship of the
Word. And just as the form of the dove, in which the Holy Ghost was
made manifest, is not the Nature of the Holy Ghost, nor is the form
of man in which the Son Himself was manifested, the very Nature of
the Son of God, so neither does the voice belong to the Nature of the
Word or of the Father who spoke. Hence (John 5:37) our Lord says:
"Neither have you heard His," i.e. the Father's, "voice at any time,
nor seen His shape." By which words, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xl in
Joan.), "He gradually leads them to the knowledge of the
philosophical truth, and shows them that God has neither voice nor
shape, but is above all such forms and utterances." And just as the
whole Trinity made both the dove and the human nature assumed by
Christ, so also they formed the voice: yet the Father alone as
speaking is manifested by the voice, just as the Son alone assumed
human nature, and the Holy Ghost alone is manifested in the dove, as
Augustine [*Fulgentius, De Fide ad Petrum] makes evident.

Reply Obj. 3: It was becoming that Christ's Godhead should not be
proclaimed to all in His nativity, but rather that It should be
hidden while He was subject to the defects of infancy. But when He
attained to the perfect age, when the time came for Him to teach, to
work miracles, and to draw men to Himself then did it behoove His
Godhead to be attested from on high by the Father's testimony, so
that His teaching might become the more credible. Hence He says (John
5:37): "The Father Himself who sent Me, hath given testimony of Me."
And specially at the time of baptism, by which men are born again
into adopted sons of God; since God's sons by adoption are made to be
like unto His natural Son, according to Rom. 8:29: "Whom He foreknew,
He also predestinated to be made conformable to the image of His
Son." Hence Hilary says (Super Matth. ii) that when Jesus was
baptized, the Holy Ghost descended on Him, and the Father's voice was
heard saying: "'This is My beloved Son,' that we might know, from
what was accomplished in Christ, that after being washed in the
waters of baptism the Holy Ghost comes down upon us from on high, and
that the Father's voice declares us to have become the adopted sons
of God."
_______________________

QUESTION 40

OF CHRIST'S MANNER OF LIFE
(In Four Articles)

Having considered those things which relate to Christ's entrance into
the world, or to His beginning, it remains for us to consider those
that relate to the process of His life. And we must consider (1) His
manner of life; (2) His temptation; (3) His doctrine; (4) His
miracles.

Concerning the first there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ should have led a solitary life, or have
associated with men?

(2) Whether He should have led an austere life as regards food,
drink, and clothing? Or should He have conformed Himself to others in
these respects?

(3) Whether He should have adopted a lowly state of life, or one of
wealth and honor?

(4) Whether He should have lived in conformity with the Law?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 40, Art. 1]

Whether Christ Should Have Associated with Men, or Led a Solitary
Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have associated
with men, but should have led a solitary life. For it behooved Christ
to show by His manner of life not only that He was man, but also that
He was God. But it is not becoming that God should associate with
men, for it is written (Dan. 2:11): "Except the gods, whose
conversation is not with men"; and the Philosopher says (Polit. i)
that he who lives alone is "either a beast"--that is, if he do this
from being wild--"or a god," if his motive be the contemplation of
truth. Therefore it seems that it was not becoming for Christ to
associate with men.

Obj. 2: Further, while He lived in mortal flesh, it behooved Christ
to lead a most perfect life. But the most perfect is the
contemplative life, as we have stated in the Second Part (II-II, Q.
182, AA. 1, 2). Now, solitude is most suitable to the contemplative
life; according to Osee 2:14: "I will lead her into the wilderness,
and I will speak to her heart." Therefore it seems that Christ should
have led a solitary life.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's manner of life should have been uniform:
because it should always have given evidence of that which is best.
But at times Christ avoided the crowd and sought lonely places: hence
Remigius [*Cf. Catena Aurea, Matth. 5:1], commenting on Matthew, says:
"We read that our Lord had three places of refuge: the ship, the
mountain, the desert; to one or other of which He betook Himself
whenever he was harassed by the crowd." Therefore He ought always to
have led a solitary life.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Baruch 3:38): "Afterwards He was
seen upon earth and conversed with men."

_I answer that,_ Christ's manner of life had to be in keeping with
the end of His Incarnation, by reason of which He came into the
world. Now He came into the world, first, that He might publish the
truth. Thus He says Himself (John 18:37): "For this was I born, and
for this came I into the world, that I should give testimony to the
truth." Hence it was fitting not that He should hide Himself by
leading a solitary life, but that He should appear openly and preach
in public. Wherefore (Luke 4:42, 43) He says to those who wished to
stay Him: "To other cities also I must preach the kingdom of God: for
therefore am I sent."

Secondly, He came in order to free men from sin; according to 1 Tim.
1:15: "Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners." And hence,
as Chrysostom says, "although Christ might, while staying in the same
place, have drawn all men to Himself, to hear His preaching, yet He
did not do so; thus giving us the example to go about and seek those
who perish, like the shepherd in his search of the lost sheep, and
the physician in his attendance on the sick."

Thirdly, He came that by Him "we might have access to God," as it is
written (Rom. 5:2). And thus it was fitting that He should give men
confidence in approaching Him by associating familiarly with them.
Wherefore it is written (Matt. 9:10): "It came to pass as He was
sitting . . . in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came,
and sat down with Jesus and His disciples." On which Jerome comments
as follows: "They had seen the publican who had been converted from a
sinful to a better life: and consequently they did not despair of
their own salvation."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ wished to make His Godhead known through His
human nature. And therefore, since it is proper to man to do so, He
associated with men, at the same time manifesting His Godhead to all,
by preaching and working miracles, and by leading among men a
blameless and righteous life.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated in the Second Part (II-II, Q. 182, A. 1; Q.
188, A. 6), the contemplative life is, absolutely speaking, more
perfect than the active life, because the latter is taken up with
bodily actions: yet that form of active life in which a man, by
preaching and teaching, delivers to others the fruits of his
contemplation, is more perfect than the life that stops at
contemplation, because such a life is built on an abundance of
contemplation, and consequently such was the life chosen by Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's action is our instruction. And therefore, in
order to teach preachers that they ought not to be for ever before
the public, our Lord withdrew Himself sometimes from the crowd. We
are told of three reasons for His doing this. First, for the rest of
the body: hence (Mk. 6:31) it is stated that our Lord said to His
disciples: "Come apart into a desert place, and rest a little. For
there were many coming and going: and they had not so much as time to
eat." But sometimes it was for the sake of prayer; thus it is written
(Luke 6:12): "It came to pass in those days, that He went out into a
mountain to pray; and He passed the whole night in the prayer of
God." On this Ambrose remarks that "by His example He instructs us in
the precepts of virtue." And sometimes He did so in order to teach us
to avoid the favor of men. Wherefore Chrysostom, commenting on Matt.
5:1, Jesus, "seeing the multitude, went up into a mountain," says:
"By sitting not in the city and in the market-place, but on a
mountain and in a place of solitude, He taught us to do nothing for
show, and to withdraw from the crowd, especially when we have to
discourse of needful things."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 40, Art. 2]

Whether It Was Becoming That Christ Should Lead an Austere Life in
This World?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was becoming that Christ should
lead an austere life in this world. For Christ preached the
perfection of life much more than John did. But John led an austere
life in order that he might persuade men by his example to embrace a
perfect life; for it is written (Matt. 3:4) that "the same John had
his garment of camel's hair and a leathern girdle about his loins:
and his meat was locusts and wild honey"; on which Chrysostom
comments as follows (Hom. x): "It was a marvelous and strange thing
to behold such austerity in a human frame: which thing also
particularly attracted the Jews." Therefore it seems that an austere
life was much more becoming to Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, abstinence is ordained to continency; for it is
written (Osee 4:10): "They shall eat and shall not be filled; they
have committed fornication, and have not ceased." But Christ both
observed continency in Himself and proposed it to be observed by
others when He said (Matt. 19:12): "There are eunuchs who have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: he that can take it let
him take it." Therefore it seems that Christ should have observed an
austere life both in Himself and in His disciples.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems absurd for a man to begin a stricter form
of life and to return to an easier life: for one might quote to his
discredit that which is written, Luke 14:30: "This man began to
build, and was not able to finish." Now Christ began a very strict
life after His baptism, remaining in the desert and fasting for
"forty days and forty nights." Therefore it seems unbecoming that,
after leading such a strict life, He should return to the common
manner of living.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 11:19): "The Son of Man came
eating and drinking."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), it was in keeping with the
end of the Incarnation that Christ should not lead a solitary life,
but should associate with men. Now it is most fitting that he who
associates with others should conform to their manner of living;
according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:22): "I became all
things to all men." And therefore it was most fitting that Christ
should conform to others in the matter of eating and drinking. Hence
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xvi) that "John is described as
'neither eating nor drinking,' because he did not take the same food
as the Jews. Therefore, unless our Lord had taken it, it would not be
said of Him, in contrast, 'eating and drinking.'"

Reply Obj. 1: In His manner of living our Lord gave an example of
perfection as to all those things which of themselves relate to
salvation. Now abstinence in eating and drinking does not of itself
relate to salvation, according to Rom. 14:17: "The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink." And Augustine (De Qq. Evang. ii, qu. 11)
explains Matt. 11:19, "Wisdom is justified by her children," saying
that this is because the holy apostles "understood that the kingdom
of God does not consist in eating and drinking, but in suffering
indigence with equanimity," for they are neither uplifted by
affluence, nor distressed by want. Again (De Doctr. Christ. iii), he
says that in all such things "it is not making use of them, but the
wantonness of the user, that is sinful." Now both these lives are
lawful and praiseworthy--namely, that a man withdraw from the society
of other men and observe abstinence; and that he associate with other
men and live like them. And therefore our Lord wished to give men an
example of either kind of life.

As to John, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxxvii super Matth.), "he
exhibited no more than his life and righteous conduct . . . but
Christ had the testimony also of miracles. Leaving, therefore, John
to be illustrious by his fasting, He Himself came the opposite way,
both coming unto publicans' tables and eating and drinking."

Reply Obj. 2: Just as by abstinence other men acquire the power of
self-restraint, so also Christ, in Himself and in those that are His,
subdued the flesh by the power of His Godhead. Wherefore, as we read
Matt. 9:14, the Pharisees and the disciples of John fasted, but not
the disciples of Christ. On which Bede comments, saying that "John
drank neither wine nor strong drink: because abstinence is
meritorious where the nature is weak. But why should our Lord, whose
right by nature it is to forgive sins, avoid those whom He could make
holier than such as abstain?"

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xiii super Matth.), "that thou
mightest learn how great a good is fasting, and how it is a shield
against the devil, and that after baptism thou shouldst give thyself
up, not to luxury, but to fasting--for this cause did He fast, not as
needing it Himself, but as teaching us . . . And for this did He
proceed no further than Moses and Elias, lest His assumption of our
flesh might seem incredible." The mystical meaning, as Gregory says
(Hom. xvi in Evang.), is that by Christ's example the number "forty"
is observed in His fast, because the power of the "decalogue is
fulfilled throughout the four books of the Holy Gospel: since ten
multiplied by four amounts to forty." Or, because "we live in this
mortal body composed of the four elements, and by its lusts we
transgress the commandments of the Lord, which are expressed in the
decalogue." Or, according to Augustine (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 81): "To
know the Creator and the creature is the entire teaching of wisdom.
The Creator is the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Now the creature is partly invisible, as the soul, to which the
number three may be ascribed, for we are commanded to love God in
three ways, 'with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our whole
mind'; and partly visible, as the body, to which the number four is
applicable on account of its being subject to heat, moisture, cold,
and dryness. Hence if we multiply ten, which may be referred to the
entire moral code, by four, which number may be applied to the body,
because it is the body that executes the law, the product is the
number forty: in which," consequently, "the time during which we sigh
and grieve is shown forth." And yet there was no inconsistency in
Christ's returning to the common manner of living, after fasting and
(retiring into the) desert. For it is becoming to that kind of life,
which we hold Christ to have embraced, wherein a man delivers to
others the fruits of his contemplation, that he devote himself first
of all to contemplation, and that he afterwards come down to the
publicity of active life by associating with other men. Hence Bede
says on Mk. 2:18: "Christ fasted, that thou mightest not disobey the
commandment; He ate with sinners, that thou mightest discern His
sanctity and acknowledge His power."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 40, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Should Have Led a Life of Poverty in This World?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have led a life of
poverty in this world. Because Christ should have embraced the most
eligible form of life. But the most eligible form of life is that
which is a mean between riches and poverty; for it is written (Prov.
30:8): "Give me neither beggary nor riches; give me only the
necessaries of life." Therefore Christ should have led a life, not of
poverty, but of moderation.

Obj. 2: Further, external wealth is ordained to bodily use as to food
and raiment. But Christ conformed His manner of life to those among
whom He lived, in the matter of food and raiment. Therefore it seems
that He should have observed the ordinary manner of life as to riches
and poverty, and have avoided extreme poverty.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ specially invited men to imitate His example
of humility, according to Matt. 11:29: "Learn of Me, because I am
meek and humble of heart." But humility is most commendable in the
rich; thus it is written (1 Tim. 6:11): "Charge the rich of this
world not to be high-minded." Therefore it seems that Christ should
not have chosen a life of poverty.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 8:20): "The Son of Man hath
not where to lay His head": as though He were to say as Jerome
observes: "Why desirest thou to follow Me for the sake of riches and
worldly gain, since I am so poor that I have not even the smallest
dwelling-place, and I am sheltered by a roof that is not Mine?" And
on Matt. 17:26: "That we may not scandalize them, go to the sea,"
Jerome says: "This incident, taken literally, affords edification to
those who hear it when they are told that our Lord was so poor that
He had not the wherewithal to pay the tax for Himself and His
apostles."

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for Christ to lead a life of poverty
in this world. First, because this was in keeping with the duty of
preaching, for which purpose He says that He came (Mk. 1:38): "Let us
go into the neighboring towns and cities, that I may preach there
also: for to this purpose am I come." Now in order that the preachers
of God's word may be able to give all their time to preaching, they
must be wholly free from care of worldly matters: which is impossible
for those who are possessed of wealth. Wherefore the Lord Himself,
when sending the apostles to preach, said to them (Matt. 10:9): "Do
not possess gold nor silver." And the apostles (Acts 6:2) say: "It is
not reasonable that we should leave the word of God and serve tables."

Secondly, because just as He took upon Himself the death of the body
in order to bestow spiritual life on us, so did He bear bodily
poverty, in order to enrich us spiritually, according to 2 Cor. 8:9:
"You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: that . . . He became
poor for our [Vulg.: 'your'] sakes that through His poverty we
[Vulg.: 'you'] might be rich."

Thirdly, lest if He were rich His preaching might be ascribed to
cupidity. Wherefore Jerome says on Matt. 10:9, that if the disciples
had been possessed of wealth, "they had seemed to preach for gain,
not for the salvation of mankind." And the same reason applies to
Christ.

Fourthly, that the more lowly He seemed by reason of His poverty, the
greater might the power of His Godhead be shown to be. Hence in a
sermon of the Council of Ephesus (P. iii, c. ix) we read: "He chose
all that was poor and despicable, all that was of small account and
hidden from the majority, that we might recognize His Godhead to have
transformed the terrestrial sphere. For this reason did He choose a
poor maid for His Mother, a poorer birthplace; for this reason did He
live in want. Learn this from the manger."

Reply Obj. 1: Those who wish to live virtuously need to avoid
abundance of riches and beggary, in as far as these are occasions of
sin: since abundance of riches is an occasion for being proud; and
beggary is an occasion of thieving and lying, or even of perjury. But
forasmuch as Christ was incapable of sin, He had not the same motive
as Solomon for avoiding these things. Yet neither is every kind of
beggary an occasion of theft and perjury, as Solomon seems to add
(Prov. 30:8); but only that which is involuntary, in order to avoid
which, a man is guilty of theft and perjury. But voluntary poverty is
not open to this danger: and such was the poverty chosen by Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: A man may feed and clothe himself in conformity with
others, not only by possessing riches, but also by receiving the
necessaries of life from those who are rich. This is what happened in
regard to Christ: for it is written (Luke 8:2, 3) that certain women
followed Christ and "ministered unto Him of their substance." For, as
Jerome says on Matt. 27:55, "It was a Jewish custom, nor was it
thought wrong for women, following the ancient tradition of their
nation, out of their private means to provide their instructors with
food and clothing. But as this might give scandal to the heathens,
Paul says that he gave it up": thus it was possible for them to be
fed out of a common fund, but not to possess wealth, without their
duty of preaching being hindered by anxiety.

Reply Obj. 3: Humility is not much to be praised in one who is poor
of necessity. But in one who, like Christ, is poor willingly, poverty
itself is a sign of very great humility.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 40, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Conformed His Conduct to the Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not conform His conduct to
the Law. For the Law forbade any work whatsoever to be done on the
Sabbath, since God "rested on the seventh day from all His work which
He had done." But He healed a man on the Sabbath, and commanded him
to take up his bed. Therefore it seems that He did not conform His
conduct to the Law.

Obj. 2: Further, what Christ taught, that He also did, according to
Acts 1:1: "Jesus began to do and to teach." But He taught (Matt.
15:11) that "not" all "that which goeth into the mouth defileth a
man": and this is contrary to the precept of the Law, which declared
that a man was made unclean by eating and touching certain animals,
as stated Lev. 11. Therefore it seems that He did not conform His
conduct to the Law.

Obj. 3: Further, he who consents to anything is of the same mind as
he who does it, according to Rom. 1:32: "Not only they that do them,
but they also that consent to them that do them." But Christ, by
excusing His disciples, consented to their breaking the Law by
plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath; as is related Matt. 12:1-8.
Therefore it seems that Christ did not conform His conduct to the Law.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 5:17): "Do not think that I
am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets." Commenting on these
words, Chrysostom says: "He fulfilled the Law . . . in one way, by
transgressing none of the precepts of the Law; secondly, by
justifying us through faith, which the Law, in the letter, was unable
to do."

_I answer that,_ Christ conformed His conduct in all things to the
precepts of the Law. In token of this He wished even to be
circumcised; for the circumcision is a kind of protestation of a
man's purpose of keeping the Law, according to Gal. 5:3: "I testify
to every man circumcising himself, that he is a debtor to do the
whole Law."

And Christ, indeed, wished to conform His conduct to the Law, first,
to show His approval of the Old Law. Secondly, that by obeying the
Law He might perfect it and bring it to an end in His own self, so
as to show that it was ordained to Him. Thirdly, to deprive the Jews
of an excuse for slandering Him. Fourthly, in order to deliver men
from subjection to the Law, according to Gal. 4:4, 5: "God sent His
Son . . . made under the Law that He might redeem them who were
under the Law."

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord excuses Himself from any transgression of the
Law in this matter, for three reasons. First, the precept of the
hallowing of the Sabbath forbids not Divine work, but human work: for
though God ceased on the seventh day from the creation of new
creatures, yet He ever works by keeping and governing His creatures.
Now that Christ wrought miracles was a Divine work: hence He says
(John 5:17): "My Father worketh until now; and I work."

Secondly, He excuses Himself on the ground that this precept does not
forbid works which are needful for bodily health. Wherefore He says
(Luke 13:15): "Doth not every one of you on the Sabbath-day loose his
ox or his ass from the manger, and lead them to water?" And farther
on (Luke 14:5): "Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fall into a
pit, and will not immediately draw him out on the Sabbath-day?" Now
it is manifest that the miraculous works done by Christ related to
health of body and soul.

Thirdly, because this precept does not forbid works pertaining to the
worship of God. Wherefore He says (Matt. 12:5): "Have ye not read in
the Law that on the Sabbath-days the priests in the Temple break the
Sabbath, and are without blame?" And (John 7:23) it is written that a
man receives circumcision on the Sabbath-day. Now when Christ
commanded the paralytic to carry his bed on the Sabbath-day, this
pertained to the worship of God, i.e. to the praise of God's power.
And thus it is clear that He did not break the Sabbath: although the
Jews threw this false accusation in His face, saying (John 9:16):
"This man is not of God, who keepeth not the Sabbath."

Reply Obj. 2: By those words Christ wished to show that man is made
unclean as to his soul, by the use of any sort of foods considered
not in their nature, but only in some signification. And that certain
foods are in the Law called "unclean" is due to some signification;
whence Augustine says (Contra Faust. vi): "If a question be raised
about swine and lambs, both are clean by nature, since 'all God's
creatures are good'; but by a certain signification lambs are clean
and swine unclean."

Reply Obj. 3: The disciples also, when, being hungry, they plucked
the ears of corn on the Sabbath, are to be excused from transgressing
the Law, since they were pressed by hunger: just as David did not
transgress the Law when, through being compelled by hunger, he ate
the loaves which it was not lawful for him to eat.
_______________________

QUESTION 41

OF CHRIST'S TEMPTATION
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's temptation, concerning which there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was becoming that Christ should be tempted?

(2) Of the place;

(3) Of the time;

(4) Of the mode and order of the temptation.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 41, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Becoming That Christ Should Be Tempted?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not becoming for Christ to be
tempted. For to tempt is to make an experiment, which is not done
save in regard to something unknown. But the power of Christ was
known even to the demons; for it is written (Luke 4:41) that "He
suffered them not to speak, for they knew that He was Christ."
Therefore it seems that it was unbecoming for Christ to be tempted.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ was come in order to destroy the works of the
devil, according to 1 John 3:8: "For this purpose the Son of God
appeared, that He might destroy the works of the devil." But it is
not for the same to destroy the works of a certain one and to suffer
them. Therefore it seems unbecoming that Christ should suffer Himself
to be tempted by the devil.

Obj. 3: Further, temptation is from a threefold source--the flesh,
the world, and the devil. But Christ was not tempted either by the
flesh or by the world. Therefore neither should He have been tempted
by the devil.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 4:1): "Jesus was led by the
Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the devil."

_I answer that,_ Christ wished to be tempted; first that He might
strengthen us against temptations. Hence Gregory says in a homily
(xvi in Evang.): "It was not unworthy of our Redeemer to wish to be
tempted, who came also to be slain; in order that by His temptations
He might conquer our temptations, just as by His death He overcame
our death."

Secondly, that we might be warned, so that none, however holy, may
think himself safe or free from temptation. Wherefore also He wished
to be tempted after His baptism, because, as Hilary says (Super
Matth., cap. iii.): "The temptations of the devil assail those
principally who are sanctified, for he desires, above all, to
overcome the holy. Hence also it is written (Ecclus. 2): Son, when
thou comest to the service of God, stand in justice and in fear, and
prepare thy soul for temptation."

Thirdly, in order to give us an example: to teach us, to wit, how to
overcome the temptations of the devil. Hence Augustine says (De Trin.
iv) that Christ "allowed Himself to be tempted" by the devil, "that
He might be our Mediator in overcoming temptations, not only by
helping us, but also by giving us an example."

Fourthly, in order to fill us with confidence in His mercy. Hence it
is written (Heb. 4:15): "We have not a high-priest, who cannot have
compassion on our infirmities, but one tempted in all things like as
we are, without sin."
