calculated raise alarm in the minds of malicious people, is alone worthy
of dwelling in a royal household. No one should, unasked offer counsel
(to a king). Paying homage in season unto the king, one should silently
and respectfully sit beside the king, for kings take umbrage at
babblers, and disgrace lying counsellors. A wise person should not
contact friendship with the king's wife, nor with the inmates of the
inner apartments, nor with those that are objects of royal displeasure.
One about the king should do even the most unimportant acts and with the
king's knowledge. Behaving thus with a sovereign, one doth not come by
harm. Even if an individual attain the highest office, he should, as
long as he is not asked or commanded, consider himself as born-blind,
having regard to the king's dignity, for O repressers of foes, the
rulers of men do not forgive even their sons and grandsons and brothers
when they happen to tamper with their dignity. Kings should be served
with regardful care, even as Agni and other gods; and he that is
disloyal to his sovereign, is certainly destroyed by him. Renouncing
anger, and pride, and negligence, it behoveth a man to follow the course
directed by the monarch. After carefully deliberating on all things, a
person should set forth before the king those topics that are both
profitable and pleasant; but should a subject be profitable without
being pleasant, he should still communicate it, despite its
disagreeableness. It behoveth a man to be well-disposed towards the king
in all his interests, and not to indulge in speech that is alike
unpleasant and profitless. Always thinking--_I am not liked by the
king_--one should banish negligence, and be intent on bringing about
what is agreeable and advantageous to him. He that swerveth not from his
place, he that is not friendly to those that are hostile to the king, he
that striveth not to do wrong to the king, is alone worthy to dwell in a
royal household. A learned man should sit either on the king's right or
the left; he should not sit behind him for that is the place appointed
for armed guards, and to sit before him is always interdicted. Let none,
when the king is engaged in doing anything (in respect of his servants)
come forward pressing himself zealously before others, for even if the
aggrieved be very poor, such conduct would still be inexcusable.[7] It
behoveth no man to reveal to others any lie the king may have told
inasmuch as the king bears ill will to those that report his falsehoods.
Kings also always disregard persons that regard themselves as learned.
No man should be proud thinking--_I am brave, or, I am intelligent_, but
a person obtains the good graces of a king and enjoys the good things of
life, by behaving agreeably to the wishes of the king. And, O Bharata,
obtaining things agreeable, and wealth also which is so hard to acquire,
a person should always do what is profitable as well as pleasant to the
king. What man that is respected by the wise can even think of doing
mischief to one whose ire is great impediment and whose favour is
productive of mighty fruits? No one should move his lips, arms and
thighs, before the king. A person should speak and spit before the king
only mildly. In the presence of even laughable objects, a man should not
break out into loud laughter, like a maniac; nor should one show
(unreasonable) gravity by containing himself, to the utmost. One should
smile modestly, to show his interest (in what is before him). He that is
ever mindful of the king's welfare, and is neither exhilarated by reward
nor depressed by disgrace, is alone worthy of dwelling in a royal
household. That learned courtier who always pleaseth the king and his
son with agreeable speeches, succeedeth in dwelling in a royal household
as a favourite. The favourite courtier who, having lost the royal favour
for just reason, does not speak evil of the king, regains prosperity.
The man who serveth the king or liveth in his domains, if sagacious,
should speak in praise of the king, both in his presence and absence.
The courtier who attempts to obtain his end by employing force on the
king, cannot keep his place long and incurs also the risk of death. None
should, for the purpose of self-interest, open communications with the
king's enemies.[8] Nor should one distinguish himself above the king in
matters requiring ability and talents. He that is always cheerful and
strong, brave and truthful and mild, and of subdued senses, and who
followeth his master like his shadow, is alone worthy to dwell in a
royal household. He that on being entrusted with a work, cometh forward,
saying,--_I will do this_--is alone worthy of living in a royal
household. He that on being entrusted with a task, either within the
king's dominion or out of it, never feareth to undertake it, is alone
fit to reside in a royal household. He that living away from his home,
doth no remember his dear ones, and who undergoeth (present) misery in
expectation of (future) happiness, is alone worthy of dwelling in a
royal household. One should not dress like the king, nor should one
indulge in laughter in the king's presence nor should one disclose royal
secrets. By acting thus one may win royal favour. Commissioned to a
task, one should not touch bribes for by such appropriation one becometh
liable to fetters or death. The robes, ornaments, cars, and other things
which the king may be pleased to bestow should always be used, for by
this, one winneth the royal favour. Ye children, controlling your minds,
do ye spend this year, ye sons of Pandu, behaving in this way. Regaining
your own kingdom, ye may live as ye please.'

    [6] Some of the Bengal text and _Sarvatramaya_ for
    _Sarvamantramaya_. The former is evidently incorrect.

    [7] This is a very difficult _sloka_. Nilakantha adopts the
    reading _Sanjayet_. The Bengal editions read _Sanjapet_. If the
    latter be the correct reading, the meaning then would be,--'Let
    none talk about what transpires in the presence of the king. For
    those even that are poor, regard it as a grave fault.' The sense
    evidently is that the occurrences in respect of a king which one
    witnesses should not be divulged. Even they that are powerless
    regard such divulgence of what occurs in respect of them as an
    insult to them, and, therefore, inexcusable.

    [8] The Bengal editions read _Rajna_ in the instrumental case.
    Following a manuscript text of a Pandit of my acquaintance I
    read _Rajnas_ in the genitive.

"Yudhishthira said, 'We have been well taught by thee. Blessed be thou.
There is none that could say so to us, save our mother Kunti and Vidura
of great wisdom. It behoveth thee to do all that is necessary now for
our departure, and for enabling us to come safely through this woe, as
well as for our victory over the foe.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Dhaumya, that
best of Brahmanas, performed according to the ordinance the rites
ordained in respect of departure. And lighting up their fires, he
offered, with _mantras_, oblations on them for the prosperity and
success of the Pandavas, as for their reconquest of the whole world. And
walking round those fires and round the Brahmanas of ascetic wealth, the
six set out, placing Yajnaseni in their front. And when those heroes had
departed, Dhaumya, that best of ascetics, taking their sacred fires, set
out for the Panchalas. And Indrasena, and others already mentioned, went
to the Yadavas, and looking after the horses and the cars of the
Pandavas passed their time happily and in privacy."


SECTION V

Vaisampayana said, "Girding their waists with swords, and equipped with
finger-protectors made of iguana skins and with various weapons, those
heroes proceeded in the direction of the river Yamuna. And those bowmen
desirous of (speedily) recovering their kingdom, hitherto living in
inaccessible hills and forest fastnesses, now terminated their
forest-life and proceeded to the southern bank of that river. And those
mighty warriors endued with great strength and hitherto leading the
lives of hunters by killing the deer of the forest, passed through
_Yakrilloma_ and Surasena, leaving behind, on their right, the country
of the Panchalas, and on their left, that of the Dasarnas. And those
bowmen, looking wan and wearing beards and equipped with swords, entered
Matsya's dominions leaving the forest, giving themselves out as hunters.
And on arriving at that country, Krishna addressed Yudhishthira, saying,
'We see footpaths here, and various fields. From this it appears that
Virata's metropolis is still at a distance. Pass we here what part of
the night is still left, for great is my fatigue.'

"Yudhishthira answered, 'O Dhananjaya of Bharata's race, do thou take up
Panchali and carry her. Just on emerging from this forest, we arrive at
the city.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thereupon like the leader of a herd of
elephants, Arjuna speedily took up Draupadi, and on coming to the
vicinity of the city, let her down. And on reaching the city, Ruru's son
(Yudhishthira), addressed Arjuna, saying, 'Where shall we deposit our
weapons, before entering the city? If, O child, we enter it with our
weapons about us, we shall thereby surely excite the alarm of the
citizens. Further, the tremendous bow, the _Gandiva_, is known to all
men, so that people will, without doubt, recognise us soon. And if even
one of us is discovered, we shall, according to promise, have to pass
another twelve years in the forest.'

"Arjuna said, 'Hard by yon cemetery and near that inaccessible peak is a
mighty _Sami_ tree, throwing-about its gigantic branches and difficult
to ascend. Nor is there any human being, who, I think, O Pandu's son,
will espy us depositing our arms at that place. That tree is in the
midst of an out-of-the way forest abounding in beasts and snakes, and is
in the vicinity of a dreary cemetery. Stowing away our weapons on the
_Sami_ tree, let us, O Bharata, go to the city, and live there, free
from anxiety!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having O bull of the Bharata race spoken thus
to king Yudhishthira the just, Arjuna prepared to deposit the weapons
(on the tree). And that bull among the Kurus, then loosened the string
of the large and dreadful _Gandiva_, ever producing thundering twang and
always destructive of hostile hosts, and with which he had conquered, on
a single car, gods and men and _Nagas_ and swelling provinces. And the
warlike Yudhishthira, that represser of foes, unfastened the undecaying
string of that bow with which he had defended the field of Kurukshetra.
And the illustrious Bhimasena unstrung that bow by means of which that
sinless one had vanquished in fight the Panchalas and the lord of
Sindhu, and with which, during his career of conquest, he had,
single-handed, opposed innumerable foes, and hearing whose twang which
was like unto the roar of the thunder or the splitting of a mountain,
enemies always fly (in panic) from the field of battle. And that son of
Pandu of coppery complexion and mild speech who is endued with great
prowess in the field, and is called Nakula in consequence of his
unexampled beauty in the family, then unfastened the string of that bow
with which he had conquered all the regions of the west. And the heroic
Sahadeva also, possessed of a mild disposition, then untied the string
of that bow with which he had subjugated the countries of the south. And
with their bows, they put together their long and flashing swords, their
precious quivers, and their arrows sharp as razors. And Nakula ascended
the tree, and deposited on it the bows and the other weapons. And he
tied them fast on those parts of the tree which he thought would not
break, and where the rain would not penetrate. And the Pandavas hung up
a corpse (on the tree), knowing that people smelling the stench of the
corpse would say--_here sure, is a dead body_, and avoid the tree from a
distance. And on being asked by the shepherds and cowherds regarding the
corpse, those repressers of foes said unto them, 'This is our mother,
aged one hundred and eighty years. We have hung up her dead body, in
accordance with the custom observed by our forefathers.' And then those
resisters of foes approached the city. And for purposes of non-discovery
Yudhishthira kept these (five) names for himself and his brothers
respectively, viz., Jaya, Jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena, and Jayadvala.
Then they entered the great city, with the view to passing the
thirteenth year undiscovered in that kingdom, agreeably to the promise
(to Duryodhana)."


SECTION VI

Vaisampayana said, "And while Yudhishthira was on his way to the
delightful city of Virata, he began to praise mentally the Divine Durga,
the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, born on the womb of Yasoda, and
fond of the boons bestowed on her by Narayana, sprung from the race of
cowherd Nanda, and the giver of prosperity, the enhancer (of the glory)
of (the worshipper's) family, the terrifier of Kansa, and the destroyer
of _Asuras_,--and saluted the Goddess--her who ascended the skies when
dashed (by Kansa) on a stony platform, who is the sister of Vasudeva,
one who is always decked in celestial garlands and attired in celestial
robes,--who is armed with scimitar and shield, and always rescues the
worshipper sunk in sin, like a cow in the mire, who in the hours of
distress calls upon that eternal giver of blessings for relieving him of
their burdens. And the king, desirous with his brothers of obtaining a
sight of the Goddess, invoked her and began to praise her by reciting
various names derived from (approved) hymns. And Yudhishthira said,
'Salutations to thee, O giver of boons. O thou that art identical with
Krishna, O maiden, O thou that hast observed the vow of _Brahmacharya_,
O thou of body bright as the newly-risen Sun, O thou of face beautiful
as the full moon. Salutations to thee, O thou of four hands and four
faces, O thou of fair round hips and deep bosom, O thou that wearest
bangles made of emeralds and sapphires, O thou that bearest excellent
bracelets on thy upper arm. Thou shinest, O Goddess, as Padma, the
consort of Narayana. O thou that rangest the etherial regions, thy true
form and thy _Brahmacharya_ are both of the purest kind. Sable as the
black clouds, thy face is beautiful as that of _Sankarshana_. Thou
bearest two large arms long as a couple of poles raised in honour of
Indra. In thy (six) other arms thou bearest a vessel, a lotus, a bell, a
noose, a bow, a large discus, and various other weapons. Thou art the
only female in the universe that possessest the attribute of purity.
Thou art decked with a pair of well-made ears graced with excellent
rings. O Goddess, thou shinest with a face that challengeth the moon in
beauty. With an excellent diadem and beautiful braid with robes made of
the bodies of snakes, and with also the brilliant girdle round thy hips,
thou shinest like the Mandara mountain encircled with snakes. Thou
shinest also with peacock-plumes standing erect on thy head, and thou
hast sanctified the celestial regions by adopting the vow of perpetual
maiden-hood. It is for this, O thou that hast slain the
_Mahishasura_,[9] that thou art praised and worshipped by the gods for
the protection of the three worlds. O thou foremost of all deities,
extend to me thy grace, show me thy mercy, and be thou the source of
blessings to me. Thou art _Jaya_ and _Vijaya_, and it is thou that
givest victory in battle. Grant me victory, O Goddess, and give me boons
also at this hour of distress. Thy eternal abode is on Vindhya--that
foremost of mountains. O _Kali_, O _Kali_, thou art the great _Kali_,
ever fond of wine and meat and animal sacrifice. Capable of going
everywhere at will, and bestowing boons on thy devotees, thou art ever
followed in thy journeys by Brahma and the other gods. By them that call
upon thee for the relief of their burdens, and by them also that bow to
thee at daybreak on Earth, there is nothing that cannot be attained in
respect either of offspring or wealth. And because thou rescuest people
from difficulties whether when they are afflicted in the wilderness or
sinking in the great ocean, it is for this that thou art called
_Durga_[10] by all. Thou art the sole refuge of men when attacked by
robbers or while afflicted in crossing streams and seas or in wilderness
and forests. Those men that remember thee are never prostrated, O great
Goddess. Thou art Fame, thou art Prosperity, thou art Steadiness, thou
art Success; thou art the Wife, thou art men's Offspring, thou art
Knowledge, and thou art the Intellect. Thou art the two Twilights, the
Night Sleep, Light--both solar and lunar, Beauty, Forgiveness, Mercy,
and every other thing. Thou dispellest, worshipped by the devotees their
fetters, ignorance, loss of children and loss of wealth, disease, death,
and fear. I, who have been deprived of my kingdom, seek thy protection.
And as I bow to thee with bended head, O Supreme Goddess, grant me
protection, O thou of eyes like lotus leaves. And be thou as boon-giving
Truth unto us that are acting according to Truth. And, O Durga, kind as
thou art unto all that seek thy protection, and affectionate unto all
thy devotees, grant me protection!'"

    [9] _Mahishasura_, the son of Rambhasura. Durga had to fight for
    many years before she could slay this formidable _Asura_.
    The story occurs in the _Markandeya Purana_. To this day, Bengal
    during the great Durga Puja festival in autumn, worships the
    goddess with great veneration.

    [10] Literally, one that rescues from difficulty.

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus praised by the son of Pandu, the Goddess
showed herself unto him. And approaching the king, she addressed him in
these words, 'O mighty armed king, listen, O Lord, to these words of
mine. Having vanquished and slain the ranks of the Kauravas through my
grace, victory in battle will soon be thine. Thou shalt again lord it
over the entire Earth, having made thy dominions destitute of thorns.
And, O king, thou shalt also, with thy brothers, obtain great happiness.
And through my grace, joy and health will be thine. And they also in the
world who will recite my attributes and achievements will be freed from
their sins, and gratified. I will bestow upon them kingdom, long life,
beauty of person, and offspring. And they, O king, who will invoke me,
after thy manner, in exile or in the city, in the midst of battle or of
dangers from foes, in forests or in inaccessible deserts, in seas or
mountain fastnesses, there is nothing that they will not obtain in this
world. And ye sons of Pandu, he will achieve success in every business
of his that will listen to, or himself recite with devotion, this
excellent hymn. And through my grace neither the Kuru's spies, nor those
that dwell in the country of the Matsyas, will succeed in recognising
you all as long as ye reside in Virata's city!' And having said these
words unto Yudhishthira, that chastiser of foes, and having arranged for
the protection of the sons of Pandu, the Goddess disappeared there and
then."


SECTION VII

Vaisampayana said, "Then tying up in his cloth dice made of gold and set
with _lapis lazuli_, and holding them below his arm-pit, king
Yudhishthira,--that illustrious lord of men--that high-souled
perpetuator of the Kuru race, regarded by kings, irrepressible in might,
and like unto a snake of virulent poison,--that bull among men, endued
with strength and beauty and prowess, and possessed of greatness, and
resembling in form a celestial though now like unto the sun enveloped in
dense clouds, or fire covered with ashes, first made his appearance when
the famous king Virata was seated in his court. And beholding with his
followers that son of Pandu in his court, looking like the moon hid in
clouds and possessed of a face beautiful as the full moon, king Virata
addressed his counsellors and the twice-born ones and the charioteers
and the Vaisyas and others, saying, 'Enquire ye who it is, so like a
king that looketh on my court for the first time. He cannot be a
