means of the other imposed on men by God, verily the earth had assuredly
gone to ruin, but God is bounteous to his creatures."--Sura, ii.

76. "Let those then fight in the cause of God who barter this present
life for that which is to come; for whoever fighteth on God's path,
whether he be slain or conquer, We will in the end give him a great
reward."

77. "But what hath come to you that ye fight not on the path of God, and
_for_ the weak among men, women and children, who say, 'O our Lord!
bring us forth from this City whose inhabitants are oppressors; give us
a champion from thy presence; and give us from thy presence a
defender?'"

78. "They who believe, fight on the path of God; and they who believe
not, fight on the path of Thagoot: Fight then against the friends of
Satan--Verily, the craft of Satan shall be powerless!"

86. "Fight then on the path of God: lay not burdens on any but thyself;
and stir up the faithful. The prowess of the infidels, God will haply
restrain; for God is the stronger in prowess, and the stronger to
punish."

91. "They desire that ye should be unbelievers as they are unbelievers,
and that ye should be alike. Take therefore none of them for friends,
until they have fled their homes for the cause of God. If they turn
back, then seize them and slay them wherever ye find them; but take none
of them as friends or helpers."

92. "Except those who seek asylum among your allies, and those who come
over to you--prevented by their own hearts by making war on you, or from
making war on their own people. Had God pleased, He would certainly have
given them power against you, and they would certainly have made war
upon you! But, if they depart from you, and make not war against you
and offer you peace, then God alloweth you no occasion against them."

93. "Ye will find others who seek to gain your confidence as well as
that of their own people: So oft as they return to sedition, they shall
be overthrown in it: But if they leave you not, nor propose terms of
peace to you, nor withhold their hands, then seize them, and slay them
wherever ye find them. Over these have We given you undoubted
power."--Sura, iv.

19. "_O Meccans!_ If ye desired a decision, now hath the decision come
to you. It will be better for you if ye give over _the struggle_ (_or
attacking upon Medina or the Moslem_). If ye return _to it_ we will
return; and your forces, though they may be many, shall by no means
avail you aught, because God is with the faithful."

39. "Say to the infidels: If they desist (_from persecuting,
obstructing, and attacking the Moslems_), what is now past shall be
forgiven them; but if they return _to it_ (commit again the
hostilities), they have already before them the doom of the ancients!"

40. "Fight then against them till civil strife be at an end, and the
religion be all of it God's; and if they desist, verily God beholdeth
what they do."

41. "But if they turn their back, know ye that God is your protector:
Excellent protector! and excellent helper!"

73. "... And they who have believed, but have not fled their homes,
shall have no rights of kindred with you at all, until they too fly
their country. Yet if they seek aid from you on account of the faith,
your part it is to give them aid, except against a people between whom
and yourselves there may be a treaty. And God beholdeth your actions."

74. "And the infidels have the _like_ relationships one with another.
Unless ye do the same (_i.e., aid the oppressed and repel the
oppressor_), there will be discord in the land and great
corruption."--Sura, viii.

(When the Meccans broke the Hodeibia treaty mentioned in the above
paragraph, the Koreish and Bani Bakr attacked Bani Khozaa, who were in
alliance with Mohammad. It became incumbent on him to assist Bani Bakr
and to chastize the aggressors. The following verses were published on
that occasion, but happily, before the expiration of the fixed period,
the Koreish submitted and Mecca was taken without bloodshed, and these
verses were not acted upon:--)

1. "An immunity from God and His Apostle to those with whom ye are in
league (_and they have violated the same--compare verses 4, 8 and 10_)
among the polytheist Meccans."

2. "Go ye therefore at large in the land four months (_i.e., four sacred
months from Shaw-wal. The treaty was violated by the Koreish in Ramzan,
a month immediately previous to the sacred months. It is announced here
that four months' time is given to the aggressors, who violated the
treaty of Hodeibia, to make terms. After the time is over (verse 5) the
Moslems will commence hostilities to defend their allies, the Bani
Khozaa_), but know that ye shall not find God feeble, and that those who
believe not, God will put to shame."

3. "And a proclamation on the part of God and His Apostle to the people
on the day of the greater pilgrimage, that God is free from _any
engagement with_ those who worship other gods with God, as is his
Apostle. If then, ye turn to God, it will be better for you; but if ye
turn back, then know that ye shall not find God feeble: and to those who
believe not, announce thou a grievous punishment."

4. "But this concerneth not those Polytheists with whom ye are in
league, and who have afterwards in no way failed you, and not yet aided
any one against you. Observe, therefore, your engagement with them
through the whole time _of their treaty_. Verily, God loveth those who
fear Him."

5. "And when the sacred months are passed[168] kill those who join other
gods with God[169] wherever ye find them; and seize them, and besiege
them, and lay wait for them with every kind of ambush; but if they
repent and observe prayer and pay the obligatory alms, then let them go
their way.[170] Verily, God is Gracious, Merciful."

6. "If any one of those who join gods with God ask an asylum of thee,
grant him an asylum, in order that he hear the Word of God; then let him
reach his place of safety. This, for that they are people devoid of
knowledge."

7. "How can they who add gods to God be in league with God and His
Apostle, save those with whom ye made a league at the sacred temple? So
long as they are true to you,[171] be ye true to them: verily, God
loveth those who fear Him."

8. "How _can they_? since if they prevail against you, they will not
regard in their dealing with you, either ties of blood or good faith:
With their mouths they content you, but their hearts are averse, and
most of them are perverse doers."

9. "They sell the signs of God for a mean price, and turn others aside
from his way; of a truth, evil is it that they do!"

10. "They respect not with a believer either ties of blood or good
faith; and these are the transgressors!"

11. "Yet if they turn to God and observe prayer, and pay the impost,
then are they your brethren in religion: and We make clear the signs for
men of knowledge."[172]

12. "But if, after alliance made, they violate their covenant and revile
your religion, then do battle with the ringleaders of infidelity--verily
there is no faith in them! Haply they will desist."

13. "Will ye not do battle with a people (_the Meccans_) who have broken
their covenant and aimed to expel your Apostle and attacked you first?
Will ye dread them? God truly is more worthy of your fear if ye are
believers!"

14. "Make war on them: By your hands will God chastize them and put them
to shame, and give victory over them, and heal the bosom of a people who
believe."

36. "... and attack those who join gods with God one and all, as they
attack you one and all."--Sura, ix.

[Sidenote: 18. What the above-quoted verses show.]

I need not repeat here what these verses and the facts related above
show, that the wars of Mohammad with the Koreish were merely defensive,
and the Koreish were the aggressors, and that Mohammad was quite
justified in taking up arms against them.

"In the state of nature every man has a right to defend," writes Mr.
Edward Gibbon,[173] "by force of arms, his person and his possessions;
to repel, or even to repeat, the violence of his enemies, and to extend
his hostilities to a reasonable measure of satisfaction and retaliation.
In the free society of the Arabs, the duties of subject and citizen
imposed a feeble restraint; and Mahommed, in the exercise of a peaceful
and benevolent mission, had been despoiled and banished by the injustice
of his countrymen." It has been fully shown in the foregoing paragraphs
that the Moslems in Mecca enjoyed neither safety nor security. Religious
freedom was denied to them, though they were harmless and peaceful
members of the community. Besides this they were expelled from their
homes, leaving their families and their property in the hands of their
persecutors, and were prevented from returning to Mecca, and were
refused access to the Sacred Mosque; and, above all, they were attacked
by the Meccans in force at Medina.

[Sidenote: 19. Justification of the Moslems in taking up arms against
their aggressors.]

The persecution of the early Moslems by the Koreish was on religious
grounds. They would not allow the believers to renounce the religion of
their forefathers and profess Islam. Their intolerance was so strong and
harsh that they tortured some of the professors of the new faith to
renounce the same and to rejoin their former idolatry. "Taking away the
lives, the fortune, the liberty, any of the rights of our brethren,
merely for serving their Maker in such manner as they are persuaded they
ought, when by so doing they hurt not human society, or any member of
it, materially, is evidently inconsistent with all justice and humanity:
for it is punishing those who have not injured us, and who, if they
mistake, deserve only pity from us."[174] The early Moslems had had
every international right to resent persecution and intolerance of the
Meccans and to establish themselves by force of arms, to enjoy their
religious liberty and to practise their religion freely.

[Sidenote 20. The first aggression after the Hegira was not on the part
of Mohammad.]

Some of the European biographers of Mohammad say, "that the first
aggressions after the Hegira were solely on the part of Mahomet and his
followers. It was not until several of their caravans had been waylaid
and plundered, and blood had thus been shed, that the people of Mecca
were forced in self-defence to resort to arms."[175]

This is not correct. The aggressors, in the first instance, were the
Koreish, who, as already shown, followed up their persecution of the
Moslems by an attack upon the city in which the Prophet and his
followers had taken refuge. Even taking it for granted that the Moslems
were the first aggressors after the Hegira, was not the Hegira, or
expulsion itself (leaving aside the previous persecutions and
oppressions at Mecca), a sufficient reason for the commencement of
hostilities by the Moslems, who were anxious to secure their moral and
religious freedom, and to protect themselves and their relatives from
further aggressions?

Sir William Muir admits, that "hostilities, indeed, were justified by
the 'expulsion' of the believers from Mecca."[176] "It may be said,"
says Major Vans Kennedy, "that, in these wars, Mohammad was the
aggressor by his having, soon after his flight, attempted to intercept
the caravans of Mecca. But the first aggression was, undoubtedly, the
conspiracy of the Koreish to assassinate Mohammad, and when to save his
life he fled from Mecca, himself and his followers were thus deprived of
their property, and obliged to depend for their subsistence on the
hospitality of the men of Medina, it could not be reasonably expected
that they would allow the caravans of their enemies to pass
unmolested."[177]

[Sidenote: 21. The alleged instances examined.]

There is no proof that Mohammad, after the Hegira, commenced hostilities
against the Koreish by intercepting their caravans. The alleged
instances of the caravans being waylaid by the Moslems at Medina are not
corroborated by authentic and trustworthy traditions. They have also
internal evidences of their improbability. The Medina people had pledged
themselves only to defend the Prophet from attack, and not to join him
in any aggressive steps against the Koreish.[178] Therefore, it seems
impossible that they should have allowed Mohammad to take any aggressive
steps against the Koreish which would have involved them in great
trouble.

[Sidenote: 22. Hamza and Obeida expedition.]

The alleged expeditions against the Koreish caravans by Hamza and the
other by Obeida in pursuit of caravans which escaped, are in themselves
improbable. Mohammad would not send fifty or sixty persons to waylay a
caravan guarded by two or three hundred armed men.

[Sidenote: 23. The Abwa, Bowat, & Osheira expeditions.]

The alleged expeditions of Abwa, Bowat, and Osheira, said to have been
led by Mohammad himself to intercept the Mecca caravans, but in vain,
are altogether without foundation. He might have gone, if he had gone at
all, to Abwa, and Osheira to negotiate friendly terms with Bani
Dhumra[179] and Bani Mudlij, as his biographers say, he did.

[Sidenote: 24. The affair at Nakhla.]

The affair of the _Nakhla_ marauding party, as related in the
traditions, is full of discrepancies, and is altogether inconsistent and
untrustworthy. The very verse (Sura, ii, verse 214) which the
biographers say was revealed on the occasion, and which I have quoted
above (para. 16), contains a reference to the Meccans' fighting against
the Moslems, which runs counter to the assumption of the European
biographers, who make it an aggressive attack on the part of Mohammad.
It is probable that Mohammad might have sent some six or eight scouts to
bring in news of the movements and condition of the Koreish, whose
attitude towards Mohammad had become more hostile since his flight to
Medina. As the Koreish had a regular and uninterrupted route to Syria
for traffic, it was only reasonable on the part of Mohammad to take
precautions, and he was always on his guard. The biographers _Ibn
Is-hak_, _Ibn Hisham_ (p. 424), _Tabri_ (Vol. II, p. 422), _Ibnal Athir_
in _Kamil_ (Vol. II, p. 87), _Halabi_ in _Insanul Oyoon_ (Vol. III, p.
318), say, that Mohammad had given written instructions to
Abdoollah-bin-Jahsh, which was to the effect "bring me intelligence of
their affairs." They also say that Mohammad was displeased with
Abdoollah's affair at Nakhla, and said, "I never commanded thee to fight
in the Sacred Month." The biographers also relate that Mohammad even
paid blood-money for the slain.

[Sidenote: 25. At Badr Mohammad had come only in his defence.]

Some of the European biographers of Mohammad allege, that the battle of
Badr was brought by Mohammad himself. They appear to hesitate to justify
Mohammad in defending himself against the superior numbers of the
Koreish, who had advanced to attack him as far as Badr, three stages
from Medina. It is alleged that Mohammad intended to attack the caravans
returning from Syria, conducted by Abu Sofian, his arch-enemy, therefore
he set out upon his march with eighty refugees and two hundred and
twenty-five people of Medina, and halted at Safra to waylay the caravan.
Abu Sofian, warned of Mohammad's intention, sent some one to Mecca for
succour. The Koreish, with nine hundred and fifty strong, marched forth
to rescue the caravan. In the meantime, the caravan had passed
unmolested, but the Koreish held a council whether to return or go to
war. On the one hand, the biographers say, it was argued that the object
for which they had set out having been secured, the army should at once
retrace its steps. Others demanded that the army should advance. Two
tribes returned to Mecca, the rest marched onwards; but it is not fair
to allege that Mohammad had set forth to attack the caravan. Had he any
such intention, the people of Medina, who had pledged themselves only to
defend him against personal attack, would not have accompanied him. The
presence of a large number of the _Ansars_, the people of Medina, more
than double that of the _Mohajirins_, the refugees, is a strong proof
that they had come out only in their defence.

Mohammad, on receiving intelligence of the advancing force of the
Koreish, set out from Medina to check the advance of the Meccan force,
and encountered it at Badr, three days' journey from Medina. The Meccan
army had advanced nine days' journey from Mecca towards Medina. The
forces met at Badr on the 17th of Ramzan (13th January 623), the Meccans
had left Mecca on the 8th of Ramzan (4th January), and Mohammad started
only on the 12th of Ramzan (8th January), about four days after the
Meccan army had actually set out to attack him. Supposing Abu Sofian had
some reason for apprehending an attack from Medina, and sent for succour
from Mecca, but the object of the Meccan army of the Koreish for which
they had set out having been secured, the caravan having passed
unmolested, they ought at once to have retraced their steps. The fact
that Mohammad left Medina four days after the Koreish had left Mecca
with a large army advancing towards Medina, is strongly in his favour.

[Sidenote: 26. The first aggressions after the Hegira, if from Mohammad,
might fairly be looked upon as retaliation.]

Even taking it for granted that the first aggressions after the Hegira
were solely on the part of the Moslems, and that several of the caravans
of the Koreish had been waylaid and plundered, and blood had been shed,
it would be unfair to condemn Mohammad. Such attacks, had they been
made, might fairly be looked upon as a retaliation for the ill-treatment
of the Moslems before the flight from Mecca. "Public war is a state of
armed hostility between sovereign nations or governments. It is a law
and requisite of civilized existence that men live in political
continuous societies, forming organized units called states or nations,
whose constituents bear, enjoy and suffer, advance and retrograde
together, in peace and in war. The citizen or native of hostile country
is thus an enemy, as one of the constituents of the hostile state or
nation, and as such is subjected to the hardships of war."[180] The
almost universal rule of most remote times was, and continues to be with
barbarous nations, that the private individual of a hostile country is
destined to suffer every privation of liberty and protection, and every
description of family ties. But Mohammad protected the inoffensive
citizen or private individual of the hostile country. He even protected
those who had actually come out of Mecca to fight at Badr, but were
reluctant to do so. Mohammad had desired quarters to be given to several
persons in the Koreish army at Badr. Abul Bakhtari, Zamaa, Harith Ibn
Amir, Abbas and other Bani Hashim were amongst those named.

[Footnote 162: Or defend, '_Yadafeo_' repel.]

[Footnote 163: _Yokataloona_, or who fight _Yokateloona_. The former
reading is the authorized and general.]

[Footnote 164: The primary signification of _fitnah_ is burning with
fire. It signifies a _trial_ or _probation_ and affliction, distress or
hardship; and particularly an _affliction whereby one is tried, proved,
or tested_.--_Vide_ Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon, p. 2335.]

[Footnote 165: Desist from persecuting you and preventing you to enter
your native city and prohibiting access to the sacred mosque and
attacking you, and from religious intolerance.]

[Footnote 166: _i.e._, the religious persecution and intolerance and
hindrance to visit the sacred mosque being suppressed; you may profess,
preach and practice your religion freely.]

[Footnote 167: _Vide_ note 2 in p. 17.]

[Footnote 168: Shaw-wal, Zulkada, Zulhij, and Moharram, the 10th, 11th,
12th, and 1st months of the Arabian year.

These verses were promulgated in Ramzan, the 9th month of the year.]

[Footnote 169: And have violated the Hodeibia Truce. Compare verses 4,
8, and 12.]

[Footnote 170: It is not meant that they should be forced to observe
prayer or pay obligatory alms, or in other words be converted to Islam;
the context and general scope of the Koran would not allow such a
meaning. The next verse clearly enjoins toleration.]

[Footnote 171: The Bani Kinana and Bani Zamara had not violated the
truce of Hodeibia while the Koreish and Bani Bakr had done so.]

[Footnote 172: This is the same as verse 5. It only means, if meanwhile
they become converts to Islam, they are to be treated as brethren in
religion. But it cannot mean that it was the sole motive of making war
with them to convert them. Such an interpretation is quite contrary to
the general style of the Koran.]

[Footnote 173: The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
by Edward Gibbon, Vol. VI, p. 245.]

[Footnote 174: Archbishop Secker's Works, III, p. 271.]

[Footnote 175: Sir W. Muir, II, p. 265.]

[Footnote 176: Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 79.]

[Footnote 177: Remarks on the character of Mohammad (suggested by
Voltaire's Tragedy of Mahomet) by Major Vans Kennedy. _Vide_
Transactions of the Literary Society of Bombay for 1821, Vol. III, p.
453, reprint Bombay, 1877.]

[Footnote 178: "Mahomet did not send the Medina converts on any hostile
expedition against the Koreish, until they had warred with him at Badr,
and the reason is, that they had pledged themselves to protect him only
at their homes."--K. Wackidi, 48; Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p.
64, _note_.]

[Footnote 179: "K. Wackidi, 98-1/2. The provisions are noted only
generally, "that neither party would levy war against the other, nor
help their enemies." The version quoted by Weil binding the Bani Dhumra
to fight _for the faith_, &c., is evidently anticipatory and apocryphal.
It is not given by the Secretary of Wackidi in his chapter of
treaties."--Muir's Life of Mahomet, III, p. 67, _note_.]

[Footnote 180: Contributions to Political Science by Francis Lieber,
LL.D., Vol. II of his miscellaneous writings, p. 251, London, 1881.]


_The Jews._

[Sidenote: 27. The Jews broke treaties.]

Mohammad, on his first arrival at Medina, made a treaty of alliance with
the Jews, by which the free exercise of their religion and the
possession of their rights and property were guaranteed. It was
stipulated in the treaty that either party, if attacked, should come to
the assistance of the other. Medina should be sacred and inviolable for
all who joined the treaty. But the Jews broke their treaty and rebelled.
They assisted the enemy during the siege of Medina, and committed
treason against the city.

[Sidenote: 28. Bani Kainukaa, Bani Nazeer, Koreiza, Khyber, and
Ghatafan.]

The Bani Kainukaa were the first among the Jews who broke the treaty and
fought against Mohammad between the battles of Badr and Ohad.[181]

The Bani Nazeer broke their compact with Mohammad after his defeat at
Ohad. They had also made a conspiracy to kill Mohammad. They were
banished; some of them went over to Khyber. The Jewish tribe of Koreiza
had defected from their allegiance to Mohammad, and entered into
negotiations with the enemy, when Medina was besieged by the Koreish and
Bedouin tribes at the battle of the Ditch. They were afterwards besieged
by Mohammad. They surrendered at the discretion of Sad, who passed a
bloody judgment against them. The Jews of Khyber (including those of
Nazeer) and Bani Ghatafan, who had lately besieged Medina with the
Koreish in the battle of the Ditch, made alliance against Mohammad,[182]
and were making preparations for an attack on him. They had been
inciting the Bani Fezara and other Bedouin tribes in their depredations,
and had combined with Bani Sad-Ibn Bakr to attack upon Medina. They were
subjected at Khyber, and made tributaries, paying _jizya_ in return of
the protection guaranteed to them.

