because the words, _I believe in God_, belong to all three paragraphs
of it; and partly by the words, _his only Son_.  See S. John i. 1-4,
14, 18; 1 S. John i. 3; S. Matth. xvi. 16.  The Nicene Creed was
prepared at a time when His Perfect Manhood was universally believed,
but some thought that He was not God.  It is therefore much fuller in
the statement of His Godhead.

{111}

III. What the Bible says of the Holy Ghost.

The third paragraph of this Creed is a summary of the teaching of the
Bible concerning Him whom we often call the third Person of the
Godhead--whom Jesus described as the Comforter (S. John xiv.-xvi.).  He
there promised to His disciples the presence with them of One, who
should be closer to them than He had Himself been, xvi. 7: xiv. 16, 17:
who should unite them more closely to Himself, xiv. 18, 23: who should
teach them, and help them to remember His words, xiv. 26: who should
testify of Him, xv. 26: and guide them into all truth, xvi. 13: when
they should be accused and persecuted, the Holy Ghost would guide their
speech, S. Matth. x. 19, 20: S. Mark xiii. 11: S. Luke xii. 11, 12:
xxi. 14, 15.

Consistently with these promises we find all good impulses, thoughts,
and actions, in man, ascribed to the Holy Ghost--Comfort, Acts ix. 31:
Joy, Rom. xiv. 17: Baptism, S. Matth. iii. 11: 1 Cor. xii. 13:
Fellowship, Phil. ii. 1: Power, Acts i. 8: Sanctification, Rom. xv. 16:
Teaching, 1 Cor. ii. 13: xii. 3: Resolution, S. Luke iv. 1: Acts xv.
28: Vocation, xiii. 2, 4: xx. 28: He is ranked with the Father and the
Son, S. Matth. xxviii. 19: Eph. iv. 4-6: 2 Cor. xiii. 14.

His Presence is imparted through the Laying on of Hands, Acts viii. 15,
17: xix. 6: ix. 17: and before it, x. 44, in the exceptional case of
Cornelius.  Thus, individually we are temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
vi. 19.

{112}

But further, the Holy Ghost unites us in one Body--the Church, Eph. iv.
2-4: wherein the work of each is allotted by Him who in 1 Cor. xii. 28
is called God, and in _vv._ 4-11 is called the Spirit, and in _v._ 3,
the Holy Ghost.  By virtue of this, the Church is Holy, 1 Cor. iii. 16,
17, even though individual members are unworthy.  And this Church was
to be One for all the world, Acts i. 8, S. Matth. xxviii. 19, 20: 1
Cor. i. 2: Eph. i. 22, 23: iii. 9, 10: S. John xvii. 20, 21.  Thus it
is the Holy Catholick Church.  Catholick=Universal, for-the-whole.
Also the Holy Catholick Church is the Society of Saints, the Communion
or Fellowship of Saints.  S. Paul writing to the Corinthians (1 Cor. i.
2) addresses them as the Church, called to be Saints, and (after
referring to the distribution of various duties amongst the members by
the Holy Spirit) he says (xii. 25-27) that there should be no schism in
the body, but all the members should care for one another, suffer with
one another, and rejoice with one another: indeed his argument is that
the Church is a body, and that this sharing of joy and sorrow is an
existing fact.  So in 2 Cor. i. his whole argument turns upon this
thought of a society, wherein the comfort of one is the comforting of
the rest, and the prayers of the rest a help to the one, the gift
bestowed upon one, a cause of the others' thankfulness; and all
stablished together by God.  In Heb. xii. 22 mount Zion is taken as the
symbol of Christ's Church; and the readers are addressed as members
thereof, together with the spirits of just men made perfect, who are
enrolled in heaven as the general assembly and church of the firstborn.
Thus the {113} Church, or Society of Saints includes the imperfect, and
those who are made perfect; those who are alive there, and those who
are alive here.  The condition of membership is briefly described in
Acts ii. 38, 42 Repentant, Baptized, having the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
Apostolic Doctrine and Fellowship, Communicant, Stedfast in Prayers.

Since then, Repentance and Baptism, Acts ii. 38: iii. 19 "for the
Remission of sins," "that our sins may be blotted out," are thus
associated with the gift of the Holy Ghost--see also S. John xx. 22,
23--this second great privilege of Christians is stated in the Creed;
we believe in the Forgiveness of Sins.  It is preached unto us through
Christ, Acts xiii. 38: it is granted to us for His Name's sake, 1 S.
John ii. 12: the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins, S.
Mark ii. 10: it is especially associated with the Presence of Christ in
the assembly of the Church, S. Matth. xviii. 17-20: 1 Cor. v. 4: S.
John xx. 22, 23.  The union of the Faithful with Him in whom they have
Faith brings, through Jesus, Rom. iii. 25, remission of their sins,
through the forbearance of God.

The third great privilege, which comes to members of Christ through the
Holy Ghost, is the Resurrection of the Body, a most prominent doctrine
of the Gospel: as in the case of other articles of the Creeds, so here,
we only give representative verses.  Acts xvii. 18 S. Paul is stated to
have been misunderstood, because he preached at Athens Jesus and the
Resurrection, and in _vv._ 31, 32 it is shown that he preached the
Resurrection of men to be judged.  So those who {114} knew Jesus best
(S. John xi. 1-3) believed, as of course, in the Resurrection of all
men _vv._ 23, 24: in S. John v. 25-29 the Lord states the doctrine: 1
Cor. xv. shows how S. Paul taught it, and, _vv._ 37, 38, declares that
the body of the Resurrection will be a nobler and higher body, as the
plant is nobler and higher than the seed--see Phil. iii. 21: 1 Cor. xv.
43, 48, 49.  Further, it is likened to the gift of Life in Baptism,
Rom. vi. 3-5, which is the work of the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. xii. 13:
hence it is expressly stated to be His work, Rom. viii. 10, 11.  The
fourth great privilege is Life everlasting.  S. John i. 12 to those who
received Jesus, He gave power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on His Name: S. John xvii. 2, 3 and this is life eternal:
S. John v. 24 which begins here on earth: but, S. Mark x. 30, is, in a
higher sense, the promise of the world to come, where, Rev. xxi. 4, 1
Cor. xv. 26, 54, there shall be no more death.

In connection with this Creed we should read the Nicene Creed, the
first Four Commandments, Articles I. to V., XI. and XV., _Gloria in
excelsis_ in the Communion Service, and the Proper Prefaces in the Holy
Communion for Christmas, Easter, Ascensiontide and Whitsuntide.  Also,
note that _Gloria Patri_, and _The grace of our Lord_, are founded upon
the Faith which is expressed in the Creed: and that the Collects not
unfrequently have endings similarly founded.



[1] Annals xv. 44.

[2] See Appendix D.




{115}

CHAPTER XII.

EXCURSUS ON THE CONFESSION OF OUR
  CHRISTIAN FAITH, COMMONLY CALLED
  THE CREED OF SAINT ATHANASIUS.

A learned Professor once attacked the use of Creeds in Worship with the
bitter words, that "they combine the maximum of offence with the
minimum of worship."  This utterance might be discussed by comparing
the use of a Creed in the worship of God, with the statement of the
merits and action of a great man.

I have often heard people praise the Professor whose words we have just
quoted.  Suppose that a number of people were assembled together, and
one in the name of the rest were to speak to the Professor of his great
talents, his immense usefulness, his upright life, his loveable
character, his services to education, we should not be offended, even
if we were not fully aware of all that he had done for humanity.  We
should not say that there was any minimum of praise, nor any maximum of
offence.  It would not be an act chargeable with these faults, unless
we did it in the midst of those who disputed his eminence.

{116}

The House of God is a place where we ought to assume that the
revelation of God is the foundation of worship.  Hence a Creed which
recites the substance of that revelation should fairly be assumed to
express the convictions of all present.

The two Creeds, known to us as _The Apostles' Creed_ and _The Nicene
Creed_, are evidently free from the charge of offence or lack of
worship.  They take so little account of matters of opinion,--they deal
so entirely with the facts of Revelation, that it is hard to conceive
any other kind of words so free from the kind of charge which the
Professor brought against Creeds in Worship.

But it will be necessary to examine more at length the position of the
Creed which is called Athanasian, and to enquire what defence may
fairly be made, if it is the form against which the Professor really
brought this charge.  For it must be acknowledged that many thoughtful
men do stumble at this Creed.  To them it is an offence, because it is
often assumed that it is the expression of opinion about those who do
not accept the doctrines which it contains.

1. Now in reciting the Athanasian Creed, a congregation is not
attempting to deliver its opinion: we are reciting the assertions which
are implied in the Bible, concerning the Being of God, and the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

Let us emphasize this point.  The Athanasian Creed has a different form
from the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds.  You could not fairly describe it
as "a loving outburst of a loyal heart," as Bp Harvey Goodwin described
the Apostles' Creed.  _Gloria {117} Patri_ is indeed added at the
close, thereby marking it as a Psalm or Hymn in its use in Church[1].

We think that in its form, fairly considered, it is the reflective
utterance of a Christian, who is meditating on the Being and Personal
Nature of the Godhead.  As I read or say it, I am, as it were,
balancing the statements which limit my conception of the truth.  On
this side I may go so far, and no further; on that side I am limited to
that expression.  Between these two--including these truths--the fact
of Godhead is to be considered, and my worship is to be directed.
Hence we can see that, like the other Creeds, it deals with the
_revealed facts of God's existence_.

2. Notice that in the Creed it is the existence of GOD which is
defined.  Faith does, in other forms, enter upon a consideration of
doctrines which introduce _Man_ to our view.

  Predestination and Election,
  Justification by Faith alone,
  Sanctification,
  Assurance and Perseverance,
  Original Sin,
  Sacramental Grace,
  Sin after Baptism,

{118} and other facts and truths, on which Revelation has thrown the
only true light, are dealt with, for instance, in the Articles and
Homilies.  And the Bible is the Court of Appeal in all such
perplexities.  But it is no disparagement to the importance of those
truths, if we acknowledge that they do not appear in our Creeds.

The Creeds are the respectful reply of the Christian to God's
disclosure of Himself to His children.  One (the Apostles' Creed) is
the reply of the Christian as such.  Another (the Nicene) is the reply
of the Christian after careful self-examination.  And this Third is the
reply of the Christian Student, as he meditates upon the furthest
extent of our knowledge of God.

3. But it will be said, "The Nicene Creed partly, and the Athanasian
Creed altogether, are not, in their origin, utterances of peaceful
meditation, but, rather, of polemical controversy.  Heated contentions
and bitter strife are called to our minds by their terms, and not the
atmosphere of the heaven of heavens."

It may help us to a right use of the Creeds in worship, if we think of
these controversies as the meditations of a very large family.  When a
deliberation can be held in a room, we can quietly put forward a
suggestion, quietly find out what fault there is in it, and as quietly
substitute a better statement than the first, guarded from the error
into which we were likely to fall.  But when the family which
deliberates is distributed around such a space as the Mediterranean
Sea, the voices are apt to become loud and harsh: instead of tentative
suggestions, diffidently put forward, we are likely to hear dogmatic
assertions, made with {119} all the energy of the human lungs.  The
voices which arose from the members of that Parliament of the Faith
present a greater variety of languages than the tongues at Pentecost.
In the Church's Meditation on the Being of God, and on the Person of
Jesus, we hear the Spaniard, the Gaul, the Welshman, Italian, Greek,
Syrian, Armenian, Alexandrian; there are voices from Arles, and from
Carthage, as well as from Samosata on the Euphrates, and Jerusalem on
its holy hill, and Caesarea on the sea-shore.  We have to regard the
Mediterranean Sea as the Council Table, with chairs at the back for
such as could not find places on its shores.  Three continents faced
one another at an oval table, 13,000 miles in circumference.  Even in
thoughtful meditation, a voice must be raised to be heard in such a
conference.  This will to some extent explain how it happened that men,
whom we account orthodox, are occasionally found uttering what we will
call _suggestions_, unorthodox in character.

I.  _About God's Being_.

1. _The Jew_.  There is but One God.

2. _The Ebionite_.  Then Christ is but a Man divinely endowed--the only
man so divinely endowed.

3. _St John_.  No!  He is the Word.  By Him all things were made; the
Word was God and was made flesh.

4. _The Sabellian_.  Then perhaps,--God being One and being made
flesh,--the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are but manifestations of God.

{120}

5. _The Catholick Church_.  No!  They are Persons.  A Father and a Son
are different persons.

6. _The Arian_.  Then, if the Father is a real father, and the Son a
real son, perhaps the Father was before the Son, and the Son was made.

7. The Catholick Church.  This will not do; because the Sonship would
not be real sonship unless the Godhead were equal.  The Godhead of the
Son must be the same Godhead as that of the Father.

8. _Macedonius_.  But at any rate the Holy Ghost may be a creature, or
a manifestation of God the Father.

9. _The Catholick Church_.  That will not do either; for His Personal
Being and Godhead are implied by some verses; and in various passages
He is ranked with the Father and the Son.

10. _The Semi-Arian_.  Then you really say that there is an actual
equality of the Three Persons, and yet that there is but one God?

11. _The Catholick Church_.  Yes!  That is the Catholick Faith.


Of course this is but a rough specimen of the dialogue which was
conducted by the Church with the various guessers at great Truths, who
debated, disputed, and dogmatized, during the early centuries.  I have
left out all the other controversies, and some parts of this, in order
to present a fairly clear view.  But you will observe that the order
followed in History has a good deal of the natural course of argument
and meditation: and that it is not a very foreign idea that these
heresies are the loud thinking {121} of a mighty host, as it outgrows
its childhood, and comes to years of discretion.

I will yet more briefly indicate the course of Historical meditation on
deep things, by treating similarly one of the other great
controversies, viz. that concerning the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ.


II. _About the Two Natures of our Lord_.

1. _The Jew_.  We bear witness that Jesus of Nazareth died at Jerusalem.

2. _The Catholick Church_.  And we aver that He rose again from the
dead, and was the Christ, the Son of the Living God.

3. _The Gnostic_.  Probably He was one of the Aeons of whom our
forefathers have told us--the leading emanation from the Most High.

4. _The Catholick Church_.  He is no Aeon, Manifestation, nor Creature.
He is God as truly as He is man.

5. _The Manichaean_.  Then, of course, if He was God, He could have
nothing really material about Him.  Matter is evil.

6. _The Catholick Church_.  On the contrary He had a body like ours.

7. _The Docetae_.  No!  That was only in appearance.  You must leave
out all about His Baptism, Circumcision, and Crucifixion.  They were
only pretence.

8. _The Catholick Church_.  Not pretence at all, but real.  He derived
Very Manhood from the Blessed Virgin Mary, as truly as He derived Very
Godhead from God the Father.

{122}

9. _The Arians_.  Perhaps He took a human body, but not a human soul.
"The Divine Word was in the place of the soul."

10. _Nestorius_.  Perhaps if these things be so--since He derived the
Person of God from God, and the Person of man from Mary--then we must
not say that He was one Person, but two.

11. _The Catholick Church_.  These ideas are contrary to the Truth: for
(Council of Ephesus 431) Christ was but one Person, in whom two natures
are intimately united, but not confounded.

