
But now already they were near the monster's lair.  They
stretched strong nets from tree to tree; they uncoupled their
dogs, they tried to find the footprints of their quarry in the
grass.  From the wood was a descent to marshy ground.  Here the
boar, as he lay among the reeds, heard the shouts of his
pursuers, and rushed forth against them.  One and another is
thrown down and slain.  Jason throws his spear with a prayer to
Diana for success; and the favoring goddess allows the weapon to
touch, but not to wound, removing the steel point of the spear
even in its flight.  Nestor, assailed, seeks and finds safety in
the branches of a tree.  Telamon rushes on, but stumbling at a
projecting root, falls prone.  But an arrow from Atalanta at
length for the first time tastes the monster's blood.  It is a
slight wound, but Meleager sees and joyfully proclaims it.
Anceus, excited to envy by the praise given to a female, loudly
proclaims his own valor, and defies alike the boar and the
goddess who had sent it; but as he rushes on, the infuriated
beast lays him low with a mortal wound.  Theseus throws his
lance, but it is turned aside by a projecting bough.  The dart of
Jason misses its object, and kills instead one of their own dogs.
But Meleager, after one unsuccessful stroke, drives his spear
into the monsters side, then rushes on and despatches him with
repeated blows.

Then rose a shout from those around; they congratulated the
conqueror, crowding to touch his hand.  He, placing his foot upon
the slain boar, turned to Atalanta and bestowed on her the head
and the rough hide which were the trophies of his success.  But
at this, envy excited the rest to strife.  Phlexippus and Toxeus,
the uncles of Meleager and Althea's brothers, beyond the rest
opposed the gift, and snatched from the maiden the trophy she had
received.  Meleager, kindling with rage at the wrong done to
himself, and still more at the insult offered to her whom he
loved, forgot the claims of kindred, and plunged his sword into
the offenders' hearts.

As Althea bore gifts of thankfulness to the temples for the
victory of her son, the bodies of her murdered brothers met her
sight.  She shrieks, and beats her breast, and hastens to change
the garments of rejoicing for those of mourning.  But when the
author of the deed is known, grief gives way to the stern desire
of vengeance on her son.  The fatal brand, which once she rescued
from the flames, the brand which the Destinies had linked with
Meleager's life, she brings forth, and commands a fire to be
prepared.  Then four times she essays to place the brand upon the
pile; four times draws back, shuddering at the thought of
bringing destruction on her son.  The feelings of the mother and
the sister contend within her.  Now she is pale at the thought of
the purposed deed, now flushed again with anger at the act of her
son.  As a vessel, driven in one direction by the wind, and in
the opposite by the tide, the mind of Althea hangs suspended in
uncertainty.  But now the sister prevails above the mother, and
she begins as she holds the fatal wood: "Turn, ye Furies,
goddesses of punishment!  Turn to behold the sacrifice I bring!
Crime must atone for crime.  Shall OEneus rejoice in his victor
son, while the house of Thestius (Thestius was father of Toxeus,
Phlexippus and Althea) is desolate?  But, alas! To what deed am I
borne along?  Brothers, forgive a mother's weakness!  My hand
fails me.  He deserves death, but not that I should destroy him.
But shall he then live, and triumph, and reign over Calydon,
while you, my brothers, wander unavenged among the shades?  No!
Thou has lived by my gift; die, now, for thine own crime.  Return
the life which twice I gave thee, first at thy birth, again when
I snatched this brand from the flames.  O that thou hadst then
died!  Alas!  Evil is the conquest; but, brothers, ye have
conquered."  And, turning away her face, she threw the fatal wood
upon the burning pile.

It gave, or seemed to give, a deadly groan.  Meleager, absent and
unknowing of the cause, felt a sudden pang.  He burns and only by
courageous pride conquers the pain which destroys him.  He mourns
only that he perishes by a bloodless and unhonored death.  With
his last breath he calls upon his aged father, his brother, and
his fond sisters, upon his beloved Atalanta, and upon his mother,
the unknown cause of his fate.  The flames increase, and with
them the pain of the hero.  Now both subside; now both are
quenched.  The brand is ashes and the life of Meleager is
breathed forth to the wandering winds.

Althea, when the deed was done, laid violent hands upon herself.
The sisters of Meleager mourned their brother with uncontrollable
grief; till Diana, pitying the sorrows of the house that once had
aroused her anger, turned them into birds.


ATALANTA

The innocent cause of so much sorrow was a maiden whose face you
might truly say was boyish for a girl, yet too girlish for a boy.
Her fortune had been told, and it was to this effect: "Atalanta,
do not marry; marriage will be your ruin."  Terrified by this
oracle, she fled the society of men, and devoted herself to the
sports of the chase.  To all suitors (for she had many) she
imposed a condition which was generally effectual in relieving
her of their persecutions:   "I will be the prize of him who
shall conquer me in the race; but death must be the penalty of
all who try and fail."  In spite of this hard condition some
would try.  Hippomenes was to be judge of the race.  "Can it be
possible that any will be so rash as to risk so much for a wife?"
said he.  But when he saw her lay aside her robe for the race, he
changed his mind, and said, "Pardon me, youths, I knew not the
prize you were competing for." As he surveyed them he wished them
all to be beaten, and swelled with envy of any one that seemed at
all likely to win.  While such were his thoughts, the virgin
darted forward.  As she ran, she looked more beautiful than ever.
The breezes seemed to give wings to her feet; her hair flew over
her shoulders, and the gay fringe of her garment fluttered behind
her.  A ruddy hue tinged the whiteness of her skin, such as a
crimson curtain casts on a marble wall.  All her competitors were
distanced, and were put to death without mercy.  Hippomenes, not
daunted by this result, fixing his eyes on the virgin, said, "Why
boast of beating those laggards?  I offer myself for the
contest."  Atalanta looked at him with a pitying countenance, and
hardly knew whether she would rather conquer him or not.  "What
god can tempt one so young and handsome to throw himself away?  I
pity him, not for his beauty (yet he is beautiful), but for his
youth.  I wish he would give up the race, or if he will be so
mad, I hope he may outrun me."  While she hesitates, revolving
these thoughts, the spectators grow impatient for the race, and
her father prompts her to prepare.  Then Hippomenes addressed a
prayer to Venus; "Help me, Venus, for you have led me on" Venus
heard, and was propitious.

In the garden of her temple, in her own island of Cyprus, is a
tree with yellow leaves and yellow branches, and golden fruit.
Hence Venus gathered three golden apples, and, unseen by all
else, gave them to Hippomenes, and told him how to use them.  The
signal is given; each starts from the goal, and skims over the
sand.  So light their tread, you would almost have thought they
might run over the river surface or over the waving grain without
sinking.  The cries of the spectators cheered on Hippomenes:
"Now, now do your best!  Haste, haste!  You gain on her!  Relax
not!  One more effort!"  It was doubtful whether the youth or the
maiden heard these cries with the greater pleasure.  But his
breath began to fail him, his throat was dry, the goal yet far
off.  At that moment he threw down one of the golden apples.  The
virgin was all amazement.  She stopped to pick it up.  Hippomenes
shot ahead.  Shouts burst forth from all sides.  She redoubled
her efforts, and soon overtook him.  Again he threw an apple.
She stopped again, but again came up with him.  The goal was
near; one chance only remained.  "Now, goddess," said he,
"prosper your gift!" and threw the last apple off at one side.
She looked at it, and hesitated; Venus impelled her to turn aside
for it.  She did so, and was vanquished.  The youth carried off
his prize.

But the lovers were so full of their own happiness that they
forgot to pay due honor to Venus; and the goddess was provoked at
their ingratitude.  She caused them to give offence to Cybele.
That powerful goddess was not to be insulted with impunity.  She
took from them their human form and turned them into animals of
characters resembling their own: of the huntress-heroine,
triumphing in the blood of her lovers, she made a lioness, and of
her lord and master a lion, and yoked them to her ear, there they
are still to be seen in all representations, in statuary or
painting, of the goddess Cybele.

Cybele is the Latin name of the goddess called by the Greeks Rhea
and Ops.  She was the wife of Cronos and mother of Zeus.  In
works of art, she exhibits the matronly air which distinguishes
Juno and Ceres.  Sometimes she is veiled, and seated on a throne
with lions at her side, at other times riding in a chariot drawn
by lions.  She sometimes wears a mural crown, that is, a crown
whose rim is carved in the form of towers and battlements.  Her
priests were called Corybantes.

Byron in describing the city of Venice, which is built on a low
island in the Adriatic Sea, borrows an illustration from Cybele:

  "She looks a sea-Cybele fresh from ocean,
  Rising with her tiara of proud towers
  At airy distance, with majestic motion,
  A ruler of the waters and their powers."
  Childe Harold, IV

In Moore's Rhymes on the Road, the poet, speaking of Alpine
scenery, alludes to the story of Atalanta and Hippomenes, thus:

  "Even here, in this region of wonders, I find
  That light-footed Fancy leaves Truth far behind,
  Or at least, like Hippomenes, turns her astray
  By the golden illusions he flings in her way."



Chapter XII

Hercules.  Hebe and Ganymede

Hercules (in Greek, Heracles) was the son of Jupiter and Alemena.
As Juno was always hostile to the offspring of her husband by
mortal mothers, she declared war against Hercules from his birth.
She sent two serpents to destroy him as he lay in his cradle, but
the precocious infant strangled them with his own hands.  (On
this account the infant Hercules was made the type of infant
America, by Dr. Franklin, and the French artists whom he employed
in the American Revolution.  Horatio Greenough has placed a bas-
relief of the Infant Hercules on the pedestal of his statue of
Washington, which stands in front of the Capitol.)  He was
however by the arts of Juno rendered subject to his cousin
Eurystheus and compelled to perform all his commands.  Eurystheus
enjoined upon him a succession of desperate adventures, which are
called the twelve "Labors of Hercules."  The first was the fight
with the Nemean lion.  The valley of Nemea was infested by a
terrible lion.  Eurystheus ordered Hercules to bring him the skin
of this monster.  After using in vain his club and arrows against
the lion, Hercules strangled the animal with his hands.  He
returned carrying the dead lion on his shoulders; but Eurystheus
was so frightened at the sight of it and at this proof of the
prodigious strength of the hero, that he ordered him to deliver
the account of his exploits in future outside the town.

His next labor was to slaughter the Hydra.  This monster ravaged
the country of Argos, and dwelt in a swamp near the well of
Amymone, of which the story is that when the country was
suffering from drought, Neptune, who loved her, had permitted her
to touch the rock with his trident, and a spring of three outlets
burst forth.  Here the Hydra took up his position, and Hercules
was sent to destroy him.  The Hydra had nine heads, of which the
middle one was immortal.  Hercules struck off its head with his
club, but in the place of the head knocked off, two new ones grew
forth each time.  At length with the assistance of his faithful
servant Iolaus, he burned away the heads of the Hydra, and buried
the ninth or immortal one under a huge rock.

Another labor was the cleaning of the Augean stables.  Augeas,
king of Elis, had a herd of three thousand oxen, whose stalls had
not been cleansed for thirty years.  Hercules brought the rivers
Alpheus and Peneus through them, and cleansed them thoroughly in
one day.

His next labor was of a more delicate kind.  Admeta, the daughter
of Eurystheus, longed to obtain the girdle of the queen of the
Amazons, and Eurystheus ordered Hercules to go and get it.  The
Amazons were a nation of women.  They were very warlike and held
several flourishing cities.  It was their custom to bring up only
the female children; the boys were either sent away to the
neighboring nations or put to death.  Hercules was accompanied by
a number of volunteers, and after various adventures at last
reached the country of the Amazons.  Hippolyta, the queen,
received him kindly, and consented to yield him her girdle; but
Juno, taking the form of an Amazon, went among the other Amazons
and persuaded them that the strangers were carrying off their
queen.  The Amazons instantly armed and came in great numbers
down to the ship.  Hercules, thinking that Hippolyta had acted
treacherously, slew her, and taking her girdle, made sail
homewards.

Another task enjoined him was to bring to Eurystheus the oxen of
Geryon, a monster with three bodies who dwelt in the island
Erytheia (the red), so called because it lay at the west, under
the rays of the setting sun.  This description is thought to
apply to Spain, of which Geryon was said to be king.  After
traversing various countries, Hercules reached at length the
frontiers of Libya and Europe, where he raised the two mountains
of Calpe and Abyla, as monuments of his progress, or according to
another account rent one mountain into two and left half on each
side, forming the Straits of Gibraltar, the two mountains being
called the Pillars of Hercules.  The oxen were guarded by the
giant Eurytion and his two-headed dog, but Hercules killed the
giant and his dog and brought away the oxen in safety to
Eurystheus.

The most difficult labor of all was bringing the golden apples of
the Hesperides, for Hercules did not know where to find them.
These were the apples which Juno had received at her wedding from
the goddess of the Earth, and which she had intrusted to the
keeping of the daughters of Hesperis, assisted by a watchful
dragon.  After various adventures Hercules arrived at Mount Atlas
in Africa.  Atlas was one of the Titans who had warred against
the gods, and after they were subdued, Atlas was condemned to
bear on his shoulders the weight of the heavens.  He was the
father of the Hesperides, and Hercules thought, might, if any one
could, find the apples and bring them to him.  But how to send
Atlas away from his post, or bear up the heavens while he was
gone?  Hercules took the burden on his own shoulders, and sent
Atlas to seek the apples.  He returned with them, and though
somewhat reluctantly, took his burden upon his shoulders again,
and let Hercules return with the apples to Eurystheus.  (Hercules
was a descendant of Perseus.  Perseus changed Atlas to stone.
How could Hercules take his place?  This is only one of the many
anachronisms found in ancient mythology.)

Milton in his Comus makes the Hesperides the daughters of
Hesperus, and nieces of Atlas:

  "---- amidst the gardens fair
  Of Hesperus and his daughters three,
  That sing about the golden tree."

The poets, led by the analogy of the lovely appearance of the
western sky at sunset, viewed the west as a region of brightness
and glory.  Hence they placed in it the Isles of the blest, the
ruddy isle Erytheia, on which the bright oxen of Geryon were
pastured, and the isle of the Hesperides.  The apples are
supposed by some to be the oranges of Spain, of which the Greeks
had heard some obscure accounts.

A celebrated exploit of Hercules was his victory over Antaeus.
Antaeus, the son of Terra (the Earth) was a mighty giant and
wrestler, whose strength was invincible so long as he remained in
contact with his mother Earth.  He compelled all strangers who
came to his country to wrestle with him, on condition that if
conquered (as they all were), they should be put to death.
Hercules encountered him, and finding that it was of no avail to
throw him, for he always rose with renewed strength from every
fall, he lifted him up from the earth and strangled him in the
air.

Cacus was a huge giant, who inhabited a cave on Mount Aventine
(one of the seven hills of Rome), and plundered the surrounding
country.  When Hercules was driving home the oxen of Geryon,
Cacus stole part of the cattle, while the hero slept.  That their
foot-prints might not serve to show where they had been driven,
he dragged them backward by their tails to his cave; so their
tracks all seemed to show that they had gone in the opposite
direction.  Hercules was deceived by this stratagem, and would
have failed to find his oxen, if it had not happened that in
driving the remainder of the herd past the cave where the stolen
ones were concealed, those within began to low, and were thus
discovered.  Cacus was slain by Hercules.

The last exploit we shall record was bringing Cerberus from the
lower world.  Hercules descended into Hades, accompanied by
Mercury and Minerva.  He obtained permission from Pluto to carry
Cerberus to the upper air, provided he could do it without the
use of weapons; and in spite of the monster's struggling he
seized him, held him fast, and carried him to Eurystheus, and
afterwards brought him back again.  When he was in Hades he
obtained the liberty of Theseus, his admirer and imitator, who
had been detained a prisoner there for an unsuccessful attempt to
carry off Proserpine.

Hercules in a fit of madness killed his friend Iphitus and was
condemned for this offence to become the slave of Queen Omphale
for three years.  While in this service the hero's nature seemed
changed.  He lived effeminately, wearing at times the dress of a
woman, and spinning wool with the handmaidens of Omphale, while
the queen wore his lion's skin.  When this service was ended he
married Dejanira and lived in peace with her three years.  On one
occasion as he was travelling with his wife, they came to a
river, across which the Centaur Nessus carried travellers for a
stated fee.  Hercules himself forded the river, but gave Dejanira
to Nessus to be carried across.  Nessus attempted to run away
with her, but Hercules heard her cries, and shot an arrow into
the heart of Nessus.  The dying Centaur told Dejanira to take a
portion of his blood and keep it, as it might be used as a charm
to preserve the love of her husband.

Dejanira did so, and before long fancied she had occasion to use
it.  Hercules in one of his conquests had taken prisoner a fair
maiden, named Iole, of whom he seemed more fond than Dejanira
approved.  When Hercules was about to offer sacrifices to the
gods in honor of his victory, he sent to his wife for a white
robe to use on the occasion.  Dejanira, thinking it a good
opportunity to try her love-spell, steeped the garment in the
blood of Nessus.  We are to suppose she took care to wash out all
traces of it, but the magic power remained, and as soon as the
garment became warm on the body of Hercules, the poison
penetrated into all his limbs and caused him the most intense
agony.  In his frenzy he seized Lichas, who had brought him the
fatal robe, and hurled him into the sea.  He wrenched off the
garment, but it stuck to his flesh, and with it he tore away
whole pieces of his body.  In this state he embarked on board a
ship and was conveyed home.  Dejanira on seeing what she had
unwittingly done, hung herself.  Hercules, prepared to die,
ascended Mount OEta, where he built a funeral pile of trees, gave
his bow and arrows to Philoctetes, and laid himself down on the
pile, his head resting on his club, and his lion's skin spread
over him.  With a countenance as serene as if he were taking his
place at a festal board, he commanded Philoctetes to apply the
torch.  The flames spread apace and soon invested the whole mass.

Milton thus alludes to the frenzy of Hercules:

  "As when Alcides (Alcides, a name of Hercules; the word means
      "descendant of Alcaeus"), from OEchalia crowned
  With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore,
  Through pain, up by the roots Thessalian pines
  And Lichas from the top of OEta threw
  Into the Euboic Sea."

The gods themselves felt troubled at seeing the champion of the
earth so brought to his end; but Jupiter with cheerful
countenance thus addressed them; "I am pleased to see your
concern, my princes, and am gratified to perceive that I am the
ruler of a loyal people, and that my son enjoys your favor.  For
although your interest in him arises from his noble deeds, yet it
is not the less gratifying to me.  But now I say to you, Fear
not.  He who conquered all else is not to be conquered by those
flames which you see blazing on Mount OEta.  Only his mother's
share in him can perish; what he derived from me is immortal.  I
shall take him, dead to earth, to the heavenly shores, and I
require of you all to receive him kindly.  If any of you feel
grieved at his attaining this honor, yet no one can deny that he
has deserved it."  The gods all gave their assent; Juno only
heard the closing words with some displeasure that she should be
so particularly pointed at, yet not enough to make her regret the
determination of her husband.  So when the flames had consumed
the mother's share of Hercules, the diviner part, instead of
being injured thereby, seemed to start forth with new vigor, to
assume a more lofty port and a more awful dignity.  Jupiter
enveloped him in a cloud, and took him up in a four-horse chariot
to dwell among the stars.  As he took his place in heaven, Atlas
felt the added weight.

Juno, now reconciled to him, gave him her daughter Hebe in
marriage.

The poet Schiller, in one of his pieces called the Ideal and
Life, illustrates the contrast between the practical and the
imaginative in some beautiful stanzas, of which the last two may
be thus translated:

  "Deep degraded to a coward's slave,
  Endless contests bore Alcides brave,
  Through the thorny path of suffering led;
  Slew the Hydra, crushed the lion's might,
  Threw himself, to bring his friend to light,
  Living, in the skiff that bears the dead.
  All the torments, every toil of earth
  Juno's hatred on him could impose,
  Well he bore them, from his fated birth
  To life's grandly mournful close.
  Till the god, the earthly part forsaken,
  From the man in flames asunder taken,
  Drank the heavenly ether's purer breath.
  Joyous in the new unwonted lightness,
  Soared he upwards to celestial brightness,
  Earth's dark heavy burden lost in death.
  High Olympus gives harmonious greeting
  To the hall where reigns his sire adored;
  Youth's bright goddess, with a blush at meeting,
  Gives the nectar to her lord."
  S. G. Bulfinch


HEBE AND GANYMEDE

Hebe, the daughter of Juno, and goddess of youth, was cupbearer
to the gods.  The usual story is, that she resigned her office on
becoming the wife of Hercules.  But there is another statement
which our countryman Crawford, the sculptor, has adopted in his
group of Hebe and Ganymede, now in the gallery of the Boston
Athenaeum.  According to this, Hebe was dismissed from her office
in consequence of a fall which she met with one day when in
attendance on the gods.  Her successor was Ganymede, a Trojan boy
whom Jupiter, in the disguise of an eagle, seized and carried off
from the midst of his playfellows on Mount Ida, bore up to
heaven, and installed in the vacant place.

Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, describes among the decorations
on the walls, a picture representing this legend:

  "There, too, flushed Ganymede his rosy thigh
  Half buried in the eagle's down,
  Sole as a flying star shot through the sky
  Above the pillared town."

And in Shelley's Prometheus, Jupiter calls to his cup-bearer
thus:

  "Pour forth heaven's wine, Idaean Ganymede,
  And let it fill the Daedal cups like fire."

The beautiful legend of the Choice of Hercules may be found in
the Tatler, No. 97.  The same story is told in the Memorabilia of
Xenophon.



Chapter XIII

Theseus.  Daedalus.  Castor and Pollux

Theseus was the son of AEgeus, king of Athens, and of Aethra,
daughter of the king of Troezene.  He was brought up at Troezene,
and, when arrived at manhood, was to proceed to Athens and
present himself to his father.  AEgeus, on parting from Aethra,
before the birth of his son, placed his sword and shoes under a
large stone, and directed her to send his son to him when he
became strong enough to roll away the stone and take them from
under it.  When she thought the time had come, his mother led
Theseus to the stone, and he removed it with ease, and took the
sword and shoes.  As the roads were infested with robbers, his
grandfather pressed him earnestly to take the shorter and safer
way to his father's country, by sea; but the youth, feeling in
himself the spirit and the soul of a hero, and eager to signalize
himself like Hercules, with whose fame all Greece then rang, by
destroying the evil-doers and monsters that oppressed the
country, determined on the more perilous and adventurous journey
by land.

His first day's journey brought him to Epidaurus, where dwelt a
man named Periphetes, a son of Vulcan.  This ferocious savage
always went armed with a club of iron, and all travellers stood
in terror of his violence.  When he saw Theseus approach, he
assailed him, but speedily fell beneath the blows of the young
hero, who took possession of his club, and bore it ever
afterwards as a memorial of his first victory.

Several similar contests with the petty tyrants and marauders of
the country followed, in all of which Theseus was victorious.
One of these evil-doers was called Procrustes, or the Stretcher.
He had an iron bedstead, on which he used to tie all travellers
who fell into his hands.  If they were shorter than the bed, he
stretched their limbs to make them fit it; if they were longer
than the bed, he lopped off a portion.  Theseus served him as he
had served others.

Having overcome all the perils of the road, Theseus at length
reached Athens, where new dangers awaited him.  Medea, the
sorceress, who had fled from Corinth after her separation from
Jason, had become the wife of AEgeus, the father of Theseus.
Knowing by her arts who he was, and fearing the loss of her
influence with her husband, if Theseus should be acknowledged as
his son, she filled the mind of AEgeus with suspicions of the
young stranger, and induced him to present him a cup of poison;
but at the moment when Theseus stepped forward to take it, the
sight of the sword which he wore discovered to his father who he
was, and prevented the fatal draught.  Medea, detected in her
arts, fled once more from deserved punishment, and arrived in
Asia, where the country afterwards called Media received its name
from her.  Theseus was acknowledged by his father, and declared
his successor.

The Athenians were at that time in deep affliction, on account of
the tribute which they were forced to pay to Minos, king of
Crete.  This tribute consisted of seven youths and seven maidens,
who were sent every year to be devoured by the Minotaur, a
monster with a bull's body and a human head.  It was exceedingly
strong and fierce, and was kept in a labyrinth constructed by
Daedalus, so artfully contrived that whoever was enclosed in it
could by no means find his way out unassisted.  Here the Minotaur
roamed, and was fed with human victims.

Theseus resolved to deliver his countrymen from this calamity, or
to die in the attempt.  Accordingly, when the time of sending off
the tribute came, and the youths and maidens were, according to
custom, drawn by lot to be sent, he offered himself as one of the
victims, in spite of the entreaties of his father.  The ship
departed under black sails, as usual, which Theseus promised his
father to change for white, in case of his returning victorious.
When they arrived in Crete, the youths and maidens were exhibited
before Minos; and Ariadne, the daughter of the king, being
present, became deeply enamored of Theseus, by whom her love was
readily returned.  She furnished him with a sword, with which to
encounter the Minotaur, and with a clew of thread by which he
might find his way out of the labyrinth.  He was successful, slew
the Minotaur, escaped from the labyrinth, and taking Ariadne as
the companion of his way, with his rescued companions sailed for
Athens.  On their way they stopped at the island of Naxos, where
Theseus abandoned Ariadne, leaving her asleep.  For Minerva had
appeared to Theseus in a dream, and warned him that Ariadne was
destined to be the wife of Bacchus, the wine-god.  (One of the
finest pieces of sculpture in Italy, the recumbent Ariadne of the
Vatican, represents this incident.  A copy is in the Athenaeum
gallery, Boston.  The celebrated statue of Ariadne, by Danneker,
represents her as riding on the tiger of Bacchus, at a somewhat
