


THE

=NATIONAL PREACHER.=

Go ... Teach all Nations.... _Matt_. xxviii. 19.

VOL. II. NEW-YORK, DECEMBER, 1827. NO. 7.


=SERMON XXVI.=

By AARON W. LELAND, D.D.

CHARLESTON, S. CAROLINA.


THE PURE GOSPEL REJECTED BY THE PERISHING.

1 COR. I. 18.--_For the preaching of the cross is, to them that perish,
foolishness_.

In the Christian revelation, there is an evident purpose of infinite
wisdom, that in all the provisions for man's salvation, his moral agency
should be left free and uncontrolled. Instead of accommodation to human
prejudices, there is ample scope for captious objections. And if
additional proof were needed, of the divine origin of the Bible, it
would be found in this characteristic. Were it a system agreeable to the
narrow views, in unison with the selfish feelings, and gratifying to the
depraved taste of human nature, it would more resemble the fabrication
of man, than the workmanship of God. But as the current of its doctrines
is so entirely opposed to our natural inclinations, as to render a moral
renovation indispensable to a perception of the glory of revealed truth;
all such ground of skepticism is removed.

Thus the obscurities and difficulties of revelation are admirably
adapted to exhibit human character, and constitute this state of
existence a real probation. For if the light of truth came upon the mind
with resistless energy, and the operations of the divine government were
clearly disclosed; if the motives and designs of infinite wisdom were
fully explained, and the realities of the spiritual world completely
laid open to view; one principal aim of this dispensation would be
frustrated. On the one hand, there would be no field for the exercise of
faith and humble confidence on the part of Christians; and thus a
precious test of their submission and obedience would be destroyed. On
the other, there could not be a full disclosure of the true feelings of
the unrenewed heart. Because, as all would be evident as the noon-day
sun, there would remain no choice in the matter of embracing the
truth--no means of evincing whether its reception were cordial or
compulsory.

In this respect; there is displayed a matchless skill, as well as a
gracious condescension, in adapting revelation to the actual character
and condition of our race. While sufficient light is afforded to guide
the sincere inquirer, there is an obscurity to perplex and offend the
proud and self-confident. While the truth is accompanied by evidence
abundantly satisfactory to every mind open to conviction, enough of
mystery remains, to form an impassable barrier to those who are inclined
to disbelieve the testimony of God. While to the eye of faith there
appears a glorious system of wisdom and mercy, depraved reason and
prejudice may discover little else than an assemblage of inconsistencies
and absurdities.

It is not without design, then, that the great facts of revelation are
made liable to misrepresentation; that its essential principles are
arrayed against the pride of human wisdom; and that its blessed
institutions are so obnoxious to abuse and opposition. Such a
constitution of things is evidently intended to furnish a decisive
criterion of human character--to exhibit, in striking contrast, the
humble votaries of faith, who reverently bow to the authority of
Scripture; and the adherents of a haughty, self-confident rationality,
who will receive the testimony of God himself, no farther than it
accords with their opinions and prejudices--and thus to elicit a fair
and full manifestation of every man's real disposition and feelings.

Such, uniformly, has been the effect of the Bible, wherever its sacred
contents have been made known. To all who have received it with
penitence, humility, and confidence, as the infallible word of God, it
has proved their pleasure and delight--their fountain of
consolation--their guide to peace: while the self-righteous and
unbelieving have transformed it into a subject of perplexity and
disputation--_a cause of deeper guilt and more aggravated ruin_. The
Gospel has appeared transcendently beautiful and glorious to all who
have been savingly enlightened by the Holy Spirit--while, to the
impenitent and skeptical, it seems obscure, irrational, and
incomprehensible. The former rejoice in the scriptures, just as they
are, and willingly yield to the obedience of faith: the latter are ever
anxious to lower the standard of divine truth to the level of their
views of fitness, and to mould its materials into a form suited to their
unholy inclinations.

On these principles it is easy to perceive the real nature and causes of
the insidious warfare, which is maintained, in various forms, against
the essential doctrines of the Gospel. It is just an effusion of the
malignity of the unsanctified heart. Its prevalence is an exact
fulfilment of prophecy; and therefore an irrefragable proof of the truth
and divine authority of that system which it is labouring to destroy.
The emphatic declaration of the apostle, in the text, strikingly
describes the state of feeling which now actually prevails, among many
who enjoy all the external privileges of the Christian
dispensation--_The preaching of the cross is, to them that perish,
foolishness._

In illustration of this passage, it will be attempted, to explain the
import of the phrase, _the preaching of the cross_--to enumerate some of
the _instances_ and _causes_ of such preaching being accounted
_foolishness_--and to describe the _fearful state and prospects_ of
those who hold it in such low estimation.

The preaching of the cross is a plain and full announcement of all the
essential truths of that system which provides pardon and salvation for
the lost and guilty. The cross is the symbol of that amazing expedient
of infinite wisdom and mercy, by which a treaty of reconciliation is
offered to convicted traitors against Jehovah's government. Its
exhibition therefore must require a developement of the principles, and
a defence of the doctrines, peculiar to this gracious dispensation.

The grand fact, which constitutes the very essence and glory of the
Gospel, and which it is the leading object of the Christian ministry to
announce; is, that He, who took upon himself the form of a servant, and
offered up the sacrifice of Calvary, is _God over all, blessed for
ever_. This gives to the cross all its glory and efficacy. It is on the
supreme Deity of Christ--on the expiation made for sin by the Maker and
Sovereign of worlds--that the whole fabric of evangelical truth rests.
On any other supposition, the sacrifice of the cross was a very ordinary
affair. If the Saviour of sinners be not God--if he be a created being,
of whatever grade,--where is the _mystery of Godliness?_--Where those
unfathomable depths of divine love, _into which the angels desire to
look_? If Christ be only a servant of God, however exalted, what was
there, in his appearance on our world, to constitute a new era in
heaven, and to fill its inhabitants with astonishment and ecstasy? Did
the heavenly host descend in rapture, and cause the mountains of Judea
to reecho with their acclamations, because a _dependent creature_ had
_consented_ to do his Maker's will? Whence the ascription of _glory to
God in the highest_, and why do the courts above resound with a new song
of praise to God for his redeeming mercy, if this redemption was
effected by the labours and sufferings of one inferior to the Deity? Was
such a dispensation as that of Moses, designed simply to prepare the way
for a messenger of God to declare his will, and to seal the testimony
with his blood, as many good men have done, both before and since? Why
did patriarchs and prophets foretell his coming, and celebrate his
praises?--Why did the continual offering of divinely appointed
sacrifices, for many centuries, typify his sufferings?--And why did
nature shudder, and shroud herself in darkness, at the consummation of
those sufferings? All these things are utterly inexplicable, on the
supposition that Christ is a created dependent being.

But view him as _God manifest in the flesh_--view him as voluntarily
laying aside his glory, and descending from the throne of infinite
majesty, to assume the nature, and expiate the guilt of a ruined
race;--and we are struck with the appropriateness of all the attending
circumstances. The splendid ceremonials of the Jewish ritual, and the
raptured songs of prophets and of angels were well employed to prepare
the way for the visible manifestation of Deity among men. The
annunciation of the divine nature of the Redeemer must, therefore, be an
essential part of _the preaching of the cross_.

Equally indispensable is a decided testimony to that perfect _atonement
for sin_, which was made by this great offering. Here is the only
foundation of human hope. This was the grand object accomplished by the
Saviour's sufferings. Thus was completely solved the mysterious problem,
which all created intelligences had deemed inexplicable--how sin could
be remitted, without infringing the rights and tarnishing the honour of
