SERMON XXIX.

   The Sins of Communities Noted and Punished.
   Mat. xxiii.36.--"Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come
   upon this generation."



 * * * * *



SERMON I.

The Wisdom of God in the means used to propagate the Gospel.

1 Corinthians i. 27, 28.

"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and god hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen, and things which are not, to
bring to nought things which are." *


* The two discourses on this text were originally one, and preached
before Windham Association, at Thompson, October Session, 1798.
Probably some of the ideas which they contain, may have been suggested
by reading Paley's Evidences of Christianity; but as the author had
not that book in his possession when he wrote on this subject, he is
not able particularly to give credit to that excellent writer, if here
his due.

The mercy promised to the fathers was Christ, the Savior. That "the
desire of all nations should come," was a prediction of his
incarnation; and his entrance here was announced by a heavenly
messenger, with, "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy--to
all people."

Yet "when he came to his own, his own received him not!" To many he
hath been "a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense!"

The design and tendency of Christianity are most benevolent; but being
opposed to men's lusts, which rule in their members, all the
malevolence of depravity hath been excited against it. Jews and
Gentile united in the opposition. "The kings of the earth stood up and
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ--both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel." The Christian religion did not creep into the world
in the dark. It first appeared at an enlightened period, and among the
most enlightened of the nations. The sciences derived from conquered
Greece, had been improved at Rome, and communicated to its
dependencies. Syria was then a province of the Empire. Every movement
in Judea was observed and reported at the metropolis. The crucifixion
of our Savior was sanctioned by a Roman deputy; and the persecuted
Christians were allowed an appeal to Caesar. Soon therefore, did the
religion of Jesus make its way to Rome. The power of Rome had also
reached its acme; and as the spirit of Christianity was diverse from
that of the world, the learning and power of the Empire soon combined
against it. That this religion would be crushed and vanish away as a
dream of the night, was generally expected.

Every circumstance seemed to indicate such an event. Those reputed
wise, considered the gospel scheme as foolishness; and the instrument
which were chosen to propagate it were thought to be weak and
contemptible. It was also observed to spread chiefly among the lower
order of men, who had not the advantages of literature, nor been
initiated in the mysteries of Judaism, all which served to inspire its
enemies with confidence, that it would soon come to nought.

The apostle takes notice, in the context, of the contempt then so
generally poured on Christianity, and declares the wisdom of God in
the permission of it. He also predicts the triumph of the cross;
especially over the powers then combined against it--predictions which
afterwards fulfilled: For those powers were all subdued and humbled,
and Christ and the gospel exalted. The Christian religion was openly
professed, and became the most reputable religion in many countries;
particularly in Syria and at Rome and its numerous provinces; and by
the means then ordered of God. This is the spirit of the text--_God
hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, &c_.

In discussing the subject, we shall _consider the means used to
propagate the gospel--the opposition made against it--and the wisdom
of God in the choice of the means_; which will bring up to view some
of the objections which have been made against the truth of the
gospel.

In treating of the means used to propagate the gospel, we pass over
the preaching and miracles of Christ, and the wonders which took place
at his inexcuseable in neglecting so great salvation; but they
preceded sending the gospel to the gentiles, and the means used to
spread it among them. The apostle had no reference to Christ, or any
thing done or suffered by him, when he spake of _the foolish and weak,
and base things, used of God, to confound those which are wise and
mighty_. He spake only with reference to the instruments which were
chosen to carry the gospel abroad and persuade the nations of the
earth to receive it.

God hath all creatures at his command; he hath power to press the most
reluctant into his service, and to compel them to bear his messages
and execute his orders; as we see in the case of Balaam and Jonah. God
can make use of man to this end, either by reconciling them to
himself, and attaching them to his interest or by overruling their
corrupt and vicious designs to effect his holy purposes, without their
consent or knowledge. Most of the prophets were brought into his view,
and made desirous to honor him. Many pagan princes, and others, who
knew him not were yet made instrumental in doing his pleasure and
executing his designs. The divine sovereign never wants for agents to
accomplish his purposes. He sitteth on the circle of the heavens, and
orders the affairs of the universe in such a manner as to do his
pleasure. "None can stay his hand." Whether the agents which he
employs are willing or unwilling, mean so, or not, is of no importance
relative to the event. "His purposes stand, and the thoughts of His
heart to all generations." The attempts of creatures to reverse his
orders, and defeat his decree only help to their accomplishment. This
was particularly the case respecting the measures adopted by the
enemies of Christianity to prevent its spreading in the world.

The persons chosen of God and sent forth to propagate the religion of
Christ, were such as human wisdom would have judged very unsuitable.
Twelve poor, despised, illiterate men, were called to be apostles;
--most of them were fishermen. One was a publican; a collector of the
Roman tribute, which had been imposed on the Jews as a conquered
people. An employment so odious, that vile persons, regardless of
character, would only accept it. Such men we should judge exceedingly
unfit for ministers of religion, and not likely to succeed in making
converts to it. Yet such were those who were appointed of God, to be
prime ministers in the Christian church! Such the men who were sent
forth to change the form and administration of Judaism, and overthrew
the systems of Paganism, rendered venerable by a general
establishment, and the religious reverence of ages. The Jews' religion
was from God, who had given abundant evidence of its divine origin.
This Christ came not to destroy. But its external administration was
to be changed; and in apprehension of most of those who professed it,
it was less opposed to the gospel scheme, than Paganism. No others had
greater enmity to Christianity than the Jews, or entered into the
opposition position with warmer zeal. They commonly stood foremost,
and stirred up the Gentiles against it, and often with success.

In treating of the means used to propagate the gospel. We may observe
the powers imparted to those who were employed in the work. These Were
not such as human wisdom would have chosen. "Their weapons were not
carnal, though mighty through God." They had none at their command,
prepared to punish those who would not receive them, or the doctrines
which they inculcated--none to retaliate injuries done them. To abuse
they had nothing to oppose, except a patient exhibition of his temper,
who "when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered
threatened not, committing himself to him who judgeth righteously,"
and praying for his murderers on the cross.

False religions have often been propagated with the sword
--particularly that of Mahomet, and the Romish corruptions of
Christianity. These, especially the latter, were urged with every
species of cruelty--a mode of attempting to proselyte, evincive of
human folly. Arguments totally diverse are requisite to enlighten the
mind and produce conviction of a divine mission. With these came the
apostles of the Lamb. They were "endowed with power from on high;" and
forbidden of their Lord to enter on their ministry until it was
conferred upon them. This was accomplished on the day of Pentecost.

They had been previously convinced of Christ's truth. They seemed
indeed to waver when he suffered, but his resurrection, the
opportunities which they had with him after that event, and his
ascension, which they had witnessed, must have removed every doubt.
But this did not quality them for their work. It did not furnish them
with means to convince others, who had not witnessed those things. But
when the Holy Ghost came upon them, on that memorable occasion, they
were furnished. The gift of miracles was then, more abundantly than
before, imparted to them. In some respects, new and very necessary
communications were then made to them--particularly that of speaking
in tongues, which at once carried evidence of their divine mission,
and enabled them to go into all the world and preach the gospel to
every creature. This was the order of their Lord, but devoid of this
gift they could not have obeyed it.

This gift, as imparted to them, seems to have carried greater evidence
of their truth, than their barely speaking all languages. Men out of
every nation heard them speak on the day of Pentecost, _every man in
his own tongue_! Therefore were they amazed, and convinced that the
apostles were sent of God and that the gospel was of heavenly
derivation.

Those heralds of gospel grace were also inspired with courage to speak
boldly in the name and cause of Christ, nothing terrified by their
enemies; and "when brought before kings and rulers for his sake, a
mouth and wisdom were given them, which all their adversaries were
unable to gainsay or resist."

Such were the means used of God to propagate the gospel? such the
agents whom he employed and such their qualifications.

We are next to consider the opposition which was made to its
propagation.

Various circumstances combined the worlds against it. So far as
Christianity prevailed, every other religion must fall. No other could
stand in connexion with it. The Jewish was not to be overthrown; but
such changes were to take place in its outward form, that those who
did not know it to be typical of a better dispensation, considered it
as included in the general proscription; as doomed to destruction if
Christianity prevailed Against Stephen that was a principal charge
--"We have heard him say, that this Jesus, shall change the customs
which Moses hath delivered us."

The different systems of Paganism were not opposed to one another, as
they were to that of the gospel. They admitted a plurality of God
--some superior? others subordinate. They considered them not only as
holding different ranks, but as reigning over different countries and
nations. If one of their systems was true another might be so. But
Christianity admitted only "one God and one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus." It declared that all others who had been
called Gods and worshiped as such, were not Gods--that those who
sacrificed to them, sacrificed to demons--and it denounced utter,
eternal ruin against those who did not forsake them and acknowledge
Jehovah. Those peculiarities, apart from the nature of this religion,
which is opposed to the lusts of men which rule in their members,
would, of course, unite the world against it. Those of every other
religion would make a common interest in opposing this, which had
fellow-ship with none of them, but tended to their entire subversion
and utter ruin. And it is a fact, that the world did unite against the
religion of Jesus, and against those whom he had appointed to
inculcate it. Christianity then appeared devoid of support--the
opposition to have everything on its side. Christ's followers were a
little flock, destitute of power or learning, and in the world's view
utterly contemptible. Rome, the mistress of the world, had reached the
summit of her greatness; and she soon turned all her power against the
feeble band, who were laboring to diffuse the knowledge of Christ. and
calling men from dumb idols, to serve the living God.

To the eye of man how unequal the conflict? Had not those followers of
the Lamb been assured that their redeemer lived--that he was divine
--that he was with them, and would be with them, they would have
declined a contest with those before whom the world trembled. But they
entered, un-dismayed on the work assigned them, went through With and
completed it! They prospered in that to which they were sent. This had
never been done had not God been with them; for none of the advantages
possessed by their enemies were neglected. The first effects of enmity
to Christianity were directed against Christ's person. He had been
some time teaching and doing miracles in Judea, and numbers had
attached themselves to him. They considered him as a prophet mighty in
"word and deed." Some who witnessed his mighty works, exclaimed, "When
Christ cometh will he do more miracles than this man hath done?"
Others, "Is this not the Christ?"

These movements among the Jews drew the attention of their rulers, and
raised them to opposition. A humble, suffering Savior, did not suit
their pride and lust of power. They looked for a temporal deliverer,
who would lead them to victory, and subdue under them, the powers
which held them in subjection. No other would they receive as the
Messiah. As soon, therefore, as the fame of Jesus began to spread
abroad, and numbers treated him with respect, they resolved to destroy
him. At the feast of the passover, which called all the males of
Israel to Jerusalem, they caused him to be apprehended--tried him
their great council--condemned him to death, and importuned the Roman
governor to sentence him to the cross, as a rebel against Caesar.
The charge was not supported--Christ did not aspire to temporal
dominion--"his kingdom was not of this world." The governor declared
him not guilty. Had Christ, like the Arabian deceiver, which
afterwards arose, assumed the sword, marked his way with blood and
carnage, the Jews would have bid him welcome, and flocked to his
standard. Then he might have been denominated a rebel against Caesar.
But nothing of this nature was found upon him. Therefore were the Jews
his enemies; but the imperial magistrate "found no fault in him;"
though persuaded to consent to his death.

But though such were the temper and views of the Romans respecting
Christ, at the time of his sufferings, they were different when his
ministers went forth to set up his religion. When the nature of
Christianity was discovered, and it appeared opposed to Paganism, and
tending to its destruction, the Roman chieftains, who had been taught
to venerate their Gods, and claimed to be high priests of the national
religion, entered with zeal into the views of Christ's enemies, and
reared the standard against his followers. All their powers were
exerted to crush, the cause of the divine Immanuel. Ten general
persecutions are said to have been raised against the Christians; and
myriads of the faithful to have been sacrificed to heathen malice and
bigotry.

Neither were these the only enemies of Christ. The learning of the age
was applied to confound his followers. The sophistry of Grecian
metaphysics directed against his unlettered disciples. Who could have
expected Christ's little flock, devoid of every worldly advantage, to
have maintained their ground against such formidable enemies? Who,
judging by the rules of man's judgment, have entertained a suspicion
that they would not soon be driven from the field? But their cause was
that of God. Heaven was on their side, "In vain did the heathen rage
and the people imagine vain things. He who sitteth in the heavens,
laughed; the Lord had them in derision."



 * * * * * *



SERMON II.

The Wisdom of God in the means used to propagating the Gospel.

1 Corinthians i, 27, 28.

"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen, and things which are not, to
bring to nought things that are."


In the preceding discourse we took a summary view of the means used of
God to propagate the gospel, and of the opposition made to its
propagation.

We are now to consider the wisdom of God in the choice of means to
this end; which will bring up to our view some of the objections which
have been made against the truth of the gospel.

That the gospel is from God, and the means used to propagate it of his
appointment, are from sundry considerations, apparent--particularly
from the miracles wrought by Christ and by his disciples, who went
forth in his name. Conclusive was the reasoning of Nicodemus--"Rabbi,
we know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can do these
miracles that thou doest, except God be with him." God, who is perfect
in wisdom, would choose no improper or unsuitable means. Their wisdom
might not at first appear to men. It did not at first appear. The
world cried folly and weakness. But "The foolishness of God is wiser
than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men."

In God's hand any means are sufficient to effect his designs. The rod
of Moses, when stretched out by divine order, availed to bring all
those plaques on Egypt, by which God made himself known and feared.
When Israel left that land, it availed to open them a passage through
the sea; and afterwards to bring back its waters to the destruction of
their enemies.

Could we see no fitness in divine appointments, we should remember
that "we are of yesterday and know nothing," and not dare to arraign
divine wisdom, or charge folly on God. But in the case before us, his
wisdom is in many respects discernable, as will appear from a
consideration of some of the objections which are made against the
gospel, and against the means appointed of God to propagate it.

One of the objections is taken from the supposed unsuitableness of the
means. Considered in itself this made an objection. It is said the
all-wise God would not have appointed them--that to appoint a company
of poor, despised, ignorant fishermen, as prime ministers of a
religion, is sufficient to prove that it is not from God, who always
useth the best means and most suitable instruments.

It is not strange that this should have been objected at the beginning
of the gospel story, before any effects of the apostles labors
appeared. It is a natural objection for the, proud, who thought
themselves the best judges of wisdom and propriety, to have made at
that day. But it comes with an ill grace from modern infidels, who
cannot deny that Christianity triumphed over the power and learning of
the world combined against it, though such means only were used to
propagate it--such weak instruments employed in it. Naaman, the
Syrian, reasoned at first like one of these objectors, but the success
which attended the prophets directions convinced him of his error. Why
has not the same the like effect on these? Surely, "had this counsel
been of men, it would have come to nought." Under the circumstances in
which Christianity made its appearance, it would have been easily
overthrown; but the power of the world could not overthrow it,
or prevent it from spreading far and wide. It continued--it prospered
--and every opposing system fell before it. Means and instruments
which human wisdom would have judged most suitable, could have done no
more. The success of measures in a contest like this, proves their
fitness.
