

4. Buddha, the Universal Life.

Zen conceives Buddha as a Being, who moves, stirs, inspires,
enlivens, and vitalizes everything.  Accordingly, we may call Him the
Universal Life in the sense that He is the source of all lives in the
universe.  This Universal Life, according to Zen, pillars the heaven,
supports the earth, glorifies the sun and moon, gives voice to
thunder, tinges clouds, adorns the pasture with flowers, enriches the
field with harvest, gives animals beauty and strength.  Therefore,
Zen declares even a dead clod of earth to be imbued with the divine
life, just as Lowell expresses a similar idea when he says:

"Every clod feels a stir of might,
An instinct within it that reaches and towers,
And groping blindly above it for light,
Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers."

One of our contemporary Zenists wittily observed that 'vegetables are
the children of earth, that animals which feed on vegetables are the
grand-children of earth, and that men who subsist on animals are the
great-grand-children of earth.'  If there be no life in earth, how
could life come out of it?  If there be no life, the same as the
animal's life in the vegetables, how could animals sustain their
lives feeding on vegetables?  If there be no life similar to ours in
animals, how could we sustain our life by subsisting on them?  The
poet must be in the right, not only in his esthetic, but in his
scientific point of view, in saying-

"I must
Confess that I am only dust.
But once a rose within me grew;
Its rootlets shot, its flowerets flew;
And all rose's sweetness rolled
Throughout the texture of my mould;
And so it is that I impart
Perfume to them, whoever thou art."

As we men live and act, so do our arteries; so does blood; so do
corpuscles.  As cells and protoplasm live and act, so do elements,
molecules, and atoms.  As elements and atoms live and act, so do
clouds; so does the earth; so does the ocean, the Milky Way, and the
Solar System.  What is this life which pervades the grandest as well
as the minutest works of Nature, and which may fitly be said 'greater
than the greatest and smaller than the smallest?'  It cannot be
defined.  It cannot be subjected to exact analysis.  But it is
directly experienced and recognized within us, just as the beauty of
the rose is to be perceived and enjoyed, but not reduced to exact
analysis.  At any rate, it is something stirring, moving, acting and
reacting continually.  This something which can be experienced and
felt and enjoyed directly by every one of us.  This life of living
principle in the microcosmos is identical with that of the
macrocosmos, and the Universal Life of the macrocosmos is the common
source of all lives.  Therefore, the Mahaparinirvana-sutra says:

"Tathagata (another name for Buddha) gives life to all beings, just
as the lake Anavatapta gives rise to the four great rivers."
"Tathagata," says the same sutra, "divides his own body into
innumerable bodies, and also restores an infinite number of bodies to
one body.  Now be becomes cities, villages, houses, mountains,
rivers, and trees; now he has a large body; now he has a small body;
now he becomes men, women, boys, and girls."



5. Life and Change.

A peculiar phase of life is change which appears in the form of
growth and decay.  Nobody can deny the transitoriness of life.  One
of our friends humorously observed: "Everything in the world may be
doubtful to you, but it can never be doubted that you will die."
Life is like a burning lamp.  Every minute its flame dies out and is
renewed.  Life is like a running stream.  Every moment it pushes
onward.  If there be anything constant in this world of change, it
should be change itself.  Is it not just one step from rosy childhood
to snowy age?  Is it not just one moment from the nuptial song to the
funeral-dirge?  Who can live the same moment twice?
In comparison with an organism, inorganic matter appears to be
constant and changeless; but, in fact, it is equally subjected to
ceaseless alteration.  Every morning, looking into the mirror, you
will find your visage reflected in it just as it was on the preceding
day; so also every morning, looking at the sun and the earth, you
will find them reflected in your retina just as they were on the
previous morning; but the sun and the earth are no less changeless
than you.  Why do the sun and the earth seem changeless and constant
to you?  Only because you yourself undergo change more quickly than
they.  When you look at the clouds sweeping across the face of the
moon, they seem to be at rest, and the moon in rapid motion; but, in
fact, the clouds, as well as the moon, incessantly move on.

Science might maintain the quantitative constancy of matter, but the
so-called matter is mere abstraction.  To say matter is changeless is
as much as to say 2 is always 2, changeless and constant, because the
arithmetical number is not more abstract than the physiological
matter.  The moon appears standing still when you look at her only a
few moments.  In like manner she seems to be free from change when
you look at her in your short span of life.  Astronomers,
nevertheless, can tell you how she saw her better days, and is now in
her wrinkles and white hair.



6. Pessimistic View of the Ancient Hindus.

In addition to this, the new theory of matter has entirely over
thrown the old conception of the unchanging atoms, and they are now
regarded to be composed of magnetic forces, ions, and corpuscles in
incessant motion.  Therefore we have no inert matter in the concrete,
no unchanging thing in the sphere of experience, no constant organism
in the transient universe.  These considerations often led many
thinkers, ancient and modern, to the pessimistic view of life.  What
is the use of your exertion, they would say, in accumulating wealth,
which is doomed to melt away in the twinkling of an eye?  What is the
use of your striving after power, which is more short-lived than a
bubble?  What is the use of your endeavour in the reformation of
society, which does not endure any longer than the castle in the air?
 How do kings differ from beggars in the eye of Transience?  How do
the rich differ from the poor, how the beautiful from the ugly, bow
the young from the old, how the good from the evil, how the lucky
from the unlucky, how the wise from the unwise, in the court of
Death?  Vain is ambition.  Vain is fame.  Vain is pleasure.  Vain are
struggles and efforts.  All is in vain.  An ancient Hindu
thinker[FN#144] says:

"O saint, what is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in this
offensive, pithless body--a mere mass of bones, skins, sinews,
marrow, and flesh?  What is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in
this body, which is assailed by lust, hatred, greed, delusion, fear,
anguish, jealousy, separation from what is loved, union with what is
not loved, hunger, old age, death, illness, grief, and other evils?
In such a world as this, what is the use of the enjoyment of
pleasures, if he who has fed on them is to return to this world again
and again?  In this world I am like a frog in a dry well."


[FN#144]  Maitrayana Upanisad.


It is this consideration on the transitoriness of life that led some
Taoist in China to prefer death to life, as expressed in Chwang Tsz
(Su-shi):[FN#145]

"When Kwang-zze went to Khu, he saw an empty skull, bleached indeed,
but still retaining its shape.  Tapping it with his horse-switch, he
asked it saying: 'Did you, sir, in your greed of life, fail in the
lessons of reason and come to this?  Or did you do so, in the service
of a perishing state, by the punishment of an axe?  Or was it through
your evil conduct, reflecting disgrace on your parents and on your
wife and children?  Or was it through your hard endurances of cold
and hunger?  Or was it that you had completed your term of life?'

"Having given expression to these questions, he took up the skull and
made a pillow of it, and went to sleep.  At midnight the skull
appeared to him in a dream, and said: 'What you said to me was after
the fashion of an orator.  All your words were about the
entanglements of men in their lifetime.  There are none of those
things after death.  Would you like to hear me, sir, tell you about
death?'  'I should,' said Kwang-zze, and the skull resumed: 'In death
there are not (the distinctions of) ruler above minister below.
There are none of the phenomena of the four seasons.  Tranquil and at
ease, our years are those of heaven and earth.  No king in his court
has greater enjoyment than we have.'  Kwang-zze did not believe it,
and said: 'If I could get the Ruler of our Destiny to restore your
body to life with its bones and flesh and skin, and to give you back
your father and mother, your wife and children, and all your village
acquaintances, would you wish me to do so?'  The skull stared fixedly
at him, and knitted its brows and said: 'How should I cast away the
enjoyment of my royal court, and undertake again the toils of life
among mankind?'"


[FN#145] 'Chwang Tsz,' vol. vi., p. 23.



7. Hinayanism and its Doctrine.

The doctrine of Transience was the first entrance gate of Hinayanism.
 Transience never fails to deprive us of what is dear and near to us.
 It disappoints us in our expectation and hope.  It brings out grief,
fear, anguish, and lamentation.  It spreads terror and destruction
among families, communities, nations, mankind.  It threatens with
perdition the whole earth, the whole universe.  Therefore it follows
that life is full of disappointment, sufferings, and miseries, and
that man is like 'a frog in a dry well.'  This is the doctrine called
by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of Suffering.

Again, when Transcience once gets hold of our imagination, we can
easily foresee ruins and disasters in the very midst of prosperity
and happiness, and also old age and ugliness in the prime and youth
of beauty.  It gives rise quite naturally to the thought that body is
a bag full of pus and blood, a mere heap of rotten flesh and broken
pieces of bone, a decaying corpse inhabited by innumerable maggots.
This is the doctrine called by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of
Impurity.[FN#146]


[FN#146]  Mahasaptipatthana Suttanta, 7, runs as follows: "And,
moreover, bhikkhu, a brother, just as if he had been a body abandoned
in the charnel-field, dead for one, two, or three days, swollen,
turning black and blue, and decomposed, apply that perception to this
very body (of his own), reflecting: 'This body, too, is even so
constituted, is of such a nature, has not got beyond that (fate).'"


And, again, Transience holds its tyrannical sway not only over the
material but over the spiritual world.  At its touch Atman, or soul,
is brought to nothing.  By its call Devas, or celestial beings, are
made to succumb to death.  It follows, therefore, that to believe in
Atman, eternal and unchanging, would be a whim of the ignorant.  This
is the doctrine called by the Hinayanists the Holy Truth of No-atman.

If, as said, there could be nothing free from Transience, Constancy
should be a gross mistake of the ignorant; if even gods have to die,
Eternity should be no more than a stupid dream of the vulgar; if all
phenomena be flowing and changing, there could be no constant noumena
underlying them.  It therefore follows that all things in the
universe are empty and unreal.  This is the doctrine called by the
Hinayanists the Holy Truth of Unreality.  Thus Hinayana Buddhism,
starting from the doctrine of Transience, arrived at the pessimistic
view of life in its extreme form.



8. Change as seen by Zen.

Zen, like Hinayanism, does not deny the doctrine of Transience, but
it has come to a view diametrically opposite to that of the Hindus.
Transience for Zen simply means change.  It is a form in which life
manifests itself.  Where there is life there is change or Transience.
 Where there is more change there is more vital activity.  Suppose an
absolutely changeless body: it must be absolutely lifeless.  An
eternally changeless life is equivalent to an eternally changeless
death.  Why do we value the morning glory, which fades in a few
hours, more than an artificial glass flower, which endures hundreds
of years?  Why do we prefer an animal life, which passes away in a
few scores of years, to a vegetable life, which can exist thousands
of years?  Why do we prize changing organism more than inorganic
matter, unchanging and constant?  If there be no change in the bright
hues of a flower, it is as worthless as a stone.  If there be no
change in the song of a bird, it is as valueless as a whistling wind.
 If there be no change in trees and grass, they are utterly
unsuitable to be planted in a garden.  Now, then, what is the use of
our life, if it stand still?  As the water of a running stream is
always fresh and wholesome because it does not stop for a moment, so
life is ever fresh and new because it does not stand still, but
rapidly moves on from parents to children, from children to
grandchildren, from grandchildren to great-grandchildren, and flows
on through generation after generation, renewing itself ceaselessly.

We can never deny the existence of old age and death--nay, death is
of capital importance for a continuation of life, because death
carries away all the decaying organism in the way of life.  But for
it life would be choked up with organic rubbish.  The only way of
life's pushing itself onward or its renewing itself is its producing
of the young and getting rid of the old.  If there be no old age nor
death, life is not life, but death.



9. Life and Change.

Transformation and change are the essential features of life; life is
not transformation nor change itself, as Bergson seems to assume.  It
is something which comes under our observation through transformation
and change.  There are, among Buddhists as well as Christians, not a
few who covet constancy and fixity of life, being allured by such
smooth names as eternal life, everlasting joy, permanent peace, and
what not.  They have forgotten that their souls can never rest
content with things monotonous.  If there be everlasting joy for
their souls, it must be presented to them through incessant change.
So also if there be eternal life granted for their souls, it must be
given through ceaseless alteration.  What is the difference between
eternal life, fixed and constant, and eternal death?  What is the
difference between everlasting bliss, changeless and monotonous, and
everlasting suffering?  If constancy, instead of change, govern life,
then hope or pleasure is absolutely impossible.  Fortunately,
however, life is not constant.  It changes and becomes.  Pleasure
arises through change itself.  Mere change of food or clothes is
often pleasing to us, while the appearance of the same thing twice or
thrice, however pleasing it may be, causes us little pleasure.  It
will become disgusting and tire us down, if it be presented
repeatedly from time to time.

An important element in the pleasure we derive from social meetings,
from travels, from sight-seeings, etc., is nothing but change.  Even
intellectual pleasure consists mainly of change.  A dead, unchanging
abstract truth, 2 and 2 make 4, excites no interest; while a
changeable, concrete truth, such as the Darwinian theory of
evolution, excites a keen interest.



10. Life, Change, and Hope.

The doctrine of Transcience never drives us to the pessimistic view
of life.  On the contrary, it gives us an inexhaustible source of
pleasure and hope.  Let us ask you: Are you satisfied with the
present state of things?  Do you not sympathize with poverty-stricken
millions living side by side with millionaires saturated with wealth?
 Do you not shed tears over those hunger-bitten children who cower in
the dark lanes of a great city?  Do you not wish to put down the
stupendous oppressor--Might-is-right?  Do you not want to do away
with the so-called armoured peace among nations?  Do you not need to
mitigate the struggle for existence more sanguine than the war of
weapons?

Life changes and is changeable; consequently, has its future.  Hope
is therefore possible.  Individual development, social betterment,
international peace, reformation of mankind in general, can be hoped.
 Our ideal, however unpractical it may seem at the first sight, can
be realized.  Moreover, the world itself, too, is changing and
changeable.  It reveals new phases from time to time, and can be
moulded to subserve our purpose.  We must not take life or the world
as completed and doomed as it is now.  No fact verifies the belief
that the world was ever created by some other power and predestined
to be as it is now.  It lives, acts, and changes.  It is transforming
itself continually, just as we are changing and becoming.  Thus the
doctrine of Transience supplies us with an inexhaustible source of
hope and comfort, leads us into the living universe, and introduces
us to the presence of Universal Life or Buddha.

The reader may easily understand how Zen conceives Buddha as the
living principle from the following dialogues: "Is it true, sir,"
asked a monk of Teu tsz (To-shi), "that all the voices of Nature are
those of Buddha?"  "Yes, certainly," replied Teu tsz.  "What is,
reverend sir," asked a man of Chao Cheu (Jo-shu), "the holy temple
(of Buddha)?"  "An innocent girl," replied the teacher.  "Who is the
master of the temple?" asked the other again.  "A baby in her womb,"
was the answer.  "What is, sir," asked a monk to Yen Kwan (Yen-kan),
"the original body of Buddha Vairocana?"[FN#147] "Fetch me a pitcher
with water," said the teacher.  The monk did as he was ordered.  "Put
it back in its place," said Yen Kwan again.[FN#148]


[FN#147]  Literally, All Illuminating Buddha, the highest of the
Trikayas. See Eitel, p. 192.

[FN#148]  Zen-rin-rui-shu.



11. Everything is Living according to Zen.

Everything alive has a strong innate tendency to preserve itself, to
assert itself, to push itself forward, and to act on its environment,
