the natural lack of adaptation, and, though the work met with
delays and drawbacks, the church was completed in 1755. It is a
tradition of the time that when the frame of the building was
raised, the shout that burst from the lips of those engaged in or
watching the work was so loud and joyous that it might have been
heard for the distance of a mile. Verily, good people of this
parish, if your predecessors could not say that they had been
brought "through fire," they could at least say that they had been
"brought through water to a wealthy place"; wealthy, not in this
world's goods, but in those spiritual gifts which are the eternal
dowry of the Bride of Christ.

So much for the place. Next let us look at those who came
together. If the place of meeting had been hardly won, those men
had "endured hardness as good soldiers of Christ." Foremost, in
the full maturity of his manhood, stands the newly consecrated
bishop. He is in his fifty-sixth year. And inasmuch as the picture
with which we are all familiar was painted while he was in London,
we no doubt see him there as he was here in Middletown, a century
ago. And a goodly sight it is; the sight of one who looked, and
was, every inch a bishop.

Jeremiah Learning comes next to view. But for his advanced age,
and the fact that imprisonment in a damp and noisome cell had made
him a cripple for life, he would have stood in Seabury's place as
our first bishop. He is now in his sixty-eighth year, having been
born in Durham in 1717. He lived to the age of nearly eighty-
eight, and one who remembered him In his latest years says: "He
rises to my mind the very ideal of age and decrepitude--a small,
emaciated old man, very lame, his ashen and withered features
surmounted sometimes by a cap, and sometimes by a small wig--
always quiet and gentle in his manner." Such a condition as is
here described is still, however, in the future for him. He is
still vigorous enough to preside in the convention of the clergy,
until the new bishop takes that place, and to preach what was
called, in the quaint phraseology of the day, "a well adapted"
ordination sermon.

We turn to the secretary of the convention, Abraham Jarvis, who
will in time become the second bishop of this diocese. He has just
entered on the twenty-first year of his rectorship of this parish,
a position which he will hold for fourteen more years. He is
described, by one who knew him, as having "an uncommon tact at
public business, and in a talent at drafting petitions, memorials,
etc., having few, if any, superiors."

Most, if not all, of the excellent papers connected with the
negotiations for the Episcopate were drawn up by him, and on him
devolved nearly all the correspondence to which the negotiations
gave rise. Nine others of the clergy of the diocese were present,
and with them two from other places--the Rev. Benjamin Moore of
New York, who came in no official capacity, and the Rev. Samuel
Parker of Boston, who appeared as representing the clergy of
Massachusetts. Dr. Moore was afterwards the second Bishop of New
York, and Dr. Parker the second Bishop of Massachusetts. The
clergy had assembled on the day previous, August 2nd, and Bishop
Seabury had presented his letters of consecration. On the day we
are commemorating, the services began with the reception and
recognition of the bishop. Four of the clergy repaired to the
parsonage, which stood nearly where the house of the Hon. Benjamin
Douglas now stands, bearing with them the declaration of the
clergy then convened, that "they confirmed their former election,
and acknowledged and received Dr. Seabury as their Episcopal head.
Two of the four immediately carried back to the convention the
answer of acceptance by the bishop, while the other two followed
in attendance upon him, and conducted him to the church." Here,
sitting near the Holy Table, with the clergy gathered before him,
he listened to their address, which was read by the Rev. Dr.
Hubbard of New Haven. I quote from it three striking passages.
Their recognition of their new bishop was made in these words:
"We, in the presence of Almighty God, declare to the world, that
we do unanimously and voluntarily accept and receive you to be
_our Bishop_, supreme in the government of the Church, and in
the administration of all ecclesiastical offices. And we do
solemnly engage to render you all that respect, duty, and
submission, which we believe do belong and are due to your high
office, and which, we understand, were given by the presbyters to
their bishop in the Primitive Church while, in her native purity,
she was unconnected with, and uncontrolled by, any secular power."

After describing the earnest attempts to obtain the Episcopate
from England, and the final failure of the attempts, they add: "We
hope that the successors of the Apostles in the Church of England
have sufficient reasons to justify themselves to the world and to
God. We, however, know of none such, nor can our imagination frame
any."

At the close of the address, after blessing God for the way opened
in Scotland, whose bishops had freely given what they had freely
received, they add, out of their full hearts, burning words of
gratitude, and say: "Wherever the American Episcopal Church shall
be mentioned in the world, may this good deed which they have done
for us, be spoken of for a memorial of them."

To this address the bishop made a brief, but sufficient and
dignified reply, expressing, among other things, his reliance on
the "ready advice and assistance" of the clergy in the discharge
of his office; so foreshadowing the character of his Episcopate.

The ordination was then proceeded with, and the four deacons were
ordained. Dr. Leaming preached the sermon, as I have already said,
and Mr. Jarvis "officiated as archdeacon" and presented the
candidates. The order of service differed somewhat in arrangement,
but in nothing else, from our order as it stands today. But the
changes are not material enough to require any mention.

The ordination ended, the bishop dissolved the convention and
directed the clergy to meet him in convocation at a later hour.
This was the first convocation of the clergy of this diocese. They
had before _come_ together by their own agreement; now they
were _called_ together by their chief pastor. These meetings
of the clergy continued till within my own memory, though they had
ceased before I was consecrated, nor do I remember ever to have
attended one as either deacon or presbyter. They were usually
held. I believe, in connection with the sessions of the Diocesan
Convention.

Of those who were admitted on that third of August to the
diaconate, another will speak to you as I could not, so that
little remains for me to add.

We can scarcely now imagine to ourselves the mingled joy and
doubt, hopes and fears, thankfulness and uncertainty, that filled
the minds and agitated the hearts of those who came together here
a hundred years ago. The great point, no doubt, was gained; but
what was to follow? Would the consecration of Seabury be
everywhere accepted? or would there be those who would reject it
because an Act of Parliament had established Presbyterianism in
Scotland, and other Acts of Parliament had proscribed the Scotch
Episcopate? Would all churchmen in all the thirteen States of the
Confederation be united in one body? Or were there such discordant
elements, that they who held to the Apostolic Faith and Order
would be thrust out? Was there vitality enough in the Church in
Connecticut to live and grow? Or, when they who composed it then
were gone, would it dwindle and die out? No man could have
answered those questions then; God has answered them since. And as
we run back along the story of the years that have written out the
answer which we read _this_ day, we come at last to _that_ day,
so truly memorable, and to the bishop, the clergy, the candidates,
who then assembled to take their several parts in the first
Episcopal Ordination in America.

In the library of Trinity College is preserved--many of us must
have seen it--Bishop Seabury's Mitre. I am sure I cannot better
express what may be called our culminating thought today, than by
quoting some lines written by the Bishop of Western New York on
that venerable relic:

     "The rod that from Jerusalem
         Went forth so strong of yore,
      That rod of David's royal stem,
         Whose hand the farthest bore?
      St. Paul to seek the setting sun,
         They say, to Britain prest;
      St. Andrew to old Calidon,
         But who still farther West?


     "Go ask! a thousand tongues shall tell
         His name and dear renown,
      Where altar, font, and holy bell
         Are gifts he handed down;
      A thousand hearts keep warm the name,
         Which share those gifts so blest;
      Yet even this may tell the same,
         First mitre of the West!


     "Aye! keep it for this mighty West
         Till truth shall glorious be,
      And good old Samuel's is confest
         Columbia's primal see.
      'Tis better than a diadem,
         The crown that Bishop wore,
      Whose hand the rod of Jesse's stem
         The farthest westward bore!"


The Rev. Dr. Beardsley then read the following biographical
account of the four candidates admitted to the diaconate by Bishop
Seabury at his first ordination:

Of the candidates ordained in Middletown on the third of August,
1785, COLIN FERGUSON was the only one not of Connecticut. He came
from Maryland, and the testimonials recommending him were signed
by the Rev. Dr. William Smith, afterwards president of the House
of Deputies, and others of that State. He was born in Kent County,
and was the son of a Scotsman who emigrated to this country and
maintained a respectable character but never rose to affluent
circumstances. An opportunity occurred for the youth to accompany
a Scottish schoolmaster about to return to Edinburgh, and he
gladly availed himself of it and thus obtained a classical
education without expense to his father. After several years spent
at the University of Edinburgh, he came back to America with a
good reputation for scholarship, but it does not appear that he
had the ministry in mind so early as this. He found employment as
an instructor, and upon the establishment of Washington College,
Chestertown, Md., in 1782, he was chosen a professor in it, and
held the place until Dr. Smith, the president or principal,
returned to Philadelphia, when he was promoted to the headship of
the institution. It was under the direction of Dr. Smith that he
studied theology, and his ministerial labors were chiefly limited
to St. Paul's Parish, Kent County, of which for sometime he had
the charge in addition to his college duties. The degree of Doctor
of Divinity was conferred upon him shortly after his ordination by
the institution with which he was connected, and was a deserved
honor on the score of learning. He was a member of the August
General Convention of 1789, and signed as one of the delegation
from Maryland the "Resolves" of that body which led to the final
union and settlement of the Church in all the States.

About the year 1804, the Legislature of Maryland passed enactments
which deprived the college of the means of a liberal support, and
Dr. Ferguson thereupon resigned his office and "retired to his
farm in the vicinity of Georgetown Cross Roads, where he spent the
remainder of his life." He died of paralysis on the 10th of March,
1806, in the 55th year of his age.

"As a preacher," says one [Footnote: P. Worth, in Sprague's
_Annals of the American Episcopal Pulpit_, p. 344.] who was
his pupil for seven years and had constant opportunities to make
observations upon his character, "I cannot say he possessed any
remarkable power. His sermons, as specimens of composition, were
of a high order, creditable to him as a scholar and a writer, but
they were not strongly marked by an evangelical tone. Perhaps
I should not do him injustice, if I was to say that his sermons,
in this respect, were not very unlike those of the celebrated Dr.
Hugh Blair."

I take the names of the candidates in the order in which they lie
in the Registry Book of Bishop Seabury--not that this order
determines the actual order of ordination, for I am confident it
does not.

HENRY VAN DYCK was born in the city of New York in 1744, and was
the only son of his parents. He graduated from King's (now
Columbia) College in 1761, when the institution was in charge of
its first president, the Rev. Dr. Samuel Johnson. After
graduating, he studied law and located himself in Stratford,
Conn., whither the family had removed and become settled. He
married Huldah Lewis of that place, August 9, 1767, and on the
sixth day of the ensuing month, he and his wife were admitted as
communicants in Christ Church, which was then under the rectorship
of Dr. Johnson for the second time, he having resigned the college
and returned to Stratford.

It does not appear that he had much success in the legal
profession, and he wrote his discouragements to William Samuel
Johnson, special colonial agent from Connecticut, then in London,
who confided in his integrity and had entrusted him with the
collection of some debts that were his due. In his reply, Johnson
said: "It gives me concern to find that you have not met with that
obliging behaviour from the profession which you expected; those
men at the bar have, I believe, most of them experienced the
friendly assistance of those who have gone before them, and should
not therefore in point of gratitude refuse it to help those who
are coming forward and to succeed them, not to mention that it is
exceedingly ungenerous and illiberal to endeavour to cramp rising
genius, or use any attempts to monopolize a profession which
should be ever open to men of merit, and especially those who
enter into it in the regular methods of education. You will find,
however, that nothing will so effectually overcome any difficulties,
prejudices, or inconveniences of this nature as the course
you say you are in, and in which therefore you will by all
means persevere, of an assiduous, careful attention to your
business and an upright, diligent conduct in every branch of your
profession. This will secure you in the possession of the business
you have, and increase it, enable you to transact it with ease and
honor, and by degrees enforce the complaisance at least, if not
the esteem, of those who by some slights and little negligences
wished to have depressed you, and by that means perhaps secured to
themselves a greater proportion of business.

"I sincerely give you and Mrs. Van Dyck joy upon your marriage,
and hope you will long, very long, enjoy all the blessings of the
connubial state, which I have ever esteemed essential to human
happiness. It would have given me an additional pleasure to have
known that your father had consented to it, and though it seems he
would not, I still hope he may yet see such happy effects of the
measure as to approve it and be convinced by its consequences that
he ought not to have been so inflexibly averse to it." [Footnote:
Ms. Letter, November 23, 1767.]

Mr. Van Dyck continued the practice of law until about the time of
the outbreak of the Revolutionary War. He was brought forward as a
lay-reader under the auspices of the Rev. Ebenezer Kneeland,
successor in the Church at Stratford to the Rev. Dr. Johnson whose
granddaughter, Charity, he had married. From the records of the
Episcopal Church in the adjoining town of Milford, it appears that
at a vestry meeting, held April 17, 1776, after electing wardens
and vestrymen, Mr. Kneeland being present, it was "voted that Mr.
Henry Van Dyke be desired to read prayers on such Sundays as Dr.
Kneeland shall be absent, and that we will see him rewarded for
his trouble." This was done with entire unanimity by the advice
and consent of Mr. Kneeland. An item in a publication of the time,
under date of August, 1779, though incorrect in reporting him as a
clergyman, gives evidence that he had ceased to pursue the legal
profession: "The _Rev._ Henry Van Dyke is at Norwalk, and
wants to go to Long Island with his family."

After the independence of the colonies had been declared, the full
use of the liturgy of the Church of England was no longer
tolerated, and for ten years there was seldom any assembling for
prayers or preaching or any new choice of officers in the Church
at Milford. But in January, 1786, Mr. Van Dyck, being then in Holy
Orders, proposed to take the care of the churches in Milford and
West Haven, and his proposition was acceded to at a salary of 90
