_First Part_.

It was sayd of olde, that zeale was an _Intension of love_: of late,
that it is a compound of _love and anger, or indignation_.

The Ancients aimed right, and shot neere, if not somwhat with the
shortest. The moderne well discovered the use and exercise of more
affections, then love, within the fathome and compasse of zeale; but in
helping that default, went themselves somewhat wide, and came not close
to the marke: which I ascribe not to any defect of eye-sight in those
sharpe sighted Eagles; but onely to the want of fixed contemplation. And
to speake truth, I have oft wondered why poore _Zeale_, a vertue so high
in Gods books, could never be so much beholding to mens writings as to
obtain a just treatise, which hath beene the lot of many particular
vertues of inferiour worth; a plaine signe of too much under-value and
neglect.

Hee that shall stedfastly view it, shall finde it not to bee a degree or
intension of love, or any single affection (as the _Schooles_ rather
confined then defined zeale) neither yet any mixt affection (as the
later, rather compounded then comprehended the nature of it) but an _hot
temper, higher degree or intension of them all_. As varnish is no one
color, but that which gives glosse & lustre to all; So the opposites of
zeale, key-coldnes and lukewarmnesse, which by the Law of contraries
must bee of the same nature, are no affections, but severall tempers of
them all.

[Sidenote: Acts 26. 7.]

_Paul_ warrants this description where hee speakes of the twelve Tribes.
_They served God with intension or vehemency_.

The roote shewes the nature of the branch. Zeale comes of [Greek: zo],
a word framed of the very sound and hissing noise, which hot coales or
burning iron make when they meete with their contrary. In plaine
English, zeale is nothing but heate: from whence it is, that zealous men
are oft in Scripture sayd to burne in the spirit. [Greek: zeontes
pneumati].

Hee that doth moderately or remisly affect any thing, may be stiled
_Philemon_, a lover; he that earnestly or extreamely, _Zelotes_, a
zelot; who to all the objects of his affections, is excessively and
passionately disposed, his love is ever fervent, his desires eager, his
delights ravishing, his hopes longing, his hatred deadly, his anger
fierce, his greefe deep, his feare terrible. The Hebrewes expresse these
Intensions by doubling the word. This being the nature of zeale in
generall, Christian zeale of which wee desire onely to speake, differs
from carnall and worldly, chiefly in the causes and objects.

It is a spirituall heate wrought in the heart of man by the holy Ghost,
improoving the good affections of love, joy, hope, &c. for the best
service and furtherance of Gods glory, with all the appurtenances
thereof, his word, his house, his Saints and salvation of soules: using
the contrarie of hatred, anger, greefe, &c as so many mastives to flie
upon the throat of Gods enemies, the Divell, his Angels, sinne, the
world with the lusts thereof. By the vertue wherof a _Zealot_ may runne
through all his affections, and with _David_, breath zeale out of every
pipe, after this manner for a taste;

[Sidenote: Psalme Love.]

_How doe I love thy Law (O Lord) more then the hony or the hony-combe,
more then thousands of silver and gold!_

[Sidenote: Hatred.]

_Thine enemies I hate with a perfect hatred._

[Sidenote: Joy.]

_Thy testimonies are my delight: I rejoyce more in them, then they that
finde great spoyles, more then in my appoynted food._

[Sidenote: Grief.]

_Mine eyes gush out rivers of teares. Oh that my head were a fountain of
teares, because they destroy thy Law._

[Sidenote: Hope.]

_Mine eyes are dimme with wayting: how doe I long for thy salvation?_

[Sidenote: Feare.]

_Thy judgements are terrible, I tremble and quake, etc._

Look what pitch of affection the naturall man bestowes upon his dearest
darling, what unsatiable thirst the covetous worldling upon his Mammon,
the ambitious upon his honour, the voluptuous upon his pleasure; the
same the Christian striveth in equall, yea, (if possible) farre
exceeding tearmes to convert and conferre upon God and his worship.

In briefe, to open a little crevise of further light, and to give a
little glimpse of heat: Zeale is to the soule, that which the spirits
are to the bodie; wine to the spirits, putting vigour and agility into
them. Whence comes that elegant Antithesis in the Scripture. _Bee not
drunke with wine wherein is excesse, but be filled with the Spirit._

[Sidenote: Ser. 41. in Can. 49.]

[Sidenote: Acts 2.]

Christ is sayd to lead his Spouse into the wine-cellar: which Simily
_Bernard_ delighting oft to repeat, in two or three Sermons interprets
of a speciall measure of zeale inspired into his Church. Thus (saith
hee) Christ led his Disciples into the wine cellar on the day of
Pentecost; and filled them, and the house with such zeale as they came
forth like Giants refreshed with wine, and seemed to the people as men
drunke with new wine.

[Sidenote: Heb. 1. 7.]

It is to the soule, as wings to the foule: this also is a Scripture
embleme to picture the Angels with wings, as in the hangings of the
Temple, and in the visions of the revelation, in token of their ardent
and zealous execution of Gods will: whence also they have their name
_Seraphim_; hee maketh his ministers a flame of fire.

To this fire and these wings, which we in the Lords prayer desire to
imitate, there is nothing in us answerable but our zeale; as wheeles to
the charriot: which makes us not goe, but runne the wayes of Gods
Commandements, and so runne that we may obtaine. As sailes to the ship,
and winde to the sailes, to which alludes the phrase so frequent in
Scripture, _Plerophorie_.

As courage to the souldier, mettle to the horse, dust to the ground,
which makes it bring forth much fruit, yea an hundredfold: vivacity to
all creatures. To conclude this, this is that celestiall fire which was
shadowed out unto us by that poore element in comparison, and beggarly
rudiment, the fire (I meane) of such necessary use in the law, which
rather then it should be wanting, the Lord caused it to descend from
heaven, that it might cause the Sacrifices to ascend thither againe, as
a sweet incense unto the Lord, without which no burnt offering was
acceptable.


_The Second Part._

But now, as then, there are certaine false fires, abhominable to God,
odious to men, dangerous to the _Nadabs_ and _Abihues_ that meddle with
them, bringing thereby coales upon their owne heads, & ill favor upon
all their services; & not onely so, but that which is worse, an ill
report and surmize even on those that offer the right fire, & serve the
Lord in spirit and truth: yet for their sakes is the name of zeale
blasphemed all the day long.

Against these, as then, so now severe caveats and cleere distinctions
must bee laid, lest such as have not their senses exercised to put a
difference, mistake poysonfull weedes for wholesome hearbes, to their
owne destruction; and for the sake of the one, revile the other to the
wrong of God and his Saints.

It fares not otherwise with the soule then with the body: besides the
native & radicall heat, the principall instrument of life, there are
aguish and distempered heats, the causes of sicknesse and death.

To discerne of those, requires some skill and judgement: yet a good
Empirick, a Christian of experience will give a shrewd ghesse at them,
the easier & the better if he marke these following signes and
symptomes, common to all the kinds of false zeale, here also following.

[Sidenote: 1 Ostentation.]

First, they are deeply sicke of the pharisaicall humor, they love to be
seene of men, and say with _Jehu, Come and see how zealous I am for the
Lord of hosts_: they proclaime their almes with a trumpet, paint their
good deedes upon Church windowes, engrave their legacies upon tombes,
have their acts upon record: Thus, Comets blaze more then fixed Starres.
Aguish heats breede flushings, & are more seen in the face, then natural
warmth at the heart. Schollers count hiding of Art the best Art: the
godly man studies by all meanes how to conceale the one hand from the
other, in doing well; hiding of zeale is the best zeale.

Secondly, of _Ahabs_ disease exceeding in externall humiliation,
affected gestures, passionate sighes, lowdnesse of voyce, odde attires &
such like: These know how to rend the garment, hang the head with the
bulrush, to whip and launce their skinnes with _Baals_ Priests; and yet
strangers to a wounded spirit: not but that true and hearty zeale doth
lift up the eyes, knocke the breast, dance before the Arke. Therefore
this character may deceive the unwarie; Let _Ely_ take heede of judging
_Hanna's_ Spirit rashly by the mooving of her lips: yet hypocrites so
usually straine nature and without a cause exceed, and that in publique,
and upon the stage, that for the most part, their actions and affections
are palpable: as _Jesuites, Cappuchins_, &c. yea in many histrionicall
Protestants: Horse-coursers jades will bound, curvet and shew more
tricks, then a horse well mettled for the rode or cart.

[Sidenote: 3 Complementall.]

Thirdly, you may know them by their diligence and curiositie in lighter
matters joyned with omission and neglect of greater, wise in
circumstance, and carelesse in substance, tithing mint, straining at
