material body on the tossing surges. Whether we suppose the miracle as
wrought on the one or the other, makes no difference to its value as a
manifestation of the glory of Christ, and of His power over the
physical order of things. In the latter case there would, perhaps, be
a hint of a power residing in His material frame, of which we possibly
have other phases, as in the Transfiguration, which may be a prophecy
of what lordship over nature is possible to a sinless manhood. However
that may be, we have here a wonderful picture which is true for all
ages of the mighty Christ, to whose gentle footfall the unquiet surges
are as a marble pavement; and who draws near in the purposes of His
love, unhindered by antagonism, and using even opposing forces as the
path for His triumphant progress. Two lessons may be drawn from this.
One is that in His marvellous providence Christ uses all the tumults
and unrest, the opposition and tempests which surround the ship that
bears His followers, as the means of achieving His purposes. We stand
before a mystery to which we have no key when we think of these two
certain facts; first, the Omnipotent redeeming will of God in Christ;
and, second, the human antagonism which is able to rear itself against
that. And we stand in the presence of another mystery, most blessed,
and yet which we cannot unthread, when we think, as we most assuredly
may, that in some mysterious fashion He works His purposes by the very
antagonism to His purposes, making even head-winds fill the sails, and
planting His foot on the white crests of the angry and changeful
billows. How often in the world's history has this scene repeated
itself, and by a divine irony the enemies have become the helpers of
Christ's cause, and what they plotted for destruction has turned out
rather to the furtherance of the Gospel! 'He maketh the wrath of man
to praise Him, and with the residue thereof He girdeth Himself.'

Another lesson for our individual lives is this, that Christ, in His
sweetness and His gentle sustaining help, comes near to us all across
the sea of sorrow and trouble. A more tender, a more gracious sense of
His nearness to us is ever granted to us in the time of our darkness
and our grief than is possible to us in the sunny hours of joy. It is
always the stormy sea that Christ comes across, to draw near to us;
and they who have never experienced the tempest have yet to learn the
inmost sweetness of His presence. When it is night, and it is dark, at
the hour which is the keystone of night's black arch, Christ comes to
us, striding across the stormy waters. Sorrow brings _Him_ near to
_us_. Do you see that sorrow does not drive _you_ away from Him!

III. Then, still further, we note in the story before us the terror
and the recognition.

St. John does not tell us why they were afraid. There is no need to
tell us. They see, possibly in the chill uncertain light of the grey
dawn breaking over the Eastern hills, a Thing coming to them across
the water there. They had fought gallantly with the storm, but this
questionable shape freezes their heart's blood, and a cry, that is
audible above even the howling of the wind and the dash of the waves,
gives sign of the superstitious terror that crept round the hearts of
those commonplace, rude men.

I do not dwell upon the fact that the average man, if he fancies that
anything from out of the Unseen is near him, shrinks in fear. I do not
ask you whether that is not a sign and indication of the deep
conviction that lies in men's souls, of a discord between themselves
and the unseen world; but I ask you if we do not often mistake the
coming Master, and tremble before Him when we ought to be glad?

We are often so absorbed with our work, so busy tugging at the oar, so
anxiously watching the set of current, so engaged in keeping the helm
right, that we have no time and no eyes to look across the ocean and
see who it is that is coming to us through all the hurly-burly. Our
tears fill our eyes, and weave a veil between us and the Master. And
when we do see that there is Something there, we are often afraid of
it, and shrink from it. And sometimes when a gentle whisper of
consolation, or some light air, as it were, of consciousness of His
presence, breathes through our souls, we think that it is only a
phantasm of our own making, and that the coming Christ is nothing more
than the play of our thoughts and imaginations.

Oh, brethren, let no absorption in cares and duties, let no
unchildlike murmurings, let no selfish abandonment to sorrow, blind
you to the Lord who always comes near troubled hearts, if they will
only look and see! Let no reluctance to entertain religious ideas, no
fear of contact with the Unseen, no shrinking from the thought of
Christ as a _Kill-joy_ keep you from seeing Him as He draws near to
you in your troubles. And let no sly, mocking Mephistopheles of doubt,
nor any poisonous air, blowing off the foul and stagnant marshes of
present materialism, make you fancy that the living Reality, treading
on the flood there, is a dream or a fancy or the projection of your
own imagination on to the void of space. He is real, whatever may be
phenomenal and surface. The storm is not so real as the Christ, the
waves not so substantial as He who stands upon them. They will pass
and quieten, He will abide for ever. Lift up your hearts and be glad,
because the Lord comes to you across the waters, and hearken to His
voice: 'It is I! Be not afraid.'

The encouragement not to fear follows the proclamation, 'It is I!'
What a thrill of glad confidence must have poured itself into their
hearts, when once they rose to the height of that wondrous fact!

  'Well roars the storm to those who hear
   A deeper voice across the storm.'

There is no fear in the consciousness of His presence. It is His old
word: 'Be not afraid!' And He breathes it whithersoever He comes; for
His coming is the banishment of danger and the exorcism of dread. So
that if only you and I, in the midst of all storm and terror, can say
'It is the Lord,' then we may catch up the grand triumphant chorus of
the old psalm, and say: 'Though the waters thereof roar and be
troubled, and the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, yet
I will not fear.' The Lord is with us; the everlasting Christ is our
Helper, our Refuge, and our Strength.

IV. So, lastly, we have here in this story the end of the tempest and
of the voyage.

Our Evangelist does not record, as the others do, that the storm
ceased upon Christ's being welcomed into the little boat. The other
Evangelists do not record, as he does, the completion of the voyage.
'Immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.' The two
things are cause and effect. I do not suppose, as many do, that a
subordinate miracle is to be seen in that last clause of our text, or
that the 'immediately' is to be taken as if it meant that without one
moment's delay, or interval, the voyage was completed; but only, which
I think is all that is needful, that the falling of the tempest and
the calming of the waters which followed upon the Master's entrance
into the vessel made the remainder of the voyage comparatively brief
and swift.

It is not always true, it is very seldom true, that when Christ comes
on board opposition ends, and the haven is reached. But it is always
true that when Christ comes on board a new spirit enters into the men
who have Him for their companion, and are conscious that they have. It
makes their work easy, and makes them 'more than conquerors' over what
yet remains. With what a different spirit the weary men would bend
their backs to the oars once more when they had the Master on board,
and with what a different spirit you and I will set ourselves to our
work if we are sure of His presence. The worst of trouble is gone when
Christ shares it with us. There is a wonderful charm to stay His rough
wind in the assurance that in all our affliction He is afflicted. If
we feel that we are following in His footsteps, we feel that He stands
between us and the blast, a refuge from the storm and a covert from
the tempest. And if still, as no doubt will be the case, we have our
share of trouble and storm and sorrow and difficulty, yet the worst of
the gale will be passed, and though a long swell may still heave, the
terror and the danger will have gone with the night, and hope and
courage and gladness revive as the morning's sun breaks over the still
unquiet waves, and shows us our Master with us and the white walls of
the port glinting in the level beams.

Friends, life is a voyage, anyhow, with plenty of storm and danger and
difficulty and weariness and exposure and anxiety and dread and
sorrow, for every soul of man. But if you will take Christ on board,
it will be a very different thing from what it will be if you cross
the wan waters alone. Without Him you will make shipwreck of
yourselves; with Him your voyage may seem perilous and be tempestuous,
but He will 'make the storm a calm,' and will bring you to the haven
of your desire.




HOW TO WORK THE WORK OF GOD

'Then said they unto Him, What shall we do, that we might work the
works of God? 29. Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work
of God, that ye, believe on Him whom He hath sent.'--JOHN vi. 28, 29.

The feeding of the five thousand was the most 'popular' of Christ's
miracles. The Evangelist tells us, with something between a smile and
a sigh, that 'when the people saw it, they said, This is of a truth
that Prophet that should come into the world,' and they were so
delighted with Him and with it, that they wanted to get up an
insurrection on the spot, and make a King of Him. I wonder if there
are any of that sort of people left. If two men were to come into
Manchester to-morrow morning, and one of them were to offer material
good, and the other wisdom and peace of heart, which of them, do you
think, would have the larger following? We need not cast a stone at
the unblushing, frank admiration that these men had for a Prophet who
could feed them, for that is exactly the sort of prophet that a great
number of us would like best if they spoke out.

So Jesus Christ had to escape from the inconvenient enthusiasm of
these mistaken admirers of His; and they followed Him in their
eagerness, but were met with words which lift them into another region
and damp their zeal. He tries to turn away their thoughts from the
miracle to a far loftier gift. He contrasts the trouble which they
willingly took in order to get a meal with their indifference as to
obtaining the true bread from heaven, and He bids them work for it
just as they had shown themselves ready to work for the other.

They put to Him this question of my text, so strangely blending as it
does right and wrong, 'You have bid us work; tell us how to work? What
must we do that we may work the works of God?' Christ answers, in
words that illuminate their confusions and clear the whole matter,
'This is the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent.'

I. Faith, then, is a work.

You know that the commonplace of evangelical teaching opposes faith to
works; and the opposition is perfectly correct, if it be rightly
understood. But I have a strong impression that a great deal of our
preaching goes clean over the heads of our hearers, because we take
for granted, and they fancy that they understand, the meaning of terms
because the terms themselves are so familiar. And I believe that many
people go to churches and chapels all their lives long, and hear this
doctrine dinned into them, that they are to be saved by faith, and not
by works, and never approach a definite understanding of what it
means.

So let me just for a moment try to clear up the terms of this
apparently paradoxical statement that faith is a work. What do we mean
by faith? What do you mean by saying that you have faith in your
friend, in your wife, in your husband, in your guide? You simply mean,
and we mean, that you trust the person, grasping him by the act of
trust. On trust the whole fabric of human society depends, as well as
in another aspect of the same expression does the whole fabric of
Manchester commerce. Faith, confidence, the leaning of myself on one
discerned to be true, trusty, strong, sufficient for the purpose in
hand, whatever it may be--that, and nothing more mysterious, nothing
further away from daily life and the common emotions which knit us to
one another, is, as I take it, what the New Testament means when it
insists upon faith.

Ah, we all exercise it. You put it forth in certain low levels and
directions. 'The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her,' is
the short summary of the happy lives of many, I have no doubt, of my
present hearers. Have you none of that confidence to spare for God? Is
it all meant to be poured out upon weak, fallible, changeful creatures
like ourselves, and none of it to rise to the One in whom absolute
confidence may eternally be fixed?

But then, of course, as we may see by the exercise of the same emotion
in regard to one Another, the under side (as I have been accustomed to
say to you) of this confidence in God or Christ is diffidence of
myself. There is no real exercise of confidence which does not
involve, as an essential part of itself, the going out from myself in
order that I may lay all the weight and the responsibility of the
matter in hand upon Him in whom I trust. And so Christian faith is
compounded of these two elements, or rather, it has these two sides
which correspond to one another. The same figure is convex or concave
according as you look at it from one side or another. If you look at
faith from one side, it rises towards God; if from the other, it
hollows itself out into a great emptiness. And so the under side of
faith is distrust; and he that puts his confidence in God thereby goes
out of himself, and declares that in himself there is nothing to rest
upon.

Now that two-sided confidence and diffidence, trust and distrust,
which are one, is truly a work. It is not an easy one either; it is
the exercise of our own inmost nature. It is an effort of will. It has
to be done by coercing ourselves. It has to be maintained in the face
of many temptations and difficulties. The contrast between faith and
work is between an inward act and a crowd of outward performances. But
the faith which knits me to God is my act, and I am responsible for
it.

But yet it is not a work, just because it is a ceasing from my own
works, and going out from myself that He may enter in. Only remember,
when we say, 'Not by works of righteousness, but by the faith of
Christ,' we are but proclaiming that the inward man must exercise that
act of self-abnegation and confession of its own impotence, and
ceasing from all reliance on anything which it does, whereby, and
whereby alone, it can be knit to God. 'Labour not for the meat that
perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto eternal life.... This
is the work of God, that ye believe.' You are responsible for doing
that, or for not doing it.

II. Secondly, faith, and not a multitude of separate acts, is what
pleases God.

Mark the difference between the form of the question and that of the
answer. The people say, 'What are we to do that we may work the
_works_ of God?' Christ answers in the singular: 'This is the _work_.'
They thought of a great variety of observances and deeds. He gathers
them all up into one. They thought of a pile, and that the higher it
rose the more likely they were to be accepted. He unified the
requirement, and He brought it all down to this one act, in which all
other acts are included, and on which alone the whole weight of a
man's salvation is to rest. 'What shall we do that we might work the
works of God?' is a question asked in all sorts of ways, by the hearts
of men all round about us; and what a babble of answers comes! The
priest says, 'Rites and ceremonies.' The thinker says, 'Culture,
education.' The moralist says, 'Do this, that, and the other thing,'
and enumerates a whole series of separate acts. Jesus Christ says,
'One thing is needful.... This is the work of God.' He brushes away
the sacerdotal answer and the answer of the mere moralist, and He
says, 'No! Not _do_; but _trust_.' In so far as that is act, it is the
only act that you need.

That is evidently reasonable. The man is more than his work; motive is
more important than action; character is deeper than conduct. God is
pleased, not by what men do, but by what men are. We must _be_ first,
and then we shall _do_. And it is obviously reasonable, because we can
find analogies to the requirement in all other relations of life. What
would you care for a child that scrupulously obeyed, and did not love
or trust? What would a prince think of a subject who was ostentatious
in acts of loyalty, and all the while was plotting and nurturing
treason in his heart?

If doing separate acts of righteousness be the way to work the works
of God, then no man has ever done them. For it is a plain fact that
every man falls below his own conscience--which conscience is less
scrupulous than the divine law. The worst of us knows a great deal
more than the best of us does; and our lives, universally, are, at the
best, lives of partial effort after unreached attainments of obedience
and of virtue.

But, even supposing that we could perform, far more completely than we
do, the requirements of our own consciences, and conform to the
evident duties of our position and relations, do you think that
without faith we should be therein working the works of God? Suppose a
man were able fully to realise his own ideal of goodness, without any
confidence in God underlying all his acts; do you think that these
would be acts that would please God? It seems to me that, however
lovely and worthy of admiration, looked at with human eyes only, many
lives are, which have nobly and resolutely fought against evil, and
struggled after good, if they have lacked the crowning grace of doing
this for God's sake, they lack, I was going to say, almost everything;
I will not say that, but I will say that they lack that which makes
them acceptable, well-pleasing to Him. The poorest, the most imperfect
realisation of our duty and ideal of conduct which has in it a love
towards God and a faith in Him that would fain do better if it could,
is a nobler thing, I venture to say, in the eyes of Heaven--which are
the truth-seeing eyes--than the noblest achievements of an untrusting
soul. It does not seem to me that to say so is bigotry or narrowness
or anything else but the plain deduction from this, that a man's
relation to God is the deepest thing about him, and that if that be
right, other things will come right, and if that be wrong nothing is
as right as it might be.

Here we have Jesus Christ laying the foundation for the doctrine which
is often said to be Pauline, as if that meant something else than
coming from Jesus Christ. We often hear people say, 'Oh, your
evangelical teaching of justification by faith, and all that, comes
out of Paul's Epistles, not out of Christ's teaching, nor out of
John's Gospel.' Well, there is a difference, which it is blindness not
to recognise, between the seeds of teaching in our Lord's words, and
the flowers and fruit of these seeds, which we get in the more
systematised and developed teaching of the Epistles. I frankly admit
that, and I should expect it, with my belief as to who Christ is, and
who Paul is. But in that saying, 'This is the work of God, that ye
believe on Him whom He hath sent,' is the germ of everything that Paul
has taught us about the works of the law being of no avail, and faith
being alone and unfailing in its power of uniting men to God, and
bringing them into the possession of eternal life. The saying stands
in John's Gospel, and so Paul and John alike received, though in
different fashions, and wrought out on different lines of subsequent
teaching, the germinal impulse from these words of the Master. Let us
hear no more about salvation by faith being a Pauline addition to
Christ's Gospel, for the lips of Christ Himself have declared 'this is
the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent.'

III. Thirdly, this faith is the productive parent of all separate
works of God.

The teaching that I have been trying to enforce has, I know, been so
presented as to make a pillow for indolence, and to be closely allied
to immorality. It has been so presented, but it has not been so
presented half as often as its enemies would have us believe. For I
know of but very few, and those by no means the most prominent and
powerful of the preachers of the great doctrine of salvation by faith,
who have not added, as its greatest teacher did: 'Let ours also be
careful to maintain good works for necessary uses.' But the true
teaching is not that trust is a substitute for work, but that it is
the foundation of work. The Gospel is, first of all, Trust; then, set
yourselves to do the works of faith. It works by love, it is the
opening of the heart to the entrance of the life of Christ, and, of
course, when that life comes in, it will act in the man in a manner
appropriate to its origin and source, and he that by faith has been
joined to Jesus Christ, and has opened his heart to receive into that
heart the life of Christ, will, as a matter of course, bring forth, in
the measure of his faith, the fruits of righteousness.

We are surely not despising fruits and flowers when we insist upon the
root from which they shall come. A man may take separate acts of
partial goodness, as you see children in the springtime sticking
daisies on the spikes of a thorn-twig picked from the hedges. But
these will die. The basis of all righteousness is faith, and the
manifestation of faith is practical righteousness. 'Show Me thy faith
by thy works' is Christ's teaching quite as much as it is the teaching
of His sturdy servant James. And so, dear friends, we are going the
shortest way to enrich lives with all the beauties of possible human
perfection when we say, 'Begin at the beginning. The longest way round
is the shortest way home; trust Him with all your hearts first, and
that will effloresce into "whatsoever things are lovely and whatever
things are of good report."' In the beautiful metaphor of the Apostle
Peter, in his second Epistle, Faith is the damsel who leads in the
chorus of consequent graces; and we are exhorted to 'add to our faith
virtue,' and all the others that unfold themselves in harmonious
sequence from that one central source.

If I had time I should be glad to turn for a moment to the light which
such considerations cast upon subjects that are largely occupying the
attention of the Christian Church to-day. I should like to insist
that, before you talk much about applied Christianity, you should be
very sure that in men there _is_ a Christianity to apply. I venture to
profess my own humble belief that in ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred, Christian ministers and churches will do no more for the
social, political, and intellectual and moral advancement of men and
the elevation of the people by sticking to their own work and
preaching this Gospel--'This is the work of God, that ye believe on
Him whom He hath sent.'

IV. Lastly, this faith secures the bread of life.

The bread of life is the starting-point of the whole conversation. In
the widest possible sense it is whatsoever truly stills the hunger of
the immortal soul. In a deeper sense it is the person of Jesus Christ
Himself, for He not only says that He will _give_, but that He _is_
the Bread of Life. And, in the deepest sense of all, it is His flesh
broken for us in His sacrifice on the Cross. That bread is a gift. So
the paradox results which stands in our text--_work_ for the bread
which God will _give_. If it be a gift, that fact determines what sort
of work must be done in order to possess it. If it be a gift, then the
only work is to accept it. If it be a gift, then we are out of the
region of _quid pro quo_; and have not to bring, as Chinese do, great
strings of copper cash that, all added up together, do not amount to a
shilling, in order to buy what God will bestow upon us. If it be a
gift, then to trust the Giver and to accept the gift is the only
condition that is possible.

It is not a condition that God has invented and arbitrarily imposed.
The necessity of it is lodged deep in the very nature of the case. Air
cannot get to the lungs of a mouse in an air-pump. Light cannot come
into a room where all the shutters are up and the keyhole stopped. If
a man chooses to perch himself on some little stool of his own, with
glass legs to it, and to take away his hand from the conductor, no
electricity will come to him. If I choose to lock my lips, Jesus
Christ does not prise open my clenched teeth to put the bread of life
into my unwilling mouth. If we ask, we get; if we take, we get.

And so the paradox comes, that we work for a gift, with a work which
is not work because it is a departure from myself. It is the same
blessed paradox which the prophet spoke when he said, 'Buy ... without
money and without price.' Oh! what a burden of hopeless effort and
weary toil--like that of the man that had to roll the stone up the
hill, which ever slipped back again--is lifted from our shoulders by
such a word as this that I have been poorly trying to speak about now!
'Thou art careful and troubled about many things,' poor soul! trying
to be good; trying to fight yourself, and the world, and the devil.
Try the other plan, and listen to Him saying, 'Give up self-imposed
effort in thine own strength. Take, eat, this is My body, which is
broken for you.'




THE MANNA

'I am that bread of life. 49. Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness, and are dead. 50. This is the bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die.'--JOHN vi. 48-50.

'This is of a truth that Prophet,' said the Jews, when Christ had fed
the five thousand on the five barley loaves and the two small fishes.
That was the kind of Teacher for them; they were quite unaffected by
the wisdom of His words and the beauty of His deeds, but a miracle
that found food precisely met their wants, and so there was excited an
impure enthusiasm, very unwelcome to Jesus. Therefore He withdrew
Himself from it, and when the people followed Him, all full of
expectation, to get some more loaves and see some more miracles, He
met them with a douche of cold water that cooled their enthusiasm and
flung them back into a critical, questioning mood. They pointed to the
miracle of the manna, and hinted that, if He expected them to accept
Him, He must do as Moses had done, or something like it. Probably
there was a Jewish tradition in existence then to the effect that the
Messiah was to repeat the miracle of the manna. But, at all events,
Christ lays hold of the reference that they put into His hands, and He
said in effect, 'Manna? Yes; I give, and am, the true Manna.'

So this is the third of the instances in this Gospel in which our Lord
pointed to Old Testament incidents and institutions as symbolising
Himself. In the first of them, when He likened Himself to the ladder
that Jacob saw, He claimed to be the Medium of communication between
heaven and earth. In the second of them, when He likened Himself to
the brazen serpent lifted in the camp, He claimed to be the Healer of
a sin-stricken and poisoned world. And now, with an allusion both to
the miracle and to the Jewish demand for the repetition of the manna
sign, He claims to be the true Food for a starving world. So there are
three things in my text: Christ's claim, His requirements, and His
promise; the bread, the eating, the issues.

I. Here is a claim of Christ's.

As I have already said, in the whole wonderful conversation of which I
have selected a portion for my text, there is a double reference to
the miracle of the loaves and of the manna. What our Lord means to
assert for Himself is that which is common to both of these--viz. that
He supplies the great primal wants of humanity, the hunger of the
heart. There may be another reference also, which I just notice
without dwelling upon it. Barley loaves were the coarsest and least
valuable form of bread. They were not only of little worth, but
altogether inadequate to feeding the five thousand. The palates,
unaccustomed to the stinging savours of the garlic and the leeks of
Egypt, loathed the light bread. And so Jesus Christ comes into the
world in lowly form, like the barley loaf or the light bread from
which men whose tastes have been vitiated by the piquant savours of
more earthly nourishment turn away as insipid. And yet He in His
lowliness, He in His savourlessness, is that which meets the deepest
wants of humanity, and is every man's fare because He will be any
man's satisfaction.

But I wish to bring before your notice the wonderful way in which our
Lord, in this great dissertation concerning Himself as the Bread of
Life, gradually unfolds the depths of His meaning and of His offer. He
began with saying that He, the Son of Man, will give to men the bread
that 'endures to everlasting life.' And then when that saying is but
dimly understood, and yet awakes some strange new desires and
appetites in the hearers, and they come to Him and ask, 'Lord,
evermore give us this bread,' He answers them with opening another
finger of His hand, as it were, and showing them a little more of the
treasure that lies in His palm. For He says, 'I _am_ that Bread of
Life.' That is an advance on the previous saying. He gives bread, and
any man that was conscious of possessing some great truth or some
great blessing which, believed and accepted, would refresh and nourish
humanity, might have said the same thing. But now we pass into the
_penumbra_ of a greater mystery: 'I am that Bread of Life.' You cannot
separate what Christ gives from what Christ is. You can take the
truths that another man proclaims, altogether irrespective of him and
his personality. That only disturbs, and the sooner it is got rid of,
the firmer and the purer our possession of the message for which he is
only the medium. You can take Plato's teaching and do as you like with
Plato. But you cannot take Christ's teaching and do as you like with
Christ. His personality is the centre of His gift to the world. 'I am
that Bread of Life.' That He should give it is much; that He should
_be_ it is far more.

And notice how, when He has thus drawn us a little further into the
magic circle of the light, He not only asserts the inseparableness of
His gift from His Person, but also asserts, with a reference, no
doubt, to the manna, 'I am the Bread that came down from heaven.' The
listeners immediately laid hold of that one point, and neglected for
the moment all the rest, and they fixed with a true instinct--although
it was for the purpose of contradicting it--on this central point,
'that came down from heaven.' They said one to the other, 'How can
this man say that He came down from heaven? Is not this Jesus the Son
of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?' So, brethren, as the
manna that descended from above in the dew of the night was to the
bread that was baked in a baker's oven, so is the Christ to the
manhood that has its origin in the natural processes of birth. The
Incarnation of the Son of God, becoming Son of Man for us and for our
salvation, is involved in this great claim. You do not get to the
heart of Christ's message unless you have accepted this as the truth
concerning Him, that 'in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God,' and that at a definite point in the
long process of the ages, 'the Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst
us.' He will never be 'the Bread of Life' unless He is 'the Bread that
came down from heaven.' For humanity needs that the blue heavens that
bend remote above should come down; and we cannot be lifted 'out of
the horrible pit and the miry clay' unless a Hand from above be
reached down into the depths of our degradation, and lift us from our
lowness. Heaven must come to earth, if earth is to rise to heaven. The
ladder must be let down from above, if ever from the lower levels men
are to ascend thither where at the summit the face of God can be seen.

But that is not all. Our Lord, if I may recur to a former figure, went
on to open another finger of His hand, and to show still more of the
gift. For He not only said, 'the Son of Man gives the bread,' and 'I
am the Bread that came down from heaven,' but He went on to say, in a
subsequent stage of the conversation, 'the Bread that I will give is
My flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.' Now, notice
that '_will_ give.' Then, though the Word was made flesh, and the
manna came down from heaven, the especial gift of His flesh for the
life of the world was, at the time of His speaking, a future thing.
And what He meant is still more clearly brought out, when we read
other words which are the very climax of this conversation, when He
declares that the condition of our having life in ourselves is our
'eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of Man.' The
figure is made repulsive on purpose, in order that it may provoke us
to penetrate to its meaning. It was even more repulsive to the Jew,
with his religious horror of touching or tasting anything in which the
blood was. And yet our Lord not only speaks of Himself as the Bread,
but of His flesh and blood as being the Food of the world. The
separation of the two clearly indicates a violent death, and I, for my
part, have no manner of doubt that, in these great words in which our
Lord lays bare the deepest foundations of His claim to be the Food of
humanity, there is couched, in the veiled language which was necessary
at the then stage of His mission, a distinct reference to His death,
as being the Sacrifice on which a hunger-stricken world may feed and
be satisfied.

So here we have, in three steps, the great central truth of the Gospel
set forth in symbolical aspect: the Son that gives, the Son that is,
the Bread of the world, and the death whereby His flesh and blood are
separated and become the nourishment of all sin-stricken souls. I do
not say one word to enforce these claims, but I beseech you deal
fairly with these Gospel narratives, and do not go on picking out of
them bits of Christ's actions or words, which commend themselves to
you, and ignoring all the rest. There is no more reason to believe
that Jesus Christ ever said, 'As ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them likewise,' or any other part of that Sermon on
the Mount which some people take as their Christianity, than there is
to believe that He said, 'The bread which I give is My flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world.' Believe it or not, it is not
dealing with the Scripture records as you deal with other historical
records if, for subjective reasons, you brush aside all that
department of our Lord's teaching. And if you do accept it, what
becomes of His 'sweet reasonableness'? What becomes of His meekness
and lowliness of heart? I was going to say what becomes of His sanity,
that He should stand up, a youngish man from Nazareth, in the
synagogue of Capernaum, and should say, 'I, heaven-descended, and
slain by men, am the Bread of Life to the whole world'?

I was going to make another observation, which I must just pass with
the slightest notice, and that is that, taking this point of view and
giving full weight to these three stages of our Lord's progressive
revelation of Himself, we have the answer to the question, What is the
connection between these discourses and the ordinance of the Lord's
Supper? Our modern sacramentarian friends will have it that Jesus
Christ is speaking of the Communion in this chapter. I take it, and I
venture to think it the reasonable explanation, that He is not
speaking about the Communion, but that this discourse and that rite
are dealing with the same truths--the one in articulate words, the
other in equivalent symbols. And so we have not to read into the text
any allusion to the rite, but to see in the text and in the rite the
proclamation of the same thing--viz. that the flesh and the blood of
the Sacrifice for sins is the food on which a sinful and cleansed
world may feed.

II. So, secondly, let me ask you to note our Lord's requirement here.

He carries on the metaphor. 'This is the Bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die.' The eating
necessarily follows from the symbol of the bread, as the designation
of the way by which we all, with our hungry hearts, may feed upon this
Bread of God. I need not remind you that in many a place, and in this
whole context, we find the explanation of the symbol very plainly. In
another part of this conversation we read, under another metaphor
which comes to the same thing, 'He that cometh unto Me shall never
hunger, and he that believeth on Me shall never thirst. So the eating
and the coming are diverse symbols for the one thing, the believing.
When a man eats he appropriates to himself, and incorporates into his
very being, the food of which he partakes. And when a man trusts
Christ he appropriates to himself, and incorporates into his inmost
being, the very life of Jesus Christ. You say, 'That is mysticism';
but it is the New Testament teaching, that when I trust Christ I get
more than His gifts--I get Himself; that when my faith goes out to Him
it not only rests me on Him, but it brings Him into me, and that food
of the spirit becomes the life, as we shall see, of _my_ spirit.

That condition is indispensable. It is useless to have food on your
table or your plate or in your hand, it does not nourish you there:
you must eat it, and then you gain sustenance from it. Many a hungry
man has died at the door of a granary. Some of us are starving, though
beside us there is 'the Bread of God that came down from heaven.'
Brethren, you must eat, and I venture to put the question to
you--_not_ Do you believe that Jesus Christ is the world's Saviour?
_not_ Do you believe in an Incarnation? _not_ Do you believe in an
Atonement? but Have you claimed your portion in the Bread? Have you
taken it into your own lips? _Crede et manducasti_, said Augustine,
'believe'--or, rather, _trust_--'and thou hast eaten.' Have _you_?

Further, let me remind you that under this eating is included not only
some initial act of faith, but a continuous course of partaking. The
dinner you ate this day last year is of no use for to-day's hunger.
The act of faith done long ago will not bring the Bread to nourish you
now. You must repeat the meal. And very strikingly and beautifully in
the last part of this conversation our Lord varies the word for
eating, and substitutes--as if He were speaking to those who had
fulfilled the previous condition--another one which implies the
ruminant action of certain animals. And that is what Christian men
have to do, to feed over and over and over again on the 'Bread of God
which came down from heaven.' Christ, and especially in and through
His death for us, can nourish and sustain our wills, giving them the
pattern of what they should desire, and the motive for which they
should desire it. Christ, and especially through His death, can feed
our consciences, and take away from them all the painful sense of
guilt, while He sharpens them to a far keener sensitiveness to evil.
Christ, and especially through His death, can feed our understandings,
and unveil therein the deepest truths concerning God and man,
concerning man's destiny and God's mercy. Christ, and especially in
His death, can feed our affections, and minister to love and desire
and submission and hope their celestial nourishment. He is 'the Bread
of God,' and we have but to eat of that which is laid before us.

III. So, lastly, we have here the issues.

'Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.' This
Bread secures that if 'a man eat thereof he shall not die.' The bread
that perishes feeds a life that perishes; but this Bread not only
sustains but creates a life that cannot perish, and, taken into the
spirits of men that are 'dead in trespasses and sins,' imparts to them
a life that has no affinity to evil, and therefore no dread of
extinction.

If 'a man eats thereof he shall not die,' Christ annihilates for us
the mere accident of physical death. That is only a momentary jolt on
the course. That may all be crammed into a parenthesis. 'He shall not
die,' but live the true life which comes from the possession of union
with Him who is the Life. The bread which we eat sustains life; the
Bread which He gives originates it. The bread which we eat is
assimilated to our bodily frame, the Bread which He gives assimilates
our spiritual nature to His. And so it comes to be the only food that
stills a hungry heart, the only food that satisfies and yet never
cloys, which, eating, we are filled, and being filled are made capable
of more, and, being capable of more, receive more. In blessed and
eternal alternation, fruition and desire, satisfaction and appetite,
go on.

'Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread?' You cannot answer
the question with any reasonable answer. Oh, dear friends! I beseech
you, listen to that Lord who is saying to each of us, 'Take, eat, this
is My body, which is broken for you.'




ONE SAYING WITH TWO MEANINGS

'Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then
I go unto Him that sent Me. 34. Ye shall seek Me, and shall not find
Me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come.'--JOHN vii. 33, 34.

'Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek Me;
and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I
say to you.'--JOHN xiii. 33.

No greater contrast can be conceived than that between these two
groups to whom such singularly similar words were addressed. The one
consists of the officers, tools of the Pharisees and of the priests,
who had been sent to seize Christ, and would fain have carried out
their masters' commission, but were restrained by a strange awe,
inexplicable even to themselves. The other consists of the little
company of His faithful, though slow, scholars, who made a great many
mistakes, and sometimes all but tired out even His patience, and yet
were forgiven much because they loved much. Hatred animated one group,
loving sorrow the other.

Christ speaks to them both in nearly the same words, but with what a
different tone, meaning, and application! To the officers the saying
is an exhibition of His triumphant confidence that their malice is
impotent and their arms paralysed; that when He wills He will _go_,
not be dragged by them or any man, but go to a safe asylum, where foes
can neither find nor follow. The officers do not understand what He
means. They think that, bad Jew as they have always believed Him to
be, He may very possibly consummate His apostasy by going over to the
Gentiles altogether; but, at any rate, they feel that He is to escape
their hands.

The disciples understand little more as to whither He goes, as they
themselves confess a moment after; but they gather from His words His
loving pity, and though the upper side of the saying seems to be
menacing and full of separation, there is an under side that suggests
the possibility of a reunion for them.

The words are nearly the same in both cases, but they are not
absolutely identical. There are significant omissions and additions in
the second form of them. 'Little children' is the tenderest of all the
names that ever came from Christ's lips to His disciples, and never
was heard on His lips except on this one occasion, for parting words
ought to be very loving words. 'A little while I am with you,' but He
does not say, 'And then I go to Him that sent Me.' 'Ye shall seek Me,'
but He does not say, 'And shall not find Me.' 'As I said unto the
Jews, whither I go ye cannot come, so now I say to you,' that little
word 'now' makes the announcement a truth for the present only. His
disciples shall not seek Him in vain, but when they seek they shall
find. And though for a moment they be parted from Him, it is with the
prospect and the confidence of reunion. Let us, then, look at the two
main thoughts here. First, the two 'seekings,' the seeking which is
