words, "He that made the eye, shall he not see? he that planted the ear,
shall he not hear?" do not at once commend themselves to the intellect of
any person, we shall never convince that person by any arguments drawn
from the absurdity of conceiving the invention of optics by a blind man,
or of music by a deaf one.

So we will assert our own old-fashioned notion boldly: and more; we will
say, in spite of ridicule--That if such a God exists, final causes must
exist also.  That the whole universe must be one chain of final causes.
That if there be a Supreme Reason, he must have reason, and that a good
reason, for every physical phenomenon.

We will tell the modern scientific man--You are nervously afraid of the
mention of final causes.  You quote against them Bacon's saying, that
they are barren virgins; that no physical fact was ever discovered or
explained by them.  You are right: as far as regards yourselves.  You
have no business with final causes; because final causes are moral
causes: and you are physical students only.  We, the natural Theologians,
have business with them.  Your duty is to find out the How of things:
ours, to find out the Why.  If you rejoin that we shall never find out
the Why, unless we first learn something of the How, we shall not deny
that.  It may be most useful, I had almost said necessary, that the
clergy should have some scientific training.  It may be most useful--I
sometimes dream of a day when it will be considered necessary--that every
candidate for Ordination should be required to have passed creditably in
at least one branch of physical science, if it be only to teach him the
method of sound scientific thought.  But our having learnt the How, will
not make it needless, much less impossible, for us to study the Why.  It
will merely make more clear to us the things of which we have to study
the Why; and enable us to keep the How and the Why more religiously apart
from each other.

But if it be said--After all, there is no Why.  The doctrine of
evolution, by doing away with the theory of creation, does away with that
of final causes,--Let us answer boldly,--Not in the least.  We might
accept all that Mr Darwin, all that Professor Huxley, all that other most
able men, have so learnedly and so acutely written on physical science,
and yet preserve our natural Theology on exactly the same basis as that
on which Butler and Paley left it.  That we should have to develop it, I
do not deny.  That we should have to relinquish it, I do.

Let me press this thought earnestly on you.  I know that many wiser and
better men than I have fears on this point.  I cannot share in them.

All, it seems to me, that the new doctrines of evolution demand is
this:--We all agree--for the fact is patent--that our own bodies, and
indeed the body of every living creature, are evolved from a seemingly
simple germ by natural laws, without visible action of any designing will
or mind, into the full organization of a human or other creature.  Yet we
do not say on that account--God did not create me: I only grew.  We hold
in this case to our old idea, and say--If there be evolution, there must
be an evolver.  Now the new physical theories only ask us, it seems to
me, to extend this conception to the whole universe; to believe that not
individuals merely, but whole varieties and races; the total organized
life on this planet; and, it may be, the total organization of the
universe, have been evolved just as our bodies are, by natural laws
acting through circumstance.  This may be true, or may be false.  But all
its truth can do to the natural Theologian will be to make him believe
that the Creator bears the same relation to the whole universe, as that
Creator undeniably bears to every individual human body.

I entreat you to weigh these words, which have not been written in haste;
and I entreat you also, if you wish to see how little the new theory,
that species may have been gradually created by variation, natural
selection, and so forth, interferes with the old theory of design,
contrivance, and adaptation, nay, with the fullest admission of
benevolent final causes--I entreat you, I say, to study Darwin's
"Fertilization of Orchids"--a book which, whether his main theory be true
or not, will still remain a most valuable addition to natural Theology.

For suppose that all the species of Orchids, and not only they, but their
congeners--the Gingers, the Arrowroots, the Bananas--are all the
descendants of one original form, which was most probably nearly allied
to the Snowdrop and the Iris.  What then?  Would that be one whit more
wonderful, more unworthy of the wisdom and power of God, than if they
were, as most believe, created each and all at once, with their minute
and often imaginary shades of difference?  What would the natural
Theologian have to say, were the first theory true, save that God's works
are even more wonderful that he always believed them to be?  As for the
theory being impossible: we must leave the discussion of that to physical
students.  It is not for us clergymen to limit the power of God.  "Is
anything too hard for the Lord?" asked the prophet of old; and we have a
right to ask it as long as time shall last.  If it be said that natural
selection is too simple a cause to produce such fantastic variety: that,
again, is a question to be settled exclusively by physical students.  All
we have to say on the matter is--That we always knew that God works by
very simple, or seemingly simple, means; that the whole universe, as far
as we could discern it, was one concatenation of the most simple means;
that it was wonderful, yea, miraculous, in our eyes, that a child should
resemble its parents, that the raindrops should make the grass grow, that
the grass should become flesh, and the flesh sustenance for the thinking
brain of man.  Ought God to seem less or more august in our eyes, when we
are told that His means are even more simple than we supposed?  We held
him to be Almighty and All-wise.  Are we to reverence Him less or more,
if we hear that His might is greater, His wisdom deeper, than we ever
dreamed?  We believed that His care was over all His works; that His
Providence watched perpetually over the whole universe.  We were
taught--some of us at least--by Holy Scripture, to believe that the whole
history of the universe was made up of special Providences.  If, then,
that should be true which Mr Darwin eloquently writes--"It may be
metaphorically said that natural selection is daily and hourly
scrutinizing, throughout the world, every variation, even the slightest;
rejecting that which is bad, preserving and adding up that which is good,
silently and incessantly working whenever and wherever opportunity offers
at the improvement of every organic being,"--if that, I say, were proven
to be true: ought God's care and God's providence to seem less or more
magnificent in our eyes?  Of old it was said by Him without whom nothing
is made, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work."  Shall we quarrel with
Science, if she should show how those words are true?  What, in one word,
should we have to say but this?--We knew of old that God was so wise that
He could make all things: but, behold, He is so much wiser than even
that, that He can make all things make themselves.

But it may be said--These notions are contrary to Scripture.  I must beg
very humbly, but very firmly, to demur to that opinion.  Scripture says
that God created.  But it nowhere defines that term.  The means, the How,
of Creation is nowhere specified.  Scripture, again, says that organized
beings were produced, each according to their kind.  But it nowhere
defines that term.  What a kind includes; whether it includes or not the
capacity of varying--which is just the question in point--is nowhere
specified.  And I think it a most important rule in Scriptural exegesis,
to be most cautious as to limiting the meaning of any term which
Scripture itself has not limited, lest we find ourselves putting into the
teaching of Scripture our own human theories or prejudices.  And
consider--Is not man a kind?  And has not mankind varied, physically,
intellectually, spiritually?  Is not the Bible, from beginning to end, a
history of the variations of mankind, for worse or for better, from their
original type?  Let us rather look with calmness, and even with hope and
goodwill, on these new theories; for, correct or incorrect, they surely
mark a tendency towards a more, not a less, Scriptural view of Nature.
Are they not attempts, whether successful or unsuccessful, to escape from
that shallow mechanical notion of the universe and its Creator which was
too much in vogue in the eighteenth century among divines as well as
philosophers; the theory which Goethe, to do him justice--and after him
Mr Thomas Carlyle--have treated with such noble scorn; the theory, I
mean, that God has wound up the universe like a clock, and left it to
tick by itself till it runs down, never troubling Himself with it; save
possibly--for even that was only half believed--by rare miraculous
interferences with the laws which He Himself had made?  Out of that
chilling dream of a dead universe ungoverned by an absent God, the human
mind, in Germany especially, tried during the early part of this century
to escape by strange roads; roads by which there was no escape, because
they were not laid down on the firm ground of scientific facts.  Then, in
despair, men turned to the facts which they had neglected; and said--We
are weary of philosophy: we will study you, and you alone.  As for God,
who can find Him?  And they have worked at the facts like gallant and
honest men; and their work, like all good work, has produced, in the last
fifty years, results more enormous than they even dreamed.  But what are
they finding, more and more, below their facts, below all phenomena which
the scalpel and the microscope can show?  A something nameless,
invisible, imponderable, yet seemingly omnipresent and omnipotent,
retreating before them deeper and deeper, the deeper they delve: namely,
the life which shapes and makes; that which the old schoolmen called
"forma formativa," which they call vital force and what not--metaphors
all, or rather counters to mark an unknown quantity, as if they should
call it _x_ or _y_.  One says--It is all vibrations: but his reason,
unsatisfied, asks--And what makes the vibrations vibrate?  Another--It is
all physiological units: but his reason asks--What is the "physis," the
nature and innate tendency of the units?  A third--It may be all caused
by infinitely numerous "gemmules:" but his reason asks him--What puts
infinite order into these gemmules, instead of infinite anarchy?  I
mention these theories not to laugh at them.  I have all due respect for
those who have put them forth.  Nor would it interfere with my
theological creed, if any or all of them were proven to be true
to-morrow.  I mention them only to show that beneath all these theories,
true or false, still lies that unknown _x_.  Scientific men are becoming
more and more aware of it; I had almost said, ready to worship it.  More
and more the noblest-minded of them are engrossed by the mystery of that
unknown and truly miraculous element in Nature, which is always escaping
them, though they cannot escape it.  How should they escape it?  Was it
not written of old--"Whither shall I go from Thy presence, or whither
shall I flee from Thy Spirit?"

Ah that we clergymen would summon up courage to tell them that!  Courage
to tell them, what need not hamper for a moment the freedom of their
investigations, what will add to them a sanction--I may say a
sanctity--that the unknown _x_ which lies below all phenomena, which is
for ever at work on all phenomena, on the whole and on every part of the
whole, down to the colouring of every leaf and the curdling of every cell
of protoplasm, is none other than that which the old Hebrews called--by a
metaphor, no doubt: for how can man speak of the unseen, save in
metaphors drawn from the seen?--but by the only metaphor adequate to
express the perpetual and omnipresent miracle; The Breath of God; The
Spirit who is The Lord, and The Giver of Life.

In the rest, let us too think, and let us too observe.  For if we are
ignorant, not merely of the results of experimental science, but of the
methods thereof: then we and the men of science shall have no common
ground whereon to stretch out kindly hands to each other.

But let us have patience and faith; and not suppose in haste, that when
those hands are stretched out it will be needful for us to leave our
standing-ground, or to cast ourselves down from the pinnacle of the
temple to earn popularity; above all, from earnest students who are too
high-minded to care for popularity themselves.

True, if we have an intelligent belief in those Creeds and those
Scriptures which are committed to our keeping, then our philosophy cannot
be that which is just now in vogue.  But all we have to do, I believe, is
to wait.  Nominalism, and that "Sensationalism" which has sprung from
Nominalism, are running fast to seed; Comtism seems to me its supreme
effort: after which the whirligig of Time may bring round its revenges:
and Realism, and we who hold the Realist creeds, may have our turn.  Only
wait.  When a grave, able, and authoritative philosopher explains a
mother's love of her newborn babe, as Professor Bain has done, in a
really eloquent passage of his book on the _Emotions and the Will_, {0a}
then the end of that philosophy is very near; and an older, simpler, more
human, and, as I hold, more philosophic explanation of that natural
phenomenon, and of all others, may get a hearing.

Only wait: and fret not yourselves; else shall you be moved to do evil.
Remember the saying of the wise man--"Go not after the world.  She turns
on her axis; and if thou stand still long enough, she will turn round to
thee."




SERMON I.  THE MYSTERY OF THE CROSS.  A GOOD FRIDAY SERMON.


PHILIPPIANS II. 5-8.

   Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in
   the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made
   Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a slave, and
   was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man,
   He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
   the Cross.

The second Lesson for this morning's service, and the chapter which
follows it, describe the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, both God and
Man.  They give us the facts, in language most awful from its perfect
calmness, most pathetic from its perfect simplicity.  But the passage of
St Paul which I have chosen for my text gives us an explanation of those
facts which is utterly amazing.  That He who stooped to die upon the
Cross is Very God of Very God, the Creator and Sustainer of the Universe,
is a thought so overwhelming, whenever we try to comprehend even a part
of it in our small imaginations, that it is no wonder if, in all ages,
many a pious soul, as it contemplated the Cross of Christ, has been rapt
itself into a passion of gratitude, an ecstasy of wonder and of love,
which is beautiful, honourable, just, and in the deepest sense most
rational, whenever it is spontaneous and natural.

But there have been thousands, as there may be many here to-day, of
colder temperament; who would distrust in themselves, even while they
respected in others, any violence of religious emotion: yet they too have
found, and you too may find, in contemplating the Passion of Christ, a
satisfaction deeper than that of any emotion; a satisfaction not to the
heart, still less to the brain, but to that far deeper and diviner
faculty within us all--our moral sense; that God-given instinct which
makes us discern and sympathise with all that is beautiful and true and
good.

And so it has befallen, for eighteen hundred years, that thousands who
have thought earnestly and carefully on God and on the character of God,
on man and on the universe, and on their relation to Him who made them
both, have found in the Incarnation and the Passion of the Son of God the
perfect satisfaction of their moral wants; the surest key to the facts of
the spiritual world; the complete assurance that, in spite of all seeming
difficulties and contradictions, the Maker of the world was a Righteous
Being, who had founded the world in righteousness; that the Father of
Spirits was a perfect Father, who in His only-begotten Son had shewn
forth His perfectness, in such a shape and by such acts that men might
not only adore it, but sympathise with it; not only thank Him for it, but
copy it; and become, though at an infinite distance, perfect as their
Father in heaven is perfect, and full of grace and truth, like that Son
who is the brightness of His Father's glory, and the express image of His
person.  Such a satisfaction have they found in looking upon the
triumphal entry into Jerusalem of Him who knew that it would be followed
by the revolt of the fickle mob, and the desertion of His disciples, and
the Cross of Calvary, and all the hideous circumstances of a Roman
malefactor's death.

But there have been those, and there are still, who have found no such
satisfaction in the story which the Gospel tells, and still less in the
explanation which the Epistle gives; who have, as St Paul says, stumbled
at the stumblingblock of the Cross.

It would be easy to ignore such persons, were they scoffers or
profligates: but when they number among their ranks men of virtuous
lives, of earnest and most benevolent purposes, of careful and learned
thought, and of a real reverence for God, or for those theories of the
universe which some of them are inclined to substitute for God, they must
at least be listened to patiently, and answered charitably, as men who,
however faulty their opinions may be, prove, by their virtue and their
desire to do good, that if they have lost sight of Christ, Christ has not
lost sight of them.

To such men the idea of the Incarnation, and still more, that of the
Passion, is derogatory to the very notion of a God.  That a God should
suffer, and that a God should die, is shocking--and, to do them justice,
I believe they speak sincerely--to their notions of the absolute majesty,
the undisturbed serenity, of the Author of the universe; of Him in whom
all things live and move and have their being; who dwells in the light to
which none may approach.  And therefore they have, in every age, tried
various expedients to escape from a doctrine which seemed repugnant to
that most precious part of them, their moral sense.  In the earlier
centuries of the Church they tried to shew that St John and St Paul
spoke, not of one who was Very God of Very God, but of some highest and
most primeval of all creatures, Emanation, AEon, or what not.  In these
later times, when the belief in such beings, and even their very names,
have become dim and dead, men have tried to shew that the words of
Scripture apply to a mere man.  They have seen in Christ--and they have
reverenced and loved Him for what they have seen in Him--the noblest and
purest, the wisest and the most loving of all human beings; and have
attributed such language as that in the text, which--translate it as you
will--ascribes absolute divinity, and nothing less, to our Lord Jesus
Christ--they have attributed it, I say, to some fondness for Oriental
hyperbole, and mystic Theosophy, in the minds of the Apostles.  Others,
again, have gone further, and been, I think, more logically honest.  They
have perceived that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, as His words are
reported, attributed divinity to Himself, just as much as did His
Apostles.  Such a saying as that one, "Before Abraham was, I am," and
others beside it, could be escaped from only by one of two methods.  To
the first of them I shall not allude in this sacred place, popular as a
late work has made it in its native France, and I fear in England
likewise.  The other alternative, more reverent indeed, but, as I
believe, just as mistaken, is to suppose that the words were never
uttered at all; that Christ--it is not I who say it--possibly never
existed at all; that His whole story was gradually built up, like certain
fabulous legends of Romish saints, out of the moral consciousness of
various devout persons during the first three centuries; each of whom
added to the portrait, as it grew more and more lovely under the hands of
succeeding generations, some new touch of beauty, some fresh trait, half
invented, half traditional, of purity, love, nobleness, majesty; till men
at last became fascinated with the ideal to which they themselves had
contributed; and fell down and worshipped their own humanity; and
christened that The Son of God.

If I believed that theory, or either of the others, I need not say that I
should not be preaching here.  I will go further, and say, that if I
believed either of those theories, or any save that which stands out in
the text, sharp-cut and colossal like some old Egyptian Memnon, and like
that statue, with a smile of sweetness on its lips which tempers the
royal majesty of its looks,--if I did not believe that, I say--I should
be inclined to confess with Homer of old, that man is the most miserable
of all the beasts of the field.

For consider but this one argument.  It is no new one; it has lain, I
believe, unspoken and instinctive, yet most potent and inspiring, in many
a mind, in many an age.  If there be a God, must He not be the best of
all beings?  But if He who suffered on Calvary were not God, but a mere
creature; then--as I hold--there must have been a creature in the
universe better than God Himself.  Or if He who suffered on Calvary had
not the character which is attributed to Him,--if Christ's love,
condescension, self-sacrifice, be a mere imagination, built up by the
fancy of man; then has Christendom for 1800 years been fancying for
itself a better God than Him who really exists.

Thousands of the best men and women in the world through all the ages of
Christendom have agreed with this argument, under some shape or other.
Thousands there have been, and I trust there will be thousands hereafter,
who have felt, as they looked upon the Cross of the Son of God, not that
it was derogatory to Christ to believe that He had suffered, but
derogatory to Him to believe that He had not suffered: for only by
suffering, as far as we can conceive, could He perfectly manifest His
glory and His Father's glory; and shew that it was full of grace.

Full of grace.  Think, I beg you, over that one word.

We all agree that God is good; all at least do so, who worship Him in
spirit and in truth.  We adore His majesty, because it is the moral and
spiritual majesty of perfect goodness.  We give thanks to Him for His
great glory, because it is the glory, not merely of perfect power,
wisdom, order, justice; but of perfect love, of perfect magnanimity,
beneficence, activity, condescension, pity--in one word, of perfect
grace.

But how much must that last word comprehend, as long as there is misery
and evil in this world, or in any other corner of the whole universe?
Grace, to be perfect, must shew itself by graciously forgiving penitents.
Pity, to be perfect, must shew itself by helping the miserable.
Beneficence, to be perfect, must shew itself by delivering the oppressed.

The old prophets and psalmists saw as much as this; and preached that
this too was part of the essence and character of God.

They saw that the Lord was gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repented Him of the evil.  They saw that the Lord
helped them to right who suffered wrong, and fed the hungry; that the
Lord loosed men out of prison, the Lord gave sight to the blind; that the
Lord helped the fallen, and defended the fatherless and widow.  They saw
too a further truth, and a more awful one.  They saw that the Lord was
actually and practically King of kings and Lord of lords: that as such He
could come, and did come at times, rewarding the loyal, putting down the
rebellious, and holding high assize from place to place, that He might
execute judgment and justice; beholding all the wrong that was done on
earth, and coming, as it were, out of His place, at each historic crisis,
each revolution in the fortunes of mankind, to make inquisition for
blood, to trample His enemies beneath His feet, and to inaugurate some
progress toward that new heaven and new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness, and righteousness alone.  That vision, in whatsoever
metaphors it may be wrapped up, is real and true, and will be so as long
as evil exists within this universe.  Were it not true, there would be
something wanting to the perfect justice and the perfect benevolence of
God.

But is this all?  If this be all, what have we Christians learnt from the
New Testament which is not already taught us in the Old?  Where is that
new, deeper, higher revelation of the goodness of God, which Jesus of
Nazareth preached, and which John and Paul and all the apostles believed
that they had found in Jesus Himself?  They believed, and all those who
accepted their gospel believed, that they had found for that word
"grace," a deeper meaning than had ever been revealed to the prophets of
old time; that grace and goodness, if they were perfect, involved self-
sacrifice.

And does not our own highest reason tell us that they were right?  Does
not our own highest reason, which is our moral sense, tell us that
perfect goodness requires, not merely that we should pity our
fellow-creatures, not merely that we should help them, not merely that we
should right them magisterially and royally, without danger or injury to
ourselves: but that we should toil for them, suffer for them, and if need
be, as the highest act of goodness, die for them at last?  Is not this
the very element of goodness which we all confess to be most noble,
beautiful, pure, heroical, divine?  Divine even in sinful and fallen man,
who must forgive because he needs to be forgiven; who must help others
because he needs help himself; who, if he suffers for others, deserves to
suffer, and probably will suffer, in himself.  But how much more
heroical, and how much more divine in a Being who needs neither
forgiveness nor help, and who is as far from deserving as He is from
needing to suffer!  And shall this noblest form of goodness be possible
to sinful man, and yet impossible to a perfectly good God?  Shall we say
that the martyr at the stake, the patriot dying for his country, the
missionary spending his life for the good of heathens; ay more, shall we
say that those women, martyrs by the pang without the palm, who in secret
chambers, in lowly cottages, have sacrificed and do still sacrifice self
and all the joys of life for the sake of simple duties, little charities,
kindness unnoticed and unknown by all, save God--shall we say that all
who have from the beginning of the world shewn forth the beauty of self-
sacrifice have had no divine prototype in heaven?--That they have been
exercising a higher grace, a nobler form of holiness, than He who made
them, and who, as they believe, and we ought to believe, inspired them
with that spirit of unselfishness, which if it be not the Spirit of God,
whose spirit can it be?  Shall we say this, and so suppose them holier
than their own Maker?  Shall we say this, and suppose that they, when
they attributed self-sacrifice to God, made indeed a God in their own
