_Gelobet Seist du Jesu Christ._

This introductory hymn of worship, a favorite Christmas hymn in Germany,
is ancient, and appears to be a versification of a Latin prose
"Sequence" variously ascribed to a 9th century author, and to Gregory
the Great in the 6th century. Its German form is still credited to
Luther in most hymnals. Julian gives an earlier German form (1370) of
the "Gelobet," but attributes all but the first stanza to Luther, as the
hymn now stands. The following translation, printed first in the
_Sabbath Hymn Book_, Andover, 1858, is the one adopted by Schaff in his
_Christ in Song_:

    All praise to Thee, eternal Lord,
    Clothed in the garb of flesh and blood;
    Choosing a manger for Thy throne,
    While worlds on worlds are Thine alone!

    Once did the skies before Thee bow;
    A virgin's arms contain Thee now;
    Angels, who did in Thee rejoice,
    Now listen for Thine infant voice.

    A little child, Thou art our guest,
    That weary ones in Thee may rest;
    Forlorn and lowly in Thy birth,
    That we may rise to heaven from earth.

    Thou comest in the darksome night,
    To make us children of the light;
    To make us, in the realms divine,
    Like Thine own angels round Thee shine.

    All this for us Thy love hath done:
    By this to Thee our love is won;
    For this we tune our cheerful lays,
    And shout our thanks in endless praise.


_THE TUNE._

The 18th century tune of "Weimar" (_Evangelical Hymnal_), by Emanuel
Bach, suits the spiritual tone of the hymn, and suggests the Gregorian
dignity of its origin.

Karl Philip Emanuel Bach, called "the Berlin Bach" to distinguish him
from his father, the great Sebastian Bach of Saxe Weimar, was born in
Weimar, March 14, 1714. He early devoted himself to music, and coming to
Berlin when twenty-four years old was appointed Chamber musician (Kammer
Musicus) in the Royal Chapel, where he often accompanied Frederick the
Great (who was an accomplished flutist) on the harpsichord. His most
numerous compositions were piano music but he wrote a celebrated
"Sanctus," and two oratorios, besides a number of chorals, of which
"Weimar" is one. He died in Hamburg, Dec. 14, 1788.


THE MAGNIFICAT.
[Greek: Megalunei he psuche mou ton Kurion.]

    Magnificat anima mea Dominum,
    Et exultavit Spiritus meus in Deo salutari meo.
                                      Luke 1:46-55.

We can date with some certainty the hymn itself composed by the Virgin
Mary, but when it first became a song of the Christian Church no one can
tell. Its thanksgiving may have found tone among the earliest martyrs,
who, as Pliny tells us, sang hymns in their secret worship. We can only
trace it back to the oldest chant music, when it was doubtless sung by
both the Eastern and Western Churches. In the rude liturgies of the 4th
and 5th centuries it must have begun to assume ritual form; but it
remained for the more modern school of composers hundreds of years later
to illustrate the "Magnificat" with the melody of art and genius.
Superseding the primitive unisonous plain-song, the old parallel
concords, and the simple faburden (faux bourdon) counterpoint that
succeeded Gregory, they taught how musical tones can better assist
worship with the beauty of harmony and the precision of scientific
taste. Musicians in Italy, France, Germany and England have contributed
their scores to this inspired hymn. Some of them still have place in the
hymnals, a noble one especially by the blind English tone-master, Henry
Smart, author of the oratorio of "Jacob." None, however, have equaled
the work of Handel. His "Magnificat" was one of his favorite
productions, and he borrowed strains from it in several of his later and
lesser productions.

George Frederic Handel, author of the immortal "Messiah," was born at
Halle, Saxony, in 1685, and died in London in 1759. The musical bent of
his genius was apparent almost from his infancy. At the age of eighteen
he was earning his living with his violin, and writing his first opera.
After a sojourn in Italy, he settled in Hanover as Chapel Master to the
Elector, who afterwards became the English king, George I. The
friendship of the king and several of his noblemen drew him to England,
where he spent forty-seven years and composed his greatest works.

He wrote three hymn-tunes (it is said at the request of a converted
actress), "Canons," "Fitzwilliam," and "Gopsall," the first an
invitation, "Sinners, Obey the Gospel Word," the second a meditation, "O
Love Divine, How Sweet Thou Art," and the third a resurrection song to
Welsey's words "Rejoice, the Lord is King." This last still survives in
some hymnals.


THE DOXOLOGIES.

    Be Thou, O God, exalted high,
    And as Thy glory fills the sky
    So let it be on earth displayed
    Till Thou art here as there obeyed.

This sublime quatrain, attributed to Nahum Tate, like the Lord's Prayer,
is suited to all occasions, to all Christian denominations, and to all
places and conditions of men. It has been translated into all civilized
languages, and has been rising to heaven for many generations from
congregations round the globe wherever the faith of Christendom has
built its altars. This doxology is the first stanza of a sixteen line
hymn (possibly longer originally), the rest of which is forgotten.

Nahum Tate was born in Dublin, in 1652, and educated there at Trinity
College. He was appointed poet-laureate by King William III. in 1690,
and it was in conjunction with Dr. Nicholas Brady that he executed his
"New" metrical version of the Psalms. The entire Psalter, with an
appendix of Hymns, was licensed by William and Mary and published in
1703. The _hymns_ in the volume are all by Tate. He died in London, Aug.
12, 1717.

Rev. Nicholas Brady, D.D., was an Irishman, son of an officer in the
royal army, and was born at Bandon, County of Cork, Oct. 28, 1659. He
studied in the Westminster School at Oxford, but afterwards entered
Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated in 1685. William made him
Queen Mary's Chaplain. He died May 20, 1726.

The other nearly contemporary form of doxology is in common use, but
though elevated and devotional in spirit, it cannot be universal, owing
to its credal line being objectionable to non-Trinitarian Protestants:

    Praise God from whom all blessings flow,
    Praise Him all creatures here below,
    Praise Him above, ye heavenly host,
    Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

The author, the Rev. Thomas Ken, was born in Berkhampstead,
Hertfordshire, Eng., July, 1637, and was educated at Winchester School,
Hertford College, and New College, Oxford. In 1662 he took holy orders,
and seventeen years later the king (Charles II.) appointed him chaplain
to his sister Mary, Princess of Orange. Later the king, just before his
death, made him Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Like John the Baptist, and Bourdaloue, and Knox, he was a faithful
spiritual monitor and adviser during all his days at court. "I must go
in and hear Ken tell me my faults," the king used to say at chapel time.
The "good little man" (as he called the bishop) never lost the favor of
the dissipated monarch. As Macaulay says, "Of all the prelates, he liked
Ken the best."

Under James, the Papist, Ken was a loyal subject, though once arrested
as one of the "seven bishops" for his opposition to the king's religion,
and he kept his oath of allegiance so firmly that it cost him his place.
William III. deprived him of his bishopric, and he retired in poverty to
a home kindly offered him by Lord Viscount Weymouth in Longleat, near
Frome, in Somersetshire, where he spent a serene and beloved old age. He
died aet. seventy-four, March 17, 1711 (N.S.), and was carried to his
grave, according to his request, by "six of the poorest men in the
parish."

His great doxology is the refrain or final stanza of each of his three
long hymns, "Morning," "Evening" and "Midnight," printed in a _Prayer
Manual_ for the use of the students of Winchester College. The "Evening
Hymn" drew scenic inspiration, it is told, from the lovely view in
Horningsham Park at "Heaven's Gate Hill," while walking to and from
church.

Another four-line doxology, adopted probably from Dr. Hatfield
(1807-1883), is almost entirely superseded by Ken's stanza, being of
even more pronounced credal character.

    To God the Father, God the Son,
    And God the Spirit, Three in One.
    Be honor, praise and glory given
    By all on earth and all in heaven.

The _Methodist Hymnal_ prints a collection of ten doxologies, two by
Watts, one by Charles Wesley, one by John Wesley, one by William Goode,
one by Edwin F. Hatfield, one attributed to "Tate and Brady," one by
Robert Hawkes, and the one by Ken above noted. These are all technically
and intentionally doxologies. To give a history of doxologies in the
general sense of the word would carry one through every Christian age
and language and end with a concordance of the Book of Psalms.

[Illustration: Oliver Holden]


_THE TUNE._

Few would think of any music more appropriate to a standard doxology
than "Old Hundred." This grand Gregorian harmony has been claimed to be
Luther's production, while some have believed that Louis Bourgeois,
editor of the French _Genevan Psalter_, composed the tune, but the
weight of evidence seems to indicate that it was the work of Guillaume
le Franc, (William Franck or William the Frenchman,) of Rouen, in
France, who founded a music school in Geneva, 1541. He was Chapel Master
there, but removed to Lausanne, where he played in the Catholic choir
and wrote the tunes for an Edition of Marot's and Beza's Psalms. Died in
Lausanne, 1570.


"THE LORD DESCENDED FROM ABOVE."

A flash of genuine inspiration was vouchsafed to Thomas Sternhold when
engaged with Rev. John Hopkins in versifying the Eighteenth Psalm. The
ridicule heaped upon Sternhold and Hopkins's psalmbook has always
stopped, and sobered into admiration and even reverence at the two
stanzas beginning with this leading line--

    The Lord descended from above
      And bowed the heavens most high,
    And underneath His feet He cast
      The darkness of the sky.

    On cherub and on cherubim
      Full royally He rode,
    And on the wings of mighty winds
      Came flying all abroad.

Thomas Sternhold was born in Gloucestershire, Eng. He was Groom of the
Robes to Henry VIII, and Edward VI., but is only remembered for his
_Psalter_ published in 1562, thirteen years after his death in 1549.


_THE TUNE._

"Nottingham" (now sometimes entitled "St. Magnus") is a fairly good echo
of the grand verses, a dignified but spirited choral in A flat. Jeremiah
Clark, the composer, was born in London, 1670. Educated at the Chapel
Royal, he became organist of Winchester College and finally to St.
Paul's Cathedral where he was appointed Gentleman of the Chapel. He died
July, 1707.

The tune of "Majesty" by William Billings will be noticed in a later
chapter.


TALLIS' EVENING HYMN.

    Glory to Thee, my God, this night
    For all the blessings of the light,
    Keep me, O keep me, King of kings,
    Under Thine own Almighty wings.

This stanza begins the second of Bp. Ken's three beautiful hymn-prayers
in his _Manual_ mentioned on a previous page.


_THE TUNE._

For more than three hundred and fifty years devout people have enjoyed
that melody of mingled dignity and sweetness known as "Tallis' Evening
Hymn."

Thomas Tallis was an Englishman, born about 1520, and at an early age
was a boy chorister at St. Paul's. After his voice changed, he played
the organ at Waltham Abbey, and some time later was chosen organist
royal to Queen Elizabeth. His pecuniary returns for his talent did not
make him rich, though he bore the title after 1542 of Gentleman of the
Chapel Royal, for his stipend was sevenpence a day. Some gain may
possibly have come to him, however, from his publication, late in life,
under the queen's special patent, of a collection of hymns and tunes.

He wrote much and was the real founder of the English Church school of
composers, but though St. Paul's was at one time well supplied with his
motets and anthems, it is impossible now to give a list of Tallis'
compositions for the Church. His music was written originally to Latin
words, but when, after the Reformation, the use of vernacular hymns, was
introduced he probably adapted his scores to either language.

It is inferred that he was in attendance on Queen Elizabeth at her
palace in Greenwich when he died, for he was buried in the old parish
church there in November, 1585. The rustic rhymer who indited his
epitaph evidently did the best he could to embalm the virtues of the
great musician as a man, a citizen, and a husband:

    Enterred here doth ly a worthy wyght,
      Who for long time in musick bore the bell:
    His name to shew was Thomas Tallis hyght;
      In honest vertuous lyff he dyd excell.

    He served long tyme in chappel with grete prayse,
      Fower sovereygnes reignes, (a thing not often seene);
    I mean King Henry and Prince Edward's dayes,
      Quene Marie, and Elizabeth our quene.

    He maryed was, though children he had none,
      And lyv'd in love full three and thirty yeres
    With loyal spowse, whose name yclept was Jone,
      Who, here entombed, him company now bears.

    As he dyd lyve, so also dyd he dy,
      In myld and quyet sort, O happy man!
    To God ful oft for mercy did he cry;
      Wherefore he lyves, let Deth do what he can.


"THE GOD OF ABRAHAM PRAISE."

This is one of the thanksgivings of the ages.

    The God of Abraham praise,
      Who reigns enthroned above;
    Ancient of everlasting days,
      And God of love.
    Jehovah, Great I AM!
      By earth and heaven confessed,
    I bow and bless the sacred Name,
      Forever blest.

The hymn, of twelve eight-line stanzas, is too long to quote entire,
but is found in both the _Plymouth_ and _Methodist Hymnals_.

Thomas Olivers, born in Tregynon, near Newtown, Montgomeryshire, Wales,
1725, was, according to local testimony, "the worst boy known in all
that country, for thirty years." It is more charitable to say that he
was a poor fellow who had no friends. Left an orphan at five years of
age, he was passed from one relative to another until all were tired of
him, and he was "bound out" to a shoemaker. Almost inevitably the
neglected lad grew up wicked, for no one appeared to care for his habits
and morals, and as he sank lower in the various vices encouraged by bad
company, there were more kicks for him than helping hands. At the age of
eighteen his reputation in the town had become so unsavory that he was
forced to shift for himself elsewhere.

Providence led him, when shabby and penniless, to the old seaport town
of Bristol, where Whitefield was at that time preaching,[4] and there
the young sinner heard the divine message that lifted him to his feet.

[Footnote 4: Whitefield's text was, "Is not this a brand plucked out of
the fire?" Zach. 3:2.]

"When that sermon began," he said, "I was one of the most abandoned and
profligate young men living; before it ended I was a new creature. The
world was all changed for Tom Olivers."

His new life, thus begun, lasted on earth more than sixty useful years.
He left a shining record as a preacher of righteousness, and died in the
triumphs of faith, November, 1799. Before he passed away he saw at least
thirty editions of his hymn published, but the soul-music it has
awakened among the spiritual children of Abraham can only reach him in
heaven. Some of its words have been the last earthly song of many, as
they were of the eminent Methodist theologian, Richard Watson--

      I shall behold His face,
      I shall His power adore,
    And sing the wonders of His grace
        Forevermore.


_THE TUNE._

The precise date of the tune "Leoni" is unknown, as also the precise
date of the hymn. The story is that Olivers visited the great "Duke's
Place" Synagogue, Aldgate, London, and heard Meyer Lyon (Leoni) sing the
Yigdal or long doxology to an air so noble and impressive that it
haunted him till he learned it and fitted to it the sublime stanzas of
his song. Lyon, a noted Jewish musician and vocalist, was chorister of
this London Synagogue during the latter part of the 18th century and the
Yigdal was a portion of the Hebrew Liturgy composed in medieval times,
it is said, by Daniel Ben Judah. The fact that the Methodist leaders
took Olivers from his bench to be one of their preachers answers any
suggestion that the converted shoemaker _copied_ the Jewish hymn and put
Christian phrases in it. He knew nothing of Hebrew, and had he known
it, a literal translation of the Yigdal will show hardly a similarity to
his evangelical lines. Only the music as Leoni sang it prompted his own
song, and he gratefully put the singer's name to it. Montgomery, who
admired the majestic style of the hymn, and its glorious imagery, said
of its author, "The man who wrote that hymn must have had the finest ear
imaginable, for on account of the peculiar measure, none but a person of
equal musical and poetic taste could have produced the harmony
perceptible in the verse."

Whether the hymnist or some one else fitted the hymn to the tune, the
"fine ear" and "poetic taste" that Montgomery applauded are evident
enough in the union.


"O WORSHIP THE KING ALL GLORIOUS ABOVE."

This hymn of Sir Robert Grant has become almost universally known, and
is often used as a morning or opening service song by choirs and
congregations of all creeds. The favorite stanzas are the first four--

    O worship the King all-glorious above,
    And gratefully sing His wonderful love--
    Our Shield and Defender, the Ancient of Days,
    Pavilioned in splendor, and girded with praise.

    O tell of His might, and sing of His grace,
    Whose robe is the light, whose canopy, space;
    His chariots of wrath the deep thunder-clouds form,
    And dark is His path on the wings of the storm.

    Thy bountiful care what tongue can recite?
    It breathes in the air, it shines in the light,
    It streams from the hills, it descends to the plain,
    And sweetly distils in the dew and the rain.

    Frail children of dust, and feeble as frail,
    In Thee do we trust, nor find Thee to fail.
    Thy mercies how tender! how firm to the end!
    Our Maker, Defender, Redeemer, and Friend!

This is a model hymn of worship. Like the previous one by Thomas
Olivers, it is strongly Hebrew in its tone and diction, and drew its
inspiration from the Old Testament Psalter, the text-book of all true
praise-song.

Sir Robert Grant was born in the county of Inverness, Scotland, in 1785,
and educated at Cambridge. He was many years member of Parliament for
Inverness and a director in the East India Company, and 1834 was
appointed Governor of Bombay. He died at Dapoorie, Western India, July
9, 1838.

Sir Robert was a man of deep Christian feeling and a poetic mind. His
writings were not numerous, but their thoughtful beauty endeared him to
a wide circle of readers. In 1839 his brother, Lord Glenelg, published
twelve of his poetical pieces, and a new edition in 1868. The volume
contains the more or less well-known hymns--

    The starry firmament on high.

    Saviour, when in dust to Thee,

and--

    When gathering clouds around I view.

Sir Robert's death, when scarcely past his prime, would indicate a
decline by reason of illness, and perhaps other serious affliction, that
justified the poetic license in the submissive verses beginning--

    Thy mercy heard my infant prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

    And now _in age_ and grief Thy name
    Does still my languid heart inflame,
      And bow my faltering knee.
    Oh, yet this bosom feels the fire,
    This trembling hand and drooping lyre
      Have yet a strain for Thee.


_THE TUNE._

Several musical pieces written to the hymn, "O, Worship the King," have
appeared in church psalm-books, and others have been borrowed for it,
but the one oftenest sung to its words is Haydn's "Lyons." Its vigor and
spirit best fit it for Grant's noble lyric.


"MAJESTIC SWEETNESS SITS ENTHRONED."

Rev. Samuel Stennett D.D., the author of this hymn, was the son of Rev.
Joseph Stennett, and grandson of Rev. Joseph Stennett D.D., who wrote--

    Another six days' work is done,
    Another Sabbath is begun.

All were Baptist ministers. Samuel was born in 1727, at Exeter, Eng.,
and at the age of twenty-one became his father's assistant, and
subsequently his successor over the church in Little Wild Street,
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London.

    Majestic sweetness sits enthroned
      Upon the Saviour's brow;
    His head with radiant glories crowned,
      His lips with grace o'erflow.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To Him I owe my life and breath
      And all the joys I have;
    He makes me triumph over death,
      He saves me from the grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Since from His bounty I receive
      Such proofs of love divine,
    Had I a thousand hearts to give,
      Lord, they should all be Thine.

Samuel Stennett was one of the most respected and influential ministers
of the Dissenting persuasion, and a confidant of many of the most
distinguished statesmen of his time. The celebrated John Howard was his
parishoner and intimate friend. His degree of Doctor of Divinity was
bestowed upon him by Aberdeen University. Besides his theological
writings he composed and published thirty-eight hymns, among them--

    On Jordan's stormy banks I stand,

    When two or three with sweet accord,

    Here at Thy table, Lord, we meet,

and--

    "'Tis finished," so the Saviour cried.

"Majestic Sweetness" began the third stanza of his longer hymn--

    To Christ the Lord let every tongue.

Dr. Stennett died in London, Aug. 24, 1795.


_THE TUNE._

For fifty or sixty years "Ortonville" has been linked with this devout
hymn, and still maintains its fitting fellowship. The tune, composed in
1830, was the work of Thomas Hastings, and is almost as well-known and
as often sung as his immortal "Toplady." (See chap. 3, "Rock of Ages.")


"ALL HAIL THE POWER OF JESUS' NAME."

This inspiring lyric of praise appears to have been written about the
middle of the eighteenth century. Its author, the Rev. Edward Perronet,
son of Rev. Vincent Perronet, Vicar of Shoreham, Eng., was a man of
great faith and humility but zealous in his convictions, sometimes to
his serious expense. He was born in 1721, and, though eighteen years
younger than Charles Wesley, the two became bosom friends, and it was
under the direction of the Wesleys that Perronet became a preacher in
the evangelical movement. Lady Huntingdon later became his patroness,
but some needless and imprudent expressions in a satirical poem, "The
Mitre," revealing his hostility to the union of church and state, cost
him her favor, and his contention against John Wesley's law that none
but the regular parish ministers had the right to administer the
sacraments, led to his complete separation from both the Wesleys. He
subsequently became the pastor of a small church of Dissenters in
Canterbury, where he died, in January, 1792. His piety uttered itself
when near his happy death, and his last words were a Gloria.

    All hail the power of Jesus' name!
      Let angels prostrate fall;
    Bring forth the royal diadem,
      To crown Him Lord of all.

    Ye seed of Israel's chosen race,
      Ye ransomed of the fall,
    Hail Him Who saves you by His grace,
      And crown Him Lord of all.

    Sinners, whose love can ne'er forget
      The wormwood and the gall,
    Go, spread your trophies at His feet,
      And crown Him Lord of all.

    Let every tribe and every tongue
      That bound creation's call,
    Now shout the universal song,
      The crowned Lord of all.

With two disused stanzas omitted, the hymn as it stands differs from the
original chiefly in the last stanza, though in the second the initial
line is now transposed to read--

    Ye chosen seed of Israel's race.

The fourth stanza now reads--

    Let every kindred, every tribe
      On this terrestrial ball
    To Him all majesty ascribe,
      And crown Him Lord of all.

And what is now the favorite last stanza is the one added by Dr.
Rippon--

    O that with yonder sacred throng
      We at His feet may fall,
    And join the everlasting song,
      And crown Him Lord of all.


_THE TUNE._

Everyone now calls it "Old Coronation," and it is entitled to the
adjective by this time, being considerably more than a hundred years
of age. It was composed in the very year of Perronet's death and one
wonders just how long the hymn and tune waited before they came
together; for Heaven evidently meant them to be wedded for all time.
This is an American opinion, and no reflection on the earlier English
melody of "Miles Lane," composed during Perronet's lifetime by William
Shrubsole and published with the words in 1780 in the _Gospel Magazine_.
There is also a fine processional tune sung in the English Church to
Perronet's hymn.

The author of "Coronation" was Oliver Holden, a self-taught musician,
born in Shirley, Mass., 1765, and bred to the carpenter's trade. The
little pipe organ on which tradition says he struck the first notes of
the famous tune is now in the Historical rooms of the Old State House,
Boston, placed there by its late owner, Mrs. Fanny Tyler, the old
musician's granddaughter. Its tones are as mellow as ever, and the times
that "Coronation" has been played upon it by admiring visitors would far
outnumber the notes of its score.

Holden wrote a number of other hymn-tunes, among which "Cowper,"
"Confidence," and "Concord" are remembered, but none of them had the
wings of "Coronation," his American "Te Deum." His first published
collection was entitled _The American Harmony_, and this was followed by
the _Union Harmony_, and the _Worcester Collection_. He also wrote and
published "Mt. Vernon," and several other patriotic anthems, mainly for
special occasions, to some of which he supplied the words. He was no
hymnist, though he did now and then venture into sacred metre. The new
_Methodist Hymnal_ preserves a simple four-stanza specimen of his
experiments in verse:

    They who seek the throne of grace
    Find that throne in every place:
    If we lead a life of prayer
    God is present everywhere.

Sacred music, however, was the good man's passion to the last. He died
in 1844.

"Such beautiful themes!" he whispered on his death bed, "Such beautiful
themes! But I can write no more."

The enthusiasm always and everywhere aroused by the singing of
"Coronation," dates from the time it first went abroad in America in
its new wedlock of music and words. "This tune," says an accompanying
note over the score in the old _Carmina Sacra_, "was a great favorite
with the late Dr. Dwight of Yale College (1798). It was often sung by
the college choir, while he, catching, as it were, the music of the
heavenly world, would join them, and lead with the most ardent
