Let me be frank. These buildings are not really beautiful. They are
enormous, but they are not impressive; they are elaborate and fine and
white, but they are not graceful. I am not sure what is the matter with
them; but I think it is that they appear to be turned out of a machine.
They are too trim; they are like a well-dressed man who is not quite a
gentleman; they are like a wedding guest; they are _haute-bourgeoise_,
they are not the nobility. It is a terrible pity, but I suppose it could
not be helped, since they were allowed so little time to grow. There is
no sense of reflectiveness about them, no patient growth of character,
as in those glorious cathedrals, Amiens, Chartres, Beauvais, which I had
so lately seen. There is nothing in reserve; they say everything, they
suggest nothing. They have no imaginative vista.

We said not one word to one another. We threaded our way across the
ground, diagonally, seeing as we went the Bureau de Constatations (or
the office where the doctors sit), contrived near the left arm of the
terraced steps; and passed out under the archway, to find ourselves with
the churches on our left, and on our right the flowing Gave, confined on
this side by a terraced walk, with broad fields beyond the stream.

The first thing I noticed were the three roofs of the _piscines_, on the
left side of the road, built under the cliff on which the churches
stand. I shall have more to say of them presently, but now it is enough
to remark that they resemble three little chapels, joined in one, each
with its own doorway; an open paved space lies across the entrances,
where the doctors and the priests attend upon the sick. This open space
is fenced in all about, to keep out the crowd that perpetually seethes
there. We went a few steps farther, worked our way in among the people,
and fell on our knees.

Overhead, the cliff towered up, bare hanging rock beneath, grass and
soaring trees above; and at the foot of the cliff a tall, irregular
cave. There are two openings of this cave; the one, the larger, is like
a cage of railings, with the gleam of an altar in the gloom beyond, a
hundred burning candles, and sheaves and stacks of crutches clinging to
the broken roofs of rock; the other, and smaller, and that farther from
us, is an opening in the cliff, shaped somewhat like a _vesica_. The
grass still grows there, with ferns and the famous climbing shrub; and
within the entrance, framed in it, stands Mary, in white and blue, as
she stood fifty years ago, raised perhaps twenty feet above the ground.

Ah, that image!... I said, "As she stood there!" Yet it could not have
been so; for surely even simple Bernadette would not have fallen on her
knees. It is too white, it is too blue; it is, like the three churches,
placed magnificently, yet not impressive; fine and slender, yet not
graceful.

But we knelt there without unreality, with the river running swift
behind us; for we knelt where a holy child had once knelt before a
radiant vision, and with even more reason; for even if the one, as some
say, had been an hallucination, were those sick folk an hallucination?
Was Pierre de Rudder's mended leg an hallucination, or the healed wounds
of Marie Borel? Or were those hundreds upon hundreds of disused crutches
an illusion? Did subjectivity create all these? If so, what greater
miracle can be demanded?

And there was more than that. For when later, at Argeles, I looked over
the day, I was able to formulate for the first time the extraordinary
impressions that Lourdes had given me. There was everything hostile to
my peace--an incalculable crowd, an oppressive heat, dust, noise,
weariness; there was the disappointment of the churches and the image;
there was the sour unfamiliarity of the place and the experience; and
yet I was neither troubled nor depressed nor irritated nor disappointed.
It appeared to me as if some great benign influence were abroad,
soothing and satisfying; lying like a great summer air over all, to
quiet and to stimulate. I cannot describe this further; I can only say
that it never really left me during those three days, I saw sights that
would have saddened me elsewhere--apparent injustices, certain
disappointments, dashed hopes that would almost have broken my heart;
and yet that great Power was over all, to reconcile, to quiet and to
reassure. To leave Lourdes at the end was like leaving home.

After a few minutes before the Grotto, we climbed the hill behind, made
an appointment for my Mass on the morrow; and, taking the car again,
moved slowly through the crowded streets, and swiftly along the country
roads, up to Argeles, nearly a dozen miles away.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The epithet is deliberate. He relates in his book, "Lourdes," the
story of an imaginary case of a girl, suffering from tuberculosis, who
goes to Lourdes as a pilgrim, and is, apparently, cured of her disease.
It breaks out, however, again during her return home; and the case would
appear therefore to be one of those in which, owing to fierce excitement
and the mere power of suggestion, there is a temporary amelioration, but
no permanent, or supernatural, cure. Will it be believed that the
details of this story, all of which are related with great
particularity, and observed by Zola himself, were taken from an actual
case that occurred during one of his visits--all the details except the
relapse? There was no relapse: the cure was complete and permanent. When
Dr. Boissarie later questioned the author as to the honesty of this
literary device, saying that he had understood him to have stated that
he had come to Lourdes for the purpose of an impartial investigation,
Zola answered that the characters in the book were his own, and that he
could make them do what he liked. It is on these principles that the
book is constructed. It must be added that Zola followed up the case,
and had communications with the _miraculee_ long after her cure had been
shown to be permanent, and before his book appeared.




II.


We were in Lourdes again next morning a little after six o'clock; and
already it might have been high noon, for the streets were one moving
mass of pilgrims. From every corner came gusts of singing; and here and
there through the crowd already moved the _brancardiers_--men of every
nation with shoulder-straps and cross--bearing the litters with their
piteous burdens.

I was to say Mass in the crypt; and when I arrived there at last, the
church was full from end to end. The interior was not so disappointing
as I had feared. It had a certain solid catacombic gloom beneath its low
curved roof, which, if it had not been for the colours and some of the
details, might very nearly have come from the hand of a good architect.
The arrangements for the pilgrims were as bad as possible; there was no
order, no marshalling; they moved crowd against crowd like herds of
bewildered sheep. Some were for Communion, some for Mass only, some for
confession; and they pushed patiently this way and that in every
direction. It was a struggle before I got my vestments; I produced a
letter from the Bishop of Rodez, with whom I had lunched a few days
before; I argued, I deprecated, I persuaded, I quoted. Everything once
more was against my peace of mind; yet I have seldom said Mass with more
consolations than in that tiny sanctuary of the high Altar.... An
ecclesiastic served, and an old priest knelt devoutly at a prie-Dieu.

When the time for Communion came, I turned about and saw but one sea of
faces stretching from the altar rail into as much of the darkness as I
could discern. For a quarter of an hour I gave Communion rapidly; then,
as soon as another priest could force his way through the crowd, I
continued Mass; he had not nearly finished giving Communion when I had
ended my thanksgiving. This, too, was the same everywhere--in the crypt,
in the basilica, in the Rosary Church, and above all in the Grotto. The
average number of Communions every day throughout the year in Lourdes
is, I am told, four thousand. In that year of Jubilee, however, Dr.
Boissarie informed me, in round numbers, one million Communions were
made, sixty thousand Masses were said, with two thousand Communions at
each midnight Mass.... Does Jesus Christ go out when Mary comes in? We
are told so by non-Catholics. Rather, it seems as if, like the Wise Men
of old, men still find the Child with Mary His Mother.

At the close of my Mass, the old priest rose from his place and began to
prepare the vessels and arrange the Missal. As soon as I took off the
vestments he put them on. I assented passively, supposing him to be the
next on the list; I even answered his _Kyrie_. But at the Collect a
frantic sacristan burst through the crowd; and from remarks made to the
devout old priest and myself, I learned that the next on the list was
still waiting in the sacristy, and that this old man was an adroit
though pious interloper who had determined not to take "No" for an
answer. He finished his Mass. I forbear from comment.

For a while afterward we stood on the terrace above the _piscines_; and,
indeed, after breakfast I returned here again alone, and remained during
all the morning. It was an extraordinary sight. From the terrace, the
cliff fell straight away down to the roofs of the three chapel-like
buildings, fifty or sixty feet beneath. Beyond that I could see the
paved space, sprinkled with a few moving figures; and, beyond the
barrier, the crowd stretching across the roadway and far on either side.
Behind them was the clean river and the green meadows, all delicious in
the early sunlight.

During that morning I must have seen many hundreds of the sick carried
into the baths; for there were almost two thousand sick in Lourdes on
that day. I could even watch their faces, white and drawn with pain, or
horribly scarred, as they lay directly beneath me, "waiting for some man
to put them into the water." I saw men and women of all nations and all
ranks attending upon them, carrying them tenderly, fanning their faces,
wiping their lips, giving them to drink of the Grotto water. A murmur of
thousands of footsteps came up from beneath (this National Pilgrimage of
France numbered between eighty and an hundred thousand persons); and
loud above the footsteps came the cries of the priests, as they stood in
a long row facing the people, with arms extended in the form of a cross.
Now and again came a far-off roar of singing from the Grotto to my left,
where Masses were said continuously by bishops and favoured priests; or
from my right, from the great oval space beneath the steps; and then, on
a sudden a great chorus of sound from beneath, as the _Gloria Patri_
burst out when the end of some decade was reached. All about us was the
wheeling earth, the Pyrenees behind, the meadows in front; and over us
heaven, with Mary looking down.

Once from beneath during that long morning I heard terrible shrieks, as
of a demoniac, that died into moans and ceased. And once I saw a little
procession go past from the Grotto, with the Blessed Sacrament in the
midst. There was no sensation, no singing. The Lord of all went simply
by on some errand of mercy, and men fell on their knees and crossed
themselves as He went.

After _dejeuner_ at the Hotel Moderne, where now it was decided that we
should stay until the Monday, we went down to the Bureau. At first there
were difficulties made, as the doctors were not come; and I occupied a
little while in watching the litters unloaded from the wagonettes that
brought them gently down to within a hundred yards of the Grotto. Once
indeed I was happy to be able to fit a _brancardier's_ straps into the
poles that supported a sick woman. It was all most terrible and most
beautiful. Figure after figure was passed along the seats--living
crucifixes of pain--and lowered tenderly to the ground, to lie there a
moment or two, with the body horribly flat and, as it seemed, almost
non-existent beneath the coverlet; and the white face with blazing eyes
of anguish, or passive and half dead, to show alone that a human
creature lay there. Then one by one each was lifted and swung gently
down to the gate of the _piscines_.

At about three o'clock, after an hour's waiting, I succeeded in getting
a certain card passed through the window, and immediately a message came
out from Dr. Cox that I was to be admitted. I passed through a barrier,
through a couple of rooms, and found myself in the Holy Place of
Science, as the Grotto is the Holy Place of Grace.

It is a little room in which perhaps twenty persons can stand with
comfort. Again and again I saw more than sixty there. Down one side runs
a table, at one end of which sits Dr. Cox; in the centre, facing the
room, is the presiding doctor's chair, where, as a rule, Dr. Boissarie
is to be found. Dr. Cox set me between him and the president, and I
began to observe.

At the farther end of the room is a long glazed case of photographs hung
against the wall. Here are photographs of many of the most famous
patients. The wounds of Marie Borel are shown there; Marie Borel herself
had been present in the Bureau that morning to report upon her excellent
health. (She was cured last year instantaneously, in the _piscine_, of a
number of running wounds, so deep that they penetrated the intestines.)
On the table lay some curious brass objects, which I learned later were
models of the bones of Pierre de Rudder's legs. (This man had for eight
years suffered from a broken leg and two running wounds--one at the
fracture, the other on the foot. These were gangrenous. The ends of the
broken bones were seen immediately before the cure, which took place
instantaneously at the shrine of Our Lady of Lourdes at Oostacker.
Pierre lived rather over twenty years after his sudden and complete
restoration to health). For the rest, the room is simple enough. There
are a few chairs. Another door leads into a little compartment where the
sick can be examined privately; a third and a fourth lead into the open
air on either side. There are two windows, looking out respectively on
this side and that.

