the only Station retained in Greece.--Preaching and the Press.
--Labors among the Greeks of Turkey.--Why in great measure
Discontinued.--Valuable Results.

CHAPTER XI. THE NESTORIANS.--1833-1836.

Commencement of the Mission.--Instructions to the Missionary.--Rise
of the Nestorians.--Their Missions.--Destroyed by the Mohammedans.
--The Overland Journey of Mr. and Mrs. Perkins.--Hardships endured
in Russia.--Kindness of the British Embassy in Persia.--Remarkable
Escape.--Friends in Need.--The Field to be Occupied.--Preliminary
Measures.--Additional Laborers.--The Province of Oroomiah.--Dr.
Grant's Medical Practice.--Recollections of Dr. Grant.--When a
Missionary Physician is most valuable.--A Nestorian Wedding.
--Reducing the Language to Writing.--Rise of the Seminary for
Males.--School for Moslem Youths.--Sickness in the Mission.

CHAPTER XII. THE NESTORIANS.--1836-1840.

Escape from Assassination.--New Missionaries.--First Impressions.
--Too much Pecuniary Aid given to the People.--Native Helpers.
--Eminent Qualities of Mrs. Grant.--She commences the Female
Seminary.--Her Death.--Priest Dunka.--Robert Glen.--Schools.
--Scarcity of Scriptures in Ancient Syriac.--Dr. Grant's Desire to
enter Koordistan from the East.--Authorized to enter from the West.
--An Arduous Journey.--Battle of Nizib.--Consequent Anarchy at
Diarbekir.--Mr. Homes.--Dr. Grant goes to Mosul.--Starts for
Koordistan.--Is challenged from the Rocks.--Welcomed by the
Mountaineers.--Boldly enters Tiary.--Pleasing Meditations.--His
Reception there.--A Learned Priest.--How Received by Mar Shimon.
--The Patriarch described.--Old Parchment Copy of the New
Testament.--Visits Nurullah Bey.--His return to Oroomiah.--New
Missionaries.--Arrival of Press and Type.--Bold Inroad of Jesuits.
--Counteractive Influences.--Demand for Preaching.--What was the
Calamity of the Nestorians.

CHAPTER XIII. THE MOUNTAIN NESTORIANS.--1840-1844.

Invitations from the Patriarch.--Dr. Grant resolves to return Home
through the Mountains.--Ten Days at Julamerk.--Womanly Forethought.
--Arrival at Boston.--Work on the Ten Tribes of Israel.
--Missionaries for Koordistan.--Dr. Grant returns through Van.
--Again with the Patriarch.--Painful Tidings.--Hastens to Mosul.
--Journey of the New Missionaries.--Death of Mr. Mitchell.
--Sufferings and Death of Mrs. Mitchell.--Seasonable Arrival of Dr.
Grant.--Reflections.--Reception by the Jacobites.--A Syrian Priest
from India.--The Koords making War on the Nestorians.--Bishop
Athanasius.--Dr. Grant again visits Oroomiah.--A Third Time enters
the Mountains.--Guest of Mar Shimon.--The Patriarch's Cooeperation.
--Mr. Hinsdale.--Papal Missionaries.--Dr. Grant visits Nurullah
Bey.--Returns to Mosul.--Death of Mr. Hinsdale.--Influence of Mr.
Ainsworth and Mr. Badger on the Patriarch.--Letter from Mar Shimon
to English Bishops.--Dr. Grant's Last Visit with Mr. Laurie to the
Patriarch.--Visits Bader Khan Bey.--Subjugation of the Mountain
Nestorians.--Escape of Dr. Grant.--Destruction of Tiary.--The
Patriarch flees to Mosul.--Destruction of Life.--Death of Mrs.
Laurie.--Arrival of Dr. Azariah Smith.--Death of Dr. Grant.
--Reflections on his Life and Character.--Tiary again explored.
--Discontinuance of the Western Branch of the Mission.--Disposal of
the Missionaries.

CHAPTER XIV. SYRIA.--1830-1838.

The Station at Beirut resumed.--Gregory Wortabet.--His Conversion.
--Accompanies the Missionaries to Malta.--Returns to Syria.--Active
in the Christian Life.--Respected by all Classes.--His Death.
--Disturbing Influences.--Conquest of Syria by Ibrahim Pasha.--Mr.
Bird's Letters in the Arabic Language.--Arabic Press at Beirut.
--Explorations in the Hauran.--Journal of the Tour lost in a
Shipwreck.--Presses in Syria.--Influence of the Mission.--National
Protection.--Schools.--Retirement of Mr. and Mrs. Bird.--Accessions
to the Mission.--Improvements in the High School.--Great
Improvements in Arabic Type.--Death of Mrs. Smith.--Biblical
Researches.

CHAPTER XV. THE DRUZES, AND THE WARS OF LEBANON.--1835-1842.

The Druzes.--Hope of introducing the Gospel among them.--Disposition
to Hear.--Their Leading Motive.--Subdued by Ibrahim Pasha.
--Increased Tendency towards a Nominal Christianity.--A Hopeful
Druze Convert.--His Firmness under Persecution.--Admitted to the
Church.--Striking Illustration of an Apparent Religious Interest.
--Papal Opposition and its Effect.--Treatment of Papal Druzes.
--Causes of Declining Interest.--Changes in the Mission.--Evidence
of Progress.--Connection between Religious and Political Events.
--Consequent Warlike Proceedings.--Remarkable Preservation of
Mission Property.--The persecuting Emir Beshir deposed.--Changes in
the Seminary.--The Mission Reassembled.--Inroad of French Jesuits.
--Mistaken Policy of English Officials.--The Patriarch's Effort to
expel the Americans.--English Officers better informed.--Mistake of
the American Minister.--Renewed Interest among the Druzes.--Proffer
of Friendly Aid.--An Unfortunate Interposition.--The Patriarch makes
War to his own Ruin.--Deliverance of the Mission.--Its Favorable
Prospects.--The Success of the Mission proportioned to its Efforts.
--Value of the Results.--A Sudden and Disastrous Revolution.

CHAPTER XVI. SYRIA.--1842-1846.

Experiences of the Mission.--Missionary Convention.--The People all
of one Race.--The most Hopeful Districts.--When to form Churches.
--Qualifications for Church membership not to be relaxed.--Practical
Errors.--Counteracting Agencies.--Call for Preaching at Hasbeiya.--A
Secession from the Greek Church.--Attention given to the Gospel.
--Needed Explanations.--Affecting Scene.--Arrival of Persecutors.
--Seasonable Intervention.--The Protestants obliged to flee.--Their
Return.--Interference of the Russian Consul General.--Partial
Success of the Enemy.--The Jerusalem Station suspended.--The
Seminary revived.--Death of Yakob Agha.--Another War between Druzes
and Maronites.--Its Results.--Friendly Services of the
Missionaries.--Reflections on the Patriarch's Death.--After the War.

CHAPTER XVII. DR. JONAS KING AND THE GREEK HIERARCHY.--1845-1847.

Importance of this Struggle.--The Accusations against Dr. King.--His
Response.--Increased Violence of the Opposition.--His Examination by
a Judge.--His Book denounced at Constantinople.--The Courts against
him.--Goes to the Criminal Court at Syra.--A Dangerous Gathering.
--Returns to Athens.--Is offered British Protection.--Again cited
for Trial at Syra.--The Citation recalled.--Alleviations.--Renewal
of the Storm.--Extraordinary Accusations.--Call from the Governor of
Attica.--A Guard of Soldiers.--Advice from the King.--Offer of Sir
Edmund Lyons.--Retires to Geneva.--More Slanderous Accusations.--His
House protected.--Subsequent Proceedings of the Government.--Goes to
Malta.--Editions of his "Farewell Letter."

CHAPTER XVIII. DR. JONAS KING AND THE GREEK HIERARCHY.--1847-1869.

Returns to Athens.--His Reasons.--The Reception.--Resumes his
Labors.--His Chief Accuser discredited.--Cheering Incident.--The
Greek Synod demands his Prosecution.--An Outbreak.--Quelled by
raising the United States Flag.--Answers to a Judge.--Effect of a
New Publication.--Allegations for a New Trial.--The Trial at
Athens.--Decides to go to the Court-room openly and on foot.
--Extraordinary Sources of Proof.--His Condemnation.--Ground of the
Condemnation.--Is imprisoned.--Appeals to the Areopagus.--Which
confirms the Sentence.--Greek Lawyers dissent from the Courts.
--Appeal to the United States Government.--The Rights of
Missionaries.--The Appeal responded to.--Opinion of the President.
--Justice partially rendered.--Sentence of Banishment revoked.
--Opinion of the American Minister.--Favorable Change in the Popular
Sentiment.--Temporary Outbreak of the Old Enmity.--Unexpected
Citation.--The Judges decide not to proceed.--Cooeperation of other
Missionaries.--A Revolution in the Government.--Disgrace of Old
Persecutors.--New King and Constitution.--Association of Editors.
--An Act of Public Justice.--Visit to the United States.--Return to
Greece.--Zealous Native Labors.--Conference with the President of
the Synod.--Death of Dr. King.--General Reflections.

CHAPTER XIX. THE NESTORIANS.--1841-1848.

Visit of Dr. and Mrs. Perkins to the United States.--Accompanied by
Mar Yohannan.--Schools and the Press.--Improved Type.--Health
Station.--New Missionaries.--Dr. Perkins's History of the Mission.
--His Return.--Version of the Scriptures.--Religious Influences.
--The Jesuits and French Government.--Counteracting Influences.--The
Patriarchal Family.--Hostility of the Patriarch.--Dismission of the
Schools.--Female Seminary revived.--Boys' Seminary reorganized.--On
employing the Higher Clergy.--Mr. Merrick's Connection with the
Mission.--Ordinations.--Protection for Native Christians.--The First
Revival.--Its First Fruits.--Brother of the Patriarch.--Interest at
Geog Tapa.--Interest in the Boys' Seminary.--Estimated Number of
Converts.--Modern Syriac New Testament.--Translation of the Old
Testament.--Nestorian Hymn Book.--New Missionaries.--Devastation by
the Cholera.--Dr. Wright's Visit to Bader Khan Bey.--Wonderful
Change in the Mountains.--Homeward Route.--Mar Shimon invited to
Constantinople.--Flees to Oroomiah.--Conflicting Influences upon
him.--His Apparent Friendship.--Throws off the Mask.--His Power
circumscribed.--His Unfriendly Acts.--The Government interposes.
--His Combination with the Jesuits.--Prejudicial to Both.--Death of
the King.--Providential Interpositions.--Persecution of Deacon
Tamo.--Deposition of the Great Koordish Chieftains.

CHAPTER XX. THE NESTORIANS.--1848-1852.

Mr. Stoddard Visits the United States.--Death of Mrs. Stoddard.
--State of the Schools.--Mar Shimon returns to the Mountains.--A
Visit to Mosul.--A Second Revival.--Deacon Guwergis.--Third
Revival.--Deacon John.--Deacon Jeremiah.--Various Tours.--The
Mission Enlarged.--Advance in Female Education.--Village Schools.
--Sabbath-schools.--The Monthly Concert.--Preaching Tours.--Deacon
Isaac.--Station at Gawar.--A Remarkable Youth.--Adverse Influences.
--Persecution of Deacon Tamo.--Intervention of Lieut.-Col.
Williams.--Powerful Friends.--Release of Tamo.--Favorable Results.
--Modern Syriac Bible.

CHAPTER XXI. SYRIA.--1845-1856.

Good News from the North.--Mr. Thomson Visits Aleppo.--The People
characterized.--Greek Catholic Archbishop.--Visit to Hasbeiya.--Mr.
Laurie's Return Home.--Unsuccessful Appeal for Laborers.--Relation
of the Druzes to Mohammedanism.--Successful Appeal of the Hasbeiyans
to the Turkish Government.--Desperate Resort of the Greek
Patriarch.--Formation of a Purely Native Church.--Translation of the
Scriptures into the Arabic.--Station of Aleppo.--Visit to Northern
Lebanon.--Death of Bedros.--Intelligent Men affected by the Truth.
--Another Visit to Hasbeiya.--English Protection.--Seminary at
Abeih.--Improved Arabic Type.--The Native Church.--Outrages at
Aleppo.--Effect of the Proceedings.--Pupils in the Seminary.--The
Church at Hasbeiya.--John Wortabet.--Drs. Bacon and Robinson.
--Female Boarding School.--Native Church at Abeih.--Experience in
Different Localities.--An Interesting Conversion.--Hopeful
Developments.--Opposition and its Effect.--A Church built at
Hasbeiya.--Progress of the Arabic Translation of the Scriptures.
--The Gospel at Ain Zehalty.--Northern Syria transferred to the
Armenian Mission.--Accessions and Bereavements.--General View.

CHAPTER XXII. THE ARMENIANS.--1845-1846.

The Grand Crisis.--The Persecuting Patriarch.--Mention of Bishop
Southgate.--The Patriarch's Mode of Proceeding.--His Treatment of
Bedros Vartabed.--Priest Vertanes.--The Chief Persecutors.
--Persecution at Erzroom.--Its Effect.--Central Position of
Erzroom.--Progress at Trebizond.--Persecutions.--The Patriarch
resorts to Excommunication.--Temporal Penalties enforced.--The
Patriarch and the First Protestant Pastor.--Appeals of the
Persecuted.--Charitable Aid.--Good Resulting from Evil.
--Intervention of the Government.--The Patriarch's Subterfuge.--Case
of Priest Haritun.--A Temporary Triumph.--Cruelties at Adabazar and
Trebizond.--A British Consul interposes.--Effect of the
Persecutions.--Barbarities at Erzroom.

CHAPTER XXIII. THE ARMENIANS.--1846-1848.

Continued Persecutions.--Interposition of the English Ambassador.
--Designation of "Protestants."--A Vizierial Letter.--The
Patriarch's Hostility to the Seminary.--Its Effect.--Seminary for
Young Ladies.--Perpetual Excommunication of the Protestants.
--Consequent Organization of an Evangelical Church at
Constantinople.--Choice of Officers.--Ordination of a Pastor.
--Public Declaration of Faith.--Other Churches formed.--Early Death
of the Pastor.--The Pastor's Wife.--Der Haritun.--Reformation at
Aintab.--Visit of Mr. Van Lennep.--Visit of Mr. Johnston.--Arrival
of Dr. Azariah Smith.--Mr. Schneider's Visit.--Trying Situation of
the Protestants.--Power of the Patriarch reduced.--Number of the
Protestants.--The Churches.--Additional Native Pastors.--Revivals of
Religion.






INTRODUCTION.


We may not hope for the conversion of the Mohammedans, unless true
Christianity be exemplified before them by the Oriental Churches. To
them the native Christians represent the Christian religion, and
they see that these are no better than themselves. They think them
worse; and therefore the Moslem believes the Koran to be more
excellent than the Bible.

It is vain to say, that the native Christians have so far departed
from the truth that they do not feel the power of the Gospel, and
that therefore the immorality of their lives is not to be attributed
to its influence. The Mohammedan has seen no other effect of it, and
he cannot be persuaded to read the Bible to correct the evidence of
his observation, and perhaps also of his own painful experience.

Hence a wise plan for the conversion of the Mohammedans of Western
Asia necessarily involved, first, a mission to the Oriental
Churches. It was needful that the lights of the Gospel should once
more burn on those candlesticks, that everywhere there should be
living examples of the religion of Jesus Christ, that Christianity
should no longer be associated in the Moslem mind with all that is
sordid and base.

The continued existence of large bodies of nominal Christians among
these Mohammedans, is a remarkable fact. They constitute more than a
third part of the population of Constantinople, and are found in all
the provinces of the empire, as, also, in Persia, and are supposed
to number at least twelve millions. Being so numerous and so widely
dispersed, should spiritual life be revived among them a flood of
light would illumine the Turkish empire, and shine far up into
Central Asia. The followers of Mohammed would look on with wonder,
and perhaps, at first, with hatred and persecution; but new views of
the Gospel would thus be forced upon them, and no longer would they
be able to boast of the superiority of their own religion.

It is true of the Oriental Churches, that they have lost nearly all
the essential principles of the Gospel; at least that those
principles have, in great measure, ceased to have a practical
influence.1 Their views of the Trinity, and of the divine and human
natures of Christ, are not unscriptural; but their views of the way
of salvation through the Son, and of the work of the Holy Spirit,
are sadly perverted. The efficacy of Christ's death for the pardon
of sin, is secured to the sinner, they suppose, by baptism and
penance. The belief is universal, that baptism cancels guilt, and is
regeneration. They also believe baptism to be the instrumental cause
of justification. Hence faith is practically regarded as no more
than a general assent of the understanding to the creeds of their
churches. Of the doctrine of a justifying faith of the heart,--the
distinguishing doctrine of the Gospel,--the people of the Oriental
Churches are believed to have been wholly ignorant, before the
arrival of Protestant missionaries among them.

1 This brief description of the religion of the Oriental Churches,
is condensed from a statement by that eminent missionary, Dr. Eli
Smith, in a sermon published in 1833, but now accessible to very
few. I often use his words, as best adapted to convey the true idea.
Subsequent observations, so far as I know, have never called for any
modification in his statement.

Being thus freed from the condemning power of original sin, and
regenerated by baptism, men were expected to work their way to
heaven by observing the laws of God and the rites of the church.
These rites were fasting, masses, saying of prayers, pilgrimages,
and the like, and in practice crowded the moral law out of mind. The
race of merit was hindered by daily sins, but not stopped, provided
the sins were of a class denominated venial. These could be canceled
by the rites of the church, the most important of which was the
mass, or the consecration and oblation of the elements of the Lord's
Supper. That ordinance is to be observed in remembrance of Christ,
but the people of the Oriental Churches are taught to look upon it
as a renewal of his death. On the priest's pronouncing the words,
"This is my body," the elements are believed to be changed from
bread and wine, and thenceforth to contain the body and blood, the
soul and divinity, of Christ; so that He is crucified afresh, and
made an expiatory sacrifice for sin, every time the consecration is
performed; which, in most churches, is almost every morning in the
year. Its merit attaches not only to the offerer and the partaker,
but to all the faithful, living and dead; especially to those who,
by paying the priest, or by some other service, have their names
mentioned in the prayers that form a part of the ceremony.

Thus a ministry to offer sacrifices is substituted for a ministry to
feed the flock of God with sound doctrine, and the spiritual worship
of God is converted into the formal adoration of a wafer. Preaching
is nowhere regarded as the leading duty of the clergy, but to say
mass. By exalting the eucharist into an expiatory sacrifice, the
partaking of the elements by the people came to be considered quite
unessential, and is generally neglected. They need not understand,
nor even hear the language of the officiating priest. It is enough,
if they see and adore. A bell warns them when to make the needful
genuflections and crosses. Nor can there be a reasonable doubt, that
the adoration of the host (which is required on pain of
excommunication in the Romish Church) is the grossest species of
idolatry.

But there are deadly, as well as venial, sins; and these expose the
soul to eternal punishment. When these are committed after baptism,
they can be remitted only by auricular confession, or the sacrifice
of penance, of which confession forms an essential part. To the
efficacy of this ceremony, contrition of heart is supposed, in
theory, to be essential; but its necessity is rarely taught, and the
great mass of the community go away from the confessional fully
satisfied that their sins are canceled by the mere external form.

Pardon by the priest is not, however, absolute. Grace is restored,
and eternal punishment remitted, but there must be a temporary
punishment,--certain penances, such as fasting, alms-giving, saying
prayers, and the like. The fasts are merely the substituting of a
less for a more palatable and nutritious diet. Alms are more for the
spiritual benefit of the giver, than for the relief of the receiver.
The supposed efficacy of prayer has no connection with the sincerity
of the offerer. For in none of the Oriental Churches, excepting the
Arabic branch of the Greek Church, are the prayers in a language
understood by the people.

They believe that all who die before baptism, or after baptism with
deadly sins unconfessed, are lost forever; but if one die after
confession, and while his penance is incomplete, he cannot be sent
