30. By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise to the lordship of the
gods. People praise earnestness; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

31. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in earnestness, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness, moves about like fire, burning all his fetters,
small or large.

32. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in reflection, who looks with
fear on thoughtlessness, cannot fall away (from his perfect state)--he
is close upon Nirvana.




Chapter III. Thought

33. As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, a wise man makes straight
his trembling and unsteady thought, which is difficult to guard,
difficult to hold back.

34. As a fish taken from his watery home and thrown on dry ground, our
thought trembles all over in order to escape the dominion of Mara (the
tempter).

35. It is good to tame the mind, which is difficult to hold in and
flighty, rushing wherever it listeth; a tamed mind brings happiness.

36. Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are difficult to
perceive, very artful, and they rush wherever they list: thoughts well
guarded bring happiness.

37. Those who bridle their mind which travels far, moves about alone,
is without a body, and hides in the chamber (of the heart), will be free
from the bonds of Mara (the tempter).

38. If a man's thoughts are unsteady, if he does not know the true law,
if his peace of mind is troubled, his knowledge will never be perfect.

39. If a man's thoughts are not dissipated, if his mind is not
perplexed, if he has ceased to think of good or evil, then there is no
fear for him while he is watchful.

40. Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a jar, and making this
thought firm like a fortress, one should attack Mara (the tempter) with
the weapon of knowledge, one should watch him when conquered, and should
never rest.

41. Before long, alas! this body will lie on the earth, despised,
without understanding, like a useless log.

42. Whatever a hater may do to a hater, or an enemy to an enemy, a
wrongly-directed mind will do us greater mischief.

43. Not a mother, not a father will do so much, nor any other relative;
a well-directed mind will do us greater service.


Chapter IV. Flowers

44. Who shall overcome this earth, and the world of Yama (the lord of
the departed), and the world of the gods? Who shall find out the plainly
shown path of virtue, as a clever man finds out the (right) flower?

45. The disciple will overcome the earth, and the world of Yama, and the
world of the gods. The disciple will find out the plainly shown path of
virtue, as a clever man finds out the (right) flower.

46. He who knows that this body is like froth, and has learnt that it
is as unsubstantial as a mirage, will break the flower-pointed arrow of
Mara, and never see the king of death.

47. Death carries off a man who is gathering flowers and whose mind is
distracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

48. Death subdues a man who is gathering flowers, and whose mind is
distracted, before he is satiated in his pleasures.

49. As the bee collects nectar and departs without injuring the flower,
or its colour or scent, so let a sage dwell in his village.

50. Not the perversities of others, not their sins of commission or
omission, but his own misdeeds and negligences should a sage take notice
of.

51. Like a beautiful flower, full of colour, but without scent, are the
fine but fruitless words of him who does not act accordingly.

52. But, like a beautiful flower, full of colour and full of scent, are
the fine and fruitful words of him who acts accordingly.

53. As many kinds of wreaths can be made from a heap of flowers, so many
good things may be achieved by a mortal when once he is born.

54. The scent of flowers does not travel against the wind, nor (that
of) sandal-wood, or of Tagara and Mallika flowers; but the odour of good
people travels even against the wind; a good man pervades every place.

55. Sandal-wood or Tagara, a lotus-flower, or a Vassiki, among these
sorts of perfumes, the perfume of virtue is unsurpassed.

56. Mean is the scent that comes from Tagara and sandal-wood;--the
perfume of those who possess virtue rises up to the gods as the highest.

57. Of the people who possess these virtues, who live without
thoughtlessness, and who are emancipated through true knowledge, Mara,
the tempter, never finds the way.

58, 59. As on a heap of rubbish cast upon the highway the lily will
grow full of sweet perfume and delight, thus the disciple of the truly
enlightened Buddha shines forth by his knowledge among those who are
like rubbish, among the people that walk in darkness.




Chapter V. The Fool

60. Long is the night to him who is awake; long is a mile to him who is
tired; long is life to the foolish who do not know the true law.

61. If a traveller does not meet with one who is his better, or
his equal, let him firmly keep to his solitary journey; there is no
companionship with a fool.

62. "These sons belong to me, and this wealth belongs to me," with such
thoughts a fool is tormented. He himself does not belong to himself; how
much less sons and wealth?

63. The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at least so far. But a
fool who thinks himself wise, he is called a fool indeed.

64. If a fool be associated with a wise man even all his life, he will
perceive the truth as little as a spoon perceives the taste of soup.

65. If an intelligent man be associated for one minute only with a wise
man, he will soon perceive the truth, as the tongue perceives the taste
of soup.

66. Fools of little understanding have themselves for their greatest
enemies, for they do evil deeds which must bear bitter fruits.

67. That deed is not well done of which a man must repent, and the
reward of which he receives crying and with a tearful face.

68. No, that deed is well done of which a man does not repent, and the
reward of which he receives gladly and cheerfully.

69. As long as the evil deed done does not bear fruit, the fool thinks
it is like honey; but when it ripens, then the fool suffers grief.

70. Let a fool month after month eat his food (like an ascetic) with the
tip of a blade of Kusa grass, yet he is not worth the sixteenth particle
of those who have well weighed the law.

71. An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not turn (suddenly);
smouldering, like fire covered by ashes, it follows the fool.

72. And when the evil deed, after it has become known, brings sorrow to
the fool, then it destroys his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

73. Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for precedence among the
Bhikshus, for lordship in the convents, for worship among other people!

74. "May both the layman and he who has left the world think that this
is done by me; may they be subject to me in everything which is to be
done or is not to be done," thus is the mind of the fool, and his desire
and pride increase.

75. "One is the road that leads to wealth, another the road that leads
to Nirvana;" if the Bhikshu, the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this,
he will not yearn for honour, he will strive after separation from the
world.




Chapter VI. The Wise Man (Pandita)

76. If you see an intelligent man who tells you where true treasures are
to be found, who shows what is to be avoided, and administers reproofs,
follow that wise man; it will be better, not worse, for those who follow
him.

77. Let him admonish, let him teach, let him forbid what is
improper!--he will be beloved of the good, by the bad he will be hated.

78. Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not have low people for
friends: have virtuous people for friends, have for friends the best of
men.

79. He who drinks in the law lives happily with a serene mind: the sage
rejoices always in the law, as preached by the elect (Ariyas).

80. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend the
arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; wise people fashion themselves.

81. As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind, wise people falter not
amidst blame and praise.

82. Wise people, after they have listened to the laws, become serene,
like a deep, smooth, and still lake.

83. Good people walk on whatever befall, the good do not prattle,
longing for pleasure; whether touched by happiness or sorrow wise people
never appear elated or depressed.

84. If, whether for his own sake, or for the sake of others, a man
wishes neither for a son, nor for wealth, nor for lordship, and if he
