resorted to by the publishers of the "Extracts," in selecting short and
partial sentences, and thus, as I conceive, grossly misrepresenting some
of the views of those Worthies long since removed from the world on
which they walked as strangers and as pilgrims, and long since, I doubt
not, permitted, through the mercy of their God and Saviour, to enter
into that "better country," where they are no more exposed to the trials
of time, no more exposed to the scoffs and persecutions of men, and no
more affected by the calumnies of "false Brethren."

Whilst, however, expressing a sincere and affectionate regard for the
memories of those who have preceded me in religious professions, I would
add that I consider them worthy to be followed only as they followed
Christ, and that if I go forth by the footsteps of this flock of my
Saviour's companions, it is that I may feed beside that good Shepherd's
tents, where, I believe, they found plentiful pasture.

I would most explicitly state, the present publication is no party act,
or an act originating in party feeling, for though I must take a
heartfelt interest in the present proceedings in our Society, yet I
deeply feel that, even if I see, or think I see, the Ark of the Covenant
of our God unsteadily placed as upon a new cart, there is a danger of
putting forth, like Uzza of old, uncalled and unprepared hands for its
support.

To the serious attention of all honest hearted enquirers after truth do
I commend this little Pamphlet, believing that the principles set forth
in the annexed Sermon, are the principles uniformly avowed and supported
by the "early Friends," and that (however their views and writings may
be distorted and belied) the whole Gospel of a crucified and risen
Saviour, in all its freeness, and in all its fullness, was what they
sought to publish, and by their lives to adorn.

C. GILPIN.

_Manchester, 4th Month, 1836._




SERMON.


The great and blessed God that made heaven and earth, the seas and the
great fountains of the deep, and rivers of water, the Almighty JEHOVAH,
who is from everlasting to everlasting. He also made man and woman; and
his design was to make them eternally happy and blessed. And therefore
he made man in his own image; "in the image of God created he him, male
and female created he them:" He made them after his own likeness holy,
wise, merciful, just, patient, and humble, endued them with knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness. But man and woman through their
transgressions lost this image of God, and with it lost their happiness
and true blessedness, that God made them in a capacity to enjoy.

Now in this state of MISERY into which we are fallen, we are come short
of the glory of God; and it is out of this wretched woful state we must
be brought, else we shall never see the face of God with comfort. This
is an eternal truth of God, and recorded in the Holy Scriptures. John
iii. 16. That "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life." God so loved the world, he gave his Son to be a light
unto the world, that all might see their way back to God again: For sin
hath darkened the understanding, and clouded the mind of man and woman,
and alienated them from the life of God, and their hearts are hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. But now is the acceptable time, now is
the day of salvation, the day of God's grace and favourable visitation,
wherein he visits men and women, illuminates their minds and spirits
with a light from heaven, that they might see the deplorable state and
condition wherein they are, and what they are doing: It is in this
light, that they have a day of grace vouchsafed to them, that it may be
well with them, both here and for ever. They that receive this light,
and come out of that which they are called from, which is sin, they may
come to enjoy peace with God. It was sin that first separated between
God and man; and it is sin now that hinders man from acquaintance with
the Lord, who brings peace unto him: It is by this light, that we are to
acquaint ourselves with God, that we may be at peace. Thus saith the
Lord by the prophet, "It is sin has separated between me and you:" Sin
hath made a partition wall between God and us, and God hath sent his Son
into the world to break down this partition wall that sin hath made;
that so fallen man might return to God, and come into Paradise again,
out of which sin hath cast him.

Now, none can bring us back to God, and into favour and communion with
him, but our Lord Jesus Christ: He is the light and leader of his
people. There is no name under heaven by which we can be saved, but the
name of JESUS: It is he that saves his people from their sins; and it is
