
31. Defensive character of the expedition against the Jews of
    Khyber                                                         40

_V.--The Christians or Romans._

32. Tabuk, the last expedition                                  _ib._

33. Description of the wars concluded                              41

_VI.--The Intolerance._

34. Mohammad never taught intolerance                              43

35. In what sense the wars were religious wars                     44

36. The alleged verses of intolerance explained                    45

37. Sir William Muir quoted                                        47

38. Comment on the above quotation                                 50

39. Object of Mohammad's wars                                      51

_VII.--The Ninth Chapter or Sura Barat._

40. The opening portion of the IX Sura of the Koran only
    relates to the Koreish who had violated the truce              55

_VIII.--The alleged Interceptions of the Koreish Caravans._

41. The nine alleged interceptions of the Koreish caravans         57

42. The interceptions were impossible under the circumstances
    in which Mohammad was placed                                   59

43. The interceptions, if occurred, were justified by way of
    reprisal                                                       60

_IX.--The alleged Assassinations._

44. Instances of the alleged assassinations cited                  61

45. Mr. Stanley Poole quoted                                       62

46. Asma-bint Marwan                                               63

47. The story deserves not our belief                              64

48. Abu Afak                                                       65

49. Kab, son of Ashraf                                             66

50. Mohammad could never have had any share in Kab's murder        68

51. Sofian bin Khalid                                              69

52. Justification of Sofian's alleged murder                       70

53. Abu Rafe                                                       72

54. Oseir bin Zarim                                                73

55. The intended assassination of Abu Sofian                       74

56. Irving and Muir quoted; concluding remarks                     76

_X.--The alleged Cruelties in executing Prisoners of War
     and others._

57. Treatment of the prisoners of war                           _ib._

58. Law of nations regarding the prisoners of war                  77

59. The execution of Nadher Ibn Harith                             79

60. The execution of Okba                                          80

61. Free liberty granted to Ozza, a prisoner of war                81

62. Abul Ozza proved a traitor and was executed                 _ib._

63. The execution of Moavia Ibn Mughira                         _ib._

64. Justification of Mughira's execution                           82

65. The intended execution of the prisoners of Badr and the
    wrong version of Sir W. Muir                                   83

66. Mohammad was never blamed in the Koran for releasing
    prisoners                                                      84

67. The Koran enjoins the prisoners of war to be either freely
    liberated or ransomed, but neither executed nor enslaved       87

68. High treason of the Bani Koreiza against Medina and their
    execution                                                      88

69. The whole of the Bani Koreiza were never executed           _ib._

70. The women and children of Bani Koreiza were never sold         89

71. The exaggerated number of persons executed                     91

_XI.--Some Miscellaneous Objections refuted._

72. The execution of Omm Kirfa for brigandage                      92

73. The alleged mutilation of the Urnee robbers                    93

74. Amputation or banishment substituted temporarily in place of
    imprisonment for want of a well organized system of jails      95

75. Torture of Kinana                                              96

76. The alleged execution of a singing girl                        97

77. The charitable spirit of Mohammad towards his enemies          98

78. Abu Basir not countenanced by the Prophet in contravention
    to the spirit of the treaty of Hodeibia                       101

79. Nueim not employed by the Prophet to circulate false reports
    in the enemy's camp                                           102

80. Deception in war allowed by the International Law           _ib._

81. Lecky's standard of morality                                  104

82. The alleged permission to kill the Jews                       106

83. Sir W. Muir quoted                                            108

84. The expulsion of the Bani Nazeer                            _ib._

85. Their fruit-trees were not cut down                           109

86. Females and the treaty of Hodeibia                            110

87. Stanley defended                                              111

88. Marriage a strict bond of union                               113

_The Popular Jihad._

89. The Koran enjoins only defensive wars                         114

90. The Mohammadan Common Law and the Jihad                       116

91. When is Jihad a positive injunction                         _ib._

92. The Hedaya quoted and refuted                                 117

93. Rule of interpretation                                        118

94. The Common Law and its commentators                           119

95. Kifaya quoted                                                 120

96. Further quotations                                            121

97. The _Kifaya_ refuted                                          122

98. S. IX, 5, discussed                                           123

99. S. II, 189, discussed                                       _ib._

100. S. II, 189, and VIII, 40, are defensive                      124

101. All injunctions were local and for the time being            125

102. _Ainee_ quoted and refuted                                 _ib._

103. _Sarakhsee_ quoted and refuted                               126

104. _Ibn Hajar_ quoted                                           128

105. _Ibn Hajar_ refuted                                          129

106. _Halabi_ quoted                                            _ib._

107. _Halabi_ refuted                                             132

108. _Ainee_ again quoted and refuted                           _ib._

109. Continuation of the above                                    133

110. Traditions quoted and refuted                              _ib._

111. Early Moslem legists against the Jihad                       134

112. Biographical sketches of the legists                         135

113. European writers' mistakes                                   137

114. Sir W. Muir quoted and refuted                               138

115. Islam not aggressive                                         139

116. Mr. Freeman quoted and refuted                               140

117. The Revd. Mr. Stephens quoted and refuted                    141

118. Mr. Bosworth Smith quoted and refuted                        143

119. Mr. George Sale quoted and refuted                         _ib._

120. Major Osborn quoted                                          146

121. Major Osborn refuted                                         149

122. The IX Sura of the Koran                                   _ib._

123. The Revd. Mr. Wherry quoted                                  150

124. Example cited from Jewish history explained                  152

125. Mosaic injunctions                                           153

126. The Revd. Mr. Hughes quoted and refuted                      154

127. Meaning of the word Jihad                                    155

128. Sura XLVIII, 5, explained                                    156

129. The Revd. Malcolm MacColl quoted                             157

130. The untenable theories of the Mohammadan Common Law      158-161


APPENDIX A.

1. Jihad or Jihd in the Koran does not mean war or crusade        163

2. Classical meaning of Jihad, &c.                                164

3. Post-classical or technical meaning of Jihad                   165

4. The classical logic and Arabian poets                        _ib._

5. The conjugation and declination of Jahd or Jihad in
   the Koran                                                      166

6. The number of instances in which they occur in the Koran       167

7. In what sense they are used in the Koran                       168

8. Conventional significations of Jihad                           169

9. Mohammadan commentators, &c., quoted                           170

10. When the word Jihad was diverted from its original
    signification to its figurative meaning of waging
    religious wars                                                171

11. All verses of the Koran containing the word Jihad and its
    derivations quoted and explained                              176

12. The above verses quoted with remarks                          177

_The Meccan Suras._

13. _Lokman_, XXXI, 14                                          _ib._

14. _Furkan_, XXV, 53, 521                                        178

15. _The Pilgrimage_, XXII, 76, 78                              _ib._

16. _The Bee_, XVI, 108, 111                                      179

17. _The Spider_, XXIX, 5                                         180

18. _Ibid_, 7                                                   _ib._

19. _Ibid_, 69                                                  _ib._

20. _The Bee_, XVI, 40                                            181

21. _Creator_, XXXV, 40                                         _ib._

_The Medinite Suras._

22. _The Cow or Heifer_, II, 215                                  182

23. _Al Amran_, III, 136                                        _ib._

24. _The Spoils_, VIII, 73                                        183

25. _Ibid._ 75                                                  _ib._

26. _Ibid._ 76                                                  _ib._

27. _The Cattle_, VI, 109                                       _ib._

28. _Mohammad_, XLVII, 33                                         184

29. _Battle Array_, LXI, 11                                     _ib._

30. _Woman._ IV. 97                                               185

31. _Light._ XXIV, 52                                           _ib._

32. _The Forbidding._ LXVI, 9                                   _ib._

33. _The Immunity._ IX, 74                                        186

36. _The Tried_, LX, 1                                            187

35. Hatib's _Story_                                               188

36. _The Apartment_, XLIX, 15                                   _ib._

37. _The Immunity_, IX, 16                                      _ib._

38. _Ibid_. 19                                                  _ib._

39. _Ibid_, 20                                                    189

40. _Ibid_, 24                                                  _ib._

41. _Ibid_, 41                                                  _ib._

42. _Ibid_, 44                                                    190

43. _Ibid_, 82                                                  _ib._

44. _Ibid_, 87                                                  _ib._

45. _Ibid_, 89                                                    191

46. _The Table_, V, 39                                          _ib._

47. _Ibid_, 58                                                  _ib._

48. _Ibid_, 59                                                  _ib._

49. Jihad does not mean the waging of war                         192

50. _Katal_ and _Kital_                                         _ib._

51. Conclusion                                                  _ib._


APPENDIX B.

1. Slavery and concubinage not allowed by the Koran               193

2. Measures taken by the Koran to abolish future slavery          194

3. None of the prisoners of war was enslaved                      196

4. _Bani Koreiza_ not enslaved                                    198

5. _Rihana_                                                       201

6. Omar, the second Khalif, liberated all the Arab slaves         202

7. Concubinage                                                    203

8. Maria the Coptic                                               204

9. Despatch of _Mokowkas_                                         205

10 & 11. Maria neither a slave nor a concubine                    207

12. Maria had no son                                              209

13. The story of Maria and Haphsa a spurious one                  211

14. The affair not noticed in the early biographies               212

15. Sir W. Muir's authority not valid                           _ib._

16. The best commentators and traditionalists refute the story    214

17. The story not accredited by the Koran                       _ib._

18. The story when fabricated                                   _ib._

19. Zeinab's case                                                 215

20. The story a spurious one                                      216

21. Sir W. Muir's conjectures not justified                       217

22. A wrong translation of Sir W. Muir                            219

23. In Zeinab's case no exceptional privilege was secured         220

24. The false story traced to _Mukatil_                         _ib._

25. _Katadas_ conjectural interpretation not warranted            222

26. Other conjectures                                             223


APPENDIX C.

  I.--The verses of the Koran referring to the persecution of
      the Koreish at Mecca                                        225

 II.--The verses of the Koran referring to the aggressions of
      the Koreish at Medina as well as those of the inhabitants
      thereof                                                   _ib._

III.--The verses of the Koran alluding to the wars of defence
      against the Koreish and Arabs, &c., with several references
      to their aggressions                                      _ib._

 IV.--The verses of the Koran alluding to the various battles     226




INTRODUCTION.


[Sidenote: Object of the book.]

1. In publishing this work, my chief object is to remove the general and
erroneous impression from the minds of European and Christian writers
regarding Islam, that Mohammad waged wars of conquest, extirpation, as
well as of proselytizing against the Koreish, other Arab tribes, the
Jews, and Christians;[1] that he held the Koran in one hand and the
scimitar in the other, and compelled people to believe in his mission. I
have endeavoured in this book, I believe on sufficient grounds, to show
that neither the wars of Mohammad were offensive, nor did he in any way
use force or compulsion in the matter of belief.

[Footnote 1: "He now occupied a position where he might become the agent
for executing the divine sentence, and at the same time triumphantly
impose the true religion on those who had rejected it." The Life of
Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, page 211. London, 1877. (New Edition.)

"The free toleration of the purer among the creeds around him, which the
Prophet had at first enjoined, gradually changes into intolerance.
Persecuted no longer, Mohammad becomes a persecutor himself; with the
Koran in one hand, and scymitar in the other, he goes forth to offer to
the nations the three-fold alternative of conversion, tribute,
death."--Mohammed and Mohammedanism, by Mr. R. Bosworth Smith, page 137.
Second Edition.]


[Sidenote: Early wrongs of the Moslems.]

[Sidenote: Justification in taking up arms, if taken.]

2. All the wars of Mohammad were defensive. He and those who took
interest in his cause were severely oppressed at intervals, and were in
a sort of general persecution at Mecca at the hands of the ungodly and
fierce Koreish. Those who were weak and without protection had to leave
their city, and twice fly to the Christian land of Abyssinia, pursued by
