understood spiritually; and what they mean by that, I do not clearly 
know.

Their notion is, that the promises of the Old Testament are more or less 
carnal, because they speak of God's rewarding men in this life; and that 
the promises of the New Testament are spiritual, because they speak of 
God's rewarding men in the next life; and what they mean by that, again, 
I do not clearly know.

For is not the Old Testament spiritual as well as the New?  I trust so, 
my friends.  Is not the Old Testament inspired, and that by the Spirit of 
God? and if it be inspired by the Spirit, what can it be but spiritual?  
Therefore, if we want to find the spiritual meaning of Old Testament 
promises, we need not to alter them to suit any fancies of our own; like 
those monks of the fourth and succeeding centuries, who saw no sanctity 
in family or national life; no sanctity in the natural world, and, 
therefore, were forced to travesty the Hebrew historians, psalmists, and 
prophets, with all their simple, healthy objective humanity, and 
politics, and poetry, into metaphorical and subjective, or, as they 
miscalled them, spiritual meanings, to make the Old Testament mean 
anything at all.  No; if we have any real reverence for the Holy 
Scriptures, we must take them word for word in their plain meaning, and 
find the message of God's Spirit in that plain meaning, instead of trying 
to put it in for ourselves.  Therefore it is that the VII. Article bids 
us beware of playing with Scripture in this way.  It says the Old 
Testament is not contrary to the New, for both in the Old and New 
Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ.  Wherefore 
they are not to be heard who feign that the old fathers did look only for 
transitory promises, that is temporary promises, promises which would be 
fulfilled only in this life, and end and pass away when they died.

But some one will say, how can that be, when so many of the old Hebrews 
seem to have known nothing about the next life?  Moses, for instance, 
always promises the Children of Israel that if they do right, and obey 
God, they shall be rewarded in this life, with peace and prosperity, 
fruitfulness and wealth; but of their being rewarded in the next life he 
never says one word--which last statement is undeniably true.

Is not then the Old Testament contrary to the New, if the Old Testament 
teaches men to look for their reward in this life, and the New Testament 
in the next?  No, it is not, my friends.  And I think we shall see that 
it is not, and why it is not, if we will look honestly at this very 
important text.  If we do that we shall see that what St. Peter meant--
what the VII.  Article means is the only meaning which will make sense of 
either one or the other; is simply this--that what causes a man to enjoy 
this life, is the same that will cause him to enjoy the life to come.  
That what will bring a blessing on him in this life, will bring a 
blessing on him in the life to come.  That what blessed the old Jews, 
will bless us Christians.  That if we refrain our tongue from evil, and 
our lips from speaking deceit; it we avoid evil and do good; if we seek 
peace and follow earnestly after it; then shall we enjoy life, and see 
good days, and inherit a blessing; whether in this life or in the life to 
come.

And why?  Because then we shall be living the one and only everlasting 
life of goodness, which alone brings blessings; alone gives good days; 
and is the only life worth living, whether in earth or heaven.

My dear friends, lay this seriously to heart, in these days especially, 
when people and preachers alike have taken to part earth and heaven, in a 
fashion which we never find in Holy Scripture.  Lay it to heart, I say, 
and believe that what is right, and therefore good, for the next life, is 
right, and therefore good, for this.  That the next life is not contrary 
to this life.  That the same moral laws hold good in heaven, as on earth.  
Mark this well; for it must be so, if morality, that is right and 
goodness, is of the eternal and immutable essence of God.  And therefore, 
mark this well again, there is but one true, real, and right life for 
rational beings, one only life worth living, and worth living in this 
world or in any other life, past, present, or to come.  And that is the 
eternal life which was before all worlds, and will be after all are 
passed away--and that is neither more nor less than a good life; a life 
of good feelings, good thoughts, good words, good deeds, the life of 
Christ and of God.

It is needful, I say, to bear this in mind just now.  People are, as I 
told you, too apt to say that the Old Testament saints got their rewards 
in this life, while we shall get them in the next.  Do they find that in 
Scripture?  If they will read their Bible they will find that the Old 
Testament saints were men whom God was training and educating, as He does 
us, by experience and by suffering.  That David, so far from having his 
reward at once in this life, had his bitter sorrows and trials; that 
Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Job, all, indeed, of the old prophets, had to be 
made perfect by suffering, and (as St. Paul says) died in faith NOT 
having received the promises.  So that if they had their reward in this 
life, it must have been a spiritual reward, the reward of a good 
conscience, and of the favour of Almighty God.  And that is no transitory 
or passing reward, but enduring as immortality itself.  But people do not 
usually care for that spiritual reward.  Their notion of reward and 
happiness is that they are to have all sorts of pleasures, they know not 
what, and know not really why.  And because they cannot get pleasant 
things enough to satisfy them in this life, they look forward greedily to 
getting them in the next life; and meanwhile are discontented with God's 
Providence, and talk of God's good world as if some fiend and not the 
Lord Jesus Christ was the maker and ruler thereof.  Do not misunderstand 
me.  I am no optimist.  I know well that things happen in this world 
which must, which ought to make us sad--so sad that at moments we envy 
the dead, who are gone home to their rest; real tragedies, real griefs, 
divine and Christlike griefs, which only loving hearts know--the 
suffering of those we love, the loss of those we love, and, last and 
worst, the sin of those we love.  Ah! if any of those swords have pierced 
the heart of any soul here, shall I blame that man, that woman, if they 
cry at times, "Father, take me home, this earth is no place for me."  
Shall I bid them do aught but cling to the feet of Christ and cry, "If it 
be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but 
as Thou wilt."  Oh, not of such do I speak; not of such sharers of 
Christ's unselfish suffering here, that they may be sharers of His 
unselfish joy hereafter.  Not of them do I speak; but of those who only 
wish to make up for selfish discomforts and disappointments in this life 
by selfish comforts and satisfaction in the next; and who therefore take 
up (let me use the honest English word) some maundering form of religion, 
which, to judge from their own conduct, they usually only half believe; 
those who seem, on six days of the week, as fond of finery and frivolity 
as any other gay worldlings, and on the seventh join eagerly in hymns in 
which (in one case at least) they inform the Almighty God of truth, who 
will not be mocked, that they lie awake at night, weeping because they 
cannot die and see "Jerusalem the golden," and so forth.  Or those, 
again, who for six days in the week are absorbed in making money--
honestly if they can, no doubt, but still making money, and living 
luxuriously on their profits--and on the seventh listen with satisfaction 
to preachers and hymns which tell them that this world is all a howling 
wilderness, full of snares and pitfalls; and that in this wretched place 
the Christian can expect nothing but tribulation and persecution till he 
"crosses Jordan, and is landed safe on Canaan's store," and so forth.

My friends, my friends, as long as a man talks so, blaspheming God's 
world--which, when He made it, behold it was all very good--and laying 
the blame of their own ignorance and peevishness on God who made them, 
they must expect nothing but tribulation and sorrow.  But the tribulation 
and the sorrow will be their own fault, and not God's.  If religious 
professors will not take St. Peter's advice and the Psalmist's advice; if 
they will go on coveting and scheming about money, and how they may get 
money; if they will go on being neither pitiful, courteous, nor 
forgiving, and hating and maligning whether it be those who differ from 
them in doctrine, or those who they fancy have injured them, or those who 
merely are their rivals in the race of life; then they are but too likely 
to find this world a thorny place, because they themselves raise the 
thorns; and a disorderly place, because their own tempers and desires are 
disorderly; and a wilderness, because they themselves have run wild, 
barbarians at heart, however civilised in dress and outward manners.  St. 
James tells them that of old.  "From whence," he says, "come wars and 
quarrels among you?  Come they not hence, even of the lusts which war in 
your members?  You long, and have not.  You fight and war, yet you have 
not, because you ask not.  You ask, and have not.  You pray for this and 
that, and God does not give it you.  Because you ask amiss, selfishly to 
consume it on your lusts."  And then you say, This world is an evil 
place, full of temptations.  What says St. James to that?  "Let no man 
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God:  for God cannot be tempted 
with evil, neither tempteth He any man.  But every man is tempted, when 
he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed."

So it was in the Old Testament times, and so it is in these Christian 
times.  God is good, and God's world is good; and the evil is not in the 
world around us, but in our own foolish hearts.  If we follow our own 
foolish hearts, we shall find this world a bad place, as the old Jews 
found it--whenever they went wrong and sinned against God--because we are 
breaking its laws, and they will punish us.  If we follow the 
commandments of God, we shall find this world a good place, as the old 
Jews found it--whenever they went right, and obeyed God--because we shall 
be obeying its laws, and they will reward us.  This is God's promise 
alike to the old Jewish fathers and to us Christian men.  And this is no 
transitory or passing promise, but is founded on the eternal and 
everlasting law of right, by which God has made all worlds, and which He 
Himself cannot alter, for it springs out of His own essence and His own 
eternal being.  Hear, then, the conclusion of the whole matter:  God hath 
called you that you might inherit a blessing.

He hath made you of a blessed race, created in His own likeness, to whom 
He hath put all things in subjection, making man a little lower than the 
angels, that He might crown him with glory and worship:  a race so 
precious in God's eyes--we know not why--that when mankind had fallen, 
and seemed ready to perish from their own sin and ignorance, God spared 
not His only begotten Son, but freely gave Him for us, that the world by 
Him might be saved.  And God hath put you in a blessed place, even His 
wondrous and fruitful world, which praises God day and night, fulfilling 
His word; for it continues this day as in the beginning, and He has given 
it a law which cannot be broken.  He has made you citizens of a blessed 
kingdom, even the kingdom of heaven, into which you were baptised; and 
has given you the Holy Bible, that you might learn the laws of the 
kingdom, and live for ever, blessing and blest.

And the Head of this blessed race, the Maker of this blessed world, the 
King of this blessed kingdom, is the most blessed of all beings, Jesus 
Christ, the only-begotten Son, both God and man.  He has washed you 
freely from your sins in His own blood; He has poured out on you freely 
His renewing Spirit.  And He asks you to enter into your inheritance; 
that you may love your life, and see good days, by living the blessed 
life, which is the life of self-sacrifice.  But not such self-sacrifices 
as too many have fancied who did not believe that mankind was a blessed 
race, and this earth a blessed place.  He does not ask you to give up 
wife, child, property, or any of the good things of this life.  He only 
asks you to give up that selfishness which will prevent you enjoying 
wife, child, or property, or anything else in earth, or in heaven either.  
He asks you not to give up anything which is AROUND you, for that which 
cometh from without defileth not a man; but to give up something which is 
within you, for that which cometh from within, that defileth a man.

He asks you to give up selfishness and all the evil tempers which that 
selfishness breeds.  To give up the tongue which speaks evil of your 
fellow-men; and the lips which utter deceit; and the brain which imagines 
cunning; and the heart which quarrels with your neighbour.  To give these 
up and to seek peace, and pursue it by all means reasonable or 
honourable; peace with all around you, which comes by having first peace 
with God; next, peace with your own conscience.  This is the peace which 
passeth understanding; for if you have it, men will not be able to 
understand why you have it.  They will see you at peace when men admire 
you and praise you, and at peace also when they insult you and injure 
you; at peace when you are prosperous and thriving, and at peace also 
when you are poor and desolate.  And that inward peace of yours will pass 
their understanding as it will pass your own understanding also.  You 
will know that God sends you the peace, and sends it you the more the 
more you pray for it:  but how He sends it you will not understand; for 
it springs out of those inner depths of your being which are beyond the 
narrow range of consciousness, and is spiritual and a mystery, and comes 
by the inspiration of the holy Spirit of God.

But remember that all your prayers will not get that peace if your heart 
be tainted with malice and selfishness and covetousness, falsehood and 
pride and vanity.  You must ask God first to root those foul seeds out of 
your heart, or the seed of His Spirit will not spring up and bear fruit 
in you to the everlasting life of love and peace and joy in the holy 
Spirit.  But if your heart be purged and cleansed of self, then indeed 
will the holy Spirit enter in and dwell there; and you will abide in 
peace, through all the chances and changes of this mortal life, for you 
will abide in God, who is for ever at peace.  And you will inherit a 
blessing; for you will inherit Christ, your light and your life, who is 
blessed for ever.  And you will love life; for life will be full to you 
of hope, of work, of duty, of interest, of lessons without number.  And 
you will see good days; for all days will seem good to you, even those 
which seem to the world bad days of affliction and distress.  And so the 
peace of God will keep you in Jesus Christ, in this life, and in the life 
to come.  Amen.



SERMON XX.  GRACE



Eversley. 1856.

St. John i. 16, 17.  "Of His fulness have all we received, and grace for 
grace.  For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus 
Christ."

I wish you to mind particularly this word GRACE.  You meet it very often 
in the Bible.  You hear often said, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be 
with you all.  Now, what does this word grace mean?  It is really worth 
your while to know; for if a man or a woman has not grace, they will be 
very unhappy people, and very disagreeable people also; a torment to 
themselves, and a torment to their neighbours also; and if they live 
without grace, they will live but a poor life; if they die without grace, 
they will come to a very bad end indeed.  What, then, does this word 
mean?  Some of you will answer that grace means God's Holy Spirit, or 
that it means what God gives to our souls by His Spirit.  But what does 
that mean?  What does God's Spirit give us?  What is the grace of Jesus 
Christ like, and how is it the same as the grace of God's Spirit?

Now, to know what grace means, we must know what St John and St Paul 
meant by it, and what the word meant in their time, and what the 
Ephesians, and Corinthians, and Romans, to whom they wrote, would have 
understood by this word grace.

Now these heathens, to whom the apostles preached, before they heard the 
gospel, knew that word grace very well indeed, often used it; and saw it 
written up in their heathen temples all about them.  And they meant by it 
just what we mean, when we talk of a graceful person, or a graceful tree 
or flower; and what we mean, too, when we say that any one is gracious; 
that they do things gracefully, and have a great deal of grace in their 
way of speaking and behaving.  We mean by that that they are handsome, 
agreeable, amiable, pleasant to look at, and talk to, and deal with.  And 
so these heathens meant, before they were Christians.  The Romans used to 
talk about some one called a Grace.  The Greeks called her CHARIS; which 
is exactly the word which St John and St Paul use, and from it come our 
words charity and charitable.  But more; they used to talk of three 
Graces:  they fancied that they were goddesses--spirits of some kind in 
the shape of beautiful, and amiable, and innocent maidens, who took 
delight in going about the world and making people happy and amiable like 
themselves; and they used to make images of these graces, and pray to 
them to make them lovely, and happy, and agreeable.  And painters and 
statuaries, too, used to pray to these graces, and ask them to put 
beautiful fancies into their minds, that they might be able to paint 
beautiful pictures, and carve beautiful statues.  So when St Paul or St 
John talked to these heathens about grace, or Charis (as the Testament 
calls it), they knew quite well what the apostles meant.

Did the apostles, then, believe in these three goddesses?  Heaven forbid.  
They came to teach these heathens to turn from those very vanities, and 
worship the living-God.  And so they told them,--You are quite right in 
thinking that grace comes from heaven, and is God's gift; that it is God 
who makes people amiable, cheerful, lovely, and honourable; that it is 
God who gives happiness and all the joys of life:  but which god?  Not 
those three maidens; they are but a dream and fancy.  All that is lovely 
and pleasant in men and women--and our life here, and our everlasting 
life after death, in this world and in all worlds to come--all comes from 
Jesus Christ and from Him alone.  God has gathered together all things in 
Him, whether things in heaven or things on earth; and He bestows 
blessings and graces on all who will ask Him, to each as much as is good 
for him.  He is full of grace--more full of it than all the human beings 
in the world put together.  All the goodness and sweetness, and all the 
graciousness which you ever saw in all the men and women whom you ever 
met; all the goodness and sweetness which you ever fancied for 
yourselves, all put together is not to be compared to Him.  For He is the 
perfect brightness of God's glory, and the express image of God's person; 
and in Him is gathered together all grace, all goodness, all which makes 
men or angels good, and lovely, and loving.  All is in Him, and He gives 
it freely to all, said the apostles; we know that He speaks truth, we 
have seen Him; our eyes saw Him, our hands touched Him, and there was a 
glory about Him such as there never could be about any other person.  A 
glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.  A 
person whom we could not help loving; could not help admiring; could not 
help trusting; could not help giving ourselves up to--to live for Him, 
and if need be, die for Him.

And, said the apostles, there was a grace of truth in another of your 
heathen fancies.  You thought that these goddesses, because they were 
amiable and innocent themselves, liked to make every one amiable, 
innocent, and happy also.  Your conscience, your reason were right there.  
That is the very nature of grace, not to keep itself to itself, but to 
spend itself on every one round it, and try to make every one like 
itself.  If a man be good, he will long to make others good; if tender, 
he will long to make others tender; if gentle, he will long to make 
others gentle; if cheerful, he will long to make others cheerful; if 
forgiving, he will long to make others forgiving; if happy, he will long 
to make others happy.  Then said the apostles, only believe that the Lord 
Jesus Christ, just because He is full of grace, wishes to fill you with 
grace, ten thousand times better grace than you ever fancied those false 
goddesses could give you--of His fulness you may all receive, and grace 
for grace.  All the grace of this world comes from Him--health, and 
youth, and happiness, and all the innocent pleasures of life, and He 
delights in giving you them.  But, over and above that, comes a deeper 
and nobler grace--spiritual grace, the grace of the immortal soul, which 
will last on, and make you loving and loveable, pure and true, gracious 
and generous, honourable and worthy of respect, when the grace of the 
body is gone, and the eye is grown dim, and the hair is grey, and the 
limbs, feeble; a grace which will make you gracious in old age, gracious 
in death, gracious for ever and ever, after the body has crumbled again 
to its dust.  Whatsoever things are honourable, lovely, and of good 
report; whatsoever tempers of mind make you a comfort to yourselves and 
all around you; Christ has them all, and He can give you them all, one 
after the other, till Christ be formed in you, till you come to be 
perfect men and women, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of 
Christ.  Come, then, boldly to His throne of grace, to find mercy, and 
grace to help you in the time of need.

This was what the apostles taught the heathen, and their words were true.  
You may see them come true round you every day.  For, my friends, just as 
far as people pray for Christ's grace, and give themselves up to be led 
by God's Spirit, they become full of grace themselves, courteous and 
civil, loving and amiable, true and honourable--a pleasure to themselves 
and to all round them.  While, on the other hand; all rudeness, all ill-
temper, all selfishness, all greediness are just so many sins against the 
