perhaps some two or three millions of savages.  Money, I say, stands
for the lives of human beings.  Therefore money is good; an
ordinance and a gift of God; as it is written, 'It is God that
giveth the power to get wealth.'  But, like every other good gift of
God, we may use it as a blessing; or we may misuse it, and make it a
snare and a curse to our own souls.  If we let into our hearts
selfishness and falsehood; if we lose faith in God, and fancy that
God's laws are not well-made enough to prosper us, but that we must
break them if we want to prosper; then we turn God's good gift into
an idol and a snare; into the unrighteous Mammon.

It is not the quantity of money we have to deal with which is the
snare, it is our own lusts and covetousness which are the snares.
It is just as easy to sell our souls for five pounds as for five
thousand.  It is just as easy to be mean and tricky about paying
little debts of a shilling or two, as it is about whole estates.  I
do not see that rich people are at all more unjust about money than
poor ones; and if any say:  Yes, but the poor are tempted more than
the rich; I answer, then look at those who are neither poor nor
rich; who have enough to live on decently, and are not tempted as
the poor are, to steal, or tempted as the rich are, to luxury and
extravagance.  Are they more honest than either rich or poor?  Not a
whit.  All depends on the man's heart.  If his heart be selfish and
mean, he will be dishonest as a poor man, as a middle-class man, as
a great lord.  If his heart be faithful and true, he will be honest,
whether he lives in a cottage or in a palace.  Any man can do
justly, and love mercy, if his heart be right with God.  I have seen
day-labourers who had a hard struggle to live at all, keep out of
debt, and out of shame, and live in a noble poverty, rich in the
sight of God, because their hearts were rich in goodness.  I have
seen tradesmen and farmers, among all the temptations of business,
keep their honour as bright as any gentleman's--brighter than too
many gentlemen's, because they had learnt to fear God and work
righteousness.  I have seen great merchants and manufacturers,
because that they were their brothers' keepers, spread not only
employment, but comfort, education, and religion, among the hundreds
of workmen whom God had put into their charge.  I have seen great
landowners live truly royal lives, doing with all their might the
good which their hand found to do; and, after the likeness of their
heavenly Father, causing their sun to shine on the evil and on the
good, and their rain to fall on the just and on the unjust.  Yes; in
every station of life, thy dealings will be right with men, if thy
heart be right with God.

Yes.  Let us bear in mind this--that whatever we cannot be, we can
at least be honest men.  Let us go to our graves, if possible, with
the feeling that there is not a man on earth, a penny the worse for
us.  And if we have ever fouled our hands with the unrighteous
Mammon, let us cleanse them by the only possible plan, by making
restitution to those whom we have wronged; and so make friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, who shall forgive us, and receive us
as friends in heaven, instead of making enemies, and going out of
the world with the fearful thought, that we shall meet at God's
judgment-seat people whom we have made miserable, who will rise up
to accuse us, and demand payment of us when it is too late for ever.

Let us bear in mind, even though we cannot copy, the dying words of
Muhammed the Arab, who, when he found his end draw near, went forth
into the market-place, and asked before all the people, 'Was there
any man whom he had wronged?  If so, his own back should bear the
stripes.  Was there any man to whom he owed money? and he should be
paid.'  'Yes,' cried some one, 'those coins which you borrowed from
me on such a day.'  'Pay him,' said Muhammed:  'better to be shamed
now on earth, than shamed in the day of judgment.'  He was a
heathen.  And shall we Christians be worse than he?  Then let us
pray for the Holy Spirit of God, the Spirit of truth, which will
make us faithful and true; so that no man may be the worse for us in
this life; no man may have to say of us, when he hears that we lie
dying, 'He wronged me, he cheated me, he lied to me; God forgive
him:' but that our friends, as they carry us to the grave, may feel
that they have lost one whom they could respect and trust; and say,
as the earth rattles in upon the coffin lid, 'There lies an honest
man.'



SERMON XXV.  THE SIGHS OF CHRIST



(Twelfth Sunday after Trinity.)

Mark vii. 34, 35.  And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith
unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.  And straightway his ears
were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake
plain.

Why did the Lord Jesus look up to heaven?  And why, too, did he
sigh?

He looked up to heaven, we may believe, because he looked to God the
Father; to God, of whom the glorious collect tells us, that he is
more ready to hear than we to pray, and is wont to give more than
either we desire or deserve.  He looked up to the Father, who is the
fountain of life, of order, of health, of usefulness; who hates all
death, disease, infirmity; who wills that none should perish, body
or soul.

My friends, think of these cheering words; and try to look up to God
the Father, as Christ looked up.  Look up to him I say, if but once,
as a Father.  Not merely as your Father, but as the Father of the
spirits of all flesh; the good God who creates, and delights to
create; who orders all worlds and heavens with perfect wisdom,
perfect power, perfect justice, perfect love; and peoples them with
immortal souls and spirits, that they may be useful, happy, blessed,
in keeping his laws, and doing the work which he has ordained for
them.  Oh think, if but once, of God the perfect and all-loving
Father; and then you will know why Jesus looked up to him.

And you will see, too, why Jesus sighed.  He sighed because he was
one with the Father.  He sighed because he had the mind of God.
Because God, the Lord of health and order, hates disease and
disorder.  Because God, the Lord of bliss and happiness, hates
misery and sorrow.  Because God made the world at first very good;
and, behold, by man's sin, it has become bad.

Why did he sigh?  Surely, also, from pity for the poor man.  His
infirmity was no such great one; he had an impediment in his speech,
and with it, as many are apt to have, deafness also:  but it was an
infirmity.  It was a disease.  It was something out of order,
something gone wrong in God's world; and as such, Christ could not
abide it; he grieved over it.  He sighed because there was sickness
in a world where there ought to be nothing but health, and sorrow
where there ought to be nothing but happiness.  He sighed, because
man had brought this sickness and sorrow on himself by sin; for,
remember, man alone is subject to disease.  The wild animal in the
wood, the bird upon the tree, seldom or never know what sickness is;
seldom or never are stunted or deformed.  They live according to
their nature, healthy and happy, and die in a good old age.  While
man--Why should I talk of what man is, of how far man is fallen from
what God the Father meant him to be, while one hundred thousand
corpses of brave men are now fattening the plains of Italy for next
year's crop; while even in our favoured land, we find at every turn
prisons and reformatories, lunatic asylums, hospitals for numberless
kinds of horrible diseases; sickness, weakness, and death all round
us?  Only look up yonder to Windsor Forest, and see the vast
building now in progress there before your eyes, for lunatic
convicts--the most miserable, perhaps, and pitiable of human
beings,--and let that building be a sign to you, how far man is
fallen, and what cause Jesus had to sigh, and has to sigh still,
over the miseries of fallen man.

Yes, my friends, not without reason did the old heathen poet, who
had no sure and certain hope of everlasting life, say, that man was
the most wretched of all the beasts of the field; not without reason
did St. Paul say, that if in this life only we have hope in Christ,
then the Christian man, who dare not indulge his passions and
appetites, dare not say, Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die:
but must curb himself, and give up his own pleasure and his own
fancy at every turn, is of all men most miserable.

If Christ's work is done; if his mercy and help ended when he died
upon the cross; if all he did was to heal the sick for three short
years in Judea a long while ago:  then what have we to which we can
look forward?  What hope have we, not merely for ourselves, who are
here now, but for all the millions who have died and suffered
already?  Yes:  what reasonable hope for mankind can they have, who
do not believe that Christ is Very God of Very God, the perfect
likeness of the heavenly Father?

But what if that which was true of him then, is true of him now?
What if he be the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever?  What if he
be ascended on high, that he might fill all things with his almighty
power, and declare that almighty power most chiefly by shewing mercy
and pity?  What if he be for ever looking up to his Father and our
Father, to his God and our God, interceding for ever for mankind;
for ever offering up to the Father that sacrifice of himself which
he perfected upon the Cross, for the sins of the whole world?  What
if he be for ever sighing over every sin, every sorrow, every
cruelty, every injustice, over all things, great and small, which go
wrong throughout the whole world; and saying for ever, 'Father, this
is not according to thy will.  Let thy will be done on earth, as in
heaven.'  And what, if he does not look up in vain, nor sigh in
vain?  What if the will of God the Father be, that sin and sorrow,
disease and death, being contrary to his will and law, should be at
last rooted out of this world, and all worlds for ever?  What if
Christ have authority and commission from God to fight against all
evil, sin, disease, and death, and all the ills which flesh is heir
to; and to teach men to fight them likewise, till they conquer them
by his might, and by his light?  What if he reigns, and will reign,
till he has put all enemies under his feet, and he has delivered up
the kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all in all?
What if the day shall come, when all the nations of the earth shall
thus see Christ's good works, and glorify his Father and their
Father who is in heaven? and by obeying the Law of their being, and
the commandment of God, which is life eternal, shall live for ever
in that glory, of which it is written, that a river of water of life
shall proceed out of the throne of God and of the Lamb; and the
leaves of the trees which grow thereby shall be for the healing of
the nations; and there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God
and of the Lamb shall be in the city of God, and his servants shall
serve him; and the Lord God shall give them light; and they shall
reign for ever and ever.

What those words mean I know not, and hardly dare to think:  but as
long as those words stand in the Bible, we will have hope.  For God
the Father, who willeth that none should perish, and Jesus the only-
begotten Son, who sighed over the poor man's infirmity in Judea, are
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.



SERMON XXVI.  THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA



(Twelfth Sunday after Trinity, 1856.)

2 Kings xviii. 9-12.  And it came to pass in the fourth year of King
Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of
Israel, that Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, came up against Samaria,
and besieged it.  And at the end of three years they took it:  even
in the sixth year of Hezekiah, that is the ninth year of Hoshea king
of Israel, Samaria was taken.  And the king of Assyria did carry
away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor by the
river of Gozon, and in the cities of the Medes:  because they obeyed
not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant,
and all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded, and would not
hear them, nor do them.

These are very simple words:  but they are awful words enough.
Awful enough to the poor creatures of whom they speak.  You here,
most of you, can hardly guess all that these words mean.  You may
thank God that you do not.  That you do not know the horrors of war,
and the misery of a conquered country, in old times.

To lose all they had ever earned; all that makes life worth having.
To have their homes burnt over their heads, their crops carried off
their fields.  To see their women dishonoured, their old men and
children murdered--to be insulted, beaten, and tortured to make them
tell where their money was hidden; and after they and theirs had
suffered every unspeakable shame and misery from the hands of brutal
enemies, to be stripped, bound, and marched away, for hundreds of
miles across the deserts, into the cold and dreary mountains of the
north of Assyria, there to live and die as slaves, and never again
to see their native land.  And such a land as it was, and is still:
or rather might be still, if there were men in it worthy the name of
men.  For of all countries in the world, that land of Israel is one
of the most rich and beautiful.  The climate and the soil there is
such, that two crops can often be grown in the year, of almost any
kind which man may need; there are rich valleys well watered, where
not only wheat and every grain-crop, but the olive, and the fig, and
the vine, flourish in perfection; rich park-like uplands, where
sheep and cattle without number may find pasture; great forests of
timber, fit for every use; and all kept cool and fruitful, even
beneath that burning eastern sun, by the clear streams which flow
for ever down from Hermon. the great snow-mountain ten thousand feet
high, which overlooks that pleasant land.  There is hardly,
travellers say, a lovelier or richer country upon earth, than the
land of Israel, from Hebron on the south to Hermon on the north; nor
a country which might have been stronger, and safer, and more
prosperous, if these Jews had been but wise.

It is, so to speak, one great castle, rising most of it two thousand
feet high, and walled in by God in a way as is seen hardly in any
other land.  On the west lies the sea; on the south and on the east
vast wildernesses of sandy desert; and on the north, the mighty
mountains of Hermon and Lebanon, which no invading army could have
crossed, if the Jews had had courage to keep them out.  And that,
the noble and divine Law of Moses would have given them.  It would
have made them one free, brave, God-fearing people, at unity with
itself; and the promise of Moses would have been fulfilled--that one
of them should chase a thousand, and no man or nation be able to
stand against them.  In David's time, and in Solomon's time also,
that promise came true; and that small people of the Jews became a
very powerful nation, respected and feared by all the kingdoms
round.

But when they fell into idolatry, and forsook the true God, and his
law:  all was changed.  Idolatry brought sin, and sin brought bad
passions, hatred, division, weakness, ruin.

The first beginning was, the breaking up of the nation into two;--
the kingdom of Judah to the south, the kingdom of Israel to the
north.  And with that division came envy, spite, quarrels; wars
between Israel and Judah, which were but madness.  For what could
come of those two brother-nations fighting against each other, but
that both should grow weaker and weaker, and so fall a prey to some
third nation stronger than them both?  The ruin of the kingdom of
Israel, of which the text tells us, arose out of some unnatural
quarrel of this kind.  Pekah, the king of Israel, had made friends
with the heathen king of Syria, and got him to join in making war on
Judah:  and a fearful war it was; for the Israelites, according to
one account, killed in that war a hundred and twenty thousand of the
Jews, men of their own blood and language, all Abraham's descendants
as well as they.  On which, Ahaz, king of Judah, not to be behind-
hand in folly, sent to the heathen king of Assyria to help him, just
as the king of Israel had sent to the king of Damascus.  He had
better have been dead than to have done that.  For those terrible
Assyrians, who had set their hearts on conquering the whole east,
were standing by, watching all the little kingdoms round tearing
themselves to pieces by foolish wars, till they were utterly weak,
and the time was ripe for the Assyrians to pounce upon them.  The
king of Assyria came.  He swept away all the heathen people of
Damascus, and killed their king.  But he did not stop there.  In a
very few years, he came on into the land of Israel, besieged Samaria
for three years, and took it, and carried off the whole of the
inhabitants of the country; and there was an end of that miserable
kingdom of Israel, which had been sinking lower and lower ever since
the days of Jeroboam.  This was the natural outcome of all their sin
and folly, of which we have been reading for the last few Sundays.

Elijah's warnings had been in vain, and Elisha's warnings also.
They liked, at heart, Ahab's and Jezebel's idolatries better than
they did the worship of the true God.  And why?  Because, if they
worshipped God, and kept his laws, they must needs have been more or
less good men, upright, just, merciful, cleanly and chaste livers:
while, on the other hand, they might worship their idols, and
nevertheless be as bad as they chose.  Indeed, the very idol-feasts
and sacrifices were mixed up with all sorts of filthy sin,
drunkenness and profligacy; so that it is a shame even to speak of
the things which went on, especially at those sacrifices to
Ashtaroth, the queen of heaven, of which they were so fond.  They
choose the worse part, and refused the better; and they were filled
with the fruit of their own devices, as every unrepenting sinner
surely will be.

But did the Jews of Judea and their king escape, who had thus
brought the king of Assyria down to murder their own countrymen, and
lay that fair land waste?  Not they.  A very few years more, the
Assyrians were back again, and overran Judea itself, laying the
country waste with fire and sword, till nothing was left to them,
but the mere city of Jerusalem.  And so they, too, were filled with
the fruit of their own devices.  In their madness they had destroyed
their brethren, the people of Israel, who ought to have been a
safeguard for them to the north; now there was nothing and no man to
prevent the Assyrians, or any other invaders, from pouring right
down into their land.  Truly says Solomon, 'He that diggeth a pit,
shall fall into it, and he who breaketh a hedge, a serpent shall
bite him.'  From that day, Judah became weaker and weaker, standing
all alone.  Good king Hezekiah, good king Josiah, could only stave
off her ruin for a few years; a little while longer, and her cup was
full too, and the Babylonians came and swept the Jews away into
captivity, as the Assyrians had swept away Israel, and that fair
land lay desolate for many a year.

The king of Assyria, we read, after he had carried away the people
of Israel, brought heathens from Assyria, and settled them in the
Holy Land, instead of the Israelites.  But the Lord sent lions among
them, we read; the land, I suppose, lying waste, the wild beasts
increased, and became very dangerous:  so these poor ignorant
settlers sent to the king of Assyria, to beg for a Jewish priest, to
teach them, as they said, the manner of the god of that land, that
they might worship him, and not be terrified by the lions any more.
It was a simple, confused notion of theirs:  but it brought a
blessing with it; for the king of Assyria sent them one of the
Jewish priests who had been carried away from Samaria; and he came
and lived at Beth-el, and taught them to fear the Lord.  So these
poor people got some confused notion of the one true God:  but they
mixed it up sadly with their old heathen idolatry, and made gods of
their own, and some of them even burnt their children in the fire,
to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim, from which
town they had come.  And so they went on for several hundred years,
marrying with the remnant of the Israelites who were left behind,
and worshipping idols and the true God at the same time.  Now these
people are the Samaritans, of whom you read so often in the New
Testament.  The Jews, when they came back, hated and despised the
Samaritans, and would not speak to them, eat with them, trade with
them, because they were only half-blooded Jews, and did not observe
Moses' law rightly; and so they were left to themselves:  but as
time went on, they seemed to have got rid of their old idolatry, and
built themselves a temple on Mount Gerizim, by Samaria, in Jacob's
old haunts, by Jacob's well, and there worshipped they knew not
what.  But still they did their best.  And their reward came at
last.

Many a hundred years had passed away.  The proud Pharisees of
Jerusalem were still calling them dogs and infidels; when there came
to that half-heathen city of Samaria such a one as never came there
before or since; and yet had been very near that place, and those
poor Samaritans, for a thousand years.

And being wearied with his journey, he sat down upon the edge of
Jacob's well, by Joseph's tomb.  The well is still there, choked
with rubbish to this very day; and Joseph's tomb by it, all in
ruins, among broad fields of corn.  And on the edge of that well he
sat.  Along the very road which was before him, Jeroboam, and Ahab,
and many a wicked king of Israel, had gone in old times, travelling
between Shechem and Samaria:  along that road the terrible Assyrians
had marched back to their own land, leading strings of weeping
prisoners out of their pleasant native land, to slavery and misery
in the far North.  He knew it all; and doubt not that he thought
over it all, as never man thought on earth.  Doubt not that his
heart yearned over these poor ignorant Samaritans, and over the
sinful woman who came to draw water at the well.  After all, half-
heathens as they were, Jacob's blood was in their veins; and if not,
were they not still human beings?  They were worshipping they knew
not what:  but still they were worshipping the best which they knew.

'Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father.  Ye worship ye know not what:  we know what we worship:  for
salvation is of the Jews.  But the hour cometh, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth:
for the Father seeketh such to worship him.  God is a spirit:  and
they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.  The
woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called
Christ:  when he is come, he will tell us all things.  Jesus saith
unto her, I that speak unto thee am he. . . . So when the Samaritans
were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them:
and he abode there two days.  And many more believed because of his
own word; and said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of
thy saying:  for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.'

Oh, my friends, despise no man; for Christ despises none.  He is no
respecter of persons:  but in every nation, he that feareth God and
worketh righteousness is accepted with him.  Despise no man; for by
so doing you deny the Father, who has made of one blood all nations
of men to dwell on the earth, and has appointed them their times,
and the bounds of their habitation; if haply they may feel after
him, and find him:  though he be not far from any of us; for in him
we live and move and have our being, and are the offspring of God.
For hundreds of years those poor ignorant Samaritans had felt after
him; in that foreign land to which the cruel Assyrian conqueror had
banished them:  but it was God who had appointed them their
habitation there, and their time also; and, in due time, they found
God:  for he came to them, and found them, and spoke with them face
to face.

Better to have been one of those ignorant Samaritans, than to have
been King Ahab, or King Hoshea, in all their glory, with all their
proud Jewish blood.  Better to have been one of those ignorant
Samaritans than one of those conceited Pharisees at Jerusalem, who,
while they were priding themselves on being Abraham's children, and
keeping Moses' law, ended by crucifying him who made Abraham, and
Moses, and his law, and them themselves.  Better to be the poorest
negro slave, if, in the midst of his ignorance and misery and shame,
he believes in Christ, and works righteousness, than the cleverest
and proudest and freest Englishman, if, in the midst of his great
light, he works the works of darkness, and, while he calls himself a
child of God, lives the sinful life, on which God's curse lies for
ever.

So you who have many advantages, take warning by the fate of those
foolish Jews, who knew a great deal, and yet did not do it, and so
came to shame and ruin.  And you who have few advantages, take
comfort by those poor Samaritans, who knew a very little, and yet
