
We cannot doubt that the earliest prayers of the Collect form had local
colouring; but those which have survived for our use are so expressed
as to include many local applications, and a very great variety of
circumstances.

Further, it will be clear that an extempore prayer may be part of a
form of Service, just as much as a printed prayer.  If the Service is
composed of, The short Prayer, a Lesson, the long Prayer, the Sermon
and several Hymns at fixed, or unfixed, places, the Service is a form.
The description of the Holy Communion in the time immediately after the
death of S. John the Evangelist (Justin Martyr, _Apology_ i. 65-67, {3}
see p. 58) shows us a form which provided for the essentials of such a
service, with prayers, praises, lessons, offertory, Consecration,
Communion, in order, although he who conducted the Service had a
certain amount of liberty in using parts of it.

We may assume then that forms are good, and that it is good to have
preparation and order and chosen phrases.  The next question is how to
provide for that Variety which shall sustain interest and engage the
mind of the worshipper in the great business of his Service.

We may consider Variety of method, Variety of singing, and Variations
in the component parts of the Service.

(_a_) Variety of Method.  The worshippers are divided into two or more
parties who take up their parts alternately, or together.  It is
evident that such a division may be made in many ways.  Those which
have been adopted in former times have resulted in the survival of five
Varieties for general Congregations [see chap. III. f.].

(_b_) Variety in Singing.  There were of old four methods of singing
the Psalms:

1.  Direct or Choral.  2. Antiphonal.  3. Responsorial.  4. Continuous.

1.  The _Direct_ or Choral Singing was done by the whole choir:

2.  The _Antiphonal_ by the two halves of the choir alternately:

3.  The _Responsorial_ by the Priest and choir alternately:

4.  The _Continuous_ by the Priest alone.

{4}

A careful study of the Rubrics will show that great liberty is allowed
in the Prayer Book in respect to the singing.

There is a Rubric in the Morning Service which prescribes the manner of
saying or singing Gloria Patri, viz. that it is to be Responsorial.
The order is that after the Morning and Evening Canticles _As it was in
the beginning_, &c. is to be an answer to _Glory be to the Father_, &c.
And this order may be found also after the Versicles of Mattins and
Evensong, _O Lord, open thou our lips_.  It might be inferred from this
that the Psalms and Canticles were intended to be sung in the same way.
But it is more likely that it was designed to continue an ancient
freedom of choice which is now represented in our custom of using the
Antiphonal Method when we sing, and the Responsorial when we say them.
The division of Gloria Patri into two verses was, no doubt, intended in
any case.  The Prayer Book does not recommend the fourth method; many
rubrics indicate that the congregation should take a substantial share
in the services with voice and heart.

(_c_) Variations in the Component Parts of Services.

  1. Praise and Prayer.
  2. Variations;
     from Service to Service,
      "   Day to Day,
      "   Week to Week,
      "   Morning to Evening,
      "   Season to Season.




{5}

CHAPTER II.

ORIGIN OF MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER.

The Services in the Prayer Book may be roughly classed as (1) those
which are used every week: and (2) those which are used more rarely.
The principal service is the Holy Communion; which is provided with a
special Collect, Epistle and Gospel for each week, and for Holy Days of
special importance as being connected with the Lord's life on earth, or
with His immediate disciples.

The weekly Collection, enjoined by S. Paul in the churches of Galatia
and Corinth (1 Cor. xvi. 2), suggests that the Holy Communion was from
the first the usual Sunday Service.  And this is confirmed when we find
S. Paul making a rapid journey from Greece to Jerusalem (Acts xx. 16),
but waiting seven days at Troas so as to be with the disciples there
upon the _first day of the week, when they came together to break
bread_ (Acts xx. 6, 7): cf. also a similar sojourn at Tyre on the same
voyage (Acts xxi. 4).  But the Holy Communion was not the only regular
Service.  Peter and John went to the Temple (Acts iii. 1) _at the hour
of prayer, being the ninth hour_.  _Peter went up upon the housetop to
pray_ (Acts x. 9) _about the sixth hour_.

{6}

Cornelius saw the vision _about the ninth hour_ (Acts x. 3).  _They
were all together in one place_ (Acts ii. 1) upon the day of
Pentecost--and it was _the third hour of the day_ (Acts ii. 15).  These
hours may have been suggested to them as Christians by the solemn
scenes of the crucifixion of our Lord (S. Mark xv. 25, 33, &c.)[1].

The constant sense of responsibility and danger tended, of course, to
the frequent assembling for united prayer.  It was natural to adopt
some such method as that in Psalm lv. 17, evening, morning and noon
(cf. Daniel vi. 10).

To these were added others: in the 3rd century for example we hear of
one at dawn and one at sunset: the former, being especially a praise
service, came to be known as _Lauds_ or _Mattin-lauds_; the latter was
soon called _Vespers_ (vesper=evening).

In the 4th century we hear of two more, making up the _seven times a
day_ of Psalm cxix. 164.  During this growth of daily services there is
sometimes a {7} doubt whether the night Service is included in the
reckoning: but eventually we find for the daytime Mattin-lauds, Prime,
Terce, Sext, None, Vespers, and Compline.

The precise time of each is not defined by its name.  If Mattins (i.e.
Lauds) was not finished when Prime was due, these two Services were
united.

But the office for Terce might be said at the 2nd hour or at the 3rd:
and in like manner Sext belonged to any of the three hours before 12;
and None to the three hours between 12 and 3.

Thus the day was divided into portions of three hours each: each
portion had its own Service, named from its close, but said at a
variable time according to the appointment of the Ordinary[2].  The
tendency was to appoint an early part of the three hours for the
Service; and this is visible in the word 'noon,' if it is true that 12
o'clock is so named from the custom of saying None at that time.

_Compline_ (completorium) is so called from its completing the services
of the day.

It will be noted that many of the names of Church Officers and many
other terms having a technical Church meaning are Greek in their
derivation.  Archangel, Angel, Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Church,
Ecclesiastical, Apostle, Prophet, Martyr, Baptism, Epistle,
Evangelical, are instances of this; and many languages show by these
and other terms that Christian Churches derive much of their
organization from times and places where the Greek tongue was prevalent.

{8}

It might be thought perhaps that the Latin derivation of the names of
the Day Hour services would imply a more local and a Western Source for
these Hours of Prayer.  But some of them are, as we have shown, very
early in their origin, and indeed there is evidence from books that
something of the same order was very early observed in the Eastern
parts of Christendom also.

This frequency of Services had a great charm for men who lived together
and worked together in communities, with no great distance between
their work and their Church, and who were able to fit their day's tasks
and necessary meals to the intervals between the Services.

It was not so suitable for mixed occupations or for isolated houses:
and as populations increased, it became evident that a less frequent
assembly would be more conducive to united worship.


GENERAL SCHEME OF THE DAY HOURS.

We will not enter into the minute differences of structure which are
found in one or other of the Day Hours.  The following list will show
the order of a Service which is nearly identical with each of them.:

  Our Father, &c.
  Versicles.
  Hymn.
  Several Psalms divided into portions by
    _Glorias_ and _Antiphons_.
  {9}
  Several Lessons divided by Responses.
  Canticles.
  Lesser Litany.  Our Father, &c.
  Versicles.
  Creed.
  Versicles.
  Confession.
  Collects.

Thus they followed the general division of worship into Praise and
Prayer.  By enlarging one portion and diminishing another a special
character was given to certain Services.  Thus Lauds was made joyful by
having many psalms.

The chief Lessons from the Bible were read in the Mattins Service when
it was said before Lauds.  The union of those two Services resulted in
the omission of many of the Psalms.  (See Preface "Concerning the
Service of the Church" in our Prayer Book.)

The Day Hour Services were not precisely alike even in their outline:
but they had a certain similarity which suggested the plan which has
been adopted in the Morning and Evening Services of the Book of Common
Prayer.

There were always two parts,--Praise: and Prayer.

[3]Each of these parts began with the Lord's Prayer.  The Praise part
always had something of the nature of Psalms and Lessons: the Prayers
always had Collects.  The Praises had Praise-versicles and the Prayers
had Prayer-versicles.  Also as time went on Litanies became usual for
special days of the week.

{10}

It was easy therefore to recast the seven Services in the shape which
they now have.

  _Praise_.   The Lord's Prayer.
              Versicles.
              Psalms.
              Lessons.
              Creed.
  _Prayers_.  The Lord's Prayer.
              Versicles.
              Collects.
              Thanksgivings.


NAMES AND TITLES.

The Services of our Church were translated into English in 1549.  Many
alterations were made at that time.

The seven Day Hours were combined into two Services--Mattins and
Evensong: the Holy Communion Service was assimilated in some respects
to Eastern Liturgies: the rules of variation for days and seasons were
simplified: interruptions were avoided by the omission of many Verses
and Responds, Antiphons, &c.: better provision was made for continuous
reading of Holy Scripture.

The change from Latin, which had once been a commonly-spoken language,
to the language spoken in England is the alteration which produced the
greatest effect upon congregational worship, and the smallest amount of
difference in the worship itself: for if you understood both languages
it would not matter to you which of them you used.

{11}

The Latin prayers had been known by their first words.  Just as we now
know a prayer as _Our Father_, or a doxology as _Glory be to the
Father_, so formerly they were known as _Pater Noster_, and _Gloria
Patri_.  Some of these titles have survived.  _Credo_ (_I believe_) has
been shortened into _Creed_.  We use as a Creed the Hymn _Quicunque
vult_ (Whosoever will).  The Canticles still are known by their first
words in Latin, _Te Deum, Benedicite_, &c., and so is the 95th Psalm,
_Venite, exultemus Domino_.

The _Lesser Litany_ is a name given to the three petitions,

  _Lord, have mercy upon us._
    _Christ, have mercy upon us._
  _Lord, have mercy upon us._

They are used before the Lord's Prayer as an Invocation of the Holy
Trinity.

We proceed to examine the foundation of this order in worship.

The model bequeathed to us by Our Lord is known to us as _The Lord's
Prayer_, often called "_Our Father_" from the first words.



[1] Haec sunt septenis propter quae psallimus horis:
    Matutina legat Christum qui crimina purgat.
    Prima replet sputis.  Causam dat Tertia mortis.
    Sexta cruci nectit.  Latus ejus Nona bipertit.
    Vespera deponit.  Tumulo Completa reponit;

which may be translated:

    Seven are the hours at which we sing and pray;
    Mattins for Christ who takes our sins away,
    Prime shows Him mocked, and Terce says why He died.
    Sext shows His Cross, and None His pierced side.
    Vespers His taking down commemorates,
    And Compline how they buried Him relates.
    Thus day by day we sing and pray Christ and Him crucified.

[2] The Ordinary, i.e. the Ordinary judge in such matters, viz. the
Bishop.

[3] See p. 16.




{12}

CHAPTER III.

THE MODEL.

THE LORD'S PRAYER.

"After this manner therefore pray ye."  S. Matth. vi. 9.


The pronouns used in the Lord's Prayer are 'Thy,' 'us,' 'our.'  It is
the voice of a people speaking to God.  Even in private we may not pray
for self alone; we must include our friends, neighbours, and all others.

For this reason the Lord's Prayer is singularly adapted to the services
of a congregation.  Its petitions are short and direct, and therefore
easily thought by every one at the same moment.  This is an important
point, because unity of intention is the essence of congregational
worship.  (S. Matth. xviii. 19, 20.)

Notice the order of the pronouns in the seven petitions:

           ( Hallowed be Thy Name.
  Thy.     ( Thy Kingdom come.
           ( Thy Will be done.

           (  Give us this day our daily bread.
           (  Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
  Us, our. (    them that trespass against us.
           (  Lead us not into temptation.
           (  Deliver us from evil.

{13}

There are, it appears, two motives which prompt a man to worship God.
