
         Haughty of heart and brow the warrior came,
         In look and language proud as proud might be,
         Vaunting his lordship, lineage, fights, and fame,
         Yet was that barefoot monk more proud than he.
         And as the ivy climbs the tallest tree,
         So round the loftiest soul his toils he wound;
         And with his spells subdued the fierce and free.
         Till ermined age and youth in arms renowned
       Honouring his scourge and hair-cloth meekly kissed the ground.

         And thus it chanced that valour, peerless knight,
         Who ne'er to king or kaiser veiled his crest,
         Victorious still in bull-feast or in fight,
         Since first with mail his limbs he did invest,
         Stooped ever to that anchoret's behest;
         Nor reasoned of the right, nor of the wrong,
         But at his bidding laid the lance in rest,
         And wrought fell deeds the troubled world along,
       For he was fierce as brave, and pitiless as strong.
                                 --SCOTT'S "Don Roderick," xxix. xxx.

Let us next consider an heretical view of the Trinity attributed to
Migetius (_circa_ 750). According to the rather obscure account, which
has come down to us,[1] he seems to have regarded the Three Persons of
the Trinity, at least in their relations with the world, as corporeal,
the Father being personified in David, the Son in Jesus, and the Holy
Ghost in Paul. It is difficult to believe that the doctrine, thus
crudely stated by Elipandus, was really held by anyone. We may perhaps
infer[2] that Migetius revived the error of Priscillian (itself a form
of Sabellianism), and reducing the Three Persons of the Trinity to one,
acknowledged certain [Greek: energeiai], or powers, emanating from Him,
which were manifested in David, Jesus, Paul respectively. As the first
and last of these three recipients of the Divine powers were confessedly
men, it follows that Migetius was ready to strip Jesus of that Divinity,
which is the cardinal doctrine of Christianity, and which more than any
other doctrine distinguishes it from the creed of Mohammed. Accordingly
he appears to have actually denied the divinity of the Word,[3] and in
this he made an approach to Mohammedanism.[4]

    [1] Elipandus to Migetius, sec. 3. See Migne, vol. 96, p. 859.

    [2] With Enhueber. Dissert, apud Migne, ci., p. 338 ff., sec.
    29.

    [3] Enhueber, sec. 32.

    [4] Neander, v. 216, n., says, Migetius held that the [Greek:
    Logos] became personal with the assumption of Christ's
    humanity; that the [Greek: Logos] was the power constituting
    the personality of Christ. Hence, says Neander, he was accused
    of asserting that Christ, the son of David according to the
    flesh, and not Christ, the Son of God, was the Second Person of
    the Trinity.

A similar, but seemingly not identical, error was propagated by those
who, as we learn from a letter of Alvar to Speraindeo, did not believe
the Three in One and One in Three, "denying the utterances of the
prophets, rejecting the doctrine of learned men, and, while they claimed
to take their stand upon the Gospel, pointing to texts like John xx. 17,
'I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, unto my God and your God,' to
prove that Christ was merely man."[1] In his answer to Alvar's letter,
Speraindeo says, "If we speak of the Trinity as one Person, we Judaize;"
he might have added, "and Mohammedanize." These heretics, according to
the abbot, spoke of three powers (_virtutes_) forming one Person, not,
as the orthodox held, three Persons forming one God.[2] Here we see a
close resemblance to the error mentioned in the preceding paragraph; but
the heretics we are now dealing with make an even closer approach to the
teaching of Mohammed in their quotation of John xx. 17 given above, as
will be seen, if we compare with that text the following passages of the
Koran, put into the mouth of Christ: "Verily, God is my Lord, and your
Lord; therefore serve him:"[3] "They are surely infidels who say,
verily, God is Christ, the Son of Mary, since Christ said, O children of
Israel, serve God, my Lord and your Lord:"[4] and, "I have not spoken
unto them any other than what thou didst command me--namely, worship
God, my Lord and your Lord."[5]

    [1] Alvar's letter. Florez, xi. 147. Another text quoted in
    defence of this doctrine of Agnoetism was Matt. xxiv. 36: "Of
    that day and that hour knoweth no man; no, not the angels of
    heaven, but my Father only." In answer to this, Speraindeo
    refers to Gen. iii. 9, where God the Father seems not to know
    where Adam is.

    [2] Speraindeo's illustration of the Trinity cannot be called a
    happy one. He likens it to a king, whose power is one, but made
    up of the man himself, his diadem, and his purple.

    [3] Koran, c. iii. v. 46.

    [4] Kor., c. v. 77.

    [5] Kor., c. v. 118.

We come next to the famous Adoptionist heresy, the most remarkable and
original of those innovations to which Alcuin taunts the Spanish Church
with being addicted. Unfortunately we derive little of our knowledge of
the new doctrine from the originators and supporters of it--our
information on the subject coming chiefly from passages quoted by their
opponents (notably our own Alcuin) in controversial works. But that the
heresy had an important connection with the Mohammedan religion has been
the opinion of many eminent writers on Church history. Mariana, the
Spanish historian, and Baronius, the apologist for the Roman Church,
held that the object of the new heresiarchs was, "by lowering the
character of Christ, to pave the way for a union between Christians and
Mohammedans."[1] Enhueber,[2] also, in his treatise on this subject,
quotes a tract, "De Primatu Ecclesiae Toletanae," which attributes the
heresy to its author, Elipandus, being brought into so close a contact
with the Saracens, and living on such friendly terms with them.[3]

Neander[4] thinks that there are some grounds for supposing that Felix,
one of the authors of the heresy, had been employed in defending
Christianity against objections brought against it from the Moslem
standpoint,[5] and in proving the divinity of Christ, so that they might
be induced to accept it. Felix, therefore, may have been led to embrace
this particular doctrine, called Adoptionism, from a wish to bring the
Christian view of Christ nearer to the Mohammedan opinion.

There is considerable doubt as to who first broached the new theory, the
evidence being of a conflicting character, and pointing now to
Elipandus, bishop of Toledo and primate of all Spain, now to Felix,
bishop of Urgel, in Catalonia.[6]

    [1] Mariana, vii. 8. Baronius, "Ann. Eccl." xiii. p. 260. See
    Blunt, "Dictionary of Religions," etc., article on Adoptionism;
    and Migne, vol. xcvi. p. 847--"deceptus uterque contagione
    forsan insidentiurn cervicibus aut e proximo blasphemantium
    Mohametanorum commercio."

    [2] Enhueber, sec. 26. Mansi, "Coll. Concil," x. 513, sec. 4.

    [3] "Usus enim frequenti Maurorum commercio."--_Ibid_.

    [4] V. 219.

    [5] This perhaps refers to a "disputatio cum sacerdote" which
    the Emperor Charles the Great had heard of as written by Felix.
    Alcuin (see "Ep.," 85) knows nothing of it. In his letter to
    Charles, Alcuin, speaking of a letter from Felix, says: "Inveni
    peiores errores, quam ante in eius scriptis legerem."

    [6] The prevailing opinion seems to be that the new doctrine
    arose out of Elipandus' controversy with Migetius.

The claims of Felix[1] are supported by Eginhard,[2] Saxo, and Jonas of
Orleans; while Paulinus of Aquileia, in his book entitled
"Sacrosyllabus," expressly calls Elipandus the author of the baneful
heresy; and Alcuin, in his letter to Leidrad,[3] says that he is
convinced that Elipandus, as he was the first in rank, so also was the
chief offender.

The evidence being inconclusive, we are driven to follow _a priori_
considerations, and these point to Elipandus as the author. According to
Neander,[4] he was a violent, excitable, bigoted man; and he certainly
uses some very strong language in his writings against his opponents,
and stands a good deal on his dignity as head of the Spanish Church. For
instance, speaking of his accusers, Etherius, Bishop of Osma, and
Beatus,[5] a priest of Libana, he says of the former that he wallows in
the mire of all lasciviousness;[6] that he is totally unfit to officiate
at God's altar;[7] that he is a false prophet[8] and a heretic; and,
forgetting the courtesies of controversy, he doesn't hesitate, in
another place, to call him an ass. Beatus also he accuses of gross
sensuality, and calls him that iniquitous priest of Astorga,[9]
accusing him of heresy, and giving him the title Antiphrasius, which
means that instead of being called Beatus, he should have been named the
very opposite.[10]

    [1] See "Froben Dissertation," Migne, vol. ci. p. 305.

    [2] "Annals," 792.

    [3] Alcuin, "Epist. ad Leidradum," says that the heresy arose
    in Cordova, and he appeals to Elipandus' letter to Felix after
    the latter's recantation.

    [4] Neander (v. p. 217) seems to infer these qualities from his
    writings. An author, quoted by Enhueber (Tract, de Primata
    Eccl. Tolet), describes him as "parum accurate in sacris
    litteris versatus."

    [5] Died in 798. Fleury v., p. 236.

    [6] Elipand. Epist., iv. 2, "Carnis immunditia fetidus."

    [7] "Ab altario Dei extraneus." Neander, v., p. 226, takes this
    to mean that he was deposed.

    [8] He gave the Revelation of St John a Moslem application: and
    prophesied the end of the world in the near future. See letter
    of Beatus, book i., sec. 23--"Novissima hora est ... nunc
    Antichristi multi facti sunt. Omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum
    est illius Antichristi, quem audistis quoniam venit, et nunc in
    mundo est." See also Alcuin's letter to the Spanish bishops.

    [9] "Elipandus and bishops of Spain to those of Gaul," sec. 1.

    [10] This practice of punning on names is very common in these
    writers. "Infelix Felix" is a poor witticism which constantly
    occurs. So Samson says of Hostegesis that he ought to be called
    "hostis Jesu"; and in the account of the Translation of the
    bodies of Aurelius, etc., we find Leovigild spoken of as a very
    "Leo vigilans."

But in spite of outbreaks like these we must beware of judging the
venerable Elipandus too hardly. Alcuin himself, in his letter to the
bishop, written, as he says, "with the pen of charity," speaks of him as
most blameless,[1] and confesses that he has heard much of his piety and
devotion, an admission which he also makes with regard to Felix, in a
letter to him.[2] Yet in his book against Elipandus, he exclaims, not
without a touch of bathos: "For all the garments of wool on your
shoulders, and the mitre upon your brow, wearing which you minister to
the people, for all the daily shaving of your beard[3] ... if you
renounce not these doctrines, you will be numbered with the goats!"
Another testimony (of doubtful value, however) in Elipandus' favour is
to be found in the anonymous life of Beatus,[4] where Elipandus is said
to have succeeded Cixila in the bishopric of Toledo, because of his
reputation for learning and piety, which extended throughout Spain.

    [1] "Sanctissime praesul," sec. 1. Cp. sec. 6, "Audiens famam
    bonam religiosae vitae de vobis."

    [2] "Celeberriman tuae sanctitatis audiens famam." The "Pseudo
    Luitprand" calls him "Vir humilis, prudens, ae in zelo fidei
    Catholicae fervens."

    [3] Beards were the sign of laymen, see Alvar, "Ep.," xiii.,
    and probably the distinction was much insisted on because of
    the Moslem custom of wearing long beards. For the distinctive
    dress of the clergy see the same letter of Alvar, ... "Quern
    staminia et lana oviuin religiosum adprobat."

    [4] See Migne, xcvi., 890 ff.

Elipandus, who boasted of having refuted and stamped out the Migetian
errors, and who also took up so independent an attitude with regard to
the See of Rome, was not the man to endure being dictated to in the
matter of what was, or what was not, sound doctrine, and, in the letter
quoted above, he scornfully remarks that he had never heard that it was
the province of the people of Libana to teach the Toledans. Here, as in
the defiant attitude taken up towards the Pope, we may perhaps see a
jealousy, felt by the old independent Church of Spain under its own
primate, towards the new Church, that was growing up in the mountains of
the North, the centre of whose religious devotion was soon to be
Compostella, and its spiritual head not the primate of Spain, but the
bishop of Rome.

It is now time to explain what the actual heresy advocated by Elipandus
and Felix was. Some have held the opinion that Adoptionism was merely a
revival of the Bonosian errors, which had long taken root in Spain;[1]
others, that it was a revival of the Nestorian[2] heresy, a new phase of
the controversy between the schools of Antioch and Alexandria;[3] or
that it was an attempt to reform Christianity, purging it from later
additions.[4] Alcuin, however, speaks of its followers as a new sect,
unknown to former times.[5] Stated briefly, the new doctrine was that
Jesus, in so far as His manhood was concerned, was son of God by
adoption. This error had been foreseen and condemned in advance by Cyril
of Alexandria (348-386):[6] by Hilary of Arles (429-449).[7] The
Eleventh Council of Toledo had also guarded against this same error a
hundred years before this (675), affirming that Christ the Son of God
was His Son by nature, not by adoption.

    [1] Enhueber, Diss., sec. 25. The errors of Bonosus were
    condemned at Capua in 389. For their development in Spain, see
    "Isidore of Seville."

    [2] Condemned at Ephesus, 431. For connection of Adoptionism
    with this, see letter of Adrian to bishops of Spain (785?).

    [3] Neander, v., p. 216.

    [4] _Ibid._, vi., p. 120, see letter of Alvar to Speraindeo.

    [5] Alcuin contra Felicem, i., sec. 7. Elipandus denied that it
    had anything to do with other heresies. "Nos vero
    anathematizamus Bonosum, qui filium Dei sine matre genitum,
    adoptivum fuisse adfirmat. Item Sabellium, qui ipsum esse
    Patrem, quem Filium, quem et Spiritus sanctus (_sic_) et non
    ipsud, delirat. Anathematizamus Arium, qui Filium et Spiritum
    Sanctum creaturas esse existimat. Anathematizamus Manichaeum
    qui Christum solum Deum et non hominem fuisse praedicat.
    Anathematizamus Antiphrasium Beatum carnis lasciviae deditum,
    et onagrum Etherium, doctorem bestialem ...," etc.

    [6] "Lectures on the Catechism," xi. "Christ is the Son of God
    by nature, begotten of the Father, not by adoption."

    [7] De Trinit, v., p. 7, "The Son of God is not a false God--a
    God by adoption, or a God by metaphor (nee adoptivus, nec
    connuncupatus)."

It is a mistake to suppose Adoptionism to be a mere resuscitation of
Nestorianism.[1] It agreed with the latter in repudiating the term
"Mother of God" as applied to the Virgin Mary,[2] but it differed from
it in the essential point of acknowledging the unity of person in
Christ. What Felix--and on him devolved the chief onus of defence in the
controversy--wished to make clear, was that the predicates of Christ's
two natures could not logically be interchanged.[3] He therefore
reasoned thus: Christ in respect to His Deity is God, and Son of God;
with respect to His Manhood He is also God and Son of God, not indeed in
essence, but by being taken into union with Him, who _is_ in essence
God, and Son of God. Therefore Christ, unless He derived His humanity
from the essence of God, must as man, and in respect of that humanity,
be Son of God only in a nuncupative sense. This relation of Jesus the
Man to God he preferred to describe by the term Adoption--a word not
found in Scripture in this connection, "but," says Felix, "implied
therein,[4] for what is adoption in a son, if it be not election,
assumption _(susceptio)_." The term itself was no doubt found by Elipandus
_in_ the Gothic Liturgy;[5] and he most likely used it at first with no
thought of raising a metaphysical discussion on so knotty a point. Being
brought to task, however, for using the word by those whom he deemed his
ecclesiastical inferiors, he was led to defend it from a natural dislike
to acknowledge himself in the wrong. "We can easily believe," says
Enhueber, "that Elipandus, who appears to have been the chief author of
the heresy at this time, fell into it at first from ignorance and
inadvertently, and did not appear openly as a heretic, till, admonished
of his error, he arrogantly and obstinately defended a position which he
had only taken up through ignorance."[6]

Elipandus also seems to have applied to Felix[7] for his opinion on
Christ's Sonship; and the latter, who was a man of great penetration and
acuteness, first formulated the new doctrine, stating in his answer that
Christ must be considered with regard to His Divinity as truly God and
Son of God, but with regard to His Manhood, as Son of God in name only,
and by adoption.

    [1] See Blunt, "Dict. of Relig.," article on Adoptionism.

    [2] Neander, v. 223. Blunt (1.1.) says just the contrary.

    [3] Neander, v. 220.

    [4] Alcuin contra Felicem, iii. c. 8.

    [5] "Elipand. ad Albinum," sec, 11. Adoptio assumptio ([Greek:
    analepsis]) occurs _(a)_ in the Missa de coena Domini:
    _adoptivi hominis passio;_ _(b)_ in the prayer de tertia feria
    Pascha: _adoptionis gratia;_ _(c)_ in that de Ascensione:
    _adoptionem carnis._ The Council of Frankfurt (794) branded the
    authors of the liturgy as heretics (so also did Alcuin) and as
    the main cause of the Saracen conquest! See Fleury, v. 243.

    [6] Enhueber, "Dissertatio," sec. 26. Neander, v. 217, has the
    same remark in other words.

    [7] See Blunt, Art. on Adoptionism.

To give an idea of the lines on which the controversy was carried on, it
will be necessary to state some of the arguments of Felix, and in
certain cases Alcuin's rejoinders. These are:--

_(a.)_ "If Christ, as man, is not the _adopted_ Son of God, then must
His Manhood be derived from the essence of God and consequently must be
something different from the manhood of men."[1] To this Alcuin can only
oppose another dilemma, which, however, is more of the nature of a
quibble. "If," he says, "Christ is an adopted Son of God, and Christ is
also God, then is God the adopted Son of God?"[2] Here Alcuin confounds
the predicates of Christ's two natures--the very thing Felix protested
against--and uses the argument thus obtained against that doctrine of
Felix, which was based on this very denial of any interchange of
predicates.

_(b.)_ Christ is spoken of sometimes as Son of David, sometimes as Son
of God. One person can only have two fathers, if one of these be an
adoptive father. So is it with Christ. Alcuin answers: "As a man (body
and soul) is called the son of his father, so Christ (God and man) is
called Son of God."[3] But to those who deny that a man's soul is
derived from his father, this argument would carry no weight.

_(c.)_ Christ stood in a position of natural dependence towards God over
and above the voluntary submission which He owed to His Father as
God.[4] This dependence Felix expresses by the term _servus
conditionalis_, applied to Jesus.[5] He may have been thinking of Matt.
xii. i8, "Behold my servant, whom I have chosen;" and St Paul's Ep. to
Philipp. ii. 7, "He took upon. Him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men."[6] Or perhaps he had in his mind, if the theory
of the influence of Mohammedanism is true, those passages of the Koran
which speak of Christ as a servant, as, "Christ doth not proudly disdain
to be a servant unto God,"[7] and, "Jesus is no other than a
servant."[8]

(_d._) To prove that Scripture recognises a distinction between Christ
the Man and Christ the God, Felix appeals to Luke xviii. 19, "Why
callest thou Me good? There is none good, save one, even God;" Mark
xiii. 32, "Of that day, or that hour, knoweth no one, not even the
angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father." Texts such as these
can only be met by a reference to other texts, such as John iii. 16,
where God is said to have given His only begotten Son to suffer death
upon the Cross.
