aspect sitting in a chair, on the back of which were the names of
various publications. It was ascertained, on more minute examination,
that, some time after the establishment of Christianity by Constantine,
[344:1] this monument had been erected in honour of Hippolytus--a
learned writer and able controversialist, who bad been bishop of Portus
in the early part of the third century, and who had finished his career
by martyrdom, about A.D. 236, during the persecution under the Emperor
Maximin. Hippolytus is commemorated as a saint in the Romish Breviary;
[344:2] and the resurrection of his statue, after it had been buried for
perhaps a thousand years, created quite a sensation among his papal
admirers. Experienced sculptors, under the auspices of the Pontiff, Pius
IV., restored the fragments to nearly their previous condition; and the
renovated statue was then duly honoured with a place in the Library of
the Vatican.

Nearly three hundred years afterwards, or in 1842, a manuscript which
had been found in a Greek monastery at Mount Athos, was deposited in the
Royal Library at Paris. This work, which has been since published,
[345:1] and which is entitled "Philosophumena, or a Refutation of all
Heresies," has been identified as the production of Hippolytus. It does
not appear in the list of his writings mentioned on the back of the
marble chair; but any one who inspects its contents can satisfactorily
account for its exclusion from that catalogue. It reflects strongly on
the character and principles of some of the early Roman bishops; and as
the Papal see was fast rising into power when the statue was erected, it
was obviously deemed prudent to omit an invidious publication. The
writer of the "Philosophumena" declares that he is the author of one of
the books named on that piece of ancient sculpture, and various other
facts amply corroborate his testimony. There is, therefore, no good
reason to doubt that a Christian bishop who lived about fifteen miles
from Rome, and who flourished little more than one hundred years after
the death of the Apostle John, composed the newly discovered Treatise.
[345:2]

In accordance with the title of his work, Hippolytus here reviews all
the heresies which had been broached up till the date of its
publication. Long prior to the reappearance of this production, it was
known that one of the early Roman bishops had been induced to
countenance the errors of the Montanists; [345:3] and it would seem that
Victor was the individual who was thus deceived; [345:4] but it had not
been before suspected that Zephyrinus and Callistus, the two bishops
next to him in succession, [345:5] held unsound views respecting the
doctrine of the Trinity. Such, however, is the testimony of their
neighbour and contemporary, the bishop of Portus. The witness may,
indeed, be somewhat fastidious, as he was himself both erudite and
eloquent; but had there not been some glaring deficiency in both the
creed and the character of the chief pastor of Rome, Hippolytus would
scarcely have described Zephyrinus as "an illiterate and covetous man,"
[346:1] "unskilled in ecclesiastical science," [346:2] and a
disseminator of heretical doctrine. According to the statement of his
accuser, he confounded the First and Second Persons of the Godhead,
maintaining the identity of the Father and the Son. [346:3]

Callistus, who was made bishop on the death of Zephyrinus, must have
possessed a far more vigorous intellect than his predecessor. Though
regarded by the orthodox Hippolytus with no friendly eye, it is plain
that he was endowed with an extraordinary share of energy and
perseverance. He had been originally a slave, and he must have won the
confidence of his wealthy Christian master Carpophores, for he had been
intrusted by him with the care of a savings bank. The establishment
became insolvent, in consequence, as Hippolytus alleges, of the
mismanagement of its conductor; and many widows and others who had
committed their money to his keeping, lost their deposits. When
Carpophorus, by whom he was now suspected of embezzlement, determined to
call him to account, Callistus fled to Portus--in the hope of escaping
by sea to some other country. He was, however, overtaken, and, after an
ineffectual attempt to drown himself, was arrested, and thrown into
prison. His master, who was placable and kind-hearted, speedily
consented to release him from confinement; but he was no sooner at
large, than, under pretence of collecting debts due to the savings bank,
he went into a Jewish synagogue during the time of public worship, and
caused such disturbance that he was seized and dragged before the city
prefect. The magistrate ordered him first to be scourged, and then to be
transported to the mines of Sardinia. He does not appear to have
remained long in exile; for, about this time, Marcia procured from the
Emperor Commodus an order for the release of the Christians who had been
banished to that unhealthy island; and Callistus, though not included in
the act of grace, contrived to prevail upon the governor to set him at
liberty along with the other prisoners. He now returned to Rome, where
he appears to have acquired the reputation of a changed character. In
due time he procured an appointment to one of the lower ecclesiastical
offices; and as he possessed much talent, he did not find it difficult
to obtain promotion. When Zephyrinus was advanced to the episcopate,
Callistus, who was his special favourite, became one of the leading
ministers of the Roman Church; and exercised an almost unbounded sway
over the mind of the superficial and time-serving bishop. The Christians
of the chief city were now split up into parties, some advocating the
orthodox doctrine of the Trinity, and others abetting a different
theory. Callistus appears to have dexterously availed himself of their
divisions; and, by inducing each faction to believe that he espoused its
cause, managed, on the death of Zephyrinus, to secure his election to
the vacant dignity.

When Callistus had attained the object of his ambition, he tried to
restore peace to the Church by endeavouring to persuade the advocates of
the antagonistic principles to make mutual concessions. Laying aside the
reserve which he had hitherto maintained, he now took up an intermediate
position, in the hope that both parties would accept his own theory of
the Godhead. "He invented," says Hippolytus, "such a heresy as follows.
He said that the Word is the Son and is also the Father, being called by
different names, but being one indivisible spirit; and that the Father
is not one and the Son another (person), but that they both are one and
the same.... The Father, having taken human flesh, deified it by uniting
it to Himself,... and so he said that the Father had suffered with the
Son." [348:1]

Though Callistus, as well as Hippolytus, is recognised as a saint in the
Romish Breviary, [348:2] it is thus certain that the bishop of Portus
regarded the bishop of Rome as a schemer and a heretic. It is equally
clear that, at this period, all bishops were on a level of equality, for
Hippolytus, though the pastor of a town in the neighbourhood of the
chief city, did not acknowledge Callistus as his metropolitan. The
bishop of Portus describes himself as one of those who are "successors
of the apostles, partakers with them of the same grace both of principal
priesthood and doctorship, and reckoned among the guardians of the
Church." [348:3] Hippolytus testifies that Callistus was afraid of him,
[348:4] and if both were members of the same synod, [348:5] well might
the heterodox prelate stand in awe of a minister who possessed
co-ordinate authority, with greater honesty and superior erudition. But
still, it is abundantly plain, from the admissions of the
"Philosophumena," that the bishop of Rome, in the time of the author of
this treatise, was beginning to presume upon his position. Hippolytus
complains of his irregularity in receiving into his communion some who
had been "cast out of the Church" of Portus "after judicial sentence."
[348:6] Had the bishop of the harbour of Rome been subject to the bishop
of the capital, he would neither have expressed himself in such a style,
nor preferred such an accusation.

Various circumstances indicate, as has already been suggested, that the
bishop of Rome, in the time of the Antonines, was chosen by lot; but we
may infer from the "Philosophumena" that, early in the third century,
another mode of appointment had been adopted. [349:1] It is obvious that
he now owed his advancement to the suffrages of the Church members, for
Hippolytus hints very broadly that Callistus pursued a particular course
with a view to promote his popularity and secure his election. It is
beyond doubt that, about A.D. 236, Fabian was chosen bishop of Rome by
the votes of the whole brotherhood, and there is on record a minute
account of certain extraordinary circumstances which signalised the
occasion. "When all the brethren had assembled in the church for the
purpose of choosing their future bishop, and when the names of many
worthy and distinguished men had suggested themselves to the
consideration of the multitude, no one so much as thought of Fabian who
was then present. They relate, however, that a dove gliding down from
the roof, straightway settled on his head, as when the Holy Spirit, like
a dove, rested upon the head of our Saviour. On this, the whole people,
as if animated by one divine impulse, with great eagerness, and with the
utmost unanimity, exclaimed that he was worthy; and, taking hold of him,
placed him forthwith on the bishop's chair." [349:2]

Some time after the resurrection of the statue of Hippolytus, another
revelation was made in the neighbourhood of Rome which has thrown much
light upon its early ecclesiastical history. In the latter part of the
sixteenth century, the unusual appearance of some apertures in the
ground, not far from the Papal capital, awakened curiosity, and led to
the discovery of dark subterranean passages of immense extent filled
with monuments and inscriptions. These dismal regions, after having been
shut up for about eight hundred years, were then again re-opened and
re-explored.

The soil for miles around Rome is undermined, and the long labyrinths
thus created are called catacombs. [350:1] The galleries are often found
in stories two or three deep, communicating with each other by stairs;
and it has been thought that formerly some of them were partially
lighted from above. They were originally gravel-pits or stone-quarries,
and were commenced long before the reign of Augustus. [350:2] The
enlargement of the city, and the growing demand for building materials,
led then to new and most extensive excavations. In the preparation of
these vast caverns, we may trace the presiding care of Providence. As
America, discovered a few years before the Reformation, furnished a
place of refuge to the Protestants who fled from ecclesiastical
intolerance, so the catacombs, re-opened shortly before the birth of our
Lord, supplied shelter to the Christians in Rome during the frequent
proscriptions of the second and third centuries. When the gospel was
first propagated in the imperial city, its adherents belonged chiefly to
the lower classes; and, for reasons of which it is now impossible to
speak with certainty, [350:3] it seems to have been soon very generally
embraced by the quarrymen and sand-diggers. [350:4] Thus it was that
when persecution raged in the capital, the Christian felt himself
comparatively safe in the catacombs. The parties in charge of them were
his friends; they could give him seasonable intimation of the approach
of danger; and among these "dens and caves of the earth," with countless
places of ingress and egress, the officers of government must have
attempted in vain to overtake a fugitive.

At present their appearance is most uncomfortable; they contain no
chamber sufficient for the accommodation of any large number of
worshippers; and it has even been questioned whether human life could be
long supported in such gloomy habitations. But we have the best
authority for believing that some of the early Christians remained for a
considerable time in these asylums. [351:1] Wells of water have been
found in their obscure recesses; fonts for baptism have also been
discovered; and it is beyond doubt that the disciples met here for
religious exercises. As early as the second century these vaults became
the great cemetery of the Church. Many of the memorials of the dead
which they contained have long since been transferred to the Lapidarian
Gallery in the Vatican; and there, in the palace of the Pope, the
venerable tombstones testify, to all who will consult them, how much
modern Romanism differs from ancient Christianity.

Though many of these sepulchral monuments were erected in the fourth and
fifth centuries, they indicate a remarkable freedom from superstitions
with which the religion of the New Testament has been since defiled.
These witnesses to the faith of the early Church of Rome altogether
repudiate the worship of the Virgin Mary, for the inscriptions of the
Lapidarian Gallery, all arranged under the papal supervision, contain no
addresses to the mother of our Lord. [352:1] They point only to Jesus as
the great Mediator, Redeemer, and Friend. It is also worthy of note that
the tone of these voices from the grave is eminently cheerful. Instead
of speaking of masses for the repose of souls, or representing departed
believers as still doomed to pass through purgatory, they describe the
deceased as having entered immediately into the abodes of eternal rest.
"Alexander," says one of them, "is not dead, but lives beyond the stars,
and his body rests in this tomb." "Here," says another, "lies Paulina,
in the place of the blessed." "Gemella," says a third, "sleeps in
peace." "Aselus," says a fourth, "sleeps in Christ." [352:2]

We learn from the testimony of Hippolytus that, during the episcopate of
Zephyrinus, Callistus was "set over the cemetery." [352:3] This was
probably considered a highly important trust, as, in those perilous
times, the safety of the Christians very much depended on the prudence,
activity, and courage of the individual who had the charge of their
subterranean refuge. [352:4] The new curator seems to have signalised
himself by the ability with which he discharged the duties of his
appointment; he probably embellished and enlarged some of these dreary
caves; and hence a portion of the catacombs was designated "The Cemetery
of Callistus." Hippolytus, led astray by the ascetic spirit beginning so
strongly to prevail in the commencement of the third century, was
opposed to all second marriages, so that he was sadly scandalized by the
exceedingly liberal views of his Roman brother on the subject of
matrimony; and he was so ill-informed as to pronounce them novel. "In
his time," says he indignantly, "bishops, presbyters, and deacons,
though they had been twice or three times married, began to be
recognised as God's ministers; and if any one of the clergy married, it
was determined that such a person should remain among the clergy, as not
having sinned." [353:1] We cannot tell how many of the ancient bishops
of the great city were husbands; [353:2] we have certainly no distinct
evidence that even Callistus took to himself a wife; but we have the
clearest proof that the primitive Church of Rome did not impose celibacy
on her ministers; and, in support of this fact, we can produce the
unimpeachable testimony of her own catacombs. There is, for instance, a
monument "To Basilus the Presbyter, and Felicitas his wife;" and, on
another tombstone, erected about A.D. 472, or only four years before the
fall of the Western Empire, there is the following singular
record--"Petronia, a deacon's wife, the type of modesty. In this place I
lay my bones: spare your tears, dear husband and daughters, and believe
that it is forbidden to weep for one who lives in God." [353:3] "Here,"
says another epitaph, "Susanna, the happy daughter of the late Presbyter
Gabinus, lies in peace along with her father." [353:4] In the Lapidarian
Gallery of the papal palace, the curious visitor may still read other
epitaphs of the married ministers of Rome.

Though the gospel continued to make great progress in the metropolis,
there was perhaps no city of the Empire in which it encountered, from
the very first, such steady and powerful opposition. The Sovereign,
being himself the Supreme Pontiff of Paganism, might be expected to
resent, as a personal indignity, any attempt to weaken its influence;
and the other great functionaries of idolatry, who all resided in the
capital, were of course bound by the ties of office to resist the
advancement of Christianity. The old aristocracy disliked everything in
the shape of religious innovation, for they believed that the glory of
their country was inseparably connected with an adherence to the worship
of the gods of their ancestors. Thus it was that the intolerance of the
state was always felt with peculiar severity at the seat of government.
Exactly in the middle of the third century a persecution of unusual
violence burst upon the Roman Church. Fabian, whose appointment to the
bishopric took place, as already related, under such extraordinary
circumstances, soon fell a victim to the storm. After his martyrdom, the
whole community over which he presided seems to have been paralysed with
terror; and sixteen months passed away before any successor was elected;
for Decius, the tyrant who now ruled the Roman world, had proclaimed,
his determination rather to suffer a competitor for his throne than a
bishop for his chief city. [354:1] A veritable rival was quickly
forthcoming to prove the falsehood of his gasconade; for when Julius
Valens appeared to dispute his title to the Empire, Decius was obliged,
by the pressure of weightier cares, to withdraw his attention from the
concerns of the Roman Christians. During the lull in the storm of
persecution, Cornelius was chosen bishop; but after an official life of
little more than a year, he was thrown into confinement. His death in
prison was, no doubt, occasioned by harsh treatment. The episcopate of
his successor Lucius was even shorter than his own, for he was martyred
about six months after his election. [355:1] Stephen, who was now
promoted to the vacant chair, did not long retain possession of it; for
though we have no reliable information as to the manner of his death, it
is certain that he occupied the bishopric only between four and five
years. His successor Xystus in less than twelve months finished his
course by martyrdom. [355:2] Thus, in a period of eight years, Rome lost
no less than five bishops, at least four of whom were cut down by
persecution: of these Cornelius and Stephen, by far the most
distinguished, were interred in the cemetery of Callistus.

There is still extant the fragment of a letter written by Cornelius
furnishing a curious statistical account of the strength of the Roman
Church at this period. [355:3] According to this excellent authority it
contained forty-six presbyters, seven deacons, seven sub-deacons,
forty-two acolyths, fifty-two others who were either exorcists, readers,
or door-keepers, and upwards of fifteen hundred besides, who were in
indigent circumstances, and of whom widows constituted a large
proportion. All these poor persons were maintained by the liberality of
their fellow-worshippers. Rome, as we have seen, was the birthplace of
prelacy; and other ecclesiastical organisms unknown to the New Testament
may also be traced to the same locality, for here we read for the first
time of such officials as the acolyths. [355:4] We may infer from the
details supplied by the letter of Cornelius, that there were now
fourteen congregations [355:5] of the faithful in the great city; and
its Christian population has been estimated at about fifty thousand. No
wonder that the chief pastor of such a multitude of zealous disciples
all residing in his capital, awakened the jealousy of a suspicious
Emperor.

A schism, which continued for generations to exert an unhappy influence,
commenced in the metropolis during the short episcopate of Cornelius.
The leader of this secession was Novatian, a man of blameless character,
[356:1] and a presbyter of the Roman Church. In the Decian persecution
many had been terrified into temporary conformity to paganism; and this
austere ecclesiastic maintained, that persons who had so sadly
compromised themselves, should, on no account whatever, be re-admitted
to communion. When he found that he could not prevail upon his brethren
to adopt this unrelenting discipline, he permitted himself to be
ordained bishop in opposition to Cornelius; and became the founder of a
separate society, known as the sect of the Novatians. As he denied the
validity of the ordinance previously administered, he rebaptized his
converts, and exhibited otherwise a miserably contracted spirit; but
many sympathised with him in his views, and Novatian bishops were soon
established in various parts of the Empire.

Immediately after the rise of this sect, a controversy relative to the
propriety of rebaptizing heretics brought the Church of Rome into
collision with many Christian communities in Africa and Asia Minor. The
discussion, which did not eventuate in any fresh schism, is chiefly
remarkable for the firm stand now made against the assumptions of the
great Bishop of the West. When Stephen, who was opposed to rebaptism,
discovered that he could not induce the Asiatics and Africans to come
over to his sentiments, he rashly tried to overbear them by declaring
that he would shut them out from his communion; but his antagonists
treated the threat merely as an empty display of insolence. "What strife
and contention hast thou awakened in the Churches of the whole world, O
Stephen," said one of his opponents, "and how great sin hast thou
accumulated when thou didst cut thyself off from so many flocks! Deceive
not thyself, for he is truly the schismatic who has made himself an
apostate from the communion of the unity of the Church. For whilst thou
thinkest that all may be excommunicated by thee, thou hast
excommunicated thyself alone from all." [357:1]

When the apostle of the circumcision said to his Master--"Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God," Jesus replied--"_Blessed_ art thou,
Simon Bar-jona, _for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but
my Father which is in heaven_." To this emphatic acknowledgment of the
faith of His disciple, our Lord added the memorable words--"And I say
also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." [357:2] As
the word Peter signifies a _stone_, [357:3] this address admits of a
very obvious and satisfactory exposition. "Thou art," said Christ to the
apostle, "a lively stone [357:4] of the spiritual structure I erect; and
upon this rock on which thy faith is established, as witnessed by thy
good confession, I will build my Church; and though the rains of
affliction may descend, and the floods of danger may come, and the winds
of temptation may blow, and beat upon this house, it shall remain
immoveable, [358:1] because it rests upon an impregnable foundation."
But a different interpretation was already gaining wide currency; for
though Peter had been led to deny Christ with oaths and imprecations,
the rapid growth and preponderating wealth of the Roman bishopric, of
which the apostle was supposed to be the founder, had now induced many
to believe that he was the Rock of Salvation, the enduring basis on
which the living temple of God was to be reared! Tertullian and Cyprian,
in the third century the two most eminent fathers of the West,
countenanced the exposition; [358:2] and though both these writers were
lamentably deficient in critical sagacity, men of inferior standing were
slow to impugn the verdict of such champions of the faith. Thus it was
that a false gloss of Scripture was already enthralling the mind of
Christendom; and Stephen boldly renewed the attempt at domination
commenced by his predecessor Victor. His opponents deserved far greater
credit for the sturdy independence with which they upheld their
individual rights than for the scriptural skill with which they unmasked
the sophistry of a delusive theory; for all their reasonings were
enervated and vitiated by their stupid admission of the claims of the
chair of Peter as the rock on which the Church was supposed to rest.
[358:3] This second effort of Rome to establish her ascendancy was,
indeed, a failure; but the misinterpretation of Holy Writ, by which it
was encouraged, was not effectively corrected and exposed; and thus the
great Western prelate was left at liberty, at another more favourable
opportunity, to wrest the Scriptures for the destruction of the Church.

From the middle of the third century, the authority of the Roman bishops
advanced apace. The magnanimity with which so many of them then
encountered martyrdom elicited general admiration; and the divisions
caused by the schism of Novatian supplied them with a specious apology
for enlarging their jurisdiction. The argument from the necessity of
unity, which was urged so successfully for the creation of a bishop
upwards of a hundred years before, could now be adduced with equal
plausibility for the erection of a metropolitan; and, from this date,
these prelates undoubtedly exercised archiepiscopal power. Seventy years
afterwards, or at the Council of Nice, [359:1] the ecclesiastical rule
of the Primate of Rome was recognised by the bishops of the ten
suburbicarian provinces, including no small portion of Italy. [359:2]

For the last forty years of the third century the Church was free from
persecution, and, during this long period of repose, the great Western
see enjoyed an unwonted measure of outward prosperity. Its religious
services were now conducted with increasing splendour, and distressed
brethren in very distant countries shared the fruits of its munificence.
In the reign of Gallienus, when the Goths burst into the Empire and
devastated Asia Minor, the bishop of Rome transmitted a large sum of
money for the release of the Christians who had fallen into the hands of
the barbarians. [359:3] A few years afterwards, when Paul of Samosata
was deposed for heresy, and when, on his refusal to surrender the
property of the Church of Antioch, an application was made to the
Emperor Aurelian for his interference, that prince submitted the matter
in dispute to the decision of Dionysius of Rome and the other bishops of
Italy. [360:1] This reference, in which the position of the Roman
prelate was publicly recognised, perhaps for the first time, by a Roman
Emperor, was calculated to add vastly to the importance of the
metropolitan see in public estimation. When Christianity was established
about fifty years afterwards by Constantine, the bishop of the chief
city was thus, to a great extent, prepared for the high position to
which he was suddenly promoted.

None of the early bishops of Rome were distinguished for their mental
accomplishments; and though they are commonly reputed the founders of
the Latin Church, it would appear that, for nearly two hundred years,
they all wrote and spoke the Greek language. The name _Pope_, which they
have since appropriated, was now common to all pastors. [360:2] For the
first three centuries almost every question relating to them is involved
in much mystery; and, as we approach the close of this period, the
difficulty of unravelling their perplexed traditions rather increases
than diminishes. Even the existence of some who are said to have now
flourished has been considered doubtful. [360:3] It is alleged that the
see was vacant for upwards of three years and a half during the
Diocletian persecution in the beginning of the fourth century; [360:4]
but even this point has not been very clearly ascertained. The Roman
bishopric was by far the most important in the Church; and the obscurity
which overhangs its early history, cannot but be embarrassing to those
who seek to establish a title to the ministry by attempting to trace it
up through such dark annals.

On looking back over the first three centuries, we may remark how much
the chairman of the Roman eldership, about the time of the death of the
Apostle John, differed from the prelate who filled his place two hundred
years afterwards. The former was the servant of the presbyters, and
appointed to carry out their decisions; the latter was their master, and
entitled to require their submission. The former presided over the
ministers of, perhaps, three or four comparatively poor congregations
dispirited by recent persecution; the latter had the charge of at least
five-and-twenty flourishing city churches, [361:1] together with all the
bishops in all the surrounding territory. In eventful times an
individual of transcendent talent, such as Pepin or Napoleon, has
adroitly bolted into a throne; but the bishop of Rome was indebted for
his gradual elevation and his ultimate ascendancy neither to
extraordinary genius nor superior erudition, but to a combination of
circumstances of unprecedented rarity. His position furnished him with
peculiar facilities for acquiring influence. Whilst the city in which he
was located was the largest in the world, it was also the most opulent
and the most powerful. He was continually coming in contact with men of
note in the Church from all parts of the Empire; and he had frequent
opportunities of obliging these strangers by various offices of
kindness. He thus, too, possessed means of ascertaining the state of the
Christian interest in every land, and of diffusing his own sentiments
under singularly propitious circumstances. When he was fast rising into
power, it was alleged that he was constituted chief pastor of the Church
by Christ himself; and a text of Scripture was quoted which was supposed
to endorse his title. For a time no one cared to challenge its
application; for meanwhile his precedence was but nominal, and those,
who might have been competent to point out the delusion, had no wish to
give offence, by attacking the fond conceit of a friendly and prosperous
prelate. But when the scene changed, and when the Empire found another
capital, the acumen of the bishop of the rival metropolis soon
discovered a sounder exposition; and Chrysostom of Constantinople, at
once the greatest preacher and the best commentator of antiquity,
ignored the folly of Tertullian and of Cyprian. "Upon the rock," says
he, "that is, upon the faith of the apostle's confession," [362:1] the
Church is built. "Christ said that he would build His Church on Peter's
confession." [362:2] Soon afterwards, the greatest divine connected with
the Western Church, and the most profound theologian among the fathers,
pointed out, still more distinctly, the true meaning of the passage.
"Our Lord declares," says Augustine, "On this rock I will found my
Church, because Peter had said: Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God. On _this rock, which thou hast confessed_, He declares I
will build my Church, for Christ was the rock on whose foundation Peter
himself was built; for other foundation hath no man laid than that which
is laid, which is Christ Jesus." [362:3] In the Italian capital, the
words on which the power of the Papacy is understood to rest are
exhibited in gigantic letters within the dome of St Peter's; but their
exhibition only proves that the Church of Rome has lost the key of
knowledge; for, though she would fain appeal to Scripture, she shews
that she does not understand the meaning of its testimony; and, closing
her eyes against the light supplied by the best and wisest of the
fathers, she persists in adhering to a false interpretation.





     SECTION II.

     THE LITERATURE AND THEOLOGY OF THE CHURCH.




CHAPTER I.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL WRITERS.


By "the Fathers" we understand the writers of the ancient Christian
Church. The name is, however, of rather vague application, for though
generally employed to designate only the ecclesiastical authors of the
first six centuries, it is extended, occasionally, to distinguished
theologians who flourished in the middle ages.

The fathers of the second and third centuries have a strong claim on our
attention. Living on the verge of apostolic times, they were acquainted
with the state of the Church when it had recently passed from under the
care of its inspired founders; and, as witnesses to its early
traditions, their testimony is of peculiar value. But the period before
us produced comparatively few authors, and a considerable portion of its
literature has perished. There have been modern divines, such as Calvin
and Baxter, who have each left behind a more voluminous array of
publications than now survives from all the fathers of these two hundred
years. Origen was by far the most prolific of the writers who flourished
during this interval, but the greater number of his productions have
been lost; and yet those which remain, if translated into English, would
amount to nearly triple the bulk of our authorised version of the Bible.
His extant works are, however, more extensive than all the other
memorials of this most interesting section of the history of the Church.

Among the earliest ecclesiastical writers after the close of the first
century is Polycarp of Smyrna. He is said to have been a disciple of the
Apostle John, and hence he is known as one of the _Apostolic Fathers_.
[365:1] An epistle of his addressed to the Philippians, and designed to
correct certain vices and errors which had been making their appearance,
is still preserved. It seems to have been written towards the middle of
the second century; [365:2] its style is simple; and its general tone
worthy of a man who had enjoyed apostolic tuition. Its venerable author
suffered martyrdom about A.D. 167, [365:3] at the advanced age of
eighty-six. [365:4]

_Justin Martyr_ was contemporary with Polycarp. He was a native of
Samaria, and a Gentile by birth; he had travelled much; he possessed a
well-cultivated mind; and he had made himself acquainted with the
various systems of philosophy which were then current. He could derive
no satisfaction from the wisdom of the pagan theorists; but, one day, as
he walked, somewhat sad and pensive, near the sea shore, a casual
meeting with an aged stranger led him to turn his thoughts to the
Christian revelation. The individual, with whom he had this solitary and
important interview, was a member and, perhaps, a minister of the
Church. After pointing out to Justin the folly of mere theorising, and
recommending him to study the Old Testament Scriptures, as well on
account of their great antiquity as their intrinsic worth, he proceeded
to expatiate on the nature and excellence of the gospel. [366:1] The
impression now made upon the mind of the young student was never
afterwards effaced; he became a decided Christian; and, about A.D. 165,
finished his career by martyrdom.

Justin is the first writer whose contributions to ecclesiastical
literature are of considerable extent. Some of the works ascribed to him
are unquestionably the productions of others; but there is no reason to
doubt the genuineness of his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, and of the
two Apologies addressed to the Emperors, [366:2] Though the meeting with
Trypho is said to have occurred at Ephesus, it is now perhaps impossible
to determine whether it ever actually took place, or whether the
Dialogue is only the report of an imaginary discussion. It serves,
however, to illustrate the mode of argument then adopted in the
controversy between the Jews and the disciples, and throws much light
upon the state of Christian theology. Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius
appear to have been the Emperors to whom the Apologies are addressed. In
these appeals to Imperial justice the calumnies against the Christians
are refuted, whilst the simplicity of their worship and the purity of
their morality are impressively described.

Justin, even after his conversion, still wore the philosopher's cloak,
and continued to cherish an undue regard for the wisdom of the pagan
sages. His mind never was completely emancipated from the influence of a
system of false metaphysics; and thus it was that, whilst his views of
various doctrines of the gospel remained confused, his allusions to them
are equivocal, if not contradictory. But it has been well remarked that
_conscience_, rather than _science_, guided many of the fathers; and the
case of Justin demonstrates the truth of the observation. He possessed
an extensive knowledge of the Scriptures; and though his theological
views were not so exact or so perspicuous as they might have been, had
he been trained up from infancy in the Christian faith, or had he
studied the controversies which subsequently arose, it is beyond doubt
that his creed was substantially evangelical. He had received the truth
"in the love of it," and he counted not his life dear in the service of
his Divine Master.

The _Epistle to Diognetus_, frequently included amongst the works of
Justin, is apparently the production of an earlier writer. Its author,
who styles himself "a disciple of apostles," designed by it to promote
the conversion of a friend; his own views of divine truth are
comparatively correct and clear; and in no uninspired memorial of
antiquity are the peculiar doctrines of the gospel exhibited with
greater propriety and beauty. Appended also to the common editions of
the works of Justin are the remains of a few somewhat later writers,
namely, Tatian, Athenagoras, Theophilus, and Hernias. Tatian was a
disciple of Justin; [367:1] Athenagoras was a learned man of Athens;
Theophilus is said to have been one of the pastors of Antioch; and of
Hermas nothing whatever is known. The tracts of these authors relate
almost entirely to the controversy between Christianity and Paganism.
Whilst they point out the folly and falsehood of the accusations so
frequently preferred against the brethren, they press the gospel upon
the acceptance of the Gentiles with much earnestness, and support its
claims by a great variety of arguments.

The tract known as the _Epistle of Barnabas_ was probably composed in
A.D.135. [367:2] It is the production apparently of a convert from
Judaism who took special pleasure in allegorical interpretations of
Scripture. Hermas, the author of the little work called _Pastor_, or The
Shepherd, is a writer of much the same character. He was, in all
likelihood, the brother of Pius, [368:1] who flourished about the middle
of the second century, and who was, perhaps, the first or second
individual who was officially designated Bishop of Rome. The writings of
Papias, said to have been pastor of Hierapolis in the time of Polycarp,
are no longer extant. [368:2] The works of Hegesippus, of a somewhat
later date, and treating of the subject of ecclesiastical history, have
also disappeared. [368:3]

_Irenaeus_ of Lyons is the next writer who claims our special notice. He
was originally connected with Asia Minor; and in his youth he is said to
have enjoyed the tuition of Polycarp of Smyrna. We cannot tell when he
left his native country, or what circumstances led him to settle on the
banks of the Rhone; but we know that, towards the termination of the
reign of Marcus Aurelius, he was appointed by the Gallic Christians to
visit the Roman Church on a mission of importance. The Celtic language,
still preserved in the Gaelic or Irish, was then spoken in France,
[368:4] and Irenaeus found it necessary to qualify himself for the
duties of a preacher among the heathen by studying the barbarous
dialect. His zeal, energy, and talent were duly appreciated; soon after
the death of the aged Pothinus he became the chief pastor of Lyons; and
for many years he exercised considerable influence throughout the whole
of the Western Church. When the Paschal controversy created such
excitement, and when Victor of Rome threatened to rend the Christian
commonwealth by his impetuous and haughty bearing, Irenaeus interposed,
and to some extent succeeded in moderating the violence of the Italian
prelate. He was the author of several works, [369:1] but his only extant
production is a treatise "Against Heresies." It is divided into five
books, four of which exist only in a Latin version; [369:2] and it
contains a lengthened refutation of the Valentinians and other Gnostics.

Irenaeus is commonly called the disciple of Polycarp; but it is reported
that he was also under the tuition of a less intelligent preceptor,
Papias of Hierapolis. [369:3] This teacher, who has been already
mentioned, and who was the author of a work now lost, entitled, "The
Explanations of the Discourses of the Lord," is noted as the earliest
ecclesiastical writer who held the doctrine of the personal reign of
Christ at Jerusalem during the millennium. "These views," says Eusebius,
"he appears to have adopted in consequence of having misunderstood the
apostolic narratives.... For he was a man of very slender intellect, as
is evident from his discourses." [369:4] His pupil Irenaeus possessed a
much superior capacity; but even his writings are not destitute of
puerilities; and it is not improbable that he derived some of the errors
to be found in them from his weak-minded teacher. [369:5]

Irenaeus is supposed to have died in the beginning of the third century;
and, shortly before that date, by far the most vigorous and acute writer
who had yet appeared among the fathers, began to attract attention. This
was the celebrated TERTULLIAN. He was originally a heathen, [370:1] and
he appears in early life to have been engaged in the profession of a
lawyer. At that time, as afterwards, there was constant intercourse
between Rome and Carthage; [370:2] Tertullian seems to have been well
acquainted with both these great cities; and he had probably resided for
several years in the capital of the Empire. [370:3] But most of his
public life was, perhaps, spent in Carthage, the place of his birth. In
the beginning of the third century clerical celibacy was beginning to be
fashionable; and yet Tertullian, though a presbyter, [370:4] was
married; for two of his tracts are addressed _To his Wife_; and it is
apparent from his works that then no law of the Church prohibited
ecclesiastics from entering into wedlock.

The extant productions of this writer are numerous; and, if rendered
into our language, would form a very portly volume. But though several
parts of them have found translators, the whole have never yet appeared
in English; and, of some pieces, the most accomplished scholar would
scarcely undertake to furnish at once a literal and an intelligible
version. [370:5] His style is harsh, his transitions are abrupt, and his
inuendos and allusions most perplexing. He must have been a man of very
bilious temperament, who could scarcely distinguish a theological
opponent from a personal enemy; for he pours forth upon those who differ
from him whole torrents of sarcasm and invective. [371:1] His strong
passion, acting upon a fervid imagination, completely overpowered his
judgment; and hence he deals so largely in exaggeration, that, as to
many matters of fact, we cannot safely depend upon his testimony. His
tone is dictatorial and dogmatic; and, though we cannot doubt his piety,
we must feel that his spirit is somewhat repulsive and ungenial. Whilst
he was sadly deficient in sagacity, he was very much the creature of
impulse; and thus it was that he was so superstitious, so bigoted, and
so choleric. But he was, beyond question, possessed of erudition and of
genius; and when he advocates a right principle, he can expound, defend,
and illustrate it with great ability and eloquence.

Tertullian is commonly known as the earliest of the Latin fathers.
[371:2] The writer who first attempted to supply the rulers of the world
with a Christian literature in their own tongue encountered a task of
much difficulty. It was no easy matter to conduct theological
controversies in a language which was not remarkable for flexibility,
and which had never before been employed in such discussions; and
Tertullian seems to have often found it necessary to coin unwonted forms
of expression, or rather to invent an ecclesiastical nomenclature. The
ponderous Latin, hitherto accustomed to speak only of Jupiter and the
gods, engages somewhat awkwardly in its new vocation; and yet contrives
to proclaim, with wonderful power, the great thoughts for which it must
now find utterance. Several years after his appearance as an author,
Tertullian lapsed into Montanism--a species of heresy peculiarly
attractive to a man of his rugged and austere character. Some of his
works bear clear traces of this change of sentiment; but others furnish
no internal evidences warranting us to pronounce decisively respecting
the date of their composition. It is remarkable that though he
identified himself with a party under the ban of ecclesiastical
proscription, his works still continued to be held in high repute, and
to be perused with avidity by those who valued themselves on their zeal
for orthodoxy. It is recorded of one of the most influential of the
Catholic bishops of the third century that he read a portion of them
daily; and, when calling for his favourite author, he is reported to
have said--"Give me _the Master_." [372:1]

Tertullian flourished at a period when ecclesiastical usurpation was
beginning to produce some of its bitter fruits, and when religion was
rapidly degenerating from its primitive purity. [372:2] His works, which
treat of a great variety of topics interesting to the Christian student,
throw immense light on the state of the Church in his generation. His
best known production is his _Apology_, in which he pleads the cause of
the persecuted disciples with consummate talent, and urges upon the
state the equity and the wisdom of toleration. He expounds the doctrine
of the Trinity more lucidly than any preceding writer; he treats of
Prayer, of Repentance, and of Baptism; he takes up the controversy with
the Jews; [372:3] and he assails the Valentinians and other heretics.
But the way of salvation by faith seems to have been very indistinctly
apprehended by him, so that he cannot be safely trusted as a theologian.
He had evidently no clear conception of the place which works ought to
occupy according to the scheme of the gospel; and hence he sometimes
speaks as if pardon could be purchased by penance, by fasting, or by
martyrdom.

_Clement of Alexandria_ was contemporary with Tertullian. Like him, he
was a Gentile by birth; but we know nothing of the circumstances
connected with his conversion. In early times Alexandria was one of the
great marts of literature and science; its citizens were noted for their
intellectual culture; and, when a Church was formed there, learned men
began to pass over to the new religion in considerable numbers. It was,
in consequence, deemed expedient to establish an institute where
catechumens of this class, before admission to baptism, could be
instructed in the faith by some well qualified teacher. The plan of the
seminary seems to have been gradually enlarged; and it soon supplied
education to candidates for the ministry. Towards the close of the
second century, Pantaenus, a distinguished scholar, had the charge of
it; and Clement, who had been his pupil, became his successor as its
president. Some of the works of this writer have perished, and his only
extant productions are a discourse entitled "What rich man shall be
saved?" his Address to the Greeks or Gentiles, his Paedagogue, and his
Stromata. The hortatory Address is designed to win over the pagans from
idolatry; the Paedagogue directs to Jesus, or the Word, as the great
Teacher, and supplies converts with practical precepts for their
guidance; whilst in the Stromata, or Miscellanies, we have a description
of what he calls the Gnostic or perfect Christian. He here takes
occasion to attack those who, in his estimation, were improperly
designated Gnostics, such as Basilides, Valentine, Marcion, and others.

Clement, as is apparent from his writings, was extensively acquainted
with profane literature. But he formed quite too high an estimate of the
value of the heathen philosophy, whilst he allegorized Scripture in a
way as dangerous as it was absurd. By the serpent which deceived Eve,
according to Clement, "_pleasure_, an earthly vice which creeps upon the
belly, is allegorically represented." [374:1] Moses, speaking
allegorically, if we may believe this writer, called the Divine Wisdom
_the tree of life_ planted in paradise; by which paradise we may
understand the world, in which all the works of creation were called
into being. [374:2] He even interprets the ten commandments
allegorically. Thus, by _adultery_, he understands a departure from the
true knowledge of the Most High, and by _murder_, a violation of the
truth respecting God and His eternal existence. [374:3] It is easy to
see how Scripture, by such a system of interpretation, might be tortured
into a witness for any extravagance.

In the early part of the third century _Hippolytus_ of Portus exerted
much influence by his writings. It was long believed that, with the
exception of some fragments and a few tracts of little consequence, the
works of this father had ceased to exist; but, as stated in a preceding
chapter, [374:4] one of his most important publications, the
"Philosophumena, or Refutation of all Heresies," has been recently
recovered. The re-appearance of this production after so many centuries
of oblivion is an extraordinary fact; and its testimony relative to
historical transactions of deep interest connected with the early Church
of Rome, has created quite a sensation among the students of
ecclesiastical literature.

Hippolytus was the disciple of Irenaeus, and one of the soundest
theologians of his generation. His works, which are written in Greek,
illustrate his learning, his acuteness, and his eloquence. His views on
some matters of ecclesiastical discipline were, indeed, too rigid; and,
by a writer of the fifth century, [375:1] he has been described as an
abettor of Novatianism; but his zeal and piety are universally admitted.
He is said to have lost his life in the cause of Christianity; and
though he attests the heretical teaching of two of her chief pastors,
the Church of Rome still honours him as a saint and a martyr.

Minucius Felix was the contemporary of Hippolytus. He was a Roman
lawyer, and a convert from paganism. In his Dialogue, entitled
"Octavius," the respective merits of Christianity and heathenism are
discussed with much vivacity. In point of style this little work is
surpassed by none of the ecclesiastical writings of the period.

Another and a still more distinguished author, contemporary with
Hippolytus, was ORIGEN. He was born at Alexandria about A.D. 185; his
father Leonides, who was a teacher of rhetoric, was a member of the
Church; and his son enjoyed the advantages of an excellent elementary
education. Origen, when very young, was required daily to commit
prescribed portions of the Word of God to memory; and the child soon
became intensely interested in the study of the sacred oracles. The
questions which he proposed to his father, as he repeated his appointed
tasks, displayed singular precocity of intellect; and Leonides rejoiced
exceedingly as he observed from time to time the growing indications of
his extraordinary genius. But, before Origen reached maturity, his good
parent fell a victim to the intolerance of the imperial laws. In the
persecution under Septimius Severus, when the young scholar was about
seventeen years of age, Leonides was put into confinement, and then
beheaded. He had a wife and seven children who were likely to be left
destitute by his death; but Origen, who was his first born, afraid lest
his constancy should be overcome by the prospect of a beggared family,
wrote a letter to him when he was in prison to encourage him to
martyrdom. "Stand steadfast, father," said the ardent youth, "and take
care not to desert your principles on our account." At this crisis he
would have exposed himself to martyrdom, had not his mother hid his
clothes, and thus prevented him from appearing in public.

When Leonides was put to death his property was confiscated, and his
family reduced to poverty. But Origen now attracted the notice of a rich
and noble lady of Alexandria, who received him into her house, and
became his patron. He did not, however, remain long under her roof; as
he was soon able to earn a maintenance by teaching. He continued,
meanwhile, to apply himself with amazing industry to the acquisition of
knowledge; and at length he began to be regarded as one of the most
learned of the Christians. So great was his celebrity as a divine that,
more than once during his life, whole synods of foreign bishops
solicited his advice and interference in the settlement of theological
controversies.

Whilst Origen, by intense study, was constantly adding to his
intellectual treasures, he also improved his mind by travelling. When
about twenty-six years of age he made a journey to Rome; and he
