2. "But according as the eye of intention be the more pure, even
so will a man make his way steadfastly through the manifold
storms.  But in many the eye of pure intention waxeth dim; for it
quickly resteth itself upon anything pleasant which occurreth,
and rarely is any man found altogether free from the blemish of
self-seeking.  So the Jews of old came to Bethany, to the house
of Martha and Mary, that they might see not Jesus, but Lazarus,
whom he had raised from the dead.(1)  Therefore must the eye of
the intention be cleansed, that it may be single and right, and
above all things which come in its way, may be directed unto Me."

(1) John xii. 9.


CHAPTER XXXIV

That to him who loveth God is sweet above all things and in all
things

Behold, God is mine, and all things are mine!  What will I more,
and what more happy thing can I desire?  O delightsome and sweet
world! that is, to him that loveth the Word, not the world,
neither the things that are in the world.(1)  My God, my all! To
him that understandeth, that word sufficeth, and to repeat it
often is pleasing to him that loveth it.  When Thou art present
all things are pleasant; when Thou art absent, all things are
wearisome.  Thou makest the heart to be at rest, givest it deep
peace and festal joy.  Thou makest it to think rightly in every
matter, and in every matter to give Thee praise; neither can
anything please long without Thee but if it would be pleasant and
of sweet savour, Thy grace must be there, and it is Thy wisdom
which must give unto it a sweet savour.

2. To him who tasteth Thee, what can be distasteful?  And to him
who tasteth Thee not, what is there which can make him joyous?
But the worldly wise, and they who enjoy the flesh, these fail in
Thy wisdom; for in the wisdom of the world is found utter vanity,
and to be carnally minded is death.  But they who follow after
Thee through contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the
flesh, are found to be truly wise because they are carried from
vanity to verity, from the flesh to the spirit.  They taste that
the Lord is good, and whatsoever good they find in creatures,
they count it all unto the praise of the Creator.  Unlike, yea,
very unlike is the enjoyment of the Creator to enjoyment of the
Creature, the enjoyment of eternity and of time, of light
uncreated and of light reflected.

3. O Light everlasting, surpassing all created lights, dart down
Thy ray from on high which shall pierce the inmost depths of my
heart.  Give purity, joy, clearness, life to my spirit that with
all its powers it may cleave unto Thee with rapture passing man's
understanding.  Oh when shall that blessed and longed-for time
come when Thou shalt satisfy me with Thy presence, and be unto me
All in all?  So long as this is delayed, my joy shall not be
full.  Still, ah me! the old man liveth in me: he is not yet all
crucified, not yet quite dead; still he lusteth fiercely against
the spirit, wageth inward wars, nor suffereth the soul's kingdom
to be in peace.

4. But Thou who rulest the raging of the sea, and stillest the
waves thereof when they arise, rise up and help me.  Scatter the
people that delight in war.(2)  Destroy them by Thy power.  Show
forth, I beseech Thee, Thy might, and let Thy right hand be
glorified, for I have no hope, no refuge, save in Thee, O Lord my
God.

(1) 1 John ii. 15.   (2) Psalm lxviii. 30.


CHAPTER XXXV

That there is no security against temptation in this life

"My Son, thou art never secure in this life, but thy spiritual
armour will always be needful for thee as long as thou livest.
Thou dwellest among foes, and art attacked on the right hand and
on the left.  If therefore thou use not on all sides the shield
of patience, thou wilt not remain long unwounded.  Above all, if
thou keep not thy heart fixed upon Me with steadfast purpose to
bear all things for My sake, thou shalt not be able to bear the
fierceness of the attack, nor to attain to the victory of the
blessed.  Therefore must thou struggle bravely all thy life
through, and put forth a strong hand against those things which
oppose thee.  For to him that overcometh is the hidden manna
given,(1) but great misery is reserved for the slothful.

2. "If thou seek rest in this life, how then wilt thou attain
unto the rest which is eternal?  Set not thyself to attain much
rest, but much patience.  Seek the true peace, not in earth but
in heaven, not in man nor in any created thing, but in God alone.
For the love of God thou must willingly undergo all things,
whether labours or sorrows, temptations, vexations, anxieties,
necessities, infirmities, injuries, gainsayings, rebukes,
humiliations, confusions, corrections, despisings; these things
help unto virtue, these things prove the scholar of Christ; these
things fashion the heavenly crown.  I will give thee an eternal
reward for short labour, and infinite glory for transient shame.

3. "Thinkest thou that thou shalt always have spiritual
consolations at thy will?  My Saints had never such, but instead
thereof manifold griefs, and divers temptations, and heavy
desolations.  But patiently they bore themselves in all, and
trusted in God more than in themselves, knowing that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us.(2)  Wouldst thou
have that immediately which many have hardly attained unto after
many tears and hard labours?  Wait for the Lord, quit thyself
like a man and be strong; be not faint-hearted, nor go aside from
Me, but constantly devote thy body and soul to the glory of God.
I will reward thee plenteously, I will be with thee in
trouble."(3)

(1) Revelation ii. 17.   (2) Romans viii. 17.
(3) Psalm xci. 15.


CHAPTER XXXVI

Against vain judgments of men

"My Son, anchor thy soul firmly upon God, and fear not man's
judgment, when conscience pronounceth thee pious and innocent.
It is good and blessed thus to suffer; nor will it be grievous to
the heart which is humble, and which trusteth in God more than in
itself.  Many men have many opinions, and therefore little trust
is to be placed in them.  But moreover it is impossible to please
all.  Although Paul studied to please all men in the Lord, and to
become all things to all men,(1) yet nevertheless with him it was
a very small thing that he should be judged by man's
judgment."(2)

2. He laboured abundantly, as much as in him lay, for the
building up and the salvation of others; but he could not avoid
being sometimes judged and despised by others.  Therefore he
committed all to God, who knew all, and by patience and humility
defended himself against evil speakers, or foolish and false
thinkers, and those who accused him according to their pleasure.
Nevertheless, from time to time he replied, lest his silence
should become a stumbling-block to those who were weak.

3. "Who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a man that
shall die?  To-day he is, and to-morrow his place is not found.
Fear God and thou shalt not quail before the terrors of men.
What can any man do against thee by words or deeds?  He hurteth
himself more than thee, nor shall he escape the judgment of God,
whosoever he may be.  Have thou God before thine eyes, and do not
contend with fretful words.  And if for the present thou seem to
give way, and to suffer confusion which thou hast not deserved,
be not angry at this, nor by impatience diminish thy reward; but
rather look up to Me in heaven, for I am able to deliver thee
from all confusion and hurt, and to render to every man according
to his works."

(1) 1 Corinthians ix. 22.   (2) 1 Corinthians iv. 3.


CHAPTER XXXVII

Of pure and entire resignation of self, for the obtaining
liberty of heart

"My Son, lose thyself and thou shalt find Me.  Stand still
without all choosing and all thought of self, and thou shalt ever
be a gainer.  For more grace shall be added to thee, as soon as
thou resignest thyself, and so long as thou dost not turn back to
take thyself again."

2. O Lord, how often shall I resign myself, and in what things
shall I lose myself?

3. "Always; every hour: in that which is little, and in that
which is great.  I make no exception, but will that thou be found
naked in all things. Otherwise how canst thou be Mine and I
thine, unless thou be inwardly and outwardly free from every will
of thine own?  The sooner thou dost this, the better shall it be
with thee; and the more fully and sincerely, the more thou shalt
please Me, and the more abundantly shalt thou be rewarded.

4. "Some resign themselves, but with certain reservations, for
they do not fully trust in God, therefore they think that they
have some provision to make for themselves.  Some again at first
offer everything; but afterwards being pressed by temptation they
return to their own devices, and thus make no progress in virtue.
They will not attain to the true liberty of a pure heart, nor to
the grace of My sweet companionship, unless they first entirely
resign themselves and daily offer themselves up as a sacrifice;
without this the union which bringeth forth fruit standeth not
nor will stand.

5. "Many a time I have said unto thee, and now say again, Give
thyself up, resign thyself, and thou shalt have great inward
peace.  Give all for all; demand nothing, ask nothing in return;
stand simply and with no hesitation in Me, and thou shalt possess
Me.  Thou shalt have liberty of heart, and the darkness shall not
overwhelm thee.  For this strive thou, pray for it, long after
it, that thou mayest be delivered from all possession of thyself,
and nakedly follow Jesus who was made naked for thee; mayest die
unto thyself and live eternally to Me.  Then shall all vain
fancies disappear, all evil disturbings, and superfluous cares.
Then also shall immoderate fear depart from thee, and inordinate
love shall die."


CHAPTER XXXVIII

Of a good government in external things, and of having recourse
to God in dangers

"My Son, for this thou must diligently make thy endeavour, that
in every place and outward action or occupation thou mayest be
free within, and have power over thyself; and that all things be
under thee, not thou under them; that thou be master and ruler of
thy actions, not a slave or hireling, but rather a free and true
Hebrew, entering into the lot and the liberty of the children of
God, who stand above the present and look upon the eternal, who
with the left eye behold things transitory, and with the right
things heavenly; whom temporal things draw not to cleave unto,
but who rather draw temporal things to do them good service, even
as they were ordained of God to do, and appointed by the Master
Workman, who hath left nought in His creation without aim and
end.

2. "And if in any chance of life thou stand not in outward
appearances, nor judgest things which are seen and heard by the
fleshly sense, but straightway in every cause enterest with Moses
into the tabernacle to ask counsel of God; thou shalt hear a
divine response and come forth instructed concerning many things
that are and shall be.  For always Moses had recourse to the
tabernacle for the solving of all doubts and questionings; and
fled to the help of prayer to be delivered from the dangers and
evil deeds of men.  Thus also oughtest thou to fly to the secret
chamber of thy heart, and earnestly implore the divine succour.
For this cause we read that Joshua and the children of Israel
were deceived by the Gibeonites, that they asked not counsel at
the mouth of the Lord,(1) but being too ready to listen to fair
speeches, were deceived by pretended piety."

(1) Joshua ix. 14.


CHAPTER XXXIX

That man must not be immersed in business

"My Son, always commit thy cause to Me; I will dispose it aright
in due time.  Wait for My arrangement of it, and then thou shalt
find it for thy profit."

2. O Lord, right freely I commit all things to Thee; for my
planning can profit but little.  Oh that I did not dwell so much
on future events, but could offer myself altogether to Thy
pleasures without delay.

3. "My Son, a man often striveth vehemently after somewhat which
he desireth; but when he hath obtained it he beginneth to be of
another mind, because his affections towards it are not lasting,
but rather rush on from one thing to another. Therefore it is not
really a small thing, when in small things we resist self."

4. The true progress of man lieth in self-denial, and a man who
denieth himself is free and safe.  But the old enemy, opposer of
all good things, ceaseth not from temptation; but day and night
setteth his wicked snares, if haply he may be able to entrap the
unwary.  Watch and pray, saith the Lord, lest ye enter into
temptation.(1)

(1) Matthew xxvi. 41.


CHAPTER XL

That man hath no good in himself, and nothing whereof to glory

Lord, what is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man
that Thou visitest him?(1)  What hath man deserved, that Thou
shouldest bestow thy favour upon him?  Lord, what cause can I
have of complaint, if Thou forsake me?  Or what can I justly
allege, if Thou refuse to hear my petition?  Of a truth, this I
may truly think and say, Lord, I am nothing, I have nothing that
is good of myself, but I fall short in all things, and ever tend
unto nothing.  And unless I am helped by Thee and inwardly
supported, I become altogether lukewarm and reckless.

2. But Thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever,
always good, righteous, and holy; doing all things well,
righteously, and holily, and disposing all in Thy wisdom.  But I
who am more ready to go forward than backward, never continue in
one stay, because changes sevenfold pass over me.  Yet it quickly
becometh better when it so pleaseth Thee, and Thou puttest forth
Thy hand to help me; because Thou alone canst aid without help of
man, and canst so strengthen me that my countenance shall be no
more changed, but my heart shall be turned to Thee, and rest in
Thee alone.

3. Wherefore, if I but knew well how to reject all human
consolations, whether for the sake of gaining devotion, or
because of the necessity by which I was compelled to seek Thee,
seeing there is no man who can comfort me; then could I worthily
trust in Thy grace, and rejoice in the gift of new consolation.

4. Thanks be to Thee, from whom all cometh, whensoever it goeth
well with me!  But I am vanity and nothing in Thy sight, a man
inconstant and weak.  What then have I whereof to glory, or why
do I long to be held in honour?  Is it not for nought?  This also
is utterly vain.  Verily vain glory is an evil plague, the
greatest of vanities, because it draweth us away from the true
glory, and robbeth us of heavenly grace.  For whilst a man
pleaseth himself he displeaseth Thee; whilst he gapeth after the
praises of man, he is deprived of true virtues.

5. But true glory and holy rejoicing lieth in glorying in Thee
and not in self; in rejoicing in Thy Name, not in our own virtue;
in not taking delight in any creature, save only for Thy sake.
Let thy Name, not mine be praised; let Thy work, not mine be
magnified; let Thy holy Name be blessed, but to me let nought be
given of the praises of men.  Thou art my glory, Thou art the joy
of my heart.  In Thee will I make my boast and be glad all the
day long, but for myself let me not glory save only in my
infirmities.(2)

6. Let the Jews seek the honour which cometh from one another;
but I will ask for that which cometh from God only.(3)  Truly all
human glory, all temporal honour, all worldly exultation,
compared to Thy eternal glory, is but vanity and folly.  O God my
Truth and my Mercy, Blessed Trinity, to Thee alone be all praise,
honour, power, and glory for ever and for ever.  Amen.

(1) Psalm viii. 4.   (2) 2 Corinthians xii. 5.
(3) John v. 44.


CHAPTER XLI

Of contempt of all temporal honour

"My Son, make it no matter of thine, if thou see others honoured
and exalted, and thyself despised and humbled.  Lift up thine
heart to Me in heaven, and then the contempt of men upon earth
will not make thee sad."

2. O Lord, we are in blindness, and are quickly seduced by
vanity.  If I look rightly within myself, never was injury done
unto me by any creature, and therefore I have nought whereof to
complain before Thee.  But because I have many times and
grievously sinned against Thee, all creatures do justly take arms
against me.  Therefore to me confusion and contempt are justly
due, but to Thee praise and honour and glory.  And except I
dispose myself for this, namely, to be willing that every
creature should despise and desert me, and that I should be
esteemed altogether as nothing, I cannot be inwardly filled with
peace and strength, nor spiritually enlightened, nor fully united
to Thee.


CHAPTER XLII

