in A.D. 404. This is said to be a Vinaya of the Sarvastivadins, but
I-Ching[723] expressly says that it does not belong to the
Mulasarvastivadin school, though not unlike it. (_b_) The Vinaya of
this latter translated by I-Ching who brought it from India. (_c_)
Shih-fen-lu-tsang in sixty fasciculi, translated in 405 and said to
represent the Dharmagupta school. (_d_) The Mi-sha-so Wu-fen Lu or
Vinaya of the Mahisasakas, said to be similar to the Pali Vinaya,
though not identical with it.[724] (_e_) Mo-ko-seng-chi Lu or
Mahasanghika Vinaya brought from India by Fa-Hsien and translated 416
A.D. It is noticeable that all five recensions are classed as
Hinayanist, although (_b_) is said to be the Vinaya used by the
Tibetan Church. Although Chinese Buddhists frequently speak of the
five-fold Vinaya,[725] this expression does not refer to these five
texts, as might be supposed, and I-Ching condemns it, saying that[726]
the real number of divisions is four.

The Abhidharma-Pitaka or Lun-tsang is, like the Sutra Pitaka, divided
into Mahayanist and Hinayanist texts and texts of both schools
admitted into the Canon after 960 A.D. The Mahayanist texts have no
connection with the Pali Canon and their Sanskrit titles do not
contain the word Abhidharma.[727] They are philosophical treatises
ascribed to Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Asanga, Vasubandhu and others,
including three works supposed to have been revealed by Maitreya to
Asanga.[728] The principal of these is the Yogacarya-bhumisastra, a
scripture of capital importance for the Yogacarya school. It describes
the career of a Bodhisattva and hence parts of it are treated as
belonging to the Vinaya. Among other important works in this section
may be mentioned the Madhyamaka Sastra of Nagarjuna, the
Mahayanasutralankara of Asanga, and the Awakening of Faith ascribed to
Asvaghosha.[729]

The Hinayana texts also show no correspondence with the Pali Pitaka but
are based on the Abhidharma works of the Sarvastivadin school.[730] These
are seven in number, namely the Jnanaprasthanasastra of Katyayaniputra
with six accessory treatises or Padas.[731] The Mahavibhashasastra, or
commentary on the Jnanaprasthana, and the Abhidharmakosa[732] are also in
this section.

The third division of the Abhidharma is of little importance but
contains two curious items: a manual of Buddhist terminology composed
as late as 1272 by Pagspa for the use of Khubilai's son and the
Sankhyakarikabhashya, which is not a Buddhist work but a compendium of
Sankhya philosophy.[733]

The fourth division of the whole collection consists of miscellaneous
works, partly translated from Sanskrit and partly composed in Chinese.
Many of the Indian works appear from their title not to differ much
from the later Mahayana Sutras, but it is rather surprising to find in
this section four translations[734] of the Dharmapada (or at least of
some similar anthology) which are thus placed outside the Sutra
Pitaka. Among the works professing to be translated from Sanskrit are
a History of the Patriarchs, the Buddhacarita of Asvaghosha, a work
similar to the Questions of King Milinda, Lives of Asvaghosha,
Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu and others and the Suhrillekha or Friendly
Epistle ascribed to Nagarjuna.

The Chinese works included in this Tripitaka consist of nearly two
hundred books, historical, critical, controversial and homiletic,
composed by one hundred and two authors. Excluding late treatises on
ceremonial and doctrine, the more interesting may be classified as
follows:

_(a) Historical._--Besides general histories of Buddhism, there are
several collections of ecclesiastical biography. The first is the
Kao-seng-chuan,[735] or Memoirs of eminent Monks (not, however, excluding
laymen), giving the lives of about five hundred worthies who lived
between 67 and 519 A.D. The series is continued in other works dealing
with the T'ang and Sung dynasties. For the Contemplative School there are
further supplements carrying the record on to the Yuan. There are also
several histories of the Chinese patriarchs. Of these the latest and
therefore most complete is the Fo-tsu-t'ung-chi[736] composed about 1270
by Chih P'an of the T'ien-T'ai school. The Ching-te-ch'uan-teng-lu[737]
and other treatises give the succession of patriarchs according to the
Contemplative School. Among historical works may be reckoned the travels
of various pilgrims who visited India.

(_b_) _Critical_.--There are thirteen catalogues of the Tripitaka as it
existed at different periods. Several of them contain biographical
accounts of the translators and other notes. The work called
Chen-cheng-lun criticizes several false sutras and names. There are also
several encyclopaedic works containing extracts from the Tripitaka,
arranged according to subjects, such as the Fa-yuan-chu-lin[738] in 100
volumes; concordances of numerical categories and a dictionary of
Sanskrit terms, Fan-i-ming-i-chi,[739] composed in 1151.

(_c_) The literature of several Chinese sects is well represented.
Thus there are more than sixty works belonging to the T'ien T'ai
school beginning with the San-ta-pu or three great books attributed to
the founder and ending with the ecclesiastical history of Chih-p'an,
written about 1270. The Hua-yen school is represented by the writings
of four patriarchs and five monks: the Lu or Vinaya school by eight
works attributed to its founder, and the Contemplative School by a
sutra ascribed to Hui-neng, the sixth patriarch, by works on the
history of the Patriarchs and by several collections of sayings or
short compositions.

(_d_) _Controversial_.--Under this heading may be mentioned
polemics against Taoism, including two collections of the
controversies which took place between Buddhists and Taoists from A.D.
71 till A.D. 730: replies to the attacks made against Buddhism by
Confucian scholars and refutations of the objections raised by
sceptics or heretics such as the Che-i-lun and the Yuan-jen-lun, or
Origin of man.[740] This latter is a well-known text-book written by
the fifth Patriarch of the Hua-yen school and while criticizing
Confucianism, Taoism, and the Hinayana, treats them as imperfect
rather than as wholly erroneous.[741] Still more conciliatory is the
Treatise on the three religions composed by Liu Mi of the Yuan
dynasty,[742] which asserts that all three deserve respect as teaching
the practice of virtue. It attacks, however, anti-Buddhist
Confucianists such as Han-Yu and Chu-Hsi.

The Chinese section contains three compositions attributed to imperial
personages of the Ming, viz., a collection of the prefaces and
laudatory verses written by the Emperor T'ai-Tsung, the
Shen-Seng-Chuan or memoirs of remarkable monks with a preface by the
Emperor Ch'eng-tsu, and a curious book by his consort the Empress
Jen-Hsiao, introducing a sutra which Her Majesty states was
miraculously revealed to her on New Year's day, 1398 (see Nanjio, No.
1657).

Though the Hindus were careful students and guardians of their sacred
works, their temperament did not dispose them to define and limit the
scriptures. But, as I have mentioned above,[743] there is some
evidence that there was a loose Mahayanist canon in India which was
the origin of the arrangement found in the Chinese Tripitaka, in so
far as it (1) accepted Hinayanist as well as Mahayanist works, and (2)
included a great number of relatively late sutras, arranged in classes
such as Prajnaparamita and Mahasannipata.

2


The Tripitaka analyzed by Nanjio, which contains works assigned to
dates ranging from 67 to 1622 A.D., is merely the best known
survivor among several similar thesauri.[744] From 518 A.D. onwards
twelve collections of sacred literature were made by imperial order
and many of these were published in more than one edition. The
validity of this Canon depends entirely on imperial authority, but,
though Emperors occasionally inserted the works of writers whom they
esteemed,[745] it does not appear that they aimed at anything but
completeness nor did they favour any school. The Buddhist Church, like
every other department of the Empire, received from them its share of
protection and supervision and its claims were sufficient to induce
the founder, or at least an early Sovereign, of every important
dynasty to publish under his patronage a revised collection of the
scriptures. The list of these collections is as follows:[746]

    1. A.D. 518 in the time of Wu-Ti, founder of the Liang.
    2.  "   533-4 Hsiao-Wu of the Northern Wei.
    3.  "   594 } Wan-ti, founder of the Sui.
    4.  "   602 } Wan-ti, founder of the Sui.
    5.  "   605-16 Yang-Ti of the Sui.
    6.  "   695 the Empress Wu of the T'ang.
    7.  "   730 Hsuan-Tsung of the T'ang.
    8.  "   971 T'ai-Tsu, founder of the Sung.
    9.  "  1285-7 Khubilai Khan, founder of the Yuan.
    10. "  1368-98 Hung-Wu, founder of the Ming.
    11. "  1403-24 Yung-Lo of the Ming.
    12. "  1735-7 Yung-Ching and Ch'ien-Lung of the Ch'ing.[747]

Of these collections, the first seven were in MS. only: the last five
were printed. The last three appear to be substantially the same. The
tenth and eleventh collections are known as southern and
northern,[748] because they were printed at Nanking and Peking
respectively. They differ only in the number of Chinese works admitted
and similarly the twelfth collection is merely a revision of the tenth
with the addition of fifty-four Chinese works.

As mentioned, the Tripitaka contains thirteen catalogues of the
Buddhist scriptures as known at different dates.[749] Of these the
most important are (_a_) the earliest published between 506 and 512
A.D., (_b_) three published under the T'ang dynasty and known as
Nei-tien-lu, T'u-chi (both about 664 A.D.), and K'ai-yuan-lu (about
720 A.D.), (_c_) Chih-Yuan-lu or catalogue of Yuan dynasty, about
1285, which, besides enumerating the Chinese titles, transliterates
the Sanskrit titles and states whether the Indian works translated are
also translated into Tibetan. (_d_) The catalogue of the first Ming
collection.

The later collections contain new material and differ from the earlier
by natural accretion, for a great number of translations were produced
under the T'ang and Sung. Thus the seventh catalogue (695 A.D.)
records that 859 new works were admitted to the Canon. But this
expansion was accompanied by a critical and sifting process, so that
whereas the first collection contained 2213 works, the Ming edition
contains only 1622. This compression means not that works of
importance were rejected as heretical or apocryphal, for, as we have
seen, the Tripitaka is most catholic, but that whereas the earlier
collections admitted multitudinous extracts or partial translations of
Indian works, many of these were discarded when complete versions had
been made.

Nanjio considers that of the 2213 works contained in the first
collection only 276 are extant. Although the catalogues are preserved,
all the earlier collections are lost: copies of the eighth and
ninth were preserved in the Zo-jo-ji Library of Tokyo[750] and
Chinese and Japanese editions of the tenth, eleventh and twelfth are
current. So far as one can judge, when the eighth catalogue, or
K'ai-yuan-lu, was composed (between 713 and 741), the older and major
part of the Canon had been definitively fixed and the later
collections merely add the translations made by Amogha, and by writers
of the Sung and Yuan dynasties.

The editions of the Chinese Tripitaka must be distinguished from the
collections, for by editions are meant the forms in which each
collection was published, the text being or purporting to be the same
in all the editions of each collection. It is said[751] that under the
Sung and Yuan twenty different editions were produced. These earlier
issues were printed on long folding sheets and a nun called
Fa-chen[752] is said to have first published an edition in the shape
of ordinary Chinese books. In 1586 a monk named Mi-Tsang[753] imitated
this procedure and his edition was widely used. About a century later
a Japanese priest known as Tetsu-yen[754] reproduced it and his
publication, which is not uncommon in Japan, is usually called the
O-baku edition. There are two modern Japanese editions: (_a_) that
of Tokyo, begun in 1880, based on a Korean edition[755] with various
readings taken from other Chinese editions. (_b_) That of Kyoto, 1905,
which is a reprint of the Ming collection.[756] A Chinese edition has
been published at Shanghai (1913) at the expense of Mrs. Hardoon, a
Chinese lady well known as a munificent patron of the faith, and I
believe another at Nanking, but I do not know if it is complete or
not.[757]

3


The translations contained in the Chinese Tripitaka belong to several
periods.[758] In the earliest, which extends to the middle of the
fourth century, the works produced were chiefly renderings of detached
sutras.[759] Few treatises classified as Vinaya or Abhidharma were
translated and those few are mostly extracts or compilations. The
sutras belong to both the Hina and Mahayana. The earliest extant
translation or rather compilation, the Sutra of Forty-two sections,
belongs to the former school, and so do the majority of the
translations made by An-Shih-Kao (148-170 A.D.), but from the second
century onwards the Prajnaparamita and Amitabha Sutras make their
appearance.[760] Many of the translations made in this period are
described as incomplete or incorrect and the fact that most of them
were superseded or supplemented by later versions shows that the
Chinese recognized their provisional character. Future research will
probably show that many of them are paraphrases or compendiums rather
than translations in our sense.

The next period, roughly speaking 375-745 A.D., was extraordinarily
prolific in extensive and authoritative translations. The translators
now attack not detached chapters or discourses but the great monuments
of Indian Buddhist literature. Though it is not easy to make any
chronological bisection in this period, there is a clear difference in
the work done at the beginning and at the end of it. From the end of
the fourth century onwards a desire to have complete translations of
the great canonical works is apparent. Between 385 and 445 A.D. were
translated the four Agamas, analogous to the Nikayas of the Pali
Canon, three great collections of the Vinaya, and the principal
scriptures of the Abhidharma according to the Sarvastivadin school.
For the Mahayana were translated the great sutras known as Avatamsaka,
Lankavatara, and many others, as well as works ascribed to
Asvaghosha and Nagarjuna. After 645 A.D. a further development of
the critical spirit is perceptible, especially in the labours of Hsuan
Chuang and I-Ching. They attempt to give the religious public not only
complete works in place of extracts and compendiums, but also to
select the most authoritative texts among the many current in India.
Thus, though many translations had appeared under the name of
Prajnaparamita, Hsuan Chuang filled 600 fasciculi with a new rendering
of the gigantic treatise. I-Ching supplemented the already bulky
library of Vinaya works with versions of the Mulasarvastivadin
recension and many auxiliary texts.

Amogha (Pu-K'ung) whose literary labours extended from 746 to 774 A.D.
is a convenient figure to mark the beginning of the next and last
period, although some of its characteristics appear a little earlier.
They are that no more translations are made from the great Buddhist
classics--partly no doubt because they had all been translated
already, well or ill--but that renderings of works described as
Dharani or Tantra pullulate and multiply. Though this literature
deserves such epithets as decadent and superstitious, yet it would
appear that Indian Tantras of the worst class were not palatable to
the Chinese.

4


The Chinese Tripitaka is of great importance for the literary history
of Buddhism, but the material which it offers for investigation is
superabundant and the work yet done is small. We are confronted by
such questions as, can we accept the dates assigned to the
translators, can we assume that, if the Chinese translations or
transliterations correspond with Indian titles, the works are the
same, and if the works are professedly the same, can we assume that
the Chinese text is a correct presentment of the Indian original?

The dates assigned to the translators offer little ground for
scepticism. The exactitude of the Chinese in such matters is well
attested, and there is a general agreement between several authorities
such as the Catalogues of the Tripitaka, the memoirs known as
Kao-Seng Chuan with their continuations, and the chapter on Buddhist
books in the Sui annals. There are no signs of a desire to claim
improbable accuracy or improbable antiquity. Many works are said to be
by unknown translators, doubtful authorship is frankly discussed, and
the movement of literature and thought indicated is what we should
expect. We have first fragmentary and incomplete translations
belonging to both the Maha and Hinayana: then a series of more
complete translations beginning about the fifth century in which the
great Hinayana texts are conspicuous: then a further series of
improved translations in which the Hinayana falls into the background
and the works of Asanga and Vasubandhu come to the front. This
evidently reflects the condition of Buddhist India about 500-650 A.D.,
just as the translations of the eighth century reflect its later and
tantric phase.

But can Chinese texts be accepted as reasonably faithful reproductions
of the Indian originals whose names they bear, and some of which have
been lost? This question is really double; firstly, did the
translators reproduce with fair accuracy the Indian text before them,
and secondly, since Indian texts often exist in several recensions,
can we assume that the work which the translators knew under a certain
Sanskrit name is the work known to us by that name? In reply it must
be said that most Chinese translators fall short of our standards of
accuracy. In early times when grammars and dictionaries were unknown
the scholarly rendering of foreign books was a difficult business,
for professional interpreters would usually be incapable of
understanding a philosophic treatise. The method often followed was
that an Indian explained the text to a literary Chinese, who recast
the explanation in his own language. The many translations of the more
important texts and the frequent description of the earlier ones as
imperfect indicate a feeling that the results achieved were not
satisfactory. Several so-called translators, especially Kumarajiva,
gave abstracts of the Indian texts.[761] Others, like Dharmaraksha,
who made a Chinese version of Asvaghosha's Buddhacarita, so
amplified and transposed the original that the result can hardly
be called a translation.[762] Others combined different texts in one.
Thus the work called Ta-o-mi-to-ching[763] consists of extracts taken
from four previous translations of the Sukhavativyuha and rearranged
by the author under the inspiration of Avalokita to whom, as he tells
us, he was wont to pray during the execution of his task. Others
again, like Dharmagupta, anticipated a method afterwards used in
Tibet, and gave a word for word rendering of the Sanskrit which is
hardly intelligible to an educated Chinese. The later versions, _e.g._
those of Hsuan Chuang, are more accurate, but still a Chinese
rendering of a lost Indian document cannot be accepted as a faithful
representation of the original without a critical examination.[764]

Often, however, the translator, whatever his weaknesses may have been,
had before him a text differing in bulk and arrangement from the Pali
and Sanskrit texts which we possess. Thus, there are four Chinese
translations of works bearing some relation to the Dhammapada of the
Pali Canon. All of these describe the original text as the compilation
of Dharmatrata, to whom is also ascribed the compilation of the
Tibetan Udanavarga.[765] His name is not mentioned in connection with
the Pali text, yet two of the Chinese translations are closely related
to that text. The Fa-chu-ching[766] is a collection of verses
translated in 224 A.D. and said to correspond with the Pali except
that it has nine additional chapters and some additional stanzas. The
Fa-chu-p'i-yu-ching[767] represents another edition of the same
verses, illustrated by a collection of parables. It was translated
between 290 and 306. The Ch'u-yao-ching,[768] translated in 399, is a
similar collection of verses and parables, but founded on another
Indian work of much greater length. A revised translation containing
only the verses was made between 980 and 1001.[769] They are said to
be the same as the Tibetan Udana, and the characteristics of this
book, going back apparently to a Sanskrit original, are that it is
divided into thirty-three chapters, and that though it contains about
300 verses found in Pali, yet it is not merely the Pali text plus
additions, but an anthology arranged on a different principle and only
partly identical in substance.[770]

There can be little doubt that the Pali Dhammapada is one among
several collections of verses, with or without an explanatory
commentary of stories. In all these collections there was much common
matter, both prose and verse, but some were longer, some shorter, some
were in Pali and some in Sanskrit. Whereas the Chinese Dhammapada is
longer than the Indian texts, the Chinese version of Milinda's
Questions[771] is much shorter and omits books iv-vii. It was made
between 317 and 420 A.D. and the inference is that the original Indian
text received later additions.

A more important problem is this: what is the relation to the Pali Canon
of the Chinese texts bearing titles corresponding to Dirgha, Madhyama,
Samyukta and Ekottara? These collections of sutras do not call themselves
Nikaya but A-han or Agama: the titles are translated as Ch'ang (long),
Chung (medium), Tsa (miscellaneous) and Tseng-i, representing Ekottara
rather than Anguttara.[772] There is hence _prima facie_ reason to
suppose that these works represent not the Pali Canon, but a somewhat
similar Sanskrit collection. That one or many Sanskrit works may have
coexisted with a somewhat similar Pali work is clearly shown by the
Vinaya texts, for here we have the Pali Canon and Chinese translations of
five Sanskrit versions, belonging to different schools, but apparently
covering the same ground and partly identical. For the Sutra Pitaka no
such body of evidence is forthcoming, but the Sanskrit fragments of the
Samyuktagama found near Turfan contain parts of six sutras which are
arranged in the same order as in the Chinese translation and are
apparently the original from which it was made. It is noticeable that
three of the four great Agamas were translated by monks who came from
Tukhara or Kabul. Gunabhadra, however, the translator of the
Samyuktagama, came from Central India and the text which he translated
was brought from Ceylon by Fa-Hsien. It apparently belonged to the
Abhayagiri monastery and not to the Mahavihara. Nanjio,[773] however,
states that about half of it is repeated in the Chinese versions of the
Madhyama and Ekottara Agamas. It is also certain that though the Chinese
Agamas and Pali Nikayas contain much common matter, it is differently
distributed.[774]

There was in India a copious collection of sutras, existing primarily
as oral tradition and varying in diction and arrangement, but codified
from time to time in a written form. One of such codifications is
represented by the Pali Canon, at least one other by the Sanskrit text
which was rendered into Chinese. With rare exceptions the Chinese
translations were from the Sanskrit.[775] The Sanskrit codification of
the sutra literature, while differing from the Pali in language
and arrangement, is identical in doctrine and almost identical in
substance. It is clearly the product of the same or similar schools,
but is it earlier or later than the Pali or contemporary with it? The
Chinese translations merely fix the latest possible date. A portion of
the Samyuktagama (Nanjio, No. 547) was translated by an unknown author
between 220 and 280. This is probably an extract from the complete
work which was translated about 440, but it would be difficult to
prove that the Indian original was not augmented or rearranged between
these dates. The earliest translation of a complete Agama is that of
the Ekottaragama, 384 A.D. But the evidence of inscriptions[776] shows
that works known as Nikayas existed in the third century B.C. The
Sanskrit of the Agamas, so far as it is known from the fragments found
in Central Asia, does not suggest that they belong to this epoch, but
is compatible with the theory that they date from the time of Kanishka
of which if we know little, we can at least say that it produced much
Buddhist Sanskrit literature. M. Sylvain Levi has suggested that the
later appearance of the complete Vinaya in Chinese is due to the late
compilation of the Sanskrit original.[777] It seems to me that other
explanations are possible. The early translators were clearly shy of
extensive works and until there was a considerable body of Chinese
monks, to what public would these theological libraries appeal? Still,
if any indication were forthcoming from India or Central Asia that the
Sanskrit Agamas were arranged or rearranged in the early centuries of
our era, the late date of the Chinese translations would certainly
support it. But I am inclined to think that the Nikayas were rewritten
in Sanskrit about the beginning of our era, when it was felt that
works claiming a certain position ought to be composed in what had
become the general literary language of India.[778] Perhaps those
who wrote them in Sanskrit were hardly conscious of making a
translation in our sense, but simply wished to publish them in the
best literary form.

It seems probable that the Hinayanist portion of the Chinese Tripitaka
is in the main a translation of the Canon of the Sarvastivadins which
must have consisted of:

    (1) Four Agamas or Nikayas only, for the Dhammapada
    is placed outside the Sutta Pitaka.

    (2) A voluminous Vinaya covering the same ground as the
    Pali recension but more copious in legend and anecdote.

    (3) An Abhidharma entirely different from the Pali works
    bearing this name.

It might seem to follow from this that the whole Pali Abhidharma and
some important works such as the Thera-Therigatha were unknown to the
Hinayanists of Central Asia and Northern India in the early centuries
of our era. But caution is necessary in drawing such inferences, for
until recently it might have been said that the Sutta Nipata also was
unknown, whereas fragments of it in a Sanskrit version have now been
discovered in Eastern Turkestan.[779] The Chinese editors draw a clear
distinction between Hinayanist and Mahayanist scriptures. They exclude
from the latter works analogous to the Pali Nikayas and Vinaya, and
also the Abhidharma of the Sarvastivadins. But the labours of Hsuan
Chuang and I-Ching show that this does not imply the rejection of all
these works by Mahayanists.

5


Buddhist literary activity has an interesting side aspect, namely the
expedients used to transliterate Indian words, which almost
provided the Chinese with an alphabet. To some extent Indian names,
particularly proper names possessing an obvious meaning, are
translated. Thus Asoka becomes Wu-yu, without sorrow: Asvaghosha,
Ma-ming or horse-voice, and Udyana simply Yuan or park.[780] But many
proper names did not lend themselves to such renderings and it was a
delicate business to translate theological terms like Nirvana and
Samadhi. The Buddhists did not perhaps invent the idea of using the
Chinese characters so as to spell with moderate precision,[781] but
they had greater need of this procedure than other writers and they
used it extensively[782] and with such variety of detail that though
they invented some fifteen different syllabaries, none of them
obtained general acceptance and Julien[783] enumerates 3000 Chinese
characters used to represent the sounds indicated by 47 Indian
letters. Still, they gave currency[784] to the system known as
_fan-ch'ieh_ which renders a syllable phonetically by two characters,
the final of the first and the initial of the second not being
pronounced. Thus, in order to indicate the sound Chung, a Chinese
dictionary will use the two characters _chu yung_, which are to be
read together as _Ch ung_.

The transcriptions of Indian words vary in exactitude and the later
are naturally better. Hsuan Chuang was a notable reformer and probably
after his time Indian words were rendered in Chinese characters as
accurately as Chinese words are now transcribed in Latin letters. It
is true that modern pronunciation makes such renderings as Fo seem a
strange distortion of the original. But it is an abbreviation of
Fo-t'o and these syllables were probably once pronounced something
like Vut-tha.[785] Similarly Wen-shu-shih-li[786] seems a parody of
Manjusri. But the evidence of modern dialects shows that the
first two syllables may have been pronounced as Man-ju. The pupil was
probably taught to eliminate the obscure vowel of _shih_, and _li_ was
taken as the nearest equivalent of _ri_, just as European authors
write _chih_ and _tzu without pretending that they are more than
conventional signs for Chinese sounds unknown to our languages. It was
certainly possible to transcribe not only names but Sanskrit prayers
and formulae in Chinese characters, and though many writers sneer at
the gibberish chanted by Buddhist priests yet I doubt if this
ecclesiastical pronunciation, which has changed with that of the
spoken language, is further removed from its original than the Latin
of Oxford from the speech of Augustus.

Sanskrit learning flourished in China for a considerable period. In
the time of the T'ang, the clergy numbered many serious students of
Indian literature and the glossaries included in the Tripitaka show
that they studied the original texts. Under the Sung dynasty (A.D.
1151) was compiled another dictionary of religious terms[787] and the
study of Sanskrit was encouraged under the Yuan. But the ecclesiastics
of the Ming produced no new translations and apparently abandoned the
study of the original texts which was no longer kept alive by the
arrival of learned men from India. It has been stated that Sanskrit
manuscripts are still preserved in Chinese monasteries, but no details
respecting such works are known to me. The statement is not improbable
in itself[788] as is shown by the Library which Stein discovered at
Tun-huang and by the Japanese palm-leaf manuscripts which came
originally from China. A few copies of Sanskrit sutras printed in
China in the Lanja variety of the Devanagari alphabet have been
brought to Europe.[789] Max Muller published a facsimile of part of
the Vajracchedika obtained at Peking and printed in Sanskrit from
wooden blocks. The place of production is unknown, but the characters
are similar to those used for printing Sanskrit in Tibet, as may be
seen from another facsimile (No. 3) in the same work. Placards and
pamphlets containing short invocations in Sanskrit and Tibetan are
common in Chinese monasteries, particularly where there is any
Lamaistic influence, but they do not imply that the monks who use them
have any literary acquaintance with those languages.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 708: [Chinese: ] For an account of some of the scriptures
here mentioned see chap. XX.]

[Footnote 709: _A catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist
Tripitaka_. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1893. An index to the Tokyo
edition has been published by Fujii. Meiji XXXI (1898). See too Forke,
_Katalog des Pekinger Tripitaka_, 1916.]

[Footnote 710: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 711: Tan-i-ching [Chinese: ]. Some of the works classed
under Tan-i-ching appear to exist in more than one form, _e.g._
Nanjio, Nos. 674 and 804.]

[Footnote 712: These characters are commonly read Pojo by Chinese
Buddhists but the Japanese reading Hannya shows that the
pronunciation of the first character was Pan.]

[Footnote 713: Vajracchedika or [Chinese: ] Chin Kang.]

[Footnote 714: Winternitz (_Gesch. Ind. Lit_. II. i. p. 242) states on
the authority of Takakusu that this work is the same as the
Gandavyuha. See also Pelliot in _J. A_. 1914, II. pp. 118-21. The
Gandavyuha is probably an extract of the Avatamsaka.]

[Footnote 715: Nos. 113 and 114 [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 716: _Catena of Buddhist Scriptures_, pp. 160 ff.]

[Footnote 717: The longer Sukhavativyuha is placed in the Ratnakuta
class.]

[Footnote 718: The Sutra of Kuan-yin with the thousand hands and eyes
is very popular and used in most temples. Nanjio, No. 320.]

[Footnote 719: No. 399 [Chinese: ] and 530 [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 720: Said to have been revealed to Asanga by Maitreya. No.
1170.]

[Footnote 721: [Chinese: ] No. 1087. It has nothing to do with the
Pali Sutra of the same name. Digha, I.]

[Footnote 722: See below for an account of it.]

[Footnote 723: _Record of Buddhist Practices_, p. 20.]

[Footnote 724: See Oldenberg, _Vinaya_, vol. I. pp. xxiv-xlvi.]

[Footnote 725: See Watters, _Yuan Chwang_, I. p. 227. The five schools
are given as Dharmagupta, Mahis'asika, Sarvastivadin, Ka'syapiya and
Mahasanghika. For the last Vatsiputra or Sthavira is sometimes
substituted.]

[Footnote 726: _Record of Buddhist Practices_, p. 8.]

[Footnote 727: The Chinese word lun occurs frequently in them, but
though it is used to translate Abhidharma, it is of much wider
application and means discussion of Sastra.]

[Footnote 728: See Watters, _Yuan Chwang_, I, pp. 355 ff.]

[Footnote 729: Nos. 1179, 1190, 1249.]

[Footnote 730: For a discussion of this literature see Takakusu on the
Abhidharma Literature of the Sarvastivadins, _J. Pali Text Society_,
1905, pp. 67 ff.]

[Footnote 731: Nanjio, Cat. Nos. 1273, 1275, 1276, 1277, 1292, 1281,
1282, 1296, 1317. This last work was not translated till the eleventh
century.]

[Footnote 732: Nanjio, Cat. Nos. 1263, 1267 and 1269.]

[Footnote 733: See Takakusu's study of these translations in
_B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, pp. 1 ff. and pp. 978 ff.]

[Footnote 734: Nanjio, Cat. Nos. 1321, 1353, 1365, 1439.]

[Footnote 735: [Chinese: ] No. 1490.]

[Footnote 736: [Chinese: ] No. 1661. For more about the Patriarchs see
the next chapter.]

[Footnote 737: [Chinese: ] No. 1524, written A.D. 1006.]

[Footnote 738: [Chinese: ] No. 1482.]

[Footnote 739: [Chinese: ] No. 1640.]

[Footnote 740: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ] Nos. 1634 and 1594.]

[Footnote 741: See for some account of it Masson-Oursel's article in
_J.A._ 1915, I. pp. 229-354.]

[Footnote 742: [Chinese: ] by [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 743: See chap. XX on the Mahayanist canon in India.]

[Footnote 744: It is described at the beginning as Ta Ming San Tsang,
but strictly speaking it must be No. 12 of the list, as it contains a
work said to have been written about 1622 A.D. (p. 468).]

[Footnote 745: Thus the Emperor Jen Tsung ordered the works of Ch'i
Sung [Chinese: ] to be admitted to the Canton in 1062.]

[Footnote 746: Taken from Nanjio's Catalogue, p. xxvii.]

[Footnote 747: Ch'ien-Lung is said to have printed the Tripitaka in
four languages, Chinese, Tibetan, Mongol and Manchu, the whole
collection filling 1392 vols. See Mollendorf in China Branch, _J.A.S._
xxiv. 1890, p. 28.]

[Footnote 748: But according to another statement the southern
recension was not the imperial collection begun in 1368 but a private
edition now lost. See Nanjio, Cat. p. xxiii.]

[Footnote 749: See for the complete list Nanjio, Cat. p. xxvii. Those
named above are (_a_) [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ],
Nos. 1483, 1485, 1487, and (_b_) [Chinese: ], No. 1612. For the date
of the first see Maspero in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1910, p. 114. There was a
still earlier catalogue composed by Tao-an in 374 of which only
fragments have been preserved. See Pelliot in _T'oung Pao_, XIX. 1920,
p. 258.]

[Footnote 750: For the Korean copy now in Japan, see Courant,
_Bibliographie coreenne_, vol. III. pp. 215-19.]

[Footnote 751: See Nanjio, Cat. p. xxii.]

[Footnote 752: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 753: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 754: Also called Do-ko.]

[Footnote 755: The earlier collections of the Tripitaka seem to have
been known in Korea and about 1000 A.D. the king procured from China a
copy of the Imperial Edition, presumably the eighth collection (971
A.D.). He then ordered a commission of scholars to revise the text and
publish an edition of his own. The copy of this edition, on which the
recent Tokyo edition was founded, was brought to Japan in the Bun-mei
period 1469-1486.]

[Footnote 756: A supplement to the Tripitaka containing non-canonical
works in 750 volumes (Dai Nippon Zoku-Zokyo) was published in
1911.]

[Footnote 757: The Peking Tripitaka catalogued by Forke appears to be
a set of 1223 works represented by copies taken from four editions
published in 1578, 1592, 1598 and 1735 A.D., all of which are editions
of the collections numbered 11 and 12 above.]

[Footnote 758: For two interesting lives of translators see the
_T'oung Pao_, 1909, p. 199, and 1905, p. 332, where will be found the
biographies of Seng Hui, a Sogdian who died in 280 and Jinagupta a
native of Gandhara (528-605).]

[Footnote 759: But between 266 and 313 Dharmaraksha translated the
Saddharmapundarika (including the additional chapters 21-26) and the
Lalitavistara. His translation of the Prajnaparamita is incomplete.]

[Footnote 760: In the translations of Lokakshi 147-186, Chih-Ch'ien
223-243, Dharmaraksha 266-313.]

[Footnote 761: But his translation of the Lotus won admiration for its
literary style. See Anesaki Nichiren, p. 17. Wieger (_Croyances_, p.
367) says that the works of An-shih-kao illustrate the various methods
of translation: absolutely literal renderings which have hardly any
meaning in Chinese: word for word translations to which is added a
paraphrase of each sentence in Chinese idiom: and elegant renderings
by a native in which the original text obviously suffers.]

[Footnote 762: Yet it must have been intended as such. The title
expressly describes the work as composed by the Bodhisattva Ma-Ming
(Asvaghosha) and translated by Dharmaraksha. Though his idea of a
translation was at best an amplified metrical paraphrase, yet he
coincides verbally with the original so often that his work can hardly
be described as an independent poem inspired by it.]

[Footnote 763: [Chinese: ] No. 203.]

[Footnote 764: See Sukhavativyuha, ed. Max Muller and Bunyiu Nanjio,
Oxford, 1883. In the preface, pp. vii-ix, is a detailed comparison of
several translations and in an appendix, pp. 79 ff., a rendering of
Sanghavarman's Chinese version of verses which occur in the work.
Chinese critics say that Tao-an in the third century was the first to
introduce a sound style of translation. He made no translations
himself which have survived but was a scholar and commentator who
influenced others.]

[Footnote 765: This is an anthology (edited by Beckh, 1911: translated
by Rockhill, 1892) in which 300 verses are similar to the Pali
Dhammapada.]

[Footnote 766: [Chinese: ] No. 1365.]

[Footnote 767: [Chinese: ] No. 1353.]

[Footnote 768: [Chinese: ] No. 1321.]

[Footnote 769: [Chinese: ] Fa-chi-yao-sung-ching, No. 1439.]

[Footnote 770: There seem to be at least two other collections.
Firstly a Prakrit anthology of which Dutreuil de Rhins discovered a
fragmentary MS. in Khotan and secondly a much amplified collection
preserved in the Korean Tripitaka and reprinted in the Tokyo edition
(xxiv.'g). The relation of these to the other recensions is not
clear.]

[Footnote 771: Nanjio, Cat. 1358. See Pelliot, _J.A._ 1914, II. p.
379.]

[Footnote 772: [Chinese: ] For the relations of the Chinese
translations to the Pali Tripitaka, and to a Sanskrit Canon now
preserved only in a fragmentary state, see _inter alia_, Nanjio, Cat.
pp. 127 ff., especially Nos. 542, 543, 545. Anesaki, _J.R.A.S._ 1901,
p. 895; _id_. "On some problems of the textual history of the Buddhist
scriptures," in _Trans. A. S. Japan_, 1908, p. 81, and more especially
his longer article entitled, "The Four Buddhist Agamas in Chinese" in
the same year of the _Trans.; id._ "Traces of Pali Texts in a Mahayana
Treatise," _Museon_, 1905. S. Levi, Le Samyuktagama Sanskrit, _T'oung
Pao_, 1904, p. 297.]

[Footnote 773: No. 544.]

[Footnote 774: Thus seventy sutras of the Pali Anguttara are found in
the Chinese Madhyama and some of them are repeated in the Chinese
Ekottara. The Pali Majjhima contains 125 sutras, the Chinese
Madhyamagama 222, of which 98 are common to both. Also twenty-two Pali
Majjhima dialogues are found in the Chinese Ekottara and Samyukta,
seventy Chinese Madhyama dialogues in Pali Anguttara, nine in Digha,
seven in Samyutta and five in Khuddaka. Anesaki, _Some Problems of the
textual history of the Buddhist Scriptures_. See also Anesaki in
_Museon_, 1905, pp. 23 ff. on the Samyutta Nikaya.]

[Footnote 775: Anesaki, "Traces of Pali Texts," _Museon_, 1905, shows
that the Indian author of the Mahaprajnaparamita Sastra may have known
Pali texts, but the only certain translation from the Pali appears to
be Nanjio, No. 1125, which is a translation of the Introduction to
Buddhaghosa's Samanta-pasadika or commentary on the Vinaya. See
Takakusu in _J.R.A.S._ 1896, p. 415. Nanjio's restoration of the title
as Sudarsana appears to be incorrect.]

[Footnote 776: See _Epigraphia Indica_, vol. II. p. 93.]

[Footnote 777: In support of this it may be mentioned that Fa-Hsien
says that at the time of his visit to India the Vinaya of the
Sarvastivadins was preserved orally and not committed to writing.]

[Footnote 778: The idea that an important book ought to be in Sanskrit
or deserves to be turned into Sanskrit is not dead in India. See
Grierson, _J.R.A.S._ 1913, p. 133, who in discussing a Sanskrit
version of the Ramayana of Tulsi Das mentions that translations of
vernacular works into Sanskrit are not uncommon.]

[Footnote 779: _J.R.A.S._ 1916, p. 709. Also, the division into five
Nikayas is ancient. See Buhler in _Epig. Indica_, II. p. 93. Anesaki
says (_Trans. A.S. Japan_, 1908, p. 9) that Nanjio, No. 714, Pen Shih
is the Itivuttakam, which could not have been guessed from Nanjio's
entry. Portions of the works composing the fifth Nikaya (_e.g._ the
Sutta Nipata) occur in the Chinese Tripitaka in the other Nikayas. For
mentions of the fifth Nikaya in Chinese, see _J.A._ 1916, II. pp.
32-33, where it is said to be called Tsa-Tsang. This is also the
designation of the last section of the Tripitaka, Nanjio, Nos. 1321 to
1662, and as this section contains the Dharmapada, it might be
supposed to be an enormously distended version of the Kshudraka
Nikaya. But this can hardly be the case, for this Tsa-Tsang is placed
as if it was considered as a fourth Pitaka rather than as a fifth
Nikaya.]

[Footnote 780: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 781: See Watters, _Essays on the Chinese Language_, pp. 36,
51, and, for the whole subject of transcription, Stanislas Julien,
_Methode pour dechiffrer et transcrire les noms Sanscrits qui se
rencontrent dans les livres chinois_.]

[Footnote 782: Entire Sanskrit compositions were sometimes transcribed
in Chinese characters. See Kien Ch'ui Fan Tsan, _Bibl. Budd_. XV. and
Max Muller, _Buddhist Texts from Japan_, III. pp. 35-46.]

[Footnote 783: _L.c._ pp. 83-232.]

[Footnote 784: See _inter alia_ the Preface to K'ang Hsi's Dictionary.
The _fan-ch'ieh_ [Chinese: ] system is used in the well-known
dictionary called Yu-Pien composed 543 A.D.]

[Footnote 785: Even in modern Cantonese Fo is pronounced as Fat.]

[Footnote 786: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 787: Nanjio, Cat. No. 1640.]

[Footnote 788: History repeats itself. I have seen many modern Burmese
and Sinhalese MSS. in Chinese monasteries.]

[Footnote 789: _Buddhist Texts from Japan_, ed. Max Muller in
_Anecdota Oxoniensia_, Aryan Series, I, II and III. For the Lanja
printed text see the last facsimile in I, also III. p. 34 and _Bibl.
Budd._ XIV (Kuan-si-im Pusar), pp. vi, vii. Another copy of this Lanja
printed text was bought in Kyoto, 1920.]




CHAPTER XLV

CHINA (_continued_)

SCHOOLS[790] OF CHINESE BUDDHISM


The Schools (Tsung) of Chinese Buddhism are an intricate subject of
little practical importance, for observers agree that at the present
day all salient differences of doctrine and practice have been
obliterated, although the older monasteries may present variations in
details and honour their own line of teachers. A particular
Bodhisattva may be singled out for reverence in one locality or some
religious observance may be specially enjoined, but there is little
aggressiveness or self assertion among the sects, even if they are
conscious of having a definite name: they each tolerate the deities,
rites and books of all and pay attention to as many items as leisure
and inertia permit. There is no clear distinction between Mahayana and
Hinayana.

The main division is of course into Lamaism on one side and all
remaining sects on the other. Apart from this we find a record of ten
schools which deserve notice for various reasons. Some, though obscure
in modern China, have flourished after transportation to Japan: some,
such as the T'ien-t'ai, are a memorial of a brilliant epoch: some
represent doctrines which, if not now held by separate bodies, at
least indicate different tendencies, such as magical ceremonies,
mystical contemplation, or faith in Amitabha.

The more important schools were comparatively late, for they date
from the sixth and seventh centuries. For two or three hundred years
the Buddhists of China were a colony of strangers, mainly occupied in
making translations. By the fifth century the extent and diversity of
Indian literature became apparent and Fa-Hsien went to India to
ascertain which was the most correct Vinaya and to obtain copies of
it. Theology was now sufficiently developed to give rise to two
schools both Indian in origin and merely transported to China, known
as Ch'eng-shih-tsung and San-lun-tsung.[791]

The first is considered as Hinayanist and equivalent to the
Sautrantikas.[792] In the seventh century it passed over to Japan
where it is known as Ji-jitsu-shu, but neither there nor in China had
it much importance. The San-lun-tsung recognizes as three authorities
(from which it takes its name) the Madhyamikasastra and
Dvadasanikayasastra of Nagarjuna with the Satasastra of his
pupil Deva. It is simply the school of these two doctors and
represents the extreme of Mahayanism. It had some importance in Japan,
where it was called San-Ron-Shu.

The arrival of Bodhidharma at Canton in 520 (or 526) was a great event
for the history of Buddhist dogma, although his special doctrines did
not become popular until much later. He introduced the contemplative
school and also the institution of the Patriarchate, which for a time
had some importance. He wrote no books himself, but taught that true
knowledge is gained in meditation by intuition[793] and communicated
by transference of thought. The best account of his teaching is
contained in the Chinese treatise which reports the sermon preached by
him before the Emperor Wu-Ti in 520.[794] The chief thesis of this
discourse is that the only true reality is the Buddha nature[795]
in the heart of every man. Prayer, asceticism and good works are vain.
All that man need do is to turn his gaze inward and see the Buddha in
his own heart. This vision, which gives light and deliverance, comes
in a moment. It is a simple, natural act like swallowing or dreaming
which cannot be taught or learnt, for it is not something imparted but
an experience of the soul, and teaching can only prepare the way for
it. Some are impeded by their karma and are physically incapable of
the vision, whatever their merits or piety may be, but for those to
whom it comes it is inevitable and convincing.

We have only to substitute _atman_ for Buddha or Buddha nature to see
how closely this teaching resembles certain passages in the
Upanishads, and the resemblance is particularly strong in such
statements as that the Buddha nature reveals itself in dreams, or that
it is so great that it embraces the universe and so small that the
point of a needle cannot prick it. The doctrine of Maya is clearly
indicated, even if the word was not used in the original, for it is
expressly said that all phenomena are unreal. Thus the teaching of
Bodhidharma is an anticipation of Sankara's monism, but it is
formulated in consistently Buddhist language and is in harmony with
the views of the Madhyamika school and of the Diamond-cutter. This
Chinese sermon confirms other evidence which indicates that the ideas
of the Advaita philosophy, though Brahmanic in their origin and
severely condemned by Gotama himself, were elaborated in Buddhist
circles before they were approved by orthodox Hindus.

Bodhidharma's teaching was Indian but it harmonized marvellously with
Taoism and Chinese Buddhists studied Taoist books.[796] A current of
Chinese thought which was old and strong, if not the main stream, bade
man abstain from action and look for peace and light within. It was, I
think, the junction of this native tributary with the river of
inflowing Buddhism which gave the Contemplative School its importance.
It lost that importance because it abandoned its special doctrines
and adopted the usages of other schools. When Taoism flourished
under the Sung Emperors it was also flourishing and influenced art as
well as thought, but it probably decayed under the Yuan dynasty which
favoured religion of a different stamp. It is remarkable that
Bodhidharma appears to be unknown to both Indian and Tibetan[797]
writers but his teaching has imparted a special tone and character to
a section (though not the whole) of Far Eastern Buddhism. It is called
in Chinese Tsung-men or Ch'an-tsung, but this word Ch'an[798] is
perhaps better known to Europe in its Japanese form Zen.

Bodhidharma is also accounted the twenty-eighth Patriarch, a title
which represents the Chinese Tsu Shih[799] rather than any Indian
designation, for though in Pali literature we hear of the succession
of teachers,[800] it is not clear that any of them enjoyed a style or
position such as is implied in the word Patriarch. Hindus have always
attached importance to spiritual lineage and every school has a list
of teachers who have transmitted its special lore, but the sense of
hierarchy is so weak that it is misleading to describe these
personages as Popes, Patriarchs or Bishops, and apart from the
personal respect which the talents of individuals may have won, it
does not appear that there was any succession of teachers who could be
correctly termed heads of the Church. Even in China such a title is of
dubious accuracy for whatever position Bodhidharma and his successors
may have claimed for themselves, they were not generally accepted as
being more than the heads of a school and other schools also gave
their chief teachers the title of Tsu-shih. From time to time the
Emperor appointed overseers of religion with the title of
Kuo-shih,[801] instructor of the nation, but these were officials
appointed by the Crown, not prelates consecrated by the Church.

Twenty-eight Patriarchs are supposed to have flourished between the
death of the Buddha and the arrival of Bodhidharma in China. The
Chinese lists[802] do not in the earlier part agree with the
Singhalese accounts of the apostolic succession and contain few
eminent names with the exception of Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Deva and
Vasubandhu.

According to most schools there were only twenty-four Patriarchs.
These are said to have been foretold by the Buddha and twenty-four is
a usual number in such series.[803] The twenty-fourth Patriarch Simha
Bhikshu or Simhalaputra went to Kashmir and suffered martyrdom there
at the hands of Mihirakula[804] without appointing a successor. But
the school of Bodhidharma continues the series, reckoning him as the
twenty-eighth, and the first of the Chinese Patriarchs. Now since the
three Patriarchs between the martyr and Bodhidharma are all described
as living in southern India, whereas such travellers as Fa-Hsien
obviously thought that the true doctrine was to be found in northern
India, and since Bodhidharma left India altogether, it is probable
that the later Patriarchs represent the spiritual genealogy of
some school which was not the Church as established at Nalanda.[805]

It will be convenient to summarize briefly here the history of
Bodhidharma's school. Finding that his doctrines were not altogether
acceptable to the Emperor Wu-Ti (who did not relish being told that
his pious exertions were vain works of no value) he retired to Lo-yang
and before his death designated as his successor Hui-k'o. It is
related of Hui-k'o that when he first applied for instruction he could
not attract Bodhidharma's attention and therefore stood before the
sage's door during a whole winter night until the snow reached his
knees. Bodhidharma indicated that he did not think this test of
endurance remarkable. Hui-k'o then took a knife, cut off his own arm
and presented it to the teacher who accepted him as a pupil and
ultimately gave him the insignia of the Patriarchate--a robe and bowl.
He taught for thirty-four years and is said to have mixed freely with
the lowest and most debauched reprobates. His successors were
Seng-ts'an, Tao-hsin, Hung-jen, and Hui-neng[806] who died in 713 and
declined to nominate a successor, saying that the doctrine was well
established. The bowl of Bodhidharma was buried with him. Thus the
Patriarch was not willing to be an Erastian head of the Church and
thought the Church could get on without him. The object of the
Patriarchate was simply to insure the correct transmission from
teacher to scholar of certain doctrines, and this precaution was
especially necessary in sects which rejected scriptural authority and
relied on personal instruction. So soon as there were several
competent teachers handing on the tradition such a safeguard was felt
to be unnecessary.

That this feeling was just is shown by the fact that the school of
Bodhidharma is still practically one in teaching. But its small regard
for scripture and insistence on oral instruction caused the principal
monasteries to regard themselves as centres with an apostolic
succession of their own and to form divisions which were geographical
rather than doctrinal. They are often called school (tsung), but
the term is not correct, if it implies that the difference is similar
to that which separates the Ch'an-tsung and Lu-tsung or schools of
contemplation and of discipline. Even in the lifetime of Hui-neng
there seems to have been a division, for he is sometimes called the
Patriarch of the South, Shen-Hsiu[807] being recognized as Patriarch
of the North. But all subsequent divisions of the Ch'an-tsung trace
their lineage to Hui-neng. Two of his disciples founded two schools
called Nan Yueh and Ch'ing Yuan[808] and between the eighth and tenth
centuries these produced respectively two and three subdivisions,
known together as Wu-tsung or five schools. They take their names from
the places where their founders dwelt and are the schools of Wei-Yang,
Lin-Chi, Ts'ao-Tung, Yun-Men and Fa-Yen.[809] This is the
chronological order, but the most important school is the Lin-Chi,
