What is the matter? What is it that is wrong with our hymnody? Even where
there is not such rooted disgust as I have implied, there is a growing
conviction that some reform is needed in words or music, or both.

Assuming that the chief blame lies with the music (as, I think, might
easily be proved), I propose to discuss the question of the music of our
hymnody, and I shall proceed on the basis of St. Augustin's principles: I
am sure that they would be endorsed by any pious church-goer who had
considered the subject, and they may be fairly formulated thus, _The
music must express the words or sense: it should not attract too much
attention to itself: it should be dignified: and its reason and use is to
heighten religious emotion._

One point calls for distinction: Augustin speaks of his emotion on
_hearing_ the hymns and canticles; he writes as if he had had no more
thought of taking part in the music himself, than we have of joining in
the anthem at a cathedral; and this might lead to a misunderstanding; for
there is no doubt that these hymns were sung by the people: the story is
that the very soldiers who were sent to blockade the basilica, happening
to be themselves catholics, joined their voices in the stanzas which St.
Ambrose had specially composed to disconcert the Arian enemy.

The ecstasy of listening to music, and the enthusiasm of a crowd who are
all singing or shouting the same hymn or song are emotions of quite
different nature and value. Now, neglecting the rare conditions under
which these emotions may be combined, we shall, as we are speaking of
hymns, be concerned chiefly with the latter kind, for all will agree that
hymns are that part of the Church music in which it is most desirable
that the congregation should join: and I believe that there would be less
difference in practice if it were at all easy to obtain good
congregational singing, or even anything that is worthy of the name. It
seems perhaps a pity that nature should have arranged that where the
people are musical (as Augustin appears to have been) they would rather
listen, and where they are unmusical they would all rather sing.

Speaking therefore of congregational hymn-singing, and conceding, as I
think we must, that the essential use of such music is to heighten
emotion, then, this emotional quality being the _sine qua non_ (the music
being of no use without it), it follows that it is the primary
consideration. If we are to have music at all, it must be such as will
raise or heighten emotion; and to define this we must ask, _Whose
emotion?_ and _What kind of emotion?_

Let us take this latter question first, and inquire what emotions it is
usual, proper, or possible to express by congregational singing of hymns.
William Law, in his _Serious Call_, has an interesting, I may say
amusing, chapter on the duty of all to sing, whether they have any turn
or inclination for it or no. All should sing, he says, even though they
dislike doing so; and I think that what he affirms of private devotion
applies with greater force to public worship. It should satisfy the most
ardent advocate of congregational singing, and it goes certainly to the
root of the matter.

  'It is so right and beneficial to devotion, has so much effect upon our
  hearts, that it may be insisted on as a common rule for all persons;
  ... for singing is as much the proper use of a psalm as devout
  supplication is the proper use of a form of prayer: and a psalm only
  read is very much like a prayer that is only looked over.... If you
  were to tell a person that has such a song, that he need not sing it,
  that it was sufficient to peruse it, he would wonder what you meant,
  ... as if you were to tell him that he should only look at his food, to
  see whether it was good, but need not eat it.... You will perhaps say
  that singing is a particular talent, that belongs only to particular
  people, and that you have neither voice nor ear for music.

  'If you had said that singing is a general talent, and that people
  differ in that as they do in all other things, you had said something
  much truer.

  'For how vastly people differ in the talent of thinking, which is not
  only common to all men, but seems to be the very essence of human
  nature: ... yet no one desires to be excused from thought because he
  has not this talent in any fine degree....

  'If a person were to forbear praying because he had an odd tone in his
  voice, he would have as good an excuse as he that forbears from singing
  psalms because he has but little management of his voice....

  'These songs make a sense (of) delight in God they awaken holy
  devotion: they teach how to ask: they kindle a holy flame....

  'Singing is the natural effect of JOY in the heart, ... and it is also
  the natural means of raising EMOTIONS OF JOY in the mind: such JOY AND
  THANKFULNESS to God as is the highest perfection of a divine and holy
  life.'

Now though I cannot feel the force of all Law's arguments nor easily
bring myself to believe that a person who dislikes singing, and has no
ear for music, will readily find any comfortable assistance to his
private devotion from making efforts to hit off the notes of the scale;
yet I feel that Law's position is in the main sound, and that he has
correctly specified the emotion most proper to that kind of uncultured
singing which he describes: and though congregational psalm-singing
necessarily involves a greater musical capacity than that assumed in
Law's extreme case, and may therefore have a wider field, yet we may
begin by laying down that JOY, PRAISE, and THANKSGIVING give us the first
main head of what is proper to be expressed, and we may extend this head
by adding ADORATION and perhaps the involved emotions of AWE and PEACE
and even the attitude of CONTEMPLATION.

In such a subject as the classification of emotions as they may be
expressed by music of one kind or another, it is plainly impossible to
make any definite tabulation with which all would agree. The very names
of the emotions will, to different minds, call up different associations
of feeling. If any agreement could be arrived at, it would be at the
expense of distinction; and all that I can expect is to have my
distinctions understood, and in the main agreed with. And as I am most
ready to grant to the reader his right to a different opinion on any
detail, I beg of him the same toleration, and that he will rather try to
follow my meaning than dwell on discrepancies which may be due to a fault
of expression, or to a difference of meaning which he and I may attach to
the same word.

With this apology in preamble, I will attempt to make some classification
of emotions as they seem to me to be the possible basis for musical
expression in congregational singing.

We have already one class: I would add a second, to include all the hymns
which exhibit the simple attitude of PRAYER.

A third class I would put under the head of FAITH. Examples of this class
will no doubt often cross with those of the first class, but they will
specify themselves as CELEBRATIONS of events of various COMMEMORATION,
introducing a distinct form, namely NARRATION, which is a very proper and
effective form for general praise.

Also this section will include all the hymns of BROTHERHOOD and
FELLOWSHIP, and of SPIRITUAL CONFLICT, with the correlative _invitatory_
and _exhortatory_ songs, as modified by what will be said later.

Also, lastly, under this same head of Faith, the DOCTRINAL hymns, and
professions of creed whether sectarian or otherwise, which, if the
definition be taken widely, make a large and popular class, well
exemplified by the German hymns of the Reformation, or by those of our
Wesleyan revival; strong with the united feeling of a small body,
asserting itself in the face of opposition: concerning which we will not
speak further, except to recall the fact that this kind of enthusiasm was
not absent from the causes which first introduced hymns into the Western
Church.

I believe that this is a pretty full list of all the attitudes of mind
that can be properly expressed by congregational singing; and if we turn
to other emotions which are made the subject of church hymns, we shall, I
think, see that they are all of them liable to suffer damage by being
entrusted to the rough handling of general vociferation.

Such will be all hymns of DIVINE AFFECTION and YEARNING; all LAMENTS and
CONSOLATIONS; all descriptions of spiritual conditions which imply
personal experience and feeling, as ABASEMENT, HUMILIATION, CONTRITION,
REPENTANCE, RESIGNATION, SELF-DEVOTION, CONVICTION, and SATISFACTION.

Here I feel that many readers will be inclined to dissent from what I
say, and as I shall not again recur to Law, I should like, in order to
show my meaning, to call up his extreme example of an unmusical person
singing in private devotion. If one pictures such a case as he supposes,
is it not clear, whether one imagines oneself the actor or the unwilling
auditor, that while such an exhibition of joy might perhaps pass, yet a
similar incompetent attempt to express any of the last-named emotions
would be only ridiculous? But between this single worshipper and the
congregation the incompetence seems to me only a question of degree;
while in the far more considerable respect of the sincerity of the
feeling in the hearts of those expressing it, Law's singer has every
advantage; indeed no objection on this score can be raised to him. But
now suppose for a moment that he has _not_ the emotion at heart
corresponding to his attempt at song, and I think the differentiation of
motives for congregational singing will seem justifiable.

All these last-named emotions,--which I have taken from congregational
hymn-books,--and I suppose there may be more of them,--call for delicacy
of treatment. A Lamentation, for instance, which might seem at first
sight as if it would gain force by volume, will, if it is realistic or
clumsy, become unmanly, almost so as to be ridiculous, and certainly
depressing to the spirit rather than purifying. In fact while many of the
subjects require beautiful expression, they are also more properly used
