
It will come through that spared remnant. The old stump will put out a
new shoot. It will be through the coming of a great king, who will prove
to be their greatest king,[113] and will reign not only over Israel, but
over all nations as tributary to Israel, with Jerusalem as the capital
city both of Israel and of the whole earth.[114] At its beginning there
will be a gathering of Israel from among all the nations where they have
been scattered.[115] To assist these scattered pilgrims to get to their
own land, the tongue of the Egyptian sea on the southwest is to be
destroyed; and the waters of the Euphrates on the extreme east are to be
so scattered or dried up that men can walk over dry-shod.

When the great king comes there will be genuine penitence among the
people over their past sins,[116] and they will become a wholly changed
people.[117] Israel will be a nation converted by the power of the Holy
Spirit through the conversion of the people individually. There will be
at this time a resurrection of God's people who have died.[118]

The new reign and kingdom is to be one of great spiritual enlightenment
to all nations.[119] There will be everywhere a new, remarkable
openmindedness to God and His truth.[120] And there will be the same
visible evidence of the presence of God at Jerusalem as when the pillar
of fire and cloud was with them in the wilderness. That wondrous
presence-cloud is to be always in view.[121]

This sounds to our ears like the highly coloured visionary dream of some
over-enthusiastic Hebrew. Yet this is a calm statement of what is found
here. And be it keenly marked, it is a picture which the godly Hebrew of
the old time never lost sight of. _This is the first thing_ that stands
out in these prophetic pages.

_The second thing_ stands out distinctly. Preceding this wondrous
kingdom _the earth will be visited by terrible judgments_.[122] There is
an awfully dark shadow before the blaze of light breaks out. A terrific
storm will come before the sun shines out in its new strength. All
nations will combine to make war against the Jew. Their forces will be
gathered at Jerusalem.[123] At the head of the coalition will be a power
called Babylon.[124] There will come a terrific battle, victory for the
coalition will seem assured. The sufferings of the Jews will be
indescribable.

Then there will come a day never after to be forgotten. In the midst of
the indescribable horrors of that battle, when things are at their worst
for the Jew, then comes the deliverance. Suddenly Jehovah will appear
out of the heavens, with a great company of holy ones. His feet will
stand upon Mount Olivet to the east of Jerusalem. There will be a
terrible earthquake, and an equally terrific shake-up of the heavenly
bodies. The luminaries, sun, moon, and stars, will be darkened.[125]
There will be terrible judgments visited not only upon the earth, but
upon the evil spirit powers.[126] Repeated emphasis is put upon the
judgment to be visited upon Babylon.

All this will sound like a veritable fairy tale to many who are not
familiar with this Book of God; the unlikeliest thing imaginable. Yet
this is the thing seriously set forth throughout these old prophetic
pages. I have given a few references in footnotes. But these few
scattered passages of themselves will not give an adequate conception of
what these pages hold.

There is all the fascination of a novel, and immensely more and deeper
fascination than any novel, in reading these prophetic pages repeatedly
in the way already spoken of till their mere contents become somewhat
familiar. Then taking paper and pencil, running through again, and
drawing off patiently and carefully, item after item of these prophecies
plainly not yet fulfilled, and then slowly and painstakingly put them
together in what would be a simple, logical order.

It will be helpful, in reading, to remember that it is a common thing
with these writers to speak of a future thing as already past. It is a
bit of the intensity that sees the thing that is yet to come as already
accomplished. And one should discern between the immediate thing that
may likely occur in that generation and the far-distant thing. A careful
noting of the language will make the difference clear.

This is the second thing that stands out, the visitation of judgments.

Then there is _a third thing_. This terrible visitation of judgments
comes in connection with, and at the close of, _a time of great
persecution of the Jew_ by the nations. Jeremiah speaks of it as the
time of Jacob's trouble,[127] and the Man of Fire tells Daniel that
there will be a time of trouble _such as never was since there was a
nation even to that same time_.[128] This persecution of the Jew, and
the visitation of judgments on the earth as a deliverance from it, are
connected with the setting up of the Kingdom.

These are the three things that stand dominantly out in these prophetic
pages as distinctly-future, the great Jew persecution unprecedented in
intensity, the visitation of terrible judgments on the earth, and the
coming of a glorious kingdom. And the three are connected. We know that
no events have yet taken place that at all satisfy the language used of
these three connected events.

This is the simple outline of expected coming events with which the
thoughtful reader of God's Word is supposed to be familiar. The reverent
student of God's promises and plans and revelations would naturally have
all this clear and fresh in his mind as he turns to open the pages of
the prophetic book of the New Testament.


Forecast of the Great Storm.

Now it is _of intense interest_ to note that our Lord Jesus speaks of
these same three things, at much length, and with much emphasis; the
persecution, the visitation of judgments, and the kingdom. It came to me
as a great surprise and with startling force when I realized, after
gathering out this summary from the Old Testament, that the three things
that stand out so sharply there are the very things Jesus speaks of here
with such fulness and emphasis.

He puts special emphasis on the time of persecution as of unprecedented
horror and ferocity. He plainly indicates that this will be directed
not only against the Jew, but against His own followers. Three times
this talk of His on Olivet just before His death is given at much
length.[129] That talk is given to a little group of Jewish disciples
who have broken with the Jewish leaders, and who become the great
leaders of the Church formed at Pentecost.

He speaks of that terrible experience as "great tribulation,"[130] "such
as there hath not been the like from the beginning of the creation which
God created until now, nor ever shall be."[131] We shall find it spoken
of in this book of Revelation as "the tribulation, the great one."[132]
It has come to be spoken of commonly as "the tribulation" and "the great
tribulation."

With all this fresh in mind, a run back through the Old Testament brings
out that it is spoken of there much more than we may have realized. The
warning to Israel, at Sinai, as they made the covenant of allegiance
with God, of the bitter punishment that would come if they were untrue,
has seemed many times as though couched in very intense, almost extreme
language.[133] But it is found to fit into these later descriptions of
this great tribulation to come. That warning is repeated, in as intense
words and with a greater fulness, by Moses in his series of farewell
talks in the Plains of Moab,[134] and it runs through the song he left
for their use.[135]

The experiences of the people of Israel in Egypt are found to be an
illustration of the coming experience at the end, great persecution and
suffering, then great deliverance through a visitation of judgment upon
their persecutors, and great revelation of God's glory following. And
the experience of the three young Hebrew exiles in Babylon comes to
mind. They went through the fire, seven times heated, and they had a
marvellous deliverance, and then high promotion.[136]

Certain Psalms shine with new light in the light of this terrible truth.
Chief among these is the Ninety-first. Quite likely it grew up out of
the experience of Israel at the last before leaving Egypt. It, of
course, has its practical use in one's daily life. But the vividness and
intensity of its meaning will probably never be realized as during the
coming tribulation days. Nor will the exultant note running through the
nine Psalms immediately following it be appreciated as by those
experiencing deliverance when the tribulation is over. The Forty-sixth
Psalm, and the Psalms of praise immediately following it, likewise seem
to get new light.

It is quite probable that very much, all through this Book of Psalms,
will be understood and appreciated fully only by the generation of God's
people that go through the tribulation and know the deliverance
following. Much of the old Book of God is quite meaningless to the
Christian who has had no tribulation _experience_. That is, I mean who
has never known opposition in his Christian faith, or who has slipped
easily along when there is opposition.

The outstanding features in the Old Testament of this great experience
are terrible persecution of the Jew, deliverance at the very worst pitch
of extremity, by a visitation of judgment on their enemies, and by
Jehovah coming in person for their deliverance; and then the great
Kingdom following.

The outstanding features spoken of by our Lord Jesus in His Olivet talk
agree with this, but go much more into detail, especially about the
tribulation. The tribulation will be _preceded_ by wars, rumors of wars,
famines, earthquakes, and persecution. There will be many false
religious teachers, many Christians untrue to their faith, and a great
increase of wickedness. This is a sort of foreshadowing.

The tribulation itself will find all this enormously intensified. It
will _begin_ with some astonishing act of blasphemy in the temple in
Jerusalem, run its terrible course, and close with a series of
judgment-events, earthquake, heavens shaken, and great distress, ending
in the visible appearance of the Lord Jesus Himself, out of heaven on
the clouds. And this will be a signal for great penitential mourning
among the people on the earth.

This, then, is the simple, broad outline with which the thoughtful
reader of God's Word would naturally be familiar as he turns to this
prophetic book at the end to get our Lord's last message to His
followers.


Getting a Broad, Clear Outlook.

As we turn now again to the book of Revelation it will help us to
remember the general plan followed in its writing. It is like a series
of dissolving views of the same scene, each of which lets us see the
same thing from a different point of view.

This is a simple teaching rule for getting a clear grasp of what is
being taught. We are familiar with it in the Bible. The story of
creation is told in the first chapter of Genesis, and then told again in
the second chapter with details not given in the first, the two together
presenting the complete story. The historical books of Chronicles
present one view of the kingdom of Israel, the official. The books of
the Kings give another look at the same period; and the prophetic books
a wholly different view as seen by these rarely spiritually minded men
of God. Daniel is shown four visions of future events, all covering the
same general stretch of events, but with a fuller description, here of
one part and there of another. The four Gospels are a familiar
illustration of the same principle in teaching and story-telling. This
is the plan followed here.

I was impressed anew with the practical value of this method one day in
St. Petersburg. We had gone to look at the panorama of the siege of
Sebastopol, then on exhibition in a huge, round building. It will be
remembered that the British and French allied themselves with Turkey and
Sardinia in an attempt to restrain the encroachments of Russia on
Turkish territory. The famous charge of Balaklava, immortalized by
Tennyson, is remembered as the most stirring event of that war. Its
chief event was the siege of Sebastopol on the Crimea peninsula, in the
Black Sea.

At the panorama we stood as though on a high central point in the city
of Sebastopol, with the view spreading out in all directions. To the
north lay the harbour with the Russian ships securely bottled in by the
attacking fleets. To the west a body of French soldiers were retreating,
hotly pursued by Russian troops, while in the distance British troops
are hurrying to the relief of the French.

Then we looked east, where the fighting was going on at close range, the
wounded being carried away and the reserves hastening up to take their
places. And again we turned to the south, where the battle raged
fiercest. The face of the commanding officer stood out so vividly. And
we almost shrank from the fierceness of the fire. And the smell of
powder almost seemed stifling.

And as I stood brooding afresh on the horrors of inhuman war, I was
tremendously impressed that only by such successive views could I get
such a grasp of that memorable siege. I had a more intelligent and
vivid understanding of it than ever before.

And so it is that we may get a simple, clear, and real grasp of the
tremendous tribulation time that is coming, that it is presented to us
in this fashion, first one distinct view, then another, and another,
till some understanding of the whole begins to get hold of us.

We have seen the Lord Jesus, in the vision in chapters four and five, as
He comes forward to take an advance step. We have seen the tremendous
outburst of praise in heaven as He steps forward. This step and scene
are in heaven. The earth is wholly unaware of it _at that moment_.

Now all that follows is connected directly with that advance step. This
is the significant thing to get clearly fixed in mind. At the present
time our Lord Jesus is still walking among the candlestick Churches
watching and waiting. We are still in that waiting time. The Holy Spirit
still dwells in the Church on earth.

At some time in the future, no one knows, nor can know, just when, the
Lord Jesus will rise up in readiness for an advance move. He will
withdraw the Holy Spirit from the Church up into His presence again
"before the throne." _Then in connection with this advance step_ there
will occur on the earth the things spoken of in these pages following.
This is the tremendous fact to keep clear, the immediate connection
between these happenings on earth and His new move in heaven.

We come now to these happenings on earth. There are seven distinct views
given here in this section, chapters six to the end of the book. There
is a great detail in description which it would be both instructive and
interesting to study out. But we want to get at the essential things.
And so we will give our time and thought to these essentials.

Our Lord Jesus is represented as about to take possession of His realm.
The first step is a dispossessing of the claimants in possession. This
furnishes the key to what follows. The descriptions are of the process
of cleaning out the evil forces. At the close of this we find Him taking
possession (in chapter twenty) and reigning over the earth.

These descriptions make it clear at once that this is the tribulation so
much spoken of in these preceding pages. What follows fits so into what
has been spoken of that the identification seems complete. The thing our
Lord Jesus is revealing here tallies with what He had told John before
on Olivet.

There comes first a general description of the whole period (chapters
vi.-vii.). Then follows a description of _how_ these happenings will
come. It will be through the withdrawal of restraint and so the
loosening out of evil (chapters viii.-ix.). During this whole period
there will be a special faithful witnessing on earth, in the midst of
the riot of evil, to God and His truth (chapter xi.).

A detailed outline of the run of events follows, giving much additional
information, picturing the rise and characteristics of the leader of the
tribulation time, and the manner of its close (chapters xii.-xiv.).
There follows this a description of the judgments and the supreme
contest with which the period closes (chapters xv.-xvi.). There is a
description of the organized system of evil, and then of the fall of the
capital of the system (chapters xvii.-xviii.) And then follows the
actual coming of our Lord Jesus, the setting up of the kingdom, and
subsequent events (chapters xix.-xxii.).


A General Look at the Storm and Its Close.

We turn now to _the first_ of these.[137] It begins with a crowned One
seated on a white horse going forth conquering and to conquer. This
description agrees with the much fuller description of the Lord Jesus
near the end of the book, as he goes to the earth for the decisive close
of the tribulation.[138]

This gives fresh emphasis to the fact that what follows is the direct
result of His advance step. At once there follows on earth a time of
war, famine, death, and of persecution to the death of God's people.
There is no hint as to how long this goes on. It is brought to a close
with an earthquake and an equally terrific disturbance of the heavens,
the sun, moon, and stars, something unknown before.

The utmost consternation is created on earth. All conditions of men,
crowned kings, merchant princes, men of autocratic power financially and
politically and socially, join with the humblest in hiding themselves in
the great holes made by the earthquake. They feel that the time of
judgment has come, and they are not ready for it.

The description of their terror tallies remarkably with the prophetic
language used by Isaiah,[139] even as the whole description fits into
our Lord's Olivet talk. This is seen to be a general, rapid vision of
the whole tribulation period.

Then there follows what clearly seems to be a parenthesis fitting in
just before the great earthquake. The earth and sea have been terribly
torn up by the earthquake. This parenthesis begins with a command that
the earth and sea be not hurt until certain things have taken place.

This fits the two events of the parenthesis in just before the ruinous
earthquake takes place. The two events are of a radically different sort
from what has just been told. They are thus put by themselves, and the
run of evil and of judgment upon it, put by itself, so keeping these two
quite clear, following the general plan of the book.

There are two events in this parenthesis. There is what is called the
"sealing" of a certain number of the Hebrew tribes _on the earth_.
Twelve thousand of each tribe are sealed, making a total of one hundred
and forty-four thousand. The word "seal" is used in two senses in the
Bible, as a means of fastening up a writing or roll, and, in the New
Testament, commonly for the presence of the Holy Spirit in a human life.

The seal in this second sense was a mark of ownership. Paul tells us
that we are sealed with the Holy Spirit,[140] so indicating that we
belong to the Lord Jesus, who gives us this evidence of His ownership.
If this simple, natural meaning be taken here, it would mean that at
this time the Holy Spirit has been poured out upon the Jew. The
spiritual regeneration spoken of so frequently in the prophetic pages
takes place at this time.

The significance of the numbers should be noticed. Twelve is the number
