SERMON.

PROVERBS, XXII. 9.

    "He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his
    bread to the poor."


How merciful and gracious is our Heavenly Father in presenting to us his
commandments, united with the promise of ample rewards to those who will
obey them. As the author of our being, the creator and preserver of our
means of existence, and our sources of happiness, he has an unqualified
right to our constant obedience and our best services. Yet he treats us
as if we were in a measure independent of him, and as if our faculties
and possessions were an underived property, for he demands of us no duty
or sacrifice for which he does not offer an abundant remuneration. And
even to the performance of those duties which are in themselves a source
of gratification to the well regulated mind, the inducements are greatly
increased by appendant promises. We might not think it remarkable that
labor and sacrifices, and self-denial, should be encouraged by the hope
of reward; but even the delightful offices of mercy and charity will be
remunerated, and heavenly blessings will hereafter be showered upon the
heads of those who may now be enjoying the luxury of doing good. Surely
I address myself to those who know that there is a pleasure in deeds of
beneficence,--a pleasure the noblest and most delightful of which our
nature is susceptible. And you my brethren, must have had experience of
this sentiment, or vain will be my efforts to unfold to you the subject
that is before me. I appear in behalf of the destitute orphan, and if I
thought I had need to convince you that there is a sweet and abiding
satisfaction in relieving those who are truly objects of charity, I
should be utterly discouraged at the outset. But such is not to be my
ungrateful task; for I see around me those who I doubt not have often
realized the pleasures of beneficence, and have often bestowed their
charities upon the simple impulse of generous feeling. I would now,
however, present to you a more exalted motive to beneficence than its
secret pleasures. I would show you that it is not simply a gratification
you can enjoy, but a solemn duty which you must perform; and therefore
that your charities are not to be governed by momentary impulses, but by
settled principles, and that you are to do good not merely because you
take delight in it, but that you may secure the favor of God who has
commanded this service. And as I have observed that where our Heavenly
Father has put forth a commandment, he has also annexed a reward to
induce us to obey it, so in our text the duty of beneficence is
presented in the form of a beatitude, like the introductory precepts of
our blessed Lord's sermon on the mount. "He that hath a bountiful eye
shall be BLESSED."

I propose, first, briefly to explain this duty, then to state its
obligation, and lastly to allude to the blessing promised in connexion
with it.


1. The expression of my text is peculiar. We hear in common speech of a
liberal or open hand as the characteristic of a benevolent man; but the
phrase, a bountiful eye, belongs alone to the sacred scriptures. There
also the opposite character of avarice and cruelty is represented by a
figure drawn from the same source. In the book from which my text is
selected, we are warned not to partake of the offered banquet of him who
spreads his table by constraint, and with ostentatious or mercenary
views, and not from the impulse of an hospitable spirit. _Eat thou not
the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty
meats: For as he thinketh in his heart so is he: Eat and drink saith he
to thee; but his heart is not with thee._[1] And again the character
and punishment of the man who is so anxious to acquire wealth as to
disregard the principles of honesty and the claims of charity is thus
described. _He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth
not that poverty shall come upon him._[2] In the book of Deuteronomy too
where the law of conduct towards the poor is laid down, and the rich are
commanded not to take advantage of their necessities we read--_If there
be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren, within any of thy gates,
in thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden
thine heart, nor shut thine hand, from thy poor brother. But thou shalt
open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for
his need, in that which he wanteth. Beware that there be not a thought
in thy wicked heart, saying, the seventh year, the year of release is at
hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest
him nought, and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto
thee. Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him._[3] As the evil eye was descriptive of a
selfish, hard hearted, avaricious temper, so the bountiful eye was meant
to represent the virtues of a humane and generous man. A phrase more
expressive, could not be selected to describe an ardent and enlightened
beneficence. A liberal hand, signifies merely generosity in giving, but
_a bountiful eye_ implies not simply this, but also industry in looking
about for objects of distress, and discrimination in the mode of
relieving them, and tenderness and kind expressions accompanying our
charities. All these are essential features of true christian
beneficence.

1. To give of our money, is perhaps, the very least praise-worthy part,
and certainly the part of easiest performance in the way of charity.
Many there are who yield to the solicitation of an object of distress,
or to an application from the agent of some charitable society merely
that they may escape from painful importunity. Others again, who feel
and acknowledge the obligation of sharing a portion of their wealth with
the poor, are yet glad to appease the monitions of conscience at the
least expense of time and thought. They therefore give freely, but with
too little attention to securing a proper channel for their bounty. The
consequence is that it often runs in waste places, and feeds
intemperance and dishonesty when it might be made to revive and nourish
