consciously or unconsciously.  The innate, strong tendency of the
living is an undeveloped, but fundamental, nature of Spirit or Mind.
It shows itself first in inert matter as impenetrability, or
affinity, or mechanical force.  Rock has a powerful tendency to
preserve itself.  And it is hard to crush it.  Diamond has a robust
tendency to assert itself.  And it permits nothing to destroy it.
Salt has the same strong tendency, for its particles act and react by
themselves, and never cease till its crystals are formed.  Steam,
too, should have the same, because it pushes aside everything in its
way and goes where it will.

In the eye of simple folks of old, mountains, rivers, trees,
serpents, oxen, and eagles were equally full of life; hence the
deification of them.  No doubt it is irrational to believe in nymphs,
fairies, elves, and the like, yet still we may say that mountains
stand of their own accord, rivers run as they will, just as we say
that trees and grass turn their leaves towards the sun of their own
accord.  Neither is it a mere figure of speech to say that thunder
speaks and hills respond, nor to describe birds as singing and
flowers as smiling, nor to narrate winds as moaning and rain as
weeping, nor to state lovers as looking at the moon, the moon as
looking at them, when we observe spiritual element in activities of
all this.  Haeckel says, not without reason: "I cannot imagine the
simple chemical and physical forces without attributing the movement
of material particles to conscious sensation."  The same author says
again: "We may ascribe the feeling of pleasure and pain to all atoms,
and so explain the electric affinity in chemistry."



12. The Creative Force of Nature and Humanity.

The innate tendency of self-preservation, which manifests itself as
mechanical force or chemical affinity in the inorganic nature,
unfolds itself as the desire of the preservation of species in the
vegetables and animals.  See how vegetables fertilize themselves in a
complicated way, and how they spread their seeds far and wide in a
most mysterious manner.  A far more developed form of the same desire
is seen in the sexual attachment and parental love of animals.  Who
does not know that even the smallest birds defend their young against
every enemy with self -sacrificing courage, and that they bring food
whilst they themselves often starve and grow lean?  In human beings
we can observe the various transformations of the self-same desire.
For instance, sorrow or despair is experienced when it is impossible;
anger, when it is hindered by others; joy, when it is fulfilled;
fear, when it is threatened; pleasure, when it is facilitated.
Although it manifests itself as the sexual attachment and parental
love in lower animals, yet its developed forms, such as sympathy,
loyalty, benevolence, mercy, humanity, are observed in human beings.
Again, the creative force in inorganic nature, in order to assert
itself and act more effectively, creates the germ of organic nature,
and gradually ascending the scale of evolution, develops the sense
organs and the nervous system; hence intellectual powers, such as
sensation, perception, imagination, memory, unfold themselves.  Thus
the creative force, exerting itself gradually, widens its sphere of
action, and necessitates the union of individuals into families,
clans, tribes, communities, and nations.  For the sake of this union
and co-operation they established customs, enacted laws, and
instituted political and educational systems.  Furthermore, to
reinforce itself, it gave birth to languages and sciences; and to
enrich itself, morality and religion.



13. Universal Life is Universal Spirit.

These considerations naturally lead us to see that Universal Life is
not a blind vital force, but Creative Spirit, or Mind, or
Consciousness, which unfolds itself in myriads of ways.  Everything
in the universe, according to Zen, lives and acts, and at the same
time discloses its spirit.  To be alive is identically the same as to
be spiritual.  As the poet has his song, so does the nightingale, so
does the cricket, so does the rivulet.  As we are pleased or
offended, so are horses, so are dogs, so are sparrows, ants,
earthworms, and mushrooms.  Simpler the body, simpler its spirit;
more complicated the body, more complicated its spirit.  'Mind
slumbers in the pebble, dreams in the plant, gathers energy in the
animal, and awakens to self-conscious discovery in the soul of man.'

It is this Creative, Universal Spirit that sends forth Aurora to
illuminate the sky, that makes Diana shed her benign rays and Æolus
play on his harp, wreathes spring with flowers, that clothes autumn
with gold, that induces plants to put forth blossoms, that incites
animals to be energetic, and that awakens consciousness in man.  The
author of Mahavaipulya-purnabuddha-sutra expressly states our idea
when he says: "Mountains, rivers, skies, the earth: all these are
embraced in the True Spirit, enlightened and mysterious."  Rin-zai
also says: "Spirit is formless, but it penetrates through the world
in the ten directions."[FN#149]  The Sixth Patriarch expresses the
same idea more explicitly: "What creates the phenomena is Mind; what
transcends all the phenomena is Buddha."[FN#150]


[FN#149]  Rin-zai-roku.

[FN#150]  Roku-so-dan-kyo.



14. Poetical Intuition and Zen.

Since Universal Life or Spirit permeates the universe, the poetical
intuition of man never fails to find it, and to delight in everything
typical of that Spirit.  "The leaves of the plantain," says a Zen
poet, "unfold themselves, hearing the voice of thunder.  The flowers
of the hollyhock turn towards the sun, looking at it all day long."
Jesus could see in the lily the Unseen Being who clothed it so
lovely.  Wordsworth found the most profound thing in all the world to
be the universal spiritual life, which manifests itself most directly
in nature, clothed in its own proper dignity and peace.  "Through
every star," says Carlyle, "through every grass blade, most through
every soul, the glory of present God still beams."

It is not only grandeur and sublimity that indicate Universal Life,
but smallness and commonplace do the same.  A sage of old awakened to
the faith[FN#151] when he heard a bell ring; another, when he looked
at the peach blossom; another, when he heard the frogs croaking; and
another, when he saw his own form reflected in a river.  The minutest
particles of dust form a world.  The meanest grain of sand under our
foot proclaims a divine law.  Therefore Teu Tsz Jo-shi), pointing to
a stone in front of his temple, said: "All the Buddhas of the past,
the present, and the future are living therein."[FN#152]


[FN#151]  Both the Chinese and the Japanese history of Zen are full
of such incidents.

[FN#152]  Zen-rin-rui-shu and To-shi-go-roku.



15. Enlightened Consciousness.

In addition to these considerations, which mainly depend on indirect
experience, we can have direct experience of life within us.  In the
first place, we experience that our life is not a bare mechanical
motion or change, but is a spiritual, purposive, and self-directing
force.  In the second place, we directly experience that it knows,
feels, and wills.  In the third place, we experience that there
exists some power unifying the intellectual, emotional, and
volitional activities so as to make life uniform and rational.
Lastly, we experience that there lies deeply rooted within us
Enlightened Consciousness, which neither psychologists treat of nor
philosophers believe in, but which Zen teachers expound with strong
conviction.  Enlightened Consciousness is, according to Zen, the
centre of spiritual life.  It is the mind of minds, and the
consciousness of consciousness.  It is the Universal Spirit awakened
in the human mind.  It is not the mind that feels joy or sorrow; nor
is it the mind that reasons and infers; nor is it the mind that
fancies and dreams; nor is it the mind that hopes and fears; nor is
it the mind that distinguishes good from evil.  It is Enlightened
Consciousness that holds communion with Universal Spirit or Buddha,
and realizes that individual lives are inseparably united, and of one
and the same nature with Universal Life.  It is always bright as a
burnished mirror, and cannot be dimmed by doubt and ignorance.  It is
ever pure as a lotus flower, and cannot be polluted by the mud of
evil and folly.  Although all sentient beings are endowed with this
Enlightened Consciousness, they are not aware of its existence,
excepting men who can discover it by the practice of Meditation.
Enlightened consciousness is often called Buddha-nature, as it is the
real nature of Universal Spirit.  Zen teachers compare it with a
precious stone ever fresh and pure, even if it be buried in the heaps
of dust.  Its divine light can never be extinguished by doubt or
fear, just as the sunlight cannot be destroyed by mist and cloud.
Let us quote a Chinese Zen poet to see how Zen treats of it:[FN#153]

"I have an image of Buddha,
The worldly people know it not.
It is not made of clay or cloth,
Nor is it carved out of wood,
Nor is it moulded of earth nor of ashes.
No artist can paint it;
No robber can steal it.
There it exists from dawn of time.
It's clean, although not swept and wiped.
Although it is but one,
Divides itself to a hundred thousand million forms."


[FN#153]  See Zen-gaku-ho-ten.



16. Buddha Dwelling in the Individual Mind.

Enlightened Consciousness in the individual mind acquires for its
possessor, not a relative knowledge of things as his intellect does,
but the profoundest insight in reference to universal brotherhood of
all beings, and enables him to understand the absolute holiness of
their nature, and the highest goal for which all of them are making.
Enlightened Consciousness once awakened within us serves as a guiding
principle, and leads us to hope, bliss, and life; consequently, it is
called the Master[FN#154] of both mind and body.  Sometimes it is
called the Original[FN#155] Mind, as it is the mind of minds.  It is
Buddha dwelling in individuals.  You might call it God in man, if you
like.  The following dialogues all point to this single idea:

On one occasion a butcher, who was used to kill one thousand sheep a
day, came to Gotama, and, throwing down his butcher-knife, said "I am
one of the thousand Buddhas."  "Yes, really," replied Gotama.  A
monk, Hwui Chao (E-cha) by name, asked Pao Yen (Ho-gen): "What is
Buddha?"  "You are Hwui Chao," replied the master.  The same question
was put to Sheu Shan (Shu-zan), Chi Man (Chi-mon), and Teu Tsz
(To-shi), the first of whom answered: "A bride mounts on a donkey and
her mother-in-law drives it;" and the second: "He goes barefooted,
his sandals being worn out;" while the third rose from his chair and
stood still without saying a word.  Chwen Hih (Fu-kiu) explains this
point in unequivocal terms: "Night after night I sleep with Buddha,
and every morning I get up with Him.  He accompanies me wherever I
go.  When I stand or sit, when I speak or be mute, when I am out or
in, He never leaves me, even as a shadow accompanies body.  Would you
know where He is? Listen to that voice and word."[FN#156]


[FN#154]  It is often called the Lord or Master of mind.

[FN#155]  Another name for Buddha is the Original Mind"
(Kechi-myaku-ron).

[FN#156]  For such dialogues, see Sho-yo-roku, Mu-mon-kan,
Heki-gan-shu. Fu-kiu's words are repeatedly quoted by Zen masters.



17. Enlightened Consciousness is not an Intellectual Insight.

Enlightened Consciousness is not a bare intellectual insight, for it
is full of beautiful emotions.  It loves, caresses, embraces, and at
the same time esteems all beings, being ever merciful to them.  It
has no enemies to conquer, no evil to fight with, but constantly
finds friends to help, good to promote.  Its warm heart beats in
harmony with those of all fellow beings.  The author of
Brahmajala-sutra fully expresses this idea as he says: "All women are
our mothers; all men our fathers; all earth and water our bodies in
the past existences; all fire and air our essence."

Thus relying on our inner experience, which is the only direct way of
knowing Buddha, we conceive Him as a Being with profound wisdom and
boundless mercy, who loves all beings as His children, whom He is
fostering, bringing up, guiding, and teaching.  "These three worlds
are His, and all beings living in them are His children."[FN#157]
"The Blessed One is the mother of all sentient beings, and gives them
all the milk of mercy."[FN#158]  Some people named Him Absolute, as
He is all light, all hope, all mercy, and all wisdom; some, Heaven,
as He is high and enlightened; some, God, as He is sacred and
mysterious; some, Truth, as He is true to Himself; some, Buddha, as
He is free from illusion; some, Creator, as He is the creative force
immanent in the universe; some, Path, as He is the Way we must
follow; some, Unknowable, as He is beyond relative knowledge; some,
Self, as He is the Self of individual selves.  All these names are
applied to one Being, whom we designate by the name of Universal Life
or Spirit.


[FN#157]  Saddharma-pundarika-sutra.

[FN#158]  Mahaparinirvana-sutra.



18. Our Conception of Buddha is not Final.

Has, then, the divine nature of Universal Spirit been completely and
exhaustively revealed in our Enlightened Consciousness?  To this
question we should answer negatively, for, so far as our limited
experience is concerned, Universal Spirit reveals itself as a Being
with profound wisdom and boundless mercy; this, nevertheless, does
not imply that the conception is the only possible and complete one.
We should always bear in mind that the world is alive, and changing,
and moving.  It goes on to disclose a new phase, or to add a new
truth.  The subtlest logic of old is a mere quibble of nowadays. The
miracles of yesterday are the commonplaces of to-day.  Now theories
are formed, new discoveries are made, only to give their places to
newer theories are discoveries.  New ideals realized or new desires
satisfied are sure to awaken newer and stronger desires.  Not an
instant life remains immutable, but it rushes on, amplifying and
enriching itself from the dawn of time to the end of eternity.

Therefore Universal Life may in the future possibly unfold its new
spiritual content, yet unknown to us because it has refined, lifted
up, and developed living beings from the amba to man, increasing the
intelligence and range of individuals, until highly civilized man
emerge into the plane of consciousness-consciousness of divine light
in him.  Thus to believe in Buddha is to be content and thankful for
the grace of His, and to hope for the infinite unfoldment of His
glories in man.



19. How to Worship Buddha.

The author of Vimalakirtti-nirdeca-sutra well explains our attitude
towards Buddha when he says: "We ask Buddha for nothing.  We ask
Dharma for nothing.  We ask Samgha for nothing."  Nothing we ask of
Buddha.  No worldly success, no rewards in the future life, no
special blessing.  Hwang Pah (O-baku) said: "I simply worship Buddha.
 I ask Buddha for nothing.  I ask Dharma for nothing.  I ask Samgha
for nothing."  Then a prince[FN#159] questioned him: "You ask Buddha
for nothing. You ask Dharma for nothing.  You ask Samgha for nothing.
 What, then, is the use of your worship?"  The Prince earned a slap
as an answer to his utilitarian question.[FN#160]  This incident well
illustrates that worship, as understood by Zen masters, is a pure act
of thanksgiving, or the opening of the grateful heart; in other
words, the disclosing of Enlightened Consciousness.  We are living
the very life of Buddha, enjoying His blessing, and holding communion
with Him through speech, thought, and action.  The earth is not 'the
vale of tears,' but the glorious creation of Universal Spirit; nor
man 'the poor miserable sinner' but the living altar of Buddha
Himself.  Whatever we do, we do with grateful heart and pure joy
sanctioned by Enlightened Consciousness; eating, drinking, talking,
walking, and every other work of our daily life are the worship and
devotion.  We agree with Margaret Fuller when she says: "Reverence
the highest; have patience with the lowest; let this day's
performance of the meanest duty be thy religion.  Are the stars too
distant?  Pick up the pebble that lies at thy feet, and from it learn
all."


[FN#159]  Afterwards the Emperor Suen Tsung (Sen-so), of the Tang
dynasty.

[FN#160]  For the details, see Heki-gan-shu.





CHAPTER V



THE NATURE OF MAN


1. Man is Good-natured according to Mencius.[FN#161]

Oriental scholars, especially the Chinese men of letters, seem to
have taken so keen an interest in the study of human nature that they
proposed all the possible opinions respecting the subject in
question-namely, (1) man is good-natured; (2) man is bad-natured; (3)
man is good-natured and bad-natured as well; (4) man is neither
good-natured nor bad-natured.  The first of these opinions was
proposed by a most reputed Confucianist scholar, Mencius, and his
followers, and is still adhered to by the majority of the Japanese
and the Chinese Confucianists.  Mencius thought it as natural for man
to do good as it is for the grass to be green.  'Suppose a person has
happened,' he would say, 'to find a child on the point of tumbling
