amongst them forbade it? O sinless one, O chief of regenerate ones, I
desire thee to recite in detail all about this, which, indeed, was the
cause of the destruction of the world."

Santi said,--"Thus addressed by the king, the disciple of Vyasa, endued
with great energy and conversant with the entire Vedas, narrated
everything that had happened."

Vaisampayana said,--"O best of the Bharatas, O great king, if thou
desirest to hear, then listen to me as I narrate to thee everything
again in detail.

"Ascertaining the opinion of Vidura, Dhritarashtra the son of Amvika,
calling Duryodhana told him again in private--'O son of Gandhari, have
nothing to do with dice. Vidura doth not speak well of it. Possessed of
great wisdom, he will never give me advice that is not for my good. I
also regard what Vidura sayeth as exceedingly beneficial for me. Do
that, O son, for I regard it all as for thy good also. Indeed, Vidura
knoweth with all its mysteries the science (of political morality) that
the illustrious and learned and wise Vrihaspati, the celestial Rishi
who is the spiritual guide of Vasava--had unfolded unto the wise chief
of the immortals. And O son, I always accept what Vidura adviseth. O
king, as the wise Uddhava is ever regarded amongst the Vrishnis, so is
Vidura possessed of great intelligence esteemed as the foremost of the
Kurus. Therefore, O son, have nothing to do with dice. It is evident
that dice soweth dissensions. And dissensions are the ruin of the
kingdom. Therefore, O son, abandon this idea of gambling. O son, thou
hast obtained from us what, it hath been ordained, a father and a
mother should give unto their son, viz., ancestral rank and
possessions. Thou art educated and clever in every branch of knowledge,
and hast been brought up with affection in thy paternal dwelling. Born
the eldest among all thy brothers, living within thy own kingdom, why
regardest thou thyself as unhappy? O thou of mighty arms, thou
obtainest food and attire of the very best kind and which is not
obtainable by ordinary men. Why dost thou grieve yet. O son, O
mighty-armed one, ruling thy large ancestral kingdom swelling with
people and wealth, thou shinest as splendidly as the chief of the
celestials in heaven. Thou art possessed of wisdom. It behoveth thee to
tell me what can be the root of this grief that hath made thee so
melancholy.'

"Duryodhana replied,--'I am a sinful wretch, O king, because I eat and
dress beholding (the prosperity of the foes). It hath been said that
man is a wretch who is not filled with jealousy at the sight of his
enemy's prosperity. O exalted one, this kind of prosperity of mine doth
not gratify me. Beholding that blazing prosperity of the son of Kunti,
I am very much pained. I tell thee strong must be my vitality, in as
much as I am living even at the sight of the whole earth owning the
sway of Yudhishthira. The Nipas, the Chitrakas, the Kukkuras, the
Karaskaras, and the Lauha-janghas are living in the palace of
Yudhishthira like bondsmen. The Himavat, the ocean, the regions on the
sea-shore, and the numberless other regions that yield jewels and gems,
have all acknowledged superiority of the mansion of Yudhishthira in
respect of wealth it containeth. And, O Monarch, regarding me as the
eldest and entitled to respect, Yudhishthira having received me
respectfully, appointed me in receiving the jewels and gems (that were
brought as tribute). O Bharata, the limit and the like of the excellent
and invaluable jewels that were brought there have not been seen. And O
king, my hands were fatigued in receiving that wealth. And when I was
tired, they that brought those valuable articles from distant regions
used to wait till I was able to resume my labour. Bringing jewels from
the lake Vindu, the Asura architect Maya constructed (for the Pandavas)
a lake-like surface made of crystal. Beholding the (artificial) lotuses
with which it was filled, I mistook it, O king for water. And seeing me
draw up my clothes (while about to cross it), Vrikodara (Bhima) laughed
at me, regarding me as wanting in jewels and having lost my head at the
sight of the affluence of my enemy. If I had the ability, I would, O
king, without the loss of a moment, slay Vrikodara for that. But, O
monarch, if we endeavour to slay Bhima now, without doubt, ours will be
the fate of Sisupala. O Bharata, that insult by the foe burneth me.
Once again, O king, beholding a similar lake that is really full of
water but which I mistook for a crystal surface, I fell into it. At
that, Bhima with Arjuna once more laughed derisively, and Draupadi also
accompanied by other females joined in the laughter. That paineth my
heart exceedingly. My apparel having been wet, the menials at the
command of the king gave me other clothes. That also is my great
sorrow. And O king, hear now of another mistake that I speak of. In
attempting to pass through what is exactly of the shape of a door but
through which there was really no passage, I struck my forehead against
stone and injured myself. The twins Nakula and Sahadeva beholding from
a distance that I was so hit at the head came and supported me in their
arms, expressing great concern for me. And Sahadeva repeatedly told me,
as if with a smile,--"This O king, is the door. Go this way!" And
Bhimasena, laughing aloud, addressed me and said,--"O son of
Dhritarashtra, this is the door." And, O king I had not even heard of
the names of those gems that I saw in that mansion. And it is for these
reasons that my heart so acheth.'


SECTION L

"Duryodhana said,--'Listen now, O Bharata, about all the most costly
articles I saw, belonging unto the sons of Pandu, and brought one after
another by the kings of the earth. Beholding that wealth of the foe, I
lost my reason and scarcely knew myself. And, O Bharata, listen as I
describe that wealth consisting of both manufactures and the produce of
the land. The king of Kamboja gave innumerable skins of the best kind,
and blankets made of wool, of the soft fur of rodents and other
burroughers, and of the hair of cats,--all inlaid with threads of gold.
And he also gave three hundred horses of the Titteti and the Kalmasha
species possessing noses like parrots. And he also gave three hundred
camels and an equal number of she-asses, all fattened with the olives
and the Pilusha. And innumerable Brahmanas engaged in rearing cattle
and occupied in low offices for the gratification of the illustrious
king Yudhishthira the just waited at the gate with three hundred
millions of tribute but they were denied admission into the palace. And
hundred upon hundreds of Brahmanas possessing wealth of kine and living
upon the lands that Yudhishthira had given them, came there with their
handsome golden Kamandalus filled with clarified butter. And though
they had brought such tribute, they were refused admission into the
palace. And the Sudra kings that dwelt in the regions on the seacoast,
brought with them, O king, hundred thousands of serving girls of the
Karpasika country, all of beautiful features and slender waist and
luxuriant hair and decked in golden ornaments; and also many skins of
the Ranku deer worthy even of Brahmanas as tribute unto king
Yudhishthira. And the tribes Vairamas, Paradas, Tungas, with the
Kitavas who lived upon crops that depended on water from the sky or of
the river and also they who were born in regions on the sea-shore, in
woodlands, or countries on the other side of the ocean waited at the
gate, being refused permission to enter, with goats and kine and asses
and camels and vegetable, honey and blankets and jewels and gems of
various kinds. And that great warrior king Bhagadatta, the brave ruler
of Pragjyotisha and the mighty sovereign of the mlechchas, at the head
of a large number of Yavanas waited at the gate unable to enter, with a
considerable tribute comprising of horses of the best breed and
possessing the speed of the wind. And king Bhagadatta (beholding the
concourse) had to go away from the gate, making over a number of swords
with handles made of the purest ivory and well-adorned with diamonds
and every kind of gems. And many tribes coming from different regions,
of whom some possess two eyes, some three and some had eyes on their
foreheads, and those also called Aushmikas, and Nishadas, and Romakas,
some cannibals and many possessing only one leg, I say, O king,
standing at the gate, being refused permission to enter. And these
diverse rulers brought as tribute ten thousand asses of diverse hues
and black necks and huge bodies and great speed and much docility and
celebrated all over the world. And these asses were all of goodly size
and delightful colour. And they were all bred on the coast of Vankhu.
And there were many kings that gave unto Yudhishthira much gold and
silver. And having given much tribute they obtained admission into the
palace of Yudhishthira. The people that came there possessing only one
leg gave unto Yudhishthira many wild horses, some of which were as red
as the cochineal, and some white, and some possessing the hues of the
rainbow and some looking like evening clouds, and some that were of
variegated colour. And they were all endued with the speed of the mind.
And they also gave unto the king enough gold of superior quality. I
also saw numberless Chins and Sakas and Uddras and many barbarous
tribes living in the woods, and many Vrishnis and Harahunas, and dusky
tribes of the Himavat, and many Nipas and people residing in regions on
the sea-coast, waiting at the gate being refused permission to enter.
And the people of Valhika gave unto him as tribute ten thousand asses,
of goodly size and black necks and daily running two hundred miles, And
those asses were of many shapes. And they were well-trained and
celebrated all over the world. And possessed of symmetrical proportion
and excellent colour, their skins were pleasant to the touch. And the
Valhikas also presented numerous blankets of woollen texture
manufactured in Chin and numerous skins of the Ranku deer, and clothes
manufactured from jute, and others woven with the threads spun by
insects. And they also gave thousands of other clothes not made of
cotton, possessing the colour of the lotus. And these were all of
smooth texture. And they also gave soft sheep-skins by thousands. And
they also gave many sharp and long swords and scimitars, and hatchets
and fine-edged battle-axes manufactured in the western countries. And
having presented perfumes and jewels and gems of various kinds by
thousands as tribute, they waited at the gate, being refused admission
into the palace. And the Sakas and Tukhatas and Tukharas and Kankas and
Romakas and men with horns bringing with them as tribute numerous large
elephants and ten thousand horses, and hundreds and hundreds of
millions of gold waited at the gate, being refused permission to enter.
And the kings of the eastern countries having presented numerous
valuable articles including many costly carpets and vehicles and beds,
and armours of diverse hues decked with jewels and gold and ivory, and
weapons of various kinds, and cars of various shapes and handsome make
and adorned with gold, with well-trained horses trimmed with tiger
skins, and rich and variegated blankets for caprisoning elephants, and
various kinds of jewels and gems, arrows long and short and various
other kinds of weapons, obtained permission to enter the sacrificial
palace of the illustrious Pandava!'


SECTION LI

"Duryodhana said,--'O sinless one, listen to me as I describe that
large mass of wealth consisting of various kinds of tribute presented
unto Yudhishthira by the kings of the earth. They that dwell by the
side of the river Sailoda flowing between the mountains of Mer and
Mandara and enjoy the delicious shade of topes of the Kichaka bamboo,
viz., the Khashas, Ekasanas, the Arhas, the Pradaras, the Dirghavenus,
the Paradas, the Kulindas, the Tanganas, and the other Tanganas,
brought as tribute heaps of gold measured in dronas (jars) and raised
from underneath the earth by ants and therefore called after these
creatures. The mountain tribes endued with great strength having
brought as tribute numerous Chamaras (long brushes) soft and black and
others white as moon-beam and sweet honey extracted from the flowers
growing on the Himavat as also from the Mishali champaka and garlands
of flowers brought from the region of the northern Kurus, and diverse
kinds of plants from the north even from Kailasa, waited with their
heads bent down at the gate of king Yudhishthira, being refused
permission to enter. I also beheld there numberless chiefs of the
Kiratas armed with cruel weapons and ever engaged in cruel deeds,
eating of fruits and roots and attired in skins and living on the
northern slopes of the Himavat and on the mountain from behind which
the sun rises and in the region of Karusha on the sea-coast and on both
sides of the Lohitya mountains. And, O king, having brought with them
as tribute loads upon loads of sandal and aloe as also black aloe, and
heaps upon heaps of valuable skins and gold and perfumes, and ten
thousand serving-girls of their own race, and many beautiful animals
and birds of remote countries, and much gold of great splendour
procured from mountains, the Kiratas waited at the gate, being refused
permission to enter. The Kairatas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Suras,
the Vaiamakas, the Audumvaras, the Durvibhagas, the Kumaras, the
Paradas along with the Vahlikas, the Kashmiras, the Ghorakas, the
Hansakayanas, the Sivis, the Trigartas, the Yauddheyas, the ruler of
Madras and the Kaikeyas, the Amvashtas, the Kaukuras, the Tarkshyas,
the Vastrapas along with the Palhavas, the Vashatayas, the Mauleyas
along with the Kshudrakas, and the Malavas, the Paundrayas, the
Kukkuras, the Sakas, the Angas, the Vangas, the Punras, the Sanavatyas,
and the Gayas--these good and well-born Kshatriyas distributed into
regular clans and trained to the use of arms, brought tribute unto king
Yudhishthira by hundreds and thousands. And the Vangas, the Kalingas,
the Magadhas, the Tamraliptas, the Supundrakas, the Dauvalikas, the
Sagarakas, the Patrornas, the Saisavas, and innumerable
Karnapravaranas, who presented themselves at the gate, were told by the
gate-keepers at the command of the king, that if they could wait and
bring good tribute they could obtain admission. Then the kings of those
nations each gave a thousand elephants furnished with tusks like unto
the shafts of ploughs and decked with girdles made of gold, and covered
with fine blankets and therefore, resembling the lotus in hue. And they
were all darkish as rocks and always musty, and procured from the sides
of the Kamyaka lake, and covered with defensive armour. And they were
also exceedingly patient and of the best breed. And having made these
presents, those kings were permitted to enter. O king, these and many
others, coming from various regions, and numberless other illustrious
kings, brought jewels and gems unto this sacrifice. And Chitraratha,
also the king of Gandharvas, the friend of Indra, gave four hundred
horses gifted with the speed of the wind. And the Gandharva Tumvuru
gladly gave a hundred horses of the colour of mango leaf and decked in
gold. And, O thou of the Kuru race, the celebrated king of the Mlechcha
tribe, called the Sukaras, gave many hundreds of excellent elephants.
And Virata, the king of Matsya, gave as tribute two thousand elephants
decked in gold. And king Vasudana from the kingdom of Pansu presented
unto the son of Pandu six and twenty elephants and two thousand horses,
O king, all decked in gold and endued with speed and strength and in
full vigour of youth, and diverse other kinds of wealth. And Yajnasena
presented unto the sons of Pandu for the sacrifice, fourteen thousand
serving-girls and ten thousand serving-men with their wives, many
hundreds of excellent elephants, six and twenty cars with elephants
yoked unto them, and also his whole kingdom. And Vasudeva of the
Vrishni race, in order to enhance the dignity of Arjuna, gave fourteen
thousands of excellent elephants. Indeed, Krishna is the soul of Arjuna
and Arjuna is the soul of Krishna, and whatever Arjuna may say Krishna
is certain to accomplish. And Krishna is capable of abandoning heaven
itself for the sake of Arjuna, and Arjuna also is capable of
sacrificing his life for the sake of Krishna. And the Kings of Chola
and Pandya, though they brought numberless jars of gold filled with
fragrant sandal juice from the hills of Malaya, and loads of sandal and
aloe wood from the Dardduras hills, and many gems of great brilliancy
and fine cloths inlaid with gold, did not obtain permission (to enter).
And the king of the Singhalas gave those best of sea-born gems called
the lapis lazuli, and heaps of pearls also, and hundreds of coverlets
for elephants. And numberless dark-coloured men with the ends of their
eyes red as copper, attired in clothes decked with gems, waited at the
gate with those presents. And numberless Brahmanas and Kshatriyas who
had been vanquished, and Vaisyas and serving Sudras, from love of
Yudhishthira, brought tribute unto the son of Pandu. And even all the
Mlechchas, from love and respect, came unto Yudhishthira. And all
orders of men, good, indifferent and low, belonging to numberless
races, coming from diverse lands made Yudhishthira's habitation the
epitome of the world.'

"'And beholding the kings of the earth to present unto the foes such
excellent and valuable presents, I wished for death out of grief. And O
king, I will now tell thee of the servants of the Pandavas, people for
whom Yudhishthira supplieth food, both cooked and uncooked. There are a
hundred thousand billions of mounted elephants and cavalry and a
hundred millions of cars and countless foot soldiers. At one place raw
provisions are being measured out; at another they are being cooked;
and at another place the foods are being distributed. And the notes of
festivity are being heard everywhere. And amongst men of all orders I
beheld not a single one in the mansion of Yudhishthira that had not
food and drink and ornaments. And eighty-eight thousands of Snataka
Brahmanas leading domestic lives, all supported by Yudhishthira, with
thirty serving-girls given unto each, gratified by the king, always
pray with complacent hearts for the destruction of his foes. And ten
thousands of other ascetics with vital seed drawn up, daily eat of
golden plates in Yudhishthira's palace. And, O king, Yajnaseni, without
having eaten herself, daily seeth whether everybody, including even the
deformed and the dwarfs, hath eaten or not. And, O Bharata, only two do
not pay tribute unto the son of Kunti, viz., the Panchalas in
consequence of their relationship by marriage, and the Andhakas and
Vrishnis in consequence of their friendship.'


SECTION LII

"Duryodhana said,--'Those kings that are revered over all the world,
who are devoted to truth and who are pledged to the observance of rigid
vows, who are possessed of great learning and eloquence, who are fully
conversant with the Vedas and their branches as also with sacrifices,
who have piety and modesty, whose souls are devoted to virtue, who
possess fame, and who have enjoyed the grand rites of coronation, all
wait upon and worship Yudhishthira. And, O king, I beheld there many
thousands of wild kine with as many vessels of white copper for milking
them, brought thither by the kings of the earth as sacrificial presents
to be given away by Yudhishthira unto the Brahmana. And, O Bharata, for
bathing Yudhishthira at the conclusion of the sacrifice, many kings
with the greatest alacrity, themselves brought there in a state of
purity many excellent jars (containing water). And king Vahlika brought
there a car decked with pure gold. And king Sudakshina himself yoked
thereto four white horses of Kamboja breed, and Sunitha of great might
fitted the lower pole and the ruler of Chedi with his own hands took up
and fitted the flag-staff. And the king of the Southern country stood
ready with the coat of mail; the ruler of Magadha, with garlands of
flowers and the head-gear; the great warrior Vasudana with a sixty
years old elephant, the king of Matsya, with the side-fittings of the
car, all encased in gold; king Ekalavya, with the shoes; the king of
Avanti, with diverse kinds of water for the final bath; king Chekitana,
with the quiver; the king of Kasi, with the bow; and Salya, with a
sword whose hilt and straps were adorned with gold. Then Dhaumya and
Vyasa, of great ascetic merit, with Narada and Asita's son Devala,
standing before performed the ceremony of sprinkling the sacred water
over the king. And the great Rishis with cheerful hearts sat where the
sprinkling ceremony was performed. And other illustrious Rishis
conversant with the Vedas, with Jamadagni's son among them, approached
Yudhishthira, the giver of large sacrificial presents, uttering mantras
all the while, like the seven Rishis, approaching the great Indra in
heaven. And Satyaki of unbaffled prowess held the umbrella (over the
king's head). And Dhananjaya and Bhima were engaged in tanning the
king; while the twins held a couple of chamaras in their hands. And the
Ocean himself brought in a sling that big conch of Varuna which the
celestial artificer Viswakarman had constructed with a thousand Nishkas
of gold, and which Prajapati had in a former Kalpa, presented unto
Indra. It was with that conch that Krishna bathed Yudhishthira after
the conclusion of the sacrifice, and beholding it, I swooned away.
People go to the Eastern or the Western seas and also to the Southern
one. But, O father, none except birds can ever go to the Northern sea.
But the Pandavas have spread their dominion even there, for I heard
hundreds of conches that had been brought thence blown (in the
sacrificial mansion) indicative of auspicious rejoicing. And while
those conches blew simultaneously, my hair stood on end. And those
among the kings, who were weak in strength fell down. And
Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki and the sons of Pandu and Kesava,--those
eight, endued with strength and prowess and handsome in person,
beholding the kings deprived of consciousness and myself in that
plight, laughed outright. Then Vibhatsu (Arjuna) with a cheerful heart
gave, O Bharata, unto the principal Brahmanas five hundred bullocks
with horns plated with gold. And king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti,
having completed the Rajasuya sacrifice, obtained like the exalted
Harishchandra such prosperity that neither Rantideva nor Nabhaga, nor
Jauvanaswa, nor Manu, nor king Prithu the son of Vena, nor Bhagiratha,
Yayati, nor Nahusha, had obtained its like. And beholding, O exalted
one, such prosperity, in the son of Pritha which is even like that
which Harishchandra had, I do not see the least good in continuing to
live, O Bharata! O ruler of men, a yoke that is tied (to the bullock's
shoulders) by a blind man becomes loosened. Even such is the case with
us. The younger ones are growing while the elder ones are decaying. And
beholding all this, O chief of the Kurus, I cannot enjoy peace even
with the aid of reflection. And it is for this, O king, that I am
plunged into grief and becoming pale and emaciated.'


SECTION LIII

"Dhritrashtra said,--'Thou art my eldest son and born also of my eldest
wife. Therefore, O son, be not jealous of the Pandavas. He that is
jealous is always unhappy and suffereth the pangs of death. O bull of
the Bharata race, Yudhishthira knoweth not deception, possesseth wealth
equal unto thine, hath thy friends for his, and is not jealous of thee.
Why shouldst thou, therefore, be jealous of him? O king, in respect of
friends and allies thou art equal unto Yudhishthira. Why shouldst thou,
therefore, covet, from folly, the property of thy brother? Be not so.
Cease to be jealous. Do not grieve. O bull of the Bharata race, if thou
covetest the dignity attaching to the performance of a sacrifice, let
the priests arrange for thee the great sacrifice, called the
Saptatantu. The kings of the earth will then, cheerfully and with great
respect, bring for thee also much wealth and gems and ornaments. O
child, coveting other's possessions is exceedingly mean. He, on the
other hand, enjoyeth happiness, who is content with his own being
engaged in the practices of his own order. Never striving to obtain the
wealth of others, persevering in one's own affairs, and protecting what
