question. Every detail is beautifully adapted to bring out the
lesson that the obligation of neighbourly affection has nothing to
do with nearness either of race or religion, but is as wide as
humanity. The wounded man was probably a Jew, but it is significant
that his nationality is not mentioned. He is 'a certain man,' that
is all. The Samaritan did not ask where he was born before he helped
him. So Christ teaches us that sorrow and need and sympathy and help
are of no nationality.

That lesson is still more strongly taught by making the helper a
Samaritan. Perhaps, if Jesus had been speaking in America, he would
have made him a negro; or, if in France, a German; or, if in
England, a 'foreigner.' It was a daring stroke to bring the despised
name of 'Samaritan' into the story, and one sees what a hard morsel
to swallow the lawyer found it, by his unwillingness to name him
after all.

The nations have not yet learned the deep, simple truth of this
parable. It absolutely forbids all limitations of mercy and help. It
makes every man the neighbour of every man. It carries in germ the
great truth of the brotherhood of the race. 'Humanity' is a purely
Christian word, and a conception that was never dreamed of before
Christ had showed us the unity of mankind. We slowly approximate to
the realisation of the teaching of this story, which is oftener
admired than imitated, and perhaps oftenest on the lips of people
who obey it least.

II. Another aspect of the parable is its lesson as to the true
manifestations of neighbourliness. The minutely detailed account of
the Samaritan's care for the half-dead man is not only graphic, but
carries large lessons. Compassionate sentiments are very well. They
must come first. The help that is given as a matter of duty, without
the outgoing of heart, will be worth little, and soon cease to flow;
but the emotion that does not drive the wheels of action, and set to
work to stanch the sorrows which cause it to run so easily, is worth
still less. It hardens the heart, as all feeling unexpressed in
action does. If the priest and Levite had gone up to the man, and
said, 'Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow! how sorry we are for you!
somebody ought to come and help you,' and so had trudged on their
way, they would have been worse than they are painted as being.

The various acts are enumerated as showing the genius of true love.
We notice the swift, cool-headed deftness of the man, his having at
hand the appliances needed, the business-like way in which he goes
about his kindness, his readiness to expend his wine and oil, his
willingness to do the surgeon's work, his cheerful giving up of his
'own beast,' while he plodded along on foot, steadying the wounded
man on his ass; his care for him at the inn; his generosity, and
withal his prudence, in not leaving a great sum in the host's hands,
but just enough to tide over a day or two, and his wise hint that he
would audit the accounts when he came back. This man's quick
compassion was blended with plenty of shrewdness, and was as
practical as the hardest, least compassionate man could have been.
There is need for organisation, 'faculty,' and the like, in the work
of loving our neighbour. A thousand pities that sometimes Christian
charity and Christian common-sense dissolve partnership. The
Samaritan was a man of business, and he did his compassion in a
business-like fashion, as we should try to do.

III. Another lesson inwrought into the parable is the divorce
between religion and neighbourliness, as shown in the conduct of the
priest and Levite. Jericho was one of the priestly cities, so that
there would be frequent travellers on ecclesiastical errands. The
priest was 'going down' (that is from Jerusalem), so he could not
plead a 'pressing public engagement' at the Temple. The verbal
repetition of the description of the conduct of both him and the
Levite serves to suggest its commonness. They two did exactly the
same thing, and so would twenty or two hundred ordinary passers by.
They saw the man lying in a pool of blood, and they made a wide
circuit, and, even in the face of such a sight, went on their way.
Probably they said to themselves, 'Robbers again; the sooner we get
past this dangerous bit, the better.' We see that they were
heartless, but they did not see it. We do the same thing ourselves,
and do not see that we do; for who of us has not known of many
miseries which we could have done something to stanch, and have left
untouched because our hearts were unaffected? The world would be a
changed place if every Christian attended to the sorrows that are
plain before him.

Let professing Christians especially lay to heart the solemn lesson
that there does lie in their very religion the possibility of their
being culpably unconcerned about some of the world's wounds, and
that, if their love to God does not find a field for its
manifestation in active love to man, worship in the Temple will be
mockery. Philanthropy is, in our days, often substituted for
religion. The service of man has been put forward as the only real
service of God. But philanthropic unbelievers and unphilanthropic
believers are equally monstrosities. What God hath joined let not
man put asunder. That simple 'and,' which couples the two great
commandments, expresses their indissoluble connection. Well for us
if in our practice they are blended in one!

It is not spiritualising this narrative when we say that Jesus is
Himself the great pattern of the swift compassion and effectual
helpfulness which it sets forth. Many unwise attempts have been made
to tack on spiritual meanings to the story. These are as irreverent
as destructive of its beauty and significance. But to say that
Christ is the perfect example of that love to every man which the
narrative portrays, has nothing in common with these fancies. It is
only when we have found in Him the pity and the healing which we
need, that we shall go forth into the world with love as wide as
His.




HOW TO PRAY


    'And it came to pass, that, as He was praying in a
    certain place, when He ceased, one of His disciples
    said unto Him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also
    taught His disciples. 2. And He said unto them, When
    ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed
    be Thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in
    heaven, so in earth. 3. Give us day by day our daily
    bread. 4. And  forgive us our sins; for we also forgive
    every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into
    temptation; but deliver us from evil. 5. And He said
    unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall
    go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend
    me three loaves; 6. For a friend of mine in his journey
    is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him?
    7. And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me
    not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me
    in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. 8. I say unto you,
    Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his
    friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and
    give him as many as he needeth. 9. And I say unto you,
    Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall
    find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 10. For
    every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh
    findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
    11. If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
    father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish,
    will he for a fish give him a serpent? 12. Or if he
    shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? 13. If
    ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
    your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father
    give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him!--LUKE xi. 1-13.

Christ's praying fired the disciples with desire to pray like Him.
There must have been something of absorption and blessedness in His
communion with the Father which struck them with awe and longing,
and which they would fain repeat. Do our prayers move any to taste
the devotion and joy which breathe through them? But low conceptions
mingled with high desires in their request. They think that if He
will give them a form, that will be enough; and they wish to be as
well off as John's disciples, whose relation to their master seems
to them parallel with theirs to Jesus.

Our Lord's answer meets and transcends their wish. He does give them
a model prayer, and He adds encouragements to pray which inculcate
confidence and persistence. The passage, then, falls into two parts--the
pattern prayer (vs. 2-4), and the spirit of prayer as enforced by some
encouragements (vs. 5-13). The material is so rich that we can but
gather the surface wealth. Deep mines must lie unexplored here.

I. The pattern of prayer. We call it the Lord's Prayer, but it is so
only in the sense that He gives it. It is our prayer for our use.
His own prayers remain unrecorded, except those in the upper room
and at Gethsemane. This is the type to which His servants' prayers
are to be conformed. 'After this manner pray ye,' whether in these
words or not. And the repetition of the words is often far enough
away from catching their spirit. To suppose that our Lord simply met
the disciples' wish by giving them a form misconceives the genius of
His work. He gave something much better; namely, a pattern, the
spirit of which we are to diffuse through all our petitions,

Two salient features of the prayer bring out the two great
characteristics of all true Christian prayer. First, we note the
invocation. It is addressed to the Father. Our prayers are, then,
after the pattern only when they are the free, unembarrassed,
confident, and utterly frank whispers of a child to its father.
Confidence and love should wing the darts which are to reach heaven.
That name, thoroughly realised, banishes fear and self-will, and
inspires submission and aspiration. To cry,' Abba, Father,' is the
essence of all prayer. Nothing more is needed.

The broad lesson drawn from the order of requests is the second
point to be noticed. If we have the child's spirit, we shall put the
Father's honour first, and absolutely subordinate our own interests
to it. So the first half of the prayer, like the first half of the
Decalogue, deals with God's name and its glory. Alas! it is hard
even for His child to keep this order. Natural self-regard must be
cast out by love, if we are thus to pray. How few of us have reached
that height, not in mere words, but in unspoken desires!

The order of the several petitions in the first half of the prayer
is significant. God's name (that is, His revealed character) being
hallowed (that is, recognised as what it is), separate from all
limitation and creatural imperfection, and yet near in love as a
Father is, the coming of His kingdom will follow; for where He is
known and honoured for what He is He will reign, and men, if they
rightly knew Him, would fall before Him and serve Him. The hallowing
of His name is the only foundation for His kingdom among us, and all
knowledge of Him which does not lead to submission to His rule is
false or incomplete.

The outward, visible establishment of God's kingdom in human society
follows individual acquaintance with His name. The doing of God's
will is the sign of His kingdom having come. The ocean is blue, like
the sky which it mirrors. Earth will be like heaven.

The second half of the prayer returns to personal interests; but
God's child has many brethren, and so His prayer is, not for 'me'
and 'my,' but for 'us' and 'ours.' Our first need, if we start from
the surface and go inwards, is for the maintenance of bodily life.
So the petition for bread has precedence, not as being most, but
least, important. We are to recognise God's hand in blessing our
daily toil. We are to limit our desires to necessaries, and to leave
the future in His hands. Is this 'the manner' after which Christians
pray for perishable good? Where would anxious care or eager rushing
after wealth be, if it were?

A deeper need, the chief in regard to the inner man, is deliverance
from sin, in its two aspects of guilt and power. So the next
petition is for pardon. Sin incurs debt. Forgiveness is the
remission of penalty, but the penalty is not merely external
punishment. The true penalty is separation from God, and His
forgiveness is His loving on, undisturbed by sin. If we truly call
God Father, the image of His mercifulness will be formed in us; and
unless we are forgiving, we shall certainly lose the consciousness
of being forgiven, and bind our sins on our backs in all their
weight. God's children need always to pray 'after this manner, 'for
sin is not entirely conquered.

Pardon is meant to lead on to holiness. Hence the next clause in
effect prays for sanctification. Knowing our own weakness, we may
well ask not to be placed in circumstances where the inducements to
sin would be strong, even while we know that we may grow thereby, if
we resist. The shortened form of the prayer in Luke, according to
the Revised Version, omits 'deliver us from evil'; but that clause
is necessary to complete the idea. Whether we read 'evil' or 'the
evil one,' the clause refers to us as tempted, and, as it were, in
the grip of an enemy too strong for us. God alone can extricate us
from the mouth of the lion. He will, if we ask Him. The only evil is
to sin away our consciousness of sonship and to cling to the sin
which separates us from God.

II. A type of prayer is not all that we need. The spirit in which we
pray is still more important. So Jesus goes on to enjoin two things
chiefly; namely, persistence and filial confidence. He presents to
us a parable with its application (vs. 5-10), and the germ of a
parable with its (vs. 11-13). Observe that these two parts deal with
encouragements to confidence drawn, first, from our own experience
in asking, and, second, with encouragements drawn from our own
experience in giving. In the former we learn from the man who will
not take 'no,' and so at last gets 'yes'; in the latter, from the
Father who will certainly give His child what he asks.

In the parable two points are to be specially noted--the persistent
suppliant pleads not for himself so much as for the hungry
traveller, and the man addressed gives without any kindliness, from
the mere wish to be left at peace. As to both points, an _a
fortiori_ argument is implied. If a man can so persevere when
pleading for another, how much more should we do so when asking for
ourselves! And if persistence has such power with selfish men, how
much more shall it avail with Him who slumbers not nor sleeps, and
to whom we can never come at an inopportune moment, and who will
give us because we are His friends, and He ours! The very ugliness
of character ascribed to the owner of the loaves, selfish in his
enjoyment of his bed, in his refusal to turn out on an errand of
neighbourliness, and in his final giving, thus serves as a foil to
the character of Him to whom our prayers are addressed.

The application of the parable lies in verses 9 and 10. The efforts
enjoined are in an ascending scale, and 'ask' and 'knock' allude to
the parable. To 'seek' is more than to ask, for it includes active
exertion; and for want of seeking by conduct appropriate to our
prayers, we often ask in vain. If we pray for temporal blessings,
and then fold our hands, and sit with our mouths open for them to
drop into, we shall not get them. If we ask for higher goods, and
rise from our knees to live worldly lives, we shall get them as
little. Knocking is more than either, for it implies a continuous
hammering on the door, like Peter's when he stood in the morning
twilight at Mary's gate. Asking and seeking must be continuous if
they are to be rewarded.

Verse 10 grounds the promise of verse 9 on experience. It is he who
asks that gets. In men's giving it is not universally true that
petitions are answered, nor that gifts are not given unasked. Nor is
it true about God's lower gifts, which are often bestowed on the
unthankful, and not seldom refused to His children. But it is
universally true in regard to His highest gifts, which are never
withheld from the earnest asker who adds to his prayers fitting
conduct, and prays always without fainting, and which are not and
cannot be given unless desire for them opens the heart for their
reception, and faith in God assures him who prays that he cannot ask
in vain.

The germ of a parable with its application (vs. 11-13) draws
encouragement from our own experience in giving. It guards against
misconceptions of God which might arise from the former parable, and
comes back to the first word of the Lord's Prayer as itself the
guarantee of every true desire of His child being heard and met.
Bread, eggs, and fish are staple articles of food. In each case
something similar in appearance, but useless or hurtful, is
contrasted with the thing asked by the child. The round loaves of
the East are not unlike rounded, wave-washed stones, water-serpents
are fishlike, and the oval body of a quiescent scorpion is similar
to an egg. Fathers do not play tricks with their hungry children.
Though we are all sinful, parental love survives, and makes a father
wise enough to know what will nourish and what would poison his
child.

Alas! that is only partially true, for many a parent has not a
father's heart, and is neither impelled by love to give good things
to, nor to withhold evil ones from, his child. But it is true with
sufficient frequency to warrant the great _a fortiori_ argument
which Jesus bases on it. Our heavenly Father's love, the archetype
of all parental affection, is tainted by no evil and darkened by no
ignorance. He loves perfectly and wisely, therefore He cannot but
give what His child needs.

But the child often mistakes, and thinks that stones are bread,
serpents fish, and scorpions eggs. So God often has to deny the
letter of our petitions, in order not to give us poison. Luke's
version of the closing promise, in which 'the Holy Spirit' stands
instead of Matthew's 'good things,' sets the whole matter in the
true light; for that Spirit brings with Him all real good, and,
while many of our desires have, for our own sakes, to be denied, we
shall never hold up empty hands and have to let them fall still
empty, if we desire that great encyclopediacal gift which our loving
Father waits to bestow. It cannot be given without our petition, it
will never be withheld from our petition.




THE PRAYING CHRIST


    '... As He was praying in a certain place, when He
    ceased, one of His disclples said unto Him, Lord,
    teach us to pray.'--LUKE xi. 1.

It is noteworthy that we owe our knowledge of the prayers of Jesus
principally to the Evangelist Luke. There is, indeed, one solemn
hour of supplication under the quivering shadows of the olive-trees
in Gethsemane which is recorded by Matthew and Mark as well; and
though the fourth Gospel passes over that agony of prayer, it gives
us, in accordance with its ruling purpose, the great chapter that
records His priestly intercession. But in addition to these
instances the first Gospel furnishes but one, and the second but
two, references to the subject. All the others are found in Luke.

I need not stay to point out how this fact tallies with the many
other characteristics of the third Gospel, which mark it as
eminently the story of the Son of Man. The record which traces our
Lord's descent to Adam rather than to Abraham; which tells the story
of His birth, and gives us all we know of the 'child Jesus'; which
records His growth in wisdom and stature, and has preserved a
multitude of minute points bearing on His true manhood, as well as
on the tenderness of His sympathy and the universality of His work,
most naturally emphasises that most precious indication of His
humanity--His habitual prayerfulness. The Gospel of the King, which
is the first Gospel, or of the Servant, which is the second, or of
the Son of God, which is the fourth, had less occasion to dwell on
this. Royalty, practical Obedience, Divinity, are their respective
themes. Manhood is Luke's, and he is ever pointing us to the
kneeling Christ.

Consider, then, for a moment, how precious the prayers of Jesus are,
as bringing Him very near to us in His true manhood. There are deep
and mysterious truths involved with which we do not meddle now. But
there are also plain and surface truths which are very helpful and
blessed. We thank God for the story of His weariness when He sat on
the well, and of His slumber when, worn out with a hard day's work,
He slept on the hard wooden pillow in the stern of the fishing-boat
among the nets and the litter. It brings Him near to us when we read
that He thirsted, and nearer still when the immortal words fall on
our wondering ears, 'Jesus wept.' But even more precious than these
indications of His true participation in physical needs and human
emotion, is the great evidence of His prayers, that He too lived a
life of dependence, of communion, and of submission; that in our
religious life, as in all our life, He is our pattern and
forerunner. As the Epistle to the Hebrews puts it, He shows that He
is not ashamed to call us brethren by this, that He too avows that
He lives by faith; and by His life--and surely pre-eminently by His
prayers--declares, I will put my trust in Him.' We cannot think of
Christ too often or too absolutely as the object of faith; and as
the hearer of our cries; but we may, and some of us do, think of Him
too seldom as the pattern of faith, and as the example for our
devotion. We should feel Him a great deal nearer us; and the fact of
His manhood would not only be grasped more clearly by orthodox
believers, but would be felt in more of its true tenderness, if we
gave more prominence in our thoughts to that picture of the praying
Christ.

Another point that may be suggested is, that the highest, holiest
life needs specific acts and times of prayer. A certain fantastical
and overstrained spirituality is not rare, which professes to have
got beyond the need of such beggarly elements. Some tinge of this
colours the habits of many people who are scarcely conscious of its
presence, and makes them somewhat careless as to forms and times of
public or of that of private worship. I do not think that I am wrong
in saying that there is a growing laxity in that matter among people
who are really trying to live Christian lives. We may well take the
lesson which Christ's prayers teach us, for we all need it, that no
life is so high, so holy, so full of habitual communion with God,
that it can afford to do without the hour of prayer, the secret
place, the uttered word. If we are to 'pray without ceasing,' by the
constant attitude of communion and the constant conversion of work
into worship, we must certainly have, and we shall undoubtedly
desire, special moments when the daily sacrifice of doing good
passes into the sacrifice of our lips. The devotion which is to be
diffused through our lives must be first concentrated and evolved in
our prayers. These are the gathering-grounds which feed the river.
The life that was all one long prayer needed the mountain-top and
the nightly converse with God. He who could say, 'The Father hath
not left Me alone, for I do always the things that please Him,' felt
that He must also have the special communion of spoken prayer. What
Christ needed we cannot afford to neglect.

Thus Christ's own prayers do, in a very real sense, 'teach us to
pray.' But it strikes me that, if we will take the instances in
which we find Him praying, and try to classify them in a rough way,
we may gain some hints worth laying to heart. Let me attempt this
briefly now.

First, then, the praying Christ teaches us to pray as a rest after
service.

The Evangelist Mark gives us, in his brief, vivid way, a wonderful
picture in his first chapter of Christ's first Sabbath-day of
ministry in Capernaum. It was crowded with work. The narrative goes
hurrying on through the busy hours, marking the press of rapidly
succeeding calls by its constant reiteration--'straightway,'
'immediately,' 'forthwith,' 'anon,' 'immediately.' He teaches in the
synagogue; without breath or pause He heals a man with an unclean
spirit; then at once passes to Simon's house, and as soon as He
enters has to listen to the story of how the wife's mother lay sick
of a fever. They might have let Him rest for a moment, but they are
too eager, and He is too pitying, for delay. As soon as He hears, He
helps. As soon as He bids it, the fever departs. As soon as she is
healed, the woman is serving them. There can have been but a short
snatch of such rest as such a house could afford. Then when the
shadows of the western hills began to fall upon the blue waters of
the lake, and the sunset ended the restrictions of the Sabbath, He
is besieged by a crowd full of sorrow and sickness, and all about
the door they lie, waiting for its opening. He could not keep it
shut any more than His heart or His hand, and so all through the
short twilight, and deep into the night, He toils amongst the dim,
prostrate forms. What a day it had been of hard toil, as well as of
exhausting sympathy! And what was His refreshment?  An hour or two
of slumber; and then, 'in the morning, rising up a great while
before day, He went out, and departed into a solitary place, and
there prayed' (Mark i. 35).

In the same way we find Him seeking the same repose after another
period of much exertion and strain on body and mind. He had
withdrawn Himself and His disciples from the bustle which Mark
describes so graphically. 'There were many coming and going, and
they had no leisure, so much as to eat.' So, seeking quiet, He takes
them across the lake into the solitudes on the other side. But the
crowds from all the villages near its head catch sight of the boat in
crossing, and hurry round; and there they all are at the landing-place,
eager and exacting as ever. He throws aside the purpose of rest, and
all day long, wearied as He was, 'taught them many things.' The closing
day brings no respite. He thinks of their hunger, before His own
fatigue, and will not send them away fasting. So He ends that day of
labour by the miracle of feeding the five thousand. The crowds gone to
their homes, He can at last think of Himself; and what is His rest? He
loses not a moment in  'constraining' His disciples to go away to the
other side, as if in haste to remove the last hindrance to something
that He had been longing to get to. 'And when He had sent them
away, He departed into a mountain to pray' (Mark vi. 46; Matt. xiv. 23).

That was Christ's refreshment after His toil. So He blended
contemplation and service, the life of inward communion and the life
of practical obedience. How much more do we need to interpose the
soothing and invigorating influences of quiet communion between
the acts of external work, since our work may harm us, as His never
did Him. It may disturb and dissipate our communion with God; it may
weaken the very motive from which it should arise; it may withdraw
our gaze from God and fix it upon ourselves. It may puff us up with
the conceit of our own powers; it may fret us with the annoyances of
resistance; it may depress us with the consciousness of failure; and
in a hundred other ways may waste and wear away our personal
religion. The more we work the more we need to pray. In this day of
activity there is great danger, not of doing too much, but of
praying too little for so much work. These two--work and prayer,
action and contemplation--are twin-sisters. Each pines without the
other. We are ever tempted to cultivate one or the other
disproportionately. Let us imitate Him who sought the mountain-top
as His refreshment after toil, but never left duties undone or
sufferers unrelieved in pain. Let us imitate Him who turned from the
joys of contemplation to the joys of service without a murmur, when
His disciples broke in on His solitude with, 'all men seek Thee,'
but never suffered the outward work to blunt His desire for, nor to
encroach on the hour of, still communion with His Father. Lord,
teach us to work; Lord, teach us to pray.

The praying Christ teaches us to pray as a preparation for important
steps.

Whilst more than one Gospel tells us of the calling of the Apostolic
Twelve, the Gospel of the manhood alone narrates (Luke vi. 12) that
on the eve of that great epoch in the development of Christ's
kingdom, 'He went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all
night in prayer to God.' Then, 'when it was day,' He calls to Him
His disciples, and chooses the Twelve.

A similar instance occurs, at a later period, before another great
epoch in His course. The great confession made by Peter, 'Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God,' was drawn forth by our Lord
to serve as basis for His bestowment on the Apostles of large
spiritual powers, and for the teaching, with much increased detail
and clearness, of His approaching sufferings. In both aspects it
distinctly marks a new stage. Concerning it, too, we read, and again
in Luke alone (ix. 18), that it was preceded by solitary prayer.

Thus He teaches us where and how we may get the clear insight into
circumstances and men that may guide us aright. Bring your plans, your
purposes to God's throne. Test them by praying about them. Do nothing
large or new--nothing small or old either, for that matter--till you
have asked there, in the silence of the secret place, 'Lord, what
wouldest Thou have me to do?' There is nothing bitterer to parents
than when children begin to take their own way without consulting them.
Do you take counsel of your Father, and have no secrets from Him. It
will save you from many a blunder and many a heartache; it will make
your judgment clear, and your step assured, even in new and difficult
ways, if you will learn from the praying Christ to pray before you
plan, and take counsel of God before you act.

Again, the praying Christ teaches us to pray as the condition of
receiving the Spirit and the brightness of God.

There were two occasions in the life of Christ when visible signs
showed His full possession of the Divine Spirit, and the lustre of
His glorious nature. There are large and perplexing questions
connected with both, on which I have no need to enter. At His
baptism the Spirit of God descended visibly and abode on Jesus. At
His transfiguration His face shone as the light, and His garments
were radiant as sunlit snow. Now on both these occasions our Gospel,
and our Gospel alone, tells us that it was whilst Christ was in the
act of prayer that the sign was given: 'Jesus being baptized, and
praying, the heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended' (iii.
21, 22). 'As He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered,
and His raiment was white and glistening' (ix. 29).

Whatever difficulty may surround the first of these narratives
especially, one thing is clear, that in both of them there was a
true communication from the Father to the man Jesus. And another
thing is, I think, clear too, that our Evangelist meant to lay
stress on the preceding act as the human condition of such
communication. So if we would have the heavens opened over our
heads, and the dove of God descending to fold its white wings, and
brood over the chaos of our hearts till order and light come there,
we must do what the Son of Man did--pray. And if we would have the
fashion of our countenances altered, the wrinkles of care wiped out,
the traces of tears dried up, the blotches of unclean living healed,
and all the brands of worldliness and evil exchanged for the name of
God written on our foreheads, and the reflected glory irradiating
our faces, we must do as Christ did--pray. So, and only so, will
God's Spirit fill our hearts, God's brightness flash in our faces,
and the vesture of heaven clothe our nakedness.

Again, the praying Christ teaches us to pray as the preparation for
sorrow. Here all the three Evangelists tell us the same sweet and
solemn story. It is not for us to penetrate further than they carry
us into the sanctities of Gethsemane. Jesus, though hungering for
companionship in that awful hour, would take no man with Him there;
and He still says, 'Tarry ye here, while I go and pray yonder.' But
as we stand afar off, we catch the voice of pleading rising through
the stillness of the night, and the solemn words tell us of a Son's
confidence, of a man's shrinking, of a Saviour's submission. The
very spirit of all prayer is in these broken words. That was truly
'The Lord's Prayer' which He poured out beneath the olives in the
moonlight. It was heard when strength came from heaven, which He
used in 'praying more earnestly.' It was heard when, the agony past
and all the conflict ended in victory, He came forth, with that
strange calm and dignity, to give Himself first to His captors and
then to His executioners, the ransom for the many.

As we look upon that agony and these tearful prayers, let us not
only look with thankfulness, but let that kneeling Saviour teach us
that in prayer alone can we be forearmed against our lesser sorrows;
that strength to bear flows into the heart that is opened in
supplication; and that a sorrow which we are made able to endure is
more truly conquered than a sorrow which we avoid. We have all a
cross to carry and a wreath of thorns to wear. If we want to be fit
for our Calvary--may we use that solemn name?--we must go to our
Gethsemane first.

So the Christ who prayed on earth teaches us to pray; and the Christ
who intercedes in heaven helps us to pray, and presents our poor
cries, acceptable through His sacrifice, and fragrant with the
incense from His own golden censer.

  'O Thou by whom we come to God,
  The Life, the Truth, the Way;
  The path of prayer Thyself hast trod;
  Lord! teach us how to pray.'




THE RICH FOOL


    'And one of the company said unto Him, Master, speak
    to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.
    14. And He said unto him, Man, who made Me a judge or
    a divider over you? 15. And He said unto them, Take
    heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life
    consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he
    possesseth. 16. And He spake a parable unto them,
    saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth
    plentifully: 17. And he thought within himself, saying,
    What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow
    my fruits! 18. And he said, This will I do: I will pull
    down my barns, and build greater; and there will I
    bestow all my fruits and my goods. 19. And I will say
    to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many
    years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
    20. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy
    soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those
    things be, which thou hast provided! 21. So is he that
    layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
    God. 22. And He said unto his disciples, Therefore I
    say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye
    shall eat; neither for the body, what ye shall put on.
    23. The life is more than meat, and the body is more
    than raiment'--LUKE xii. 13-23.

What a gulf between the thoughts of Jesus and those of this
unmannerly interrupter! Our Lord had been speaking solemnly as to
confessing Him before men, the divine help to be given, and the
blessed reward to follow, and this hearer had all the while been
thinking only of the share in his father's inheritance, out of
which he considered that his brother had cheated him. Such
indifference must have struck a chill into Christ's heart, and how
keenly he felt it is traceable in the curt and stern brushing aside
of the man's request. The very form of addressing him puts him at a
distance. 'Man' is about as frigid as can be. Our Lord knew the
discouragement of seeing that His words never came near some of His
hearers, and had no power to turn their thoughts even for a minute
from low objects. 'What do I care about being confessed before the
angels, or about the Holy Spirit to teach me? What I want is my
share of the paternal acres. A rabbi who will help me to these is
the rabbi for me.' John Bunyan's 'man with the muck-rake' had his
eyes so glued to the ground and the muck that he did not see the
crown hanging above him. How many of us find the sermon time a good
opportunity for thinking about investments and business!

Christ's answer is intentionally abrupt and short. It deals with
part only of the man's error, the rest of which, being an error to
which we are all exposed, and which was the root of the part special
to him, is dealt with in the parable that follows. Because the man
was covetous, he could see in Jesus nothing more than a rabbi who
might influence his brother. Our sense of want largely shapes our
conception of Christ. Many to-day see in Him mainly a social (and
economical) reformer, because our notion of what we and the world
need most is something to set social conditions right, and so to
secure earthly well-being. They who take Jesus to be first and
foremost 'a judge or a divider' fail to see His deepest work or
their own deepest need. He will be all that they wish Him to be, if
they will take Him for something else first. He will 'bid' men
'divide the inheritance' with their brethren after men have gone to
Him for salvation.

But covetousness, or the greedy clutching at more and more of
earthly good, has its roots in us all, and unless there is the most
assiduous weeding, it will overrun our whole nature. So Jesus puts
great emphasis into the command, 'Take heed, and keep yourselves,'
which implies that without much 'heed' and diligent inspection of
ourselves (for the original word is 'see'), there will be no
guarding against the subtle entrance and swift growth of the vice.
We may be enslaved by it, and never suspect that we are. Further,
the correct reading is 'from _all_ covetousness,' for it has
many shapes, besides the grossest one of greed for money. The reason
for the exhortation is somewhat obscure in construction, but plain
in its general meaning, and sufficiently represented by the
Authorised and Revised Versions. The Revised Version margin gives
the literal translation, 'Not in a man's abundance consisteth his
life, from the things which he possesseth,' on which we may note
that the second clause is obviously to be completed from the first,
and that the difference between the two seems to lie mainly in the
difference of prepositions, 'from' or 'out of in the second clause
standing instead of 'in' in the first, while there may be also a
distinction between 'abundance' and 'possessions' the former being a
superfluous amount of the latter. The whole will then mean that life
does not _consist in_ possessions, however abundant, nor does
it _come out of_ anything that simply belongs to us in outward
fashion. Not what we possess, but what we are, is the important
matter.

But what does 'life' mean? The parable shows that we cannot leave
out the notion of physical life. No possessions keep a man alive.
Death knocks at palaces and poor men's hovels. Millionaires and
paupers are huddled together in his net. But we must not leave out
the higher meaning of life, for it is eminently true that the real
life of a man has little relation to what he possesses. Neither
nobleness nor peace nor satisfaction, nor anything in which man
lives a nobler life than a dog, has much dependence on property of
any sort. Wealth often chokes the channels by which true life would
flow into us. 'We live by admiration, hope, and love,' and these may
be ours abundantly, whatever our portion of earth's riches.
Covetousness is folly, because it grasps at worldly good, under the
false belief that thereby it will secure the true good of life, but
when it has made its pile, it finds that it is no nearer peace of
heart, rest, nobleness, or joy than before, and has probably lost
much of both in the process of making it. The mad race after wealth,
which is the sin of this luxurious, greedy, commercial age, is the
consequence of a lie--that life does consist in the abundance of
possessions. It consists in knowing 'Thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent.' Is there any saying of Jesus
Christ's more revolutionary, or less believed by His professed
followers, than this?

The story of the rich fool is not a parable in the narrower meaning
of that word--that is, a description of some event or thing in the
natural sphere, transferred by analogy to the spiritual--but an
imaginary narrative exemplifying in a concrete instance the
characteristics of the class of covetous men. The first point noted
is that accumulated wealth breeds anxiety rather than satisfaction.
The man is embarrassed by his abundance. The trouble of knowing how
to keep it is as great as the labour of acquiring it, and the
enjoyment of it is still in the future. Many a rich man is more
worried about his securities than he was in making his money. There
are so many 'bags with holes' that he is at his wits' end for
investments, and the first thing he looks at in his morning's paper
is the share list, the sight of which often spoils his breakfast.

The next point is the selfish and arrogant sense of possession, as
betrayed by the repetition of 'my'--my fruits, my barns, my corn,
and my goods. He has no thought of God, nor of his own stewardship.
He recognises no claim on his wealth. If he had looked a little
beyond himself, he would have seen many places where he could have
bestowed his fruits. Were there no poor at his gates? He had better
have poured some riches into the laps of these than have built a new
barn. Corn laid up would breed weevils; dispersed, it would bring
blessings.

Again, this type of covetous men is a fool because he reckons on
'many years.' The goods may last, but will he? He can make sure that
they will suffice for a long time, but he cannot make sure of the
long time. Again, he blunders tragically in his estimate of the
power of worldly goods to satisfy. 'Eat, drink,' might be said to
his body, but to say it to his soul, and to fancy that these
pleasures of sense would put it at ease, is the fatal error which
gnaws like a worm at the root of every worldly life. The word here
rendered 'take thine ease' is cognate with Christ's in His great
promise, 'Ye shall find rest unto your souls.' Not in abundance of
worldly goods, but in union with Him, is that rest to be found which
the covetous man vainly promises himself in filled barns and
luxurious idleness.

There is a grim contrast between what the rich man said and what God
said. The man's words were empty breath; God's are powers, and what
He says is a deed. The divine decree comes crashing into the
abortive human plans like a thunder-clap into a wood full of singing
birds, and they are all stricken silent. So little does life consist
in possessions that all the abundance cannot keep the breath in a
man for one moment. His life is 'required of him,' not only in the
sense that he has to give it up, but also inasmuch as he has to
answer for it. In that requirement the selfishly used wealth will be
'a swift witness against' him, and  instead of ministering to life
or ease, will 'eat his flesh as fire.' Molten gold dropping on flesh
burns badly. Wealth, trusted in and selfishly clutched, without
recognition of God the giver or of others' claims to share it, will
burn still worse.

The 'parable' is declared to be of universal application. Examples
of it are found wherever there are men who selfishly lay up
treasures for their own delectation, and 'are not rich toward God.'
That expression is best understood in this connection to mean, not
rich in spiritual wealth, but in worldly goods used with reference
to God, or for His glory and service. So understood, the two
phrases, laying up treasure for oneself and being rich towards God,
are in full antithesis.




ANXIOUS ABOUT EARTH, OR EARNEST ABOUT THE KINGDOM


    'And He said unto His disciples, Therefore I say unto
    you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat;
    neither for the body, what ye shall put on. 23. The
    life is more than meat, and the body is more than
    raiment. 24. Consider the ravens: for they neither sow
    nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and
    God feedeth them: how much more are ye better than the
    fowls? 25. And which of you with taking thought can
    add to his stature one cubit? 26. If ye then be not
    able to do that thing which is least, why take ye
    thought for the rest? 27. Consider the lilies how they
    grow: they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto
    you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
    like one of these. 28. If then God so clothe the grass,
    which is to-day in the field, and to-morrow is cast
    into the oven; how much more will He clothe you, O ye
    of little faith! 29. And seek not ye what ye shall eat,
    or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.
    30. For all these things do the nations of the world
    seek after: and your Father knoweth that ye have need
    of these things. 31. But rather seek ye the kingdom of
    God; and all these things shall he added unto you.'
    --LUKE xii. 22-31.

The parable of the rich fool was spoken to the multitude, but our
Lord now addresses the disciples. 'Therefore' connects the following
with the foregoing teachings. The warnings against anxiety are
another application of the prohibition of laying up treasure for
self. Torturing care is the poor man's form of worldliness, as
luxurious self-indulgence is the rich man's. There are two kinds of
gout, as doctors tell us--one from high living, and one from poverty
of blood. This passage falls into two parts--the prohibition against
anxious care (vs. 22-31), and the exhortation to set the affections
on the true treasure (vs. 31-34).

I. The first part gives the condemnation of anxiety about earthly
necessities. The precept is first stated generally, and then
followed by a series of reasons enforcing it. As to the precept, we
may remark that the disciples were mostly poor men, who might think
that they were in no danger of the folly branded in the parable.
They had no barns bursting with plenty, and their concern was how to
find food and clothing, not what to do with superfluities. Christ
would have them see that the same temper may be in them, though it
takes a different shape. Dives and Lazarus may be precisely alike.

The temper condemned here is 'self-consuming care,' the opposite of
trust. Its misery is forcibly expressed by the original meaning of
the Greek word, which implies being torn in pieces, and thus paints
the distraction and self-inflicted harrassment which are the lot of
the anxious mind. Prudent foresight and strenuous work are equally
outside this prohibition. Anxiety is so little akin to foresight
that it disables from exercising it, and both hinders from seeing
what to do to provide daily bread, and from doing it.

The disciples' danger of being thus anxious may be measured by the
