these parting words of our Lord, when 'Jesus, knowing that He came
forth from God, laid aside His garments and took a towel, and girded
Himself,' and washed the foul feet of these travel-stained men. That
was a parable of the Incarnation. The consciousness of His divine
origin was ever with Him, and that consciousness led Him to lay aside
the garments of His majesty, and to gird Himself with the towel of
service. That He had a body round which to wrap it was more humiliation
than that He wrapped it round the body which He took. And we may learn
there what it is that gives Him His supreme right to our devotion and
our surrender--viz., that, 'being in the form of God, He thought not
equality with God a thing to be covetously retained, but made Himself
of no reputation, and was found in fashion as a Man.'

III. Note the voluntary leaving the world.

The stages of that departure are not distinguished. They are threefold
in fact--the death, the resurrection, the ascension, and in all three
we have the majestic, spontaneous energy of Christ as their cause.

There was a voluntary death, I have so often had occasion to insist
upon that, in the course of these sermons, that I do not need to dwell
upon it now. Let me remind you only how distinctly and in what various
forms that thought is presented to us in the Scriptures. We have our
Lord's own words about His having 'power to lay down His life.' We have
in the story of the Passion hints that seem to suggest that His
relation to death, to which He is about to bow His head, was altogether
different from that of ours. For instance, we read: 'Into Thy hands I
_commend_ My Spirit'; and 'He _gave up_ the Spirit.' We have hints of a
similar nature in the very swiftness of His death and unexpected
brevity of His suffering, to be accounted for by no natural result of
the physical process of crucifixion. The fact is that Jesus Christ is
the Lord of death, and was so even when He seemed to be its Servant,
and that He never showed Himself more completely the Prince of Life and
the Conqueror of Death than when He gave up His life and died, not
because He must, but because He would. There is a scene in a modern
book of fiction of a man sitting on a rock and the ocean stretching
round him. It reaches high upon his breast, but it threatens not his
life, till he, sitting there in his calm, bows his head beneath the
wave and lets it roll over him. So Christ willed to die, and died
because He willed.

There was also a voluntary resurrection by His own power; for although
Scripture sometimes represents His rising again from the dead as being
the Father's attestation of the Son's finished work, it also represents
it as being, in accordance with His own claim of 'power to lay down My
life, and to take it again,' the Son's triumphant egress from the
prison into which, for the moment, He willed to pass. Jesus 'was raised
from the dead by the glory of the Father,' but also Jesus rose from the
dead by His own power.

There was also a voluntary ascension to the heavens. There was no need
for Elijah's chariot of fire. There was no need for a whirlwind to
sweep a mortal to the sky. There was no need for any external vehicle
or agency whatsoever. No angels bore Him up upon their wings. But, the
cords of duty which bound Him to earth being cut, He rose to His own
native sphere; and, if one might so say, the natural forces of His
supernatural life bore Him, by inverted gravitation, upward to the
place which was His own. He ascended by His own inherent power.

Thus, by a voluntary death, He became the Sacrifice for our sins; by
the might of His self-effected resurrection He proclaimed Himself the
Lord of death and the resurrection for all that trust Him; and by
ascending up on high He draws our hearts' desires after Him, so that
we, too, as we see Him lost from our sight, behind the bright Shekinah
cloud that stooped to conceal the last stages of His ascension from our
view, may return to our lowly work 'with great joy,' and 'set our
affection on things above, where Christ is, sitting at the right hand
of God.'

IV. So, lastly, we have here the dwelling again with the Father.

But that final dwelling with God is not wholly identical with the
initial one. The earthly life was no mere parenthesis, and He who
returned to the Throne carried with Him the manhood which He had
assumed, and bore it thither into the glory in which the Word had dwelt
from the beginning. And this is the true consolation which Christ
offered to these His weeping servants, and which He still offers to us
His waiting children, that now the manhood of Jesus Christ is exalted
to participation in the divine glory, and dwells there in the calm,
invisible sweetness and solemnity of fellowship with the Father.

If that be so, it is no mere abstract dogma of theology, but it touches
our daily life at all points, and is essential to the fullness of our
satisfaction and our rest in Christ.

'We see not all things put under Him, but we see Jesus.' Our Brother is
elevated to the Throne, and, if I might so say, He makes the fortunes
of the family, and none of them will be poor as long as He is so rich.
He sends us from the far-off land where He is gone precious gifts of
its produce, and He will send for us to share His throne one day.

Christ's ascension to the Father is the elevation of our best and
dearest Friend to the Throne of the Universe, and the hands that were
pierced for us on the Cross hold the helm and sway the sceptre of
Creation, and therefore we may calmly meet all events.

The elevation of Jesus Christ to the Throne fills Heaven for our faith,
our imagination, and our hearts. How different it is to look up into
those awful abysses, and to wonder where, amidst their crushing
infinitude, the spirits of dear ones that are gone are wandering, if
they are at all; and to look up and to think 'My Christ hath passed
through the Heavens,' and is somewhere with a true Body, and with Him
all that loved Him. Without an ascended Christ we recoil from the cold
splendours of an unknown Heaven, as a rustic might from the
unintelligible magnificence of a palace. But if we believe that He is
'at the right hand of God,' then the far-off becomes near, and the
vague becomes definite, and the unsubstantial becomes solid, and what
was a fear becomes a joy, and we can trust ourselves and the dear dead
in His hands, knowing that where He is they are, and that in Him they
and we have all that we need.

So, dear friends! it all comes to this--make sure that you have hold of
the whole Christ for yourselves. His earthly life is little without the
celestial halo that rings it round. His life is nothing without His
death. His death without His resurrection and ascension maybe a little
more pathetic than millions of other deaths, but is nothing, really, to
us. And the life and death and resurrection are not apprehended in
their fullest power until they are set between the eternal glory before
and the eternal glory after.

These four facts--the dwelling in the Father; the voluntary coming to
earth; the voluntary leaving earth; and, again, the dwelling with the
Father--are the walls of the strong fortress into which we may flee and
be safe. With them it 'stands four square to every wind that blows.'
Strike away one of them, and it totters into ruin. Make the whole
Christ your Christ; for nothing less than the whole Christ, 'conceived
of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, ... crucified, dead, and
buried, ... ascended into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of
God,' is strong enough to help your infirmities, vast enough to satisfy
your desires, loving enough to love you as you need, or able to deliver
you from your sins, and to lift you to the glories of His own Throne.



GLAD CONFESSION AND SAD WARNING

'His disciples said unto Jesus, Lo! now speakest Thou plainly, and
speakest no proverb. Now are we sure that Thou knowest all things, and
needest not that any man should ask Thee: by this we believe that Thou
earnest forth from God. Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? Behold,
the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every
man to his own, and shall leave Me alone: and yet I am not alone,
because the Father is with Me.'--JOHN xvi. 29-32.

The first words of these wonderful discourses were, 'Let not your heart
be troubled.' They struck the key-note of the whole. The aim of all was
to bring peace and confidence unto the disciples' spirits. And this
joyful burst of confession which wells up so spontaneously and
irrepressibly from their hearts, shows that the aim has been reached.
For a moment sorrow, bewilderment, dullness of apprehension, had all
passed away, and the foolish questioners and non-receptive listeners
had been lifted into a higher region, and possessed insight, courage,
confidence. The last sublime utterance of our Lord had gathered all the
scattered rays into a beam so bright that the blindest could not but
see, and the coldest could not but be warmed.

But yet the calm, clear eye of Christ sees something not wholly
satisfactory in this outpouring of the disciples' confidence. He does
not reject their imperfect faith, but He warns them, as if seeing the
impending hour of denial which was so terribly to contradict the
rapture of that moment. And then, with most pathetic suddenness, He
passes from them to Himself; and in a singularly blended utterance lets
us get a glimpse into His deep solitude and the companions that shared
it.

My words now make no attempt at anything more than is involved in
following the course of thought in the words before us.

I. Note the disciples' joyful confession.

Their words are permeated throughout with allusions to the previous
promises and sayings of our Lord, and the very allusions show how
shallow was their understanding of what they thought so plain. He had
said to them that, in that coming day which was so near its dawn, He
would speak to them 'no more in proverbs, but show them plainly of the
Father'; and they answer, with a kind of rapture of astonishment, that
the promised day has come already, and that even now He is speaking to
them 'plainly,' and without mysterious sayings. Did they understand His
words when they thought them so plain? 'I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world? Again I leave the world and go unto the
Father,' that summary statement of the central mysteries of
Christianity, which the generations have found to be inexhaustible, and
which to so many minds has been absolutely incredible, seemed to the
shallow apprehension of these disciples to be sun-clear. If they had
understood what He meant, could they have spoken thus, or have left Him
so soon?

They begin with what they believed to be a fact, His clear utterance.
Then follows a conviction which has allusion to His previous words.
'Now', say they, 'we know that Thou knowest all things, and needest not
that any man should ask Thee.' He had said to them, 'In that day ye
shall ask Me nothing'; and from the fact that he had interpreted their
unspoken words, and had anticipated their desire to ask what they durst
not ask, they draw, and rightly draw, the conclusion of His divine
Omniscience. They think that therein, in His answer to their question
before it is asked, is the fulfilment of that great promise. Was that
all that He meant? Certainly not. Did He merely mean to say, 'You will
ask Me nothing, because I shall know what you want to know, without
your asking'? No! But He meant, 'Ye shall ask Me nothing, because in
that day you will have with you an illuminating Spirit who will solve
all your difficulties.' So, again, a shallow interpretation empties the
words which they accept of their deepest and most precious meaning.

And then they take yet a further step. First, they begin with a fact;
then from that they infer a conviction; and now, upon the basis of the
inferred conviction, they rear a faith, 'We believe that Thou camest
forth from God.' But what they meant by 'coming forth from God' fell
far short of the greatness of what He meant by the declaration, and
they stand, in this final, articulate confession of their faith, but a
little in advance of Nicodemus the Rabbi, and behind Peter the Apostle
when he said: 'Thou art the Son of the living God.'

So their confession is a strangely mingled warp and woof of insight and
of ignorance. And they may stand for us both as examples to teach us
what we ought to be, and as beacons teaching us what we should not be.

Let me note just one or two lessons drawn from the disciples' demeanour
and confession.

The first remark that I would make is that here we learn what it is
that gives life to a creed--experience. These men had, over and over
again, in our Lord's earlier utterances, heard the declaration that 'He
came forth from God'; and in a sort of fashion they believed it. But,
as so many of our convictions do, it lay dormant and half dead in their
souls. But now, rightly or wrongly, experience had brought them into
contact, as they thought, with a manifest proof of His divine
Omniscience, and the torpid conviction flashed all up at once into
vitality. The smouldering fire of a mere piece of abstract belief was
kindled at once into a glow that shed warmth through their whole
hearts; and although they had professed to believe long ago that He
came from God, now, for the first time, they grasp it as a living
reality. Why? Because experience had taught it to them. It is the only
teacher that teaches us the articles of our creed in a way worth
learning them. Every one of us carries professed beliefs, which lie
there inoperative, bedridden, in the hospital and dormitory of our
souls, until some great necessity or sudden circumstance comes that
flings a beam of light upon them, and then they start and waken. We do
not know the use of the sword until we are in battle. Until the
shipwreck comes, no man puts on the lifebelt in his cabin. Every one of
as has large tracts of Christian truth which we think we most surely
believe, but which need experience to quicken them, and need us to grow
up into the possession of them. Of all our teachers who turn beliefs
assented to into beliefs really believed none is so mighty as Sorrow;
for that makes a man lay a firm hold on the deep things of God's Word.

Then another lesson that I draw from this glad confession is--the bold
avowal that always accompanies certitude. These men's stammering
tongues are loosed. They have a fact to base themselves upon. They have
a piece of assured knowledge inferred from the fact. They have a faith
built upon the certitude of what they know. Having this, out it all
comes in a gush. No man that believes with all his heart can help
speaking. You silent Christians are so, because you do not more than
half grasp the truth that you say you hold. 'Thy word, when shut up in
my bones, was like a fire'; and it ate its way through all the dead
matter that enclosed it, until at last it flamed out heaven high. Can
you say, 'We know and we believe,' with unfaltering confidence? Not 'we
argue'; not 'we humbly venture to think that on the whole'; not 'we are
inclined rather to believe'; but 'we _know_--that Thou knowest all
things, and that Thou hast come from God.' Seek for that blessed
certitude of knowledge, based upon the facts of individual experience,
which 'makes the tongue of the dumb sing,' and changes all the deadness
of an outward profession of Christianity into a living, rejoicing power.

Then, further, I draw this lesson. Take care of indolently supposing
that you understand the depths of God's truth. These Apostles fancied
that they had grasped the whole meaning of the Master's words, and were
glad in them. They fed on them, and got something out of them; but how
far they were from the true perception of their meaning! This
generation abhors mystery, and demands that the deepest truths of the
highest subject, which is religion, shall be so broken down into
mincemeat that the 'man in the street' can understand them in the
intervals of reading the newspaper. There are only too many of us who
are disposed to grasp at the most superficial interpretation of
Christian truth, and lazily to rest ourselves in that. A creed which
has no depth in it is like a picture which has no distance. It is flat
and unnatural, and self-condemned by the very fact. It is better that
we should feel that the smallest word that comes from God is like some
little leaf of a water plant on the surface of a pond; if you lift that
you draw a whole trail after it, and nobody knows how far off and how
deep down are the roots. It is better that we should feel how Infinity
and Eternity press in upon us on all sides, and should take as ours the
temper that recognises that till the end we are but learners, seeing
'in a glass, in a riddle,' and therefore patiently waiting for light
and strenuously striving to stretch our souls to the width of the
infinite truth of God.

II. So, then, look, in the second place, at the sad questions and
forebodings of the Master.

'Do ye _now_ believe?' That does not cast doubt on the reality of their
faith so much as on its permanence and power. 'Behold the hour cometh
that ye shall be scattered'--as He had told them a little while before
in the upper room, like a flock when the shepherd is stricken
down--'every man to his own.' He does not reject their imperfect
homage, though He discerns so clearly its imperfection and its
transiency, but sadly warns them to beware of the fleeting nature of
their present emotion; and would seek to prepare them, by the
knowledge, for the terrible storm that is going to break upon them.

So let us learn two or three simple lessons. One is that the dear Lord
accepts imperfect surrender, ignorant faith and love, of which He knows
that it will soon turn to denial. Oh! if He did not, what would become
of us all? _We_ reject half hearts; we will not have a friendship on
which we cannot rely. The sweetness of vows is all sucked out of them
to our apprehension, if we have reason to believe that they will be
falsified in an hour. But the patient Master was willing to put up with
what you and I will not put up with; and to accept what we reject; and
be pleased that they gave Him even that. His 'charity suffereth long,
and is kind.' Let us not be afraid to bring even imperfect
consecration--

  'A little faith all undisproved'--

to His merciful feet.

Then another lesson is the need for Christian men sedulously to search
and make sure that their inward life corresponds with their words and
professions. I wonder how many thousands of people will stand up this
day and say, 'I believe in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ
His only Son,' whose words would stick in their throats if that
question of the Master's was put to them, '_Do_ ye now believe?' And I
wonder how many of us are the fools of our own verbal acknowledgments
of Christ. Self-examination is not altogether a wholesome exercise, and
it may easily be carried too far, to the destruction of the spontaneity
and the gladness of the Christian life. A man may set his pulse going
irregularly by simply concentrating his attention upon it, and there
may be self-examination of the wrong sort, which does harm rather than
good. But, on the other hand, we all need to verify our position, lest
our outward life should fatally slip away from correspondence with our
inward. Our words and acts of Christian profession and service are like
bank notes. What will be the end if there is a whole ream of such going
up and down the world, and no balance of bullion in the cellars to meet
them? Nothing but bankruptcy. Do you see to it that your reserve of
gold, deep down in your hearts, always leaves a margin beyond the notes
in circulation issued by you. And in the midst of your professions hear
the Master saying, '_Do ye_ now believe?'

Another lesson that I draw is, trust no emotions, no religious
experiences, but only Him to whom they turn.

These men were perfectly sincere, and there was a glow of gladness in
their hearts, and a real though imperfect faith when they spoke. In an
hours time where were they?

We often deal far too hard measure to these poor disciples, in our
estimate of their conduct at that critical moment. We talk about them
as cowards. Well, they were better and they were worse than cowards;
for their courage failed second, but their faith had failed first. The
Cross made them dastards because it destroyed their confidence in Jesus
Christ.

'We _trusted_.' Ah! what a world of sorrow there is in those two final
letters of that word! 'We trusted that it had been He who should have
redeemed Israel.' But they do not trust it any more, and so why should
they put themselves in peril for One on whom their faith can no longer
build?

Would we have been any better if we had been there? Suppose you had
stood afar off and seen Jesus die on the cross, would your faith have
lived? Do we not know what it is to be a great deal more exuberant in
our professions of faith--and real faith it is, no doubt--in some quiet
hour when we are with Him by ourselves, than when swords are flashing
and we are in the presence of His antagonists? Do we not know what it
is to grasp conviction at one moment, and the next to find it gone like
a handful of mist from our clutch? Is our Christian life always lived
upon one high uniform level? Have we no experience of hours of
exhaustion coming after deep religious emotion? 'Let him that is
without sin among you cast the first stone'; there will not be many
stones flung if that law be applied. Let us all, recognising our own
weakness, trust to nothing, either in our convictions or our emotions,
but only to Him, and cry, 'Hold Thou me up, and I shall be safe!'

III. Lastly, note the lonely Christ and His companion.

'Ye shall leave Me alone'; there is sadness, though it be calm, in that
clause, and then, I suppose, there was a moment's pause before the
quiet voice began again: 'And yet I am not alone, for the Father is
with Me.' There are two currents there, both calm; but the one bright
and the other dark.

Jesus was the loneliest man that ever lived. All other forms of human
solitude were concentrated in His. He knew the pain of unappreciated
aims, unaccepted love, unbelieved teachings, a heart thrown back upon
itself. No man understood Him, no man knew Him, no man deeply and
thoroughly loved Him or sympathised with Him, and He dwelt apart. He
felt the pain of solitude more sharply than sinful men do. Perfect
purity is keenly susceptible; a heart fully charged with love is
wounded sore when the love is thrown back, and all the more sorely the
more unselfish it is.

Solitude was no small part of the pain of Christ's passion. Remember
the pitiful appeal in Gethsemane, 'Tarry ye here and watch with Me!'
Remember the threefold vain return to the sleepers in the hope of
finding some sympathy from them. Remember the emphasis with which, more
than once in His life, He foretold the loneliness of His death. And
then let us understand how the bitterness of the cup that He drank had
for not the least bitter of its ingredients the sense that He drank it
alone.

Now, dear friends! some of us, no doubt, have to live outwardly
solitary lives. We all of us live alone after all fellowship and
communion. Physicists tell us that in the most solid bodies the atoms
do not touch. Hearts come closer than atoms, but yet, after all, we die
alone, and in the depths of our souls we all live alone. So let us be
thankful that the Master knows the bitterness of solitude, and has
Himself trod that path.

Then we have here the calm consciousness of unbroken communion. Jesus
