made the best of it, and so at last saw a great light, after sitting
in darkness for so long.  Schools, books, church-going, ordinances
of all kinds, they are good.  If you can get them, use them, and
thank God for them:  but remember, God does not ask for learning,
but for goodness and holiness:  he does not ask for knowledge, but
for a right life.  And do not fancy, that because your children have
a good education now, and you had none, that God does not love you
as well as he loves them.  His mercy is over all his works; and the
promises are to you as well as to your children.  There is many a
poor soul who never read a book in her life, who is nearer God than
many a great scholar, and fine preacher, and learned divine.  All
Christ asks of you is, to receive him when he comes to you; and to
love, and thank, and admire him, and try to be like him, because he
will make you like him:  while for the rest to whom little is given,
of him shall little be required; and to him who uses what he has, be
it little or much, more shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
For God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation, he that
feareth God, and worketh righteousness, is accepted by him.



SERMON XXVII.  THE INVASION OF THE ASSYRIANS



(Thirteenth Sunday after Trinity, Morning.)

2 Kings xix. 15-19.  And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said,
O Lord God of Israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art
the Lord, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou
hast made heaven and earth.  Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear:
open, Lord, thine eyes, and see:  and hear the words of Sennacherib,
which hath sent him to reproach the living God.  Of a truth, Lord,
the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations and their lands, and
have cast their gods into the fire:  for they were no gods, but the
work of men's hands, wood and stone:  therefore they have destroyed
them.  Now, therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save thou us
out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that
thou art the Lord God, even thou only.

This noble story, which we read in Church every year, seems to have
had a great hold on the minds of the Jews.  They plainly thought it
a very important story.  For it is told three times over in the
Bible:  first in the Book of Kings, then in the Book of Chronicles,
and again in that of the Prophet Isaiah.  Indeed, many chapters of
Isaiah's prophecies speak altogether of this invasion of the
Assyrians and their destruction.  But what has this story to do with
us, you may ask?  There are no miracles in our day.  We can expect
no angels to fight for our armies.  We must fight for ourselves.

True, my friends:  but the lesson of these old stories, the moral of
them stands good for ever.  And I am thankful that this very story
is appointed to be read publicly in church once a year, to put us in
mind of many things, which all men are too apt to forget.

For instance:  to learn one lesson out of many which this chapter
may teach us.  We are too apt to think that peace and prosperity are
the only signs of God's favour.  That if a nation be religious, it
is certain to thrive and be happy.  But it is not so.  We find from
history that the times in which nations have shewn most nobleness,
most courage, most righteousness, most faith in God, have been times
of trouble, and danger, and terror.  When nations have been invaded,
persecuted, trampled under foot by tyrants, then all the good which
was in them has again and again shewed itself.  Then to the
astonishment of the world they have become greater than themselves,
and done deeds which win them glory for ever.  Then they are truly
purged in the fire of affliction, that whatever dross and trash is
in their hearts may be burnt out, and the pure gold left.

So it was with the Jews in Hezekiah's time.  So again in the time of
the Maccabees.  So with the old Greeks, when the great Kings of
Persia tried to enslave them.  So with the old Romans, when the
Carthaginians set upon them.  So it was with us English, three
hundred years ago, when for a time the whole world seemed against
us, because we alone were standing up for the Gospel and the Bible
against the Pope of Rome.  Then the king of Spain, who was then as
terrible a conqueror and devourer of nations, as the Assyrians of
old, sent against us the Great Armada.  Then was England in greater
danger than she had ever been before, or has been since.

And what came of it?  That that dreadful danger brought out more
faith, more courage, than perhaps has ever been among us since.
That when we seemed weakest we were strongest.  That while all the
nations of Europe were looking on to see us devoured up by those
Spaniards, our laws and liberties taken from us, the Popish
Inquisition set up in England, and England made a Spanish province,
what they did see was, the people of this little island rising as
one man, to fight for themselves on earth, while the tempests of God
fought for them from heaven; and all that mighty fleet of the King
of Spain routed and scattered, till not one man in a hundred ever
saw their native country again.

And in England, after that terrible trial had passed over us, there
rose up the best and noblest time which she had ever yet beheld.

Yes, my friends, three hundred years ago we went through just such a
fiery trial as the Jews went through in Hezekiah's time; and God
grant that we may never forget that lesson.

But what is true of whole nations, is often true also of each single
person; of you and me.

To almost every man, at least once in his life, comes a time of
trial--what we call a crisis.  A time when God purges the man, and
tries him in the fire, and burns up the dross in him, that the pure
sterling gold only may be left.

To some people it comes in the shape of some terrible loss, or
affliction.  To others it comes in the shape of some great
temptation.  Nay, if we will consider, it comes to us all, perhaps
often, in that shape.  A man is brought to a point where he must
choose between right and wrong.  God puts him where the two roads
part.  One way turns off to the broad road, which leads to
destruction:  the other way turns off to the narrow road which leads
to life.  The man would be glad to go both ways at once, and do
right and wrong too:  but it so happens that he cannot.  Then he
would be glad to go neither way, and stay where he is:  but he
cannot.  He must move on.  He must do something.  Perhaps he is
asked a question which he does not wish to answer:  but he must.  It
would be well worth his while to tell a lie.  It would be very safe
for him, profitable for him; while it would be very dangerous for
him to tell the truth.  He might ruin himself once and for all, by
being an honest man.  Now which shall he do?  He would be glad to do
both, glad to do neither:  but choose he must; speak he must.  He
must either lie or tell the truth.  Then comes the trial, whether he
believes in God and in Christ, or whether he does not.  If he only
believes, as too many do without knowing it, in a dead God, a God
far away, he will lie.  If he only believes, as too many do without
knowing it, in a dead Christ, a Christ who bore his sins on the
cross eighteen hundred years ago, but since then has had nothing to
do with him to speak of, as far as he knows--then he will lie.  And
that is the God and the Christ which most people believe in:  and
therefore when the time of trial comes, they fall away, and do and
say things of which they ought to be ashamed, because their trust is
not in God, but in man.

But if that man believes in the living God, and believes that he
lives, and moves, and has his being in God, he cannot lie.  As it is
written, 'he that is born of God, sinneth not, for his seed
remaineth in him, and that wicked one toucheth him not.'  He will
say, Whatever happens, I must obey God, and not man.  The Lord is on
my side, therefore I will not fear what man can do to me.

And what is the seed which remains in that man, and keeps him from
playing the coward?  Christ himself, the seed and Son of God.  If he
believes in the living Christ; if he believes that Christ is really
his master, his teacher, who is watching over him, training him,
from his cradle to his grave;--if he believes that Christ is
dwelling in him, that whatever wish to do right he has comes from
Christ, whatever sense of honour and honesty he has comes from
Christ; then it will seem to him a dreadful thing to lie, to play
the hypocrite, or the coward; to sin against his own better
feelings.  It will be sinning against Christ himself.

Remember the great Martin Luther, when he stood on one side, a poor
monk standing up for the Bible and the Gospel, and against him were
arrayed the Pope and the Emperor, cardinals, bishops, and almost all
the princes in Europe; and his friends wanted him to hold his
tongue, or to say Yes and No at once; in short, to smooth over the
matter in some way.--What conceit, said many, of one poor monk
standing up against all the world; and what folly, too!  He would
certainly be burnt alive.  But Luther could not hold his tongue.  He
was afraid enough, no doubt.  He disliked being burnt as much as
other men.  But he felt he must speak God's truth then or never.  He
must bear witness for Christ's free gospel, against Pope, Emperor,
all the devils in hell, if need be, or else hereafter for ever hold
his peace.  He must play the honest man that day, or be a hypocrite
and a rogue for ever.  His friends said to him, 'If you go to the
Council, Duke George will have you burnt.'  He answered, 'If it
snowed Duke Georges nine days together, I must go.'  They said, 'If
you go into that town, you will never leave it alive.'  He said, 'If
there were as many devils in the town as there are tiles on the
houses, I must go.'  And he went, Bible in hand, and said, 'Here I
stand; I can do no otherwise.  God help me!'  He went, and he
conquered.

And so it will be with you, my friends, if you will believe in the
living God, and in the living Christ; then, when temptation comes,
you will be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all, to
stand.  And you will feel yourselves better men from that day
forward.  You will feel that you have made one great step upward;
you will look back upon that time of temptation and perplexity as
the beginning of a new life; as a sign to you that Christ is with
you, and in you, training you and shaping your character, till he
makes you, at last, somewhat like himself; somewhat of the stature
of a true man; somewhat like what he has bidden you to be, 'perfect
as your Father in heaven is perfect.'



SERMON XXVIII.  THE TEN LEPERS



(Fourteenth Sunday after Trinity.)

Luke xvii. 17, 18.  Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the
nine?  There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save
this stranger.

No men, one would have thought, had more reason to thank God than
those nine lepers.  Afflicted with a filthy and tormenting disease,
hopelessly incurable, at least in those days, they were cut off from
family and friends, cut off from all mankind; forced to leave their
homes, and wander away; forbidden to enter the houses of men, or the
churches of God; forbidden, for fear of infection, to go near any
human being; keeping no company but that of wretched lepers like
themselves, and forced to get their living by begging; by standing
(as the Gospel says) afar off, and praying the passers-by to throw
them a coin.

In this wretched state, in which they had been certain of living and
dying miserably, they met the Lord:  and suddenly, instantly, beyond
all hope or expectation, they found themselves cured, restored to
their families, their homes, their power of working, their rights as
citizens; restored to all that makes life worth having, and that
freely, and in a moment.  If such a blessing had come to us, should
we have thought any thanks too great!  Would not our whole lives
have been too short to bless God for his great mercy?  Should we
have gone away, like those nine, without a word of thanks to God, or
even to the man who had healed us?  What stupidity, hardhearted-
ness, ingratitude of those nine, never to have even thanked the Lord
for their restoration to health and happiness.

Ay, so we think.  Yet those nine lepers were men of like passions
with ourselves; and what they did, we perhaps might do in their
place.  It is very humbling to think so:  but the Bible is a
humbling book:  and, therefore, a wholesome book, profitable for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.  And I am
very much afraid that when the Bible tells us that nine out of ten
of those lepers were ungrateful to God, it tells us that nine out of
ten of us are ungrateful likewise.

Ungrateful to God?  I fear so; and more ungrateful, I fear, than
those ten lepers.  For which of the two is better off, the man who
loses a good thing, and then gets it back again; or the man who
never loses it at all, but enjoys it all his life?  Surely the man
who never loses it at all.  And which of the two has more cause to
thank God?  Those lepers had been through a very miserable time;
they had had great affliction; and that, they might feel, was a set-
off against their good fortune in recovering their health.  They had
bad years to balance their good ones.  But we--how many of us have
had nothing but good years?  Oh consider, consider the history of
the average of us.  How we grow up tolerably healthy, tolerably
comfortable, in a free country, under just laws, with the power of
earning our livelihood, and the certainty of keeping what we earn.
Famine we know nothing of in this happy land; war, and the horrors
of war, we knew nothing of--God grant we never may.  In health,
safety and prosperity most of us grow up; forced, it is true, to
work hard:  but that, too, is a blessing; for what better thing for
a man, soul and body, than to be forced to work hard?  In health,
safety and prosperity; leaving children behind us, to prosper as we
have done.  And how many of us give God the glory, or Christ the
thanks?

But if these be our bodily blessings, what are our spiritual
blessings?  Has not God given us his only-begotten son Jesus Christ?
Has he not baptised us into his Church?  Has he not forgiven our
sins?  Has he not revealed to us that he is our Father, and we his
children?  Has he not given us the absolutely inestimable blessing
of his commandments?  Of knowing what the right thing to be done is,
that we may do it and live for ever; that treasure of which not only
Solomon, but the wise men of old held, that to know what was right
was a more precious possession than rubies and fine gold, and all
the wealth of Ind?  Has he not given us the hope of a joyful
immortality, of everlasting life after death, not only with those
whom we have loved and lost, but with God himself?

And how many of us give God the glory, and Christ the thanks?  Do we
not copy those nine lepers, and just shew ourselves to the priest?--
Come to church on the Sunday, because it is the custom; people
expect it of us; and God, we understand, expects it too:  but where
is the gratitude?  Where is the giving of glory to God for all his
goodness?  Which are we most like?  Children of God, looking up to
our Father in heaven, and saying, at every fresh blessing, Father, I
thank thee.  Truly thou knowest my necessities before I ask, and my
ignorance in asking?--Or, like the stalled ox, which eats, and eats,
and eats, and never thanks the hand which feeds him?

We are too comfortable, I think, at times.  We are so much
accustomed to be blest by God, that we take his blessings as matters
of course, and feel them no more than we do the air we breathe.

The wise man says--


Our torments may by length of time become
Our elements;


and I am sure our blessings may.  They say that people who endure
continual pain and misery, get at length hardly to feel it.  And so,
on the other hand, people who have continual prosperity get at
length hardly to feel that.  God forgive us!  My friends, when I say
this to you, I say it to myself.  If I blame you, I blame myself.
If I warn you, I warn myself.  We most of us need warning in these
comfortable times; for I believe that it is this very
unrighteousness of ours which brings many of our losses and troubles
on us.  If we are so dull that we will not know the value of a thing
when we have got it, then God teaches us the value of it by taking
it from us.  He teaches us the value of health by making us feel
sickness; he teaches us the value of wealth by making us feel
poverty.  I do not say it is always so.  God forbid.  There are
those who suffer bitter afflictions, not because they have sinned,
but that, like the poor blind man, the glory of God may be made
manifest in them.  There are those too who suffer no sorrow at all,
even though they feel, in their thoughtful moments, that they
deserve it.  And miserable enough should we all be, if God punished
us every time we were ungrateful to him.  If he dealt with us after
our sins, and rewarded us according to our iniquities, where should
we be this day?

But still, I cannot but believe that if we do go on in prosperity,
careless and unthankful, we are running into danger; we are likely
to bring down on ourselves some sorrow or anxiety which will teach
us, which at least is meant to teach us--from whom all good things
come; and to know that the Lord has given, when the Lord has taken
away.

God grant that when that lesson is sent to us we may learn it.
Learn it, perhaps, at once, and in a moment, we cannot.  Weak flesh
and blood cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and see that he is
ruling us, and all things, in love and justice; and our eyes are, as
it were, dimmed with our tears, so that we cannot see God's
handwriting upon the wall against us.  But at length, when the first
burst of sorrow is past, we may learn it; and, like righteous Job,
justify God; saying,--The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.  If we do that, and give God the
glory, it may be with us, after all, as it was with Job, when God
gave him back sevenfold for all that he had taken away, wealth and
prosperity, sons and daughters.  For God doth not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of men out of spite.  His punishments are
not revenge, but correction; and, as a father, he chastises his
children, not to harm, but to bless them.

And God grant that if that day, too, comes--if after sorrow comes
joy, if after storm comes sunshine--we may not forget God afresh in
our prosperity, nor go our ways like those dull-hearted Jews, after
they were cleansed from their leprosy:  but, like the Samaritan,
return, and give glory to God, who gives, and delights in giving;
and only takes away, that he may lift up our souls to him, in whom
we live, and move, and have our being:  and so, knowing who we are,
and where we are, may live in God, and by God, and for God, in this
life, and for ever.



SERMON XXIX.  PARDON AND PEACE



(Twenty-first Sunday after Trinity.)

Psalm xxxii. 1-7.  Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered.  Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.  When
I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day
long.  For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me:  my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer.  I acknowledge my sin unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid.  I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin.  For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a
time when thou mayest be found:  surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh unto him.  Thou art my hiding place;
thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shall compass me about
with songs of deliverance.

The collect for to-day is a very beautiful one.  There is something
musical in the sound of the very words; so musical, that it is sung
as an anthem in many churches.  Let us think a little over it.
'Grant, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people
pardon and peace; that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and
serve thee with a quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.'
That is a noble prayer; and a prayer for each and every one of us,
every day.  I say for every day.  It is not like the fifty-first
psalm, the prayer of a man who has committed some black and dreadful
crime; who fears lest God should take his Holy Spirit from him, and
leave him to remorse and horror; who feels that he needs to be
utterly changed, and have a new heart created within him.  It is not
a prayer of that kind.  It is rather the prayer of a man who is
weary with the burden of sinful mortality; who finds it very hard
work to do his duty, even tolerably well; who is dissatisfied with
himself, and ashamed of himself, not about one great fault, but
about many little faults; and who wants to be cleansed from them;
who is tempted to be fretful, anxious, out of heart, because things
go wrong; and because he feels it partly his own fault that things
go wrong; and who, therefore, wants peace, that he may serve God
with a quiet mind.  Now then, dear friends, did I not speak truth,
when I said, this is a prayer for every one of us, and for every
day?  For which of us does his duty as he ought?  I take for
granted, we are all trying to do our duty, better or worse:  but I
take for granted, too, that the more we try to do our duty, the more
dissatisfied with ourselves we are; and the more we find we have
sins without number to be cleansed from.  For the more we try to do
our duty, the higher notion we get of what our duty is; the more we
do, the more we feel we ought to do; and the more we feel that we
leave undone a great many things which we ought to do, and do a
great many things which we ought not to do, and that there is no
health in us:  but a great deal of disease and weakness;--disease of
soul, in the way of conceit, pride, selfishness, temper, obstinacy;
weakness, in the way of laziness, fearfulness, and very often of
sheer stupidity; we do not see, or rather will not take the trouble
to see, what we ought to do, and how to do it.  And therefore, we
must be, or rather ought to be, dissatisfied with ourselves; and our
consciences accuse us when we lie down at night, of a hundred petty
miserable mistakes, which we ought to have avoided.  We are
continually knowing what is right, and doing what is wrong, till we
get deservedly angry with ourselves; and think at times, that God
must be deservedly angry with us; that we are such poor paltry
creatures that he can only look on us with dislike and contempt:
and even worse; that, perhaps, he does not care to see us mend; that
our struggles to do right are of no value in his eyes:  but that he
has sternly left us to ourselves, to struggle through life, right or
wrong, as best we may; and to be punished at last, for all that we
have done amiss.

Such thoughts will cross our minds.  They have crossed the minds of
all mankind since the first man's conscience awoke, and he
discovered that he was not a brute animal, by finding in himself
that awful thought, which no brute animal can have--'I have done
wrong.'  And therefore the consciences of men will cry for pardon,
just in proportion as they are worthy of the name of men, and not
merely a superior sort of animals; and therefore just in proportion
as our souls are alive in us, alive with the feeling of duty, of
justice, of purity, of love, of a just and orderly God above--just
in that proportion shall we be tormented by the difference between
what we are, and what we ought to be; and the sense of sin, and the
longing for pardon, will be more keen in us; and we shall have no
rest till the sins are got rid of, and the pardon sure.  That is the
price we pay for having immortal souls.  It is a heavy price truly:
but it is well worth the paying, if it be only paid aright.  If that
tormenting feeling of being continually wrong in this life, ends by
making us continually right for ever in the world to come; if Christ
be formed in us at last; if out of our sinful and mortal manhood a
sinless and immortal manhood is born;--then shall we, like the
mother over her new-born babe, forget our anguish, for joy that a
man is born into the world.

