and must give up that longing fondness which binds him to the things of
this earth. They call these the attributes of the Supreme Spirit. The
_gunas_ (qualities or attributes) that we are conscious of, reduce
themselves to _agunas_ (non-gunas) in Him; He is not bound by anything,
and is perceptible only by the expansion and development of our
spiritual vision; as soon as the illusion of ignorance is dispelled,
this supreme unalloyed beatitude is attained. By foregoing the objects
of both pleasure and pain and by renouncing the feelings which bind him
to the things of this earth, a man may attain Brahma (Supreme Spirit or
salvation). O good Brahmana, I have now briefly explained to thee all
this, as I have heard. What else dost thou wish to know?"'"


SECTION CCXIII

"Markandeya said, 'When, O Yudhishthira, all this mystery of salvation
was explained to that Brahmana, he was highly pleased and he said
addressing the fowler, "All this that thou hast explained, is rational,
and it seems to me that there is nothing in connection with the
mysteries of religion which thou dost not know." The fowler replied, "O
good and great Brahmana, thou shalt perceive with thine own eyes, all
the virtue that I lay claim to, and by reason of which I have attained
this blissful state. Rise, worshipful sir, and quickly enter this inner
apartment. O virtuous man, it is proper that thou shouldst see my father
and my mother."' Markandeya continued, 'Thus addressed the Brahmana went
in, and beheld a fine beautiful mansion. It was a magnificent house
divided in four suites of rooms, admired by gods and looking like one of
their palaces; it was also furnished with seats and beds, and redolent
of excellent perfumes. His revered parents clad in white robes, having
finished their meals, were seated at ease. The fowler, beholding them,
prostrated himself before them with his head at their feet. His aged
parents then addressed him thus, "Rise, O man of piety, rise, may
righteousness shield thee; we are much pleased with thee for thy piety;
mayst thou be blessed with a long life, and with knowledge, high
intelligence, and fulfilment of thy desires. Thou art a good and dutiful
son, for, we are constantly and reasonably looked after by thee, and
even amongst the celestials thou hast not another divinity to worship.
By constantly subduing thyself, thou hast become endowed with the
self-restraining power of Brahmanas and all thy grandsires and ancestors
are constantly pleased with thee for thy self-restraining virtues and
for thy piety towards us. In thought, word or deed thy attention to us
never flags, and it seems that at present thou hast no other thought in
thy mind (save as to how to please us). As Rama, the son of Jamadagni,
laboured to please his aged parents, so hast thou, O Son, done to please
us, and even more." Then the fowler introduced the Brahmana to his
parents and they received him with the usual salutation of welcome, and
the Brahmana accepting their welcome, enquired if they, with their
children and servants, were all right at home, and if they were always
enjoying good health at that time (of life). The aged couple replied,
"At home, O Brahmana, we are all right, with all our servants. Hast
thou, adorable sir, reached this place without any difficulty?"'
Markandeya continued, 'The Brahmana replied, "Yes, I have." Then the
fowler addressing himself to the Brahmana said to him, "These my
parents, worshipful sir, are the idols that I worship; whatever is due
to the gods, I do unto them. As the thirty-three gods with Indra at
their head are worshipped by men, so are these aged parents of mine
worshipped by me. As Brahmanas exert themselves for the purpose of
procuring offering for their gods, so do I act with diligence for these
two (idols of mine). These my father and mother, O Brahmana, are my
supreme gods, and I seek to please them always with offering of flowers,
fruits and gems. To me they are like the three sacred fires mentioned by
the learned; and, O Brahmana, they seem to me to be as good as
sacrifices or the four _Vedas_. My five life-giving airs, my wife and
children and friends are all for them (dedicated to their service). And
with my wife and children I always attend on them. O good Brahmana, with
my own hands I assist them in bathing and also wash their feet and give
them food and I say to them only what is agreeable, leaving out what is
unpleasant. I consider it to be my highest duty to do what is agreeable
to them even though it be not strictly justifiable. And, O Brahmana, I
am always diligent in attending on them. The two parents, the sacred
fire, the soul and the spiritual preceptor, these five, O good Brahmana,
are worthy of the highest reverence from a person who seeks prosperity.
By serving them properly, one acquires the merit of perpetually keeping
up the sacred fire. And it is the eternal and invariable duty of all
householders."'"


SECTION CCXIV

"Markandeya continued, 'The virtuous fowler, having introduced his
(both) parents to that Brahmana as his highest _gurus_, again spoke to
him as follows, "Mark thou the power of this virtue of mine, by which my
inner spiritual vision is extended. For this, thou wast told by that
self-restrained, truthful lady, devoted to her husband, 'Hie thee to
Mithila; for there lives a fowler who will explain to thee, the
mysteries of religion.'" The Brahmana said, "O pious man, so constant in
fulfilling thy religious obligations, bethinking myself of what that
truthful good-natured lady so true to her husband, hath said, I am
convinced that thou art really endowed with every high quality." The
fowler replied, "I have no doubt, my lord, that what that lady, so
faithful to her husband, said to thee about me, was said with full
knowledge of the facts. I have, O Brahmana, explained to thee all this
as a matter of favour. And now, good sir, listen to me. I shall explain
what is good for thee. O good Brahmana, of irreproachable character,
thou hast wronged thy father and thy mother, for thou hast left home
without their permission, for the purpose of learning the _Vedas_. Thou
hast not acted properly in this matter, for thy ascetic and aged parents
have become entirely blind from grief at thy loss. Do thou return home
to console them. May this virtue never forsake thee. Thou art
high-minded, of ascetic merit, and always devoted to thy religion but
all these have become useless to thee. Do thou without delay return to
console thy parents. Do have some regard for my words and not act
otherwise; I tell thee what is good for thee, O Brahmana _Rishi_. Do
thou return home this very day." The Brahmana replied, "This that thou
hast said, is undoubtedly true; mayst thou, O pious man, attain
prosperity; I am much pleased with thee." The fowler said, "O Brahmana,
as thou practisest with assiduousness those divine, ancient, and eternal
virtues which are so difficult of attainment even by pure-minded
persons, thou appearest (to me) like a divine being. Return to the side
of thy father and mother and be quick and diligent in honouring thy
parents; for, I do not know if there is any virtue higher than this."
The Brahmana replied, "By a piece of singular good luck have I arrived
here, and by a piece of similar good luck have I thus been associated
with thee. It is very difficult to find out, in our midst, a person who
can so well expound the mysteries of religion; there is scarcely one man
among thousands, who is well versed in the science of religion. I am
very glad, O great man, to have secured thy friendship; mayst thou be
prosperous. I was on the point of falling into hell, but was extricated
by thee. It was destined to be so, for thou didst (unexpectedly) come in
my way. And, O great man, as the fallen King Yayati was saved by his
virtuous grandsons (daughter's sons), so have I know been saved by thee.
According to thy advice, I shall honour my father and my mother; for a
man with an impure heart can never expound the mysteries of sin and
righteousness. As it is very difficult for a person born in the Sudra
class to learn the mysteries of the eternal religion, I do not consider
thee to be a Sudra. There must surely be some mystery in connection with
this matter. Thou must have attained the Sudra's estate by reason of the
fruition of thine own past _karma_. O magnanimous man, I long to know
the truth about this matter. Do thou tell it to me with attention and
according to thy own inclination."

"'The fowler replied, "O good Brahmana, Brahmanas are worthy of all
respect from me. Listen, O sinless one, to this story of a previous
existence of mine. O son of an excellent Brahmana, I was formerly a
Brahmana, well-read in the _Vedas_, and an accomplished student of the
_Vedangas_. Through my own fault I have been degraded to my present
state. A certain king, accomplished in the science of _dhanurveda_
(science of archery), was my friend; and from his companionship, O
Brahmana, I, too became skilled in archery; and one day the king, in
company with his ministers and followed by his best warriors, went out
on a hunting expedition. He killed a large number of deer near a
hermitage. I, too, O good Brahmana, discharged a terrible arrow. And a
_rishi_ was wounded by that arrow with its head bent out. He fell down
upon the ground, and screaming loudly said, 'I have harmed no one, what
sinful man has done this?' And, my lord, taking him for a deer, I went
up to him and found that he was pierced through the body by my arrow. On
account of my wicked deed I was sorely grieved (in mind). And then I
said to that _rishi_ of severe ascetic merit, who was loudly crying,
lying upon the ground, 'I have done this unwittingly, O _rishi_.' And
also this I said to the _muni_: 'Do thou think it proper to pardon all
this transgression.' But, O Brahmana, the _rishi_, lashing himself into
a fury, said to me, 'Thou shalt be born as a cruel fowler in the Sudra
class.'"'"


SECTION CCXV

"'The fowler continued, "Thus cursed by that _rishi_, I sought to
propitiate him with these words: 'Pardon me, O _muni_, I have done this
wicked deed unwittingly. It behooves thee to pardon all that. Do thou,
worshipful sir, soothe yourself.' The _rishi_ replied, 'The curse that I
have pronounced can never be falsified, this is certain. But from
kindness towards thee, I shall do thee a favour. Though born in the
Sudra class thou shalt remain a pious man and thou shalt undoubtedly
honour thy parents; and by honouring them thou shalt attain great
spiritual perfection; thou shalt also remember the events of thy past
life and shalt go to heaven; and on the expiation of this curse, thou
shalt again become a Brahmana.' O best of men, thus, of old was I cursed
by that _rishi_ of severe power, and thus was he propitiated by me.
Then, O good Brahmana, I extricated the arrow from his body, and took
him into the hermitage, but he was not deprived of his life (recovered).
O good Brahmana, I have thus described to thee what happened to me of
old, and also how I can go to heaven hereafter." The Brahmana said, "O
thou of great intelligence, all men are thus subject to happiness or
misery, thou shouldst not therefore grieve for that. In obedience to the
customs of thy (present) race, thou hast pursued these wicked ways, but
thou art always devoted to virtue and versed in the ways and mysteries
of the world. And, O learned man, these being the duties of thy
profession, the stain of evil _karma_ will not attach to thee. And after
dwelling here for some little time, thou shalt again become a Brahmana;
and even now, I consider thee to be a Brahmana, there is no doubt about
this. For the Brahmana who is vain and haughty, who is addicted to vices
and wedded to evil and degrading practices, is like a Sudra. On the
other hand, I consider a Sudra who is always adorned with these
virtues,--righteousness, self-restraint, and truthfulness,--as a
Brahmana. A man becomes a Brahmana by his character; by his own evil
_karma_ a man attains an evil and terrible doom. O good man, I believe
that sin in thee has now died out. Thou must not grieve for this, for
men, like thee who art so virtuous and learned in the ways and mysteries
of the world, can have no cause for grief."

"'The fowler replied, "The bodily afflictions should be cured with
medicines, and the mental ones with spiritual wisdom. This is the power
of knowledge. Knowing this, the wise should not behave like boys. Men of
low intelligence are overpowered with grief at the occurrence of
something which is not agreeable to them, or non-occurrence of something
which is good or much desired. Indeed, all creatures are subject to this
characteristic (of grief or happiness). It is not merely a single
creature or class that is subject to misery. Cognisant of this evil,
people quickly mend their ways, and if they perceive it at the very
outset they succeed in curing it altogether. Whoever grieves for it,
only makes himself uneasy. Those wise men whose knowledge has made them
happy and contented, and who are indifferent to happiness and misery
alike, are really happy. The wise are always contented and the foolish
always discontented. There is no end to discontentment, and contentment
is the highest happiness. People who have reached the perfect way, do
not grieve, they are always conscious of the final destiny of all
creatures. One must not give way to discontent[17] for it is like a
virulent poison. It kills persons of undeveloped intelligence, just as a
child is killed by an enraged snake. That man has no manliness whose
energies have left him and who is overpowered with perplexity when an
occasion for the exercise of vigour presents itself. Our actions are
surely followed by their consequences. Whoever merely gives himself up
to passive indifference (to worldly affairs) accomplishes no good.
Instead of murmuring one must try to find out the way by which he can
secure exemption from (spiritual) misery; and the means of salvation
found, he must then free himself from sensuality. The man who has
attained a high state of spiritual knowledge is always conscious of the
great deficiency (instability) of all matter. Such a person keeping in
view the final doom (of all), never grieves. I too, O learned man, do
not grieve; I stay here (in this life) biding my time. For this reason,
O best of men, I am not perplexed (with doubts)". The Brahmana said,
"Thou art wise and high in spiritual knowledge and vast is thy
intelligence. Thou who art versed in holy writ, art content with thy
spiritual wisdom. I have no cause to find fault with thee. Adieu, O best
of pious men, mayst thou be prosperous, and may righteousness shield
thee, and mayst thou be assiduous in the practice of virtue."'

    [17] _Vishada_ is the original. It means discontent, but here it
    means more a mixture of discontent, perplexity and confusion
    than mere discontent.

"Markandeya continued, 'The fowler said to him, "Be it so." And the good
Brahmana walked round him[18] and then departed. And the Brahmana
returning home was duly assiduous in his attention to his old parents. I
have thus, O pious Yudhishthira, narrated in detail to thee this history
full of moral instruction, which thou, my good son, didst ask me to
recite,--the virtue of women's devotion to their husbands and that of
filial piety.' Yudhishthira replied, 'O most pious Brahmana and best of
_munis_, thou hast related to me this good and wonderful moral story;
and listening to thee, O learned man, my time has glided away like a
moment; but, O adorable sir, I am not as yet satiated with hearing this
moral[19] discourse.'"

    [18] A form of Hindu etiquette at parting.

    [19] It is so very difficult to translate the word
    _Karma_,--religion and morals were invariably associated with
    each other in ancient Hindu mind.


SECTION CCXVI

Vaisampayana continued, "The virtuous king Yudhishthira, having listened
to this excellent religious discourse, again addressed himself to the
_rishi_ Markandeya saying, 'Why did the fire-god hide himself in water
in olden times, and why is it that Angiras of great splendour
officiating as fire-god, used to convey[20] oblations during his
dissolution. There is but one fire, but according to the nature of its
action, it is seen to divide itself into many. O worshipful sir, I long
to be enlightened on all these points,--How the Kumara[21] was born, how
he came to be known as the son of Agni (the fire-god) and how he was
begotten by Rudra or Ganga and Krittika. O noble scion of Bhrigu's race,
I desire to learn all this accurately as it happened. O great _muni_, I
am thrilled with great curiosity.' Markandeya replied, 'In this
connection this old story is cited by the learned, as to how the carrier
of oblations (the fire-god) in a fit of rage, sought the waters of the
sea in order to perform a penance, and how the adorable Angiras
transforming himself into the fire-god,[22] destroyed darkness and
distressed the world with his scorching rays. In olden times, O
long-armed hero, the great Angiras performed a wonderful penance in his
hermitage; he even excelled the fire-god, the carrier of oblations, in
splendour and in that state he illumined the whole universe. At that
time the fire-god was also performing a penance and was greatly
distressed by his (Angirasa's) effulgence. He was greatly depressed, but
did not know what to do. Then that adorable god thought within himself,
"Brahma has created another fire-god for this universe. As I have been
practising austerities, my services as the presiding deity of fire have
been dispensed with;" and then he considered how he could re-establish
himself as the _god_ of fire. He beheld the great _muni_ giving heat to
the whole universe like fire, and approached him slowly with fear. But
Angiras said to him, "Do thou quickly re-establish yourself as the fire
animating the universe, thou art well-known in the three stable worlds
and thou wast first created by Brahma to dispel darkness. Do thou, O
destroyer of darkness, quickly occupy thine own proper place." Agni
replied, "My reputation has been injured now in this world. And thou art
become the fire-god, and people will know thee, and not me, as fire. I
have relinquished my god-hood of fire, do thou become the primeval fire
and I shall officiate as the second or Prajapatyaka fire." Angiras
replied, "Do thou become the fire-god and the destroyer of darkness and
do thou attend to thy sacred duty of clearing people's way to heaven,
and do thou, O lord, make me speedily thy first child."' Markandeya
continued, 'Hearing these words of Angiras, the fire-god did as desired,
and, O king, Angiras had a son named Vrihaspati. Knowing him to be the
first son of Angiras by Agni, the gods, O Bharata, came and enquired
about the mystery. And thus asked by the gods he then enlightened them,
and the gods then accepted the explanation of Angiras. In this
connection, I shall describe to thee religious sorts of fire of great
effulgence which are here variously known in the Brahmanas[23] by their
respective uses.'"

    [20] Agni or fire was supposed to convey the oblations offered
    by men to the gods.

    [21] _Kumara_ means a boy, hence a prince. Here Kartika the
    war-god is meant.

    [22] By carrying their oblations to the gods.

    [23] Portions of the Vedas.


SECTION CCXVII

"Markandeya continued, 'O ornament of Kuru's race, he (Angiras) who was
the third son of Brahma had a wife of the name of Subha. Do thou hear of
the children he had by her. His son Vrihaspati, O king, was very famous,
large-hearted and of great bodily vigour. His genius and learning were
profound, and he had a great reputation as a counsellor. Bhanumati was
his first-born daughter. She was the most beautiful of all his children.
Angiras's second daughter was called Raga.[24] She was so named because
she was the object of all creature's love. Siniwali was the third
daughter of Angiras. Her body was of such slender make that she was
visible at one time and invisible at another; and for this reason she
was likened to _Rudra's_ daughter. Archismati was his fourth daughter,
she was so named from her great refulgence. And his fifth daughter was
called _Havishmati_, so named from her accepting _havis_ or oblations.
The sixth daughter of Angiras was called Mahismati the pious. O
keen-witted being, the seventh daughter of Angiras is known by the name
of Mahamati, who is always present at sacrifices of great splendour, and
that worshipful daughter of Angiras, whom they call unrivalled and
without portion, and about whom people utter the words _kuhu kuhu_
(wonder), is known by the name of Kuhu.'"

    [24] _Raga_ means love.


SECTION CCXVIII

"Markandeya continued, 'Vrihaspati had a wife (called Tara) belonging to
the lunar world. By her, he had six sons partaking of the energy of
fire, and one daughter. The fire in whose honour oblations of clarified
butter are offered at the Paurnamasya and other sacrifices, was a son of
Vrihaspati called Sanju; he was of great ascetic merit. At the
_Chaturmasya_ (four-monthly) and _Aswamedha_ (horse) sacrifices, animals
are offered first in his honour, and this powerful fire is indicated by
numerous flames. Sanju's wife was called Satya, she was of matchless
beauty and she sprang from Dharma (righteousness) for the sake of truth.
The blazing fire was his son, and he had three daughters of great
religious merit. The fire which is honoured with the first oblations at
sacrifices is his first son called Bharadwaja. The second son of Sanju
is called Bharata in whose honour oblations of clarified butter are
offered with the sacrificial ladle (called Sruk) at all the full moon
(_Paurnamasaya_) sacrifices. Beside these three sons of whom Bharata is
the senior, he had a son named Bharata and a daughter called Bharati.
The Bharata fire is the son of _Prajapati_ Bharata _Agni_ (fire). And, O
ornament of Bharata's race, because he is greatly honoured, he is also
called the great. Vira is Bharadwaja's wife; she gave birth to Vira. It
is said by the Brahmanas that he is worshipped like _Soma_ (with the
same hymns) with offerings of clarified butter. He is joined with Soma
in the secondary oblation of clarified butter and is also called
Rathaprabhu, Rathadhwana and Kumbhareta. He begot a son named Siddhi by
his wife Sarayu, and enveloped the sun with his splendour and from being
the presiding genius of the fire sacrifice he is ever mentioned in the
hymns in praise of fire. And the fire _Nischyavana_ praises the earth
only; he never suffers in reputation, splendour and prosperity. The
sinless fire Satya blazing with pure flame is his son. He is free from
all taint and is not defiled by sin, and is the regulator of time. That
fire has another name Nishkriti, because he accomplished the _Nishkriti_
(relief) of all blatant creatures here. When properly worshipped he
vouchsafes good fortune. His son is called Swana, who is the generator
of all diseases; he inflicts severe sufferings on people for which they
cry aloud, and moves in the intelligence of the whole universe. And the
other fire (Vrihaspati's third son) is called Viswajit by men of
spiritual wisdom. The fire, which is known as the internal heat by which
the food of all creatures is digested, is the fourth son of Vrihaspati
known through all the worlds, O Bharata, by the name of Viswabhuk. He is
self-restrained, of great religious merit, and is a _Brahmacharin_ and
he is worshipped by Brahmanas at the Paka-sacrifices. The sacred river
Gomati was his wife and by her all religious-minded men perform their
rites. And that terrible water-drinking sea fire called Vadava is the
fifth son of Vrihaspati. This Brahmic fire has a tendency to move
upwards and hence it is called _Urdhvabhag_, and is seated in the vital
air called _Prana_. The sixth son is called the great Swishtakrit; for
by him oblations became _swishta_ (_su_, excellently, and _ishta_,
offered) and the _udagdhara_ oblation is always made in his honour. And
when all creatures are claimed, the fire called Manyauti becomes filled
with fury. This inexorably terrible and highly irascible fire is the
daughter of Vrihaspati, and is known as _Swaha_ and is present in all
matter. (By the respective influence of the three qualities of _sattwa,
rajas_ and _tamas_, Swaha had three sons). By reason of the first she
had a son who was equaled by none in heaven in personal beauty, and
from this fact he was surnamed by the gods as the _Kama_-fire.[25] (By
reason of the second) she had a son called the _Amogha_ or invincible
fire, the destroyer of his enemies in battle. Assured of success he
curbs his anger and is armed with a bow and seated on a chariot and
adorned with wreaths of flowers. (From the action of the third quality)
she had a son, the great _Uktha_ (the means of salvation) praised by
(akin to) three Ukthas.[26] He is the originator of the great word[27]
and is therefore known as the Samaswasa or the means of rest
(salvation).'"

    [25] Kama is the name of the god of love, Indian Cupid.

    [26] The body, the exciting Cause of our actions is an _uktha_,
    the soul of the vivifier of the body is the second _uktha_, and
    the Supreme Spirit, the inciter of the soul is the third.

    [27] The word of God.


SECTION CCXIX

"Markandeya continued, 'He (_Uktha_) performed a severe penance lasting
for many years, with the view of having a pious son equal unto _Brahma_
in reputation. And when the invocation was made with the _vyahriti_
hymns and with the aid of the five sacred fires, _Kasyapa, Vasistha,
Prana_, the son of _Prana, Chyavana_, the son of _Angiras_, and
_Suvarchaka_--there arose a very bright energy (force) full of the
animating (creative) principle, and of five different colours. Its head
was of the colour of the blazing fire, its arms were bright like the sun
and its skin and eyes were golden-coloured and its feet, O Bharata, were
black. Its five colours were given to it by those five men by reason of
their great penance. This celestial being is therefore described as
appertaining to five men, and he is the progenitor of five tribes. After
having performed a penance for ten thousand years, that being of great
ascetic merit produced the terrible fire appertaining to the _Pitris_
(manes) in order to begin the work of creation, and from his head and
mouth respectively he created Vrihat and Rathantara (day and night) who
quickly steal away (life, &c.). He also created Siva from his navel,
Indra from his might and wind and fire from his soul, and from his two
arms sprang the hymns _Udatta_ and _Anudatta_. He also produced the
mind, and the five senses, and other creatures. Having created these, he
produced the five sons of the _Pitris_. Of these _Pranidhi_ was the son
of _Vrihadratha_. Vrihadratha was the son of Kasyapa. Bhanu was the
godson of Chyavana, Saurabha, the son of Suvarchaka, and Anudatta, the
son of Prana. These twenty-five beings are reputed (to have been created
by him). Tapa also created fifteen other gods who obstruct
sacrifices[28]. They are Subhima, Bhima, Atibhima, Bhimavala, Avala,
Sumitra, Mitravana, Mitasina, Mitravardhana and Mitradharaman,[29] and
Surapravira, Vira, Suveka, Suravarchas and Surahantri. These gods are
divided into three classes of five each. Located here in this world,
they destroy the sacrifices of the gods in heaven; they frustrate their
objects and spoil their oblations of clarified butter. They do this only
to spite the sacred fires carrying oblations to the gods. If the
officiating priests are careful, they place the oblations in their
honour outside of the sacrificial altar. To that particular place where
the sacred fire may be placed, they cannot go. They carry the oblation
of their votaries by means of wings. When appeased by hymns, they do not
frustrate the sacrificial rites. Vrihaduktha, another son of Tapa,
belongs to the Earth. He is worshipped here in this world by pious men
performing _Agnihotra_ sacrifices. Of the son of Tapa who is known as
Rathantara, it is said by officiating priests that the sacrificial
oblation offered in his honour is offered to Mitravinda. The celebrated
Tapa was thus very happy with his sons.'"

    [28] In Hindu Mythology there are no gods who destroy
    sacrifices. It is only the Asuras who do so. The Burdwan
    translator renders this passage,--"fifteen other gods belonging
    to western nations or _Asuras_." It is noticeable that the
    beings that were denounced as _Asuras_ by the Hindus were
    worshipped as Gods (_Asuras_) by the followers of Zarathustra.

    [29] In connection with the names of these Mitra-gods, it is to
    be remembered that Mitra was the name of the principal god of
    the ancient Persians.


SECTION CCXX

"Markandeya continued, 'The fire called Bharata was bound by severe
rules of asceticism. Pushtimati is another name of his fire; for when he
is satisfied he vouchsafes _pushti_ (development) to all creatures, and
for this reason he is called _Bharata_ (or the Cherisher). And that
other fire, by name Siva, is devoted to the worship of Sakti (the forces
of the presiding deity of the forces of Nature), and because he always
relieves the sufferings of all creatures afflicted with misery, he is
called Siva (the giver of good). And on the acquisition of great ascetic
wealth by _Tapa_, an intelligent son named Puranda was born to inherit
the same. Another son named Ushma was also born. This fire is observed
in the vapour of all matter. A third son Manu was born. He officiated as
Prajapati. The Brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas, then speak of the
exploits of the fire Sambhu. And after that the bright Avasathya fire of
great refulgence is spoken of by the Brahmanas. Tapa thus created the
five Urjaskara fires, all bright as gold. These all share the _Soma_
drink in sacrifices. The great sun-god when fatigued (after his day's
labours) is known as the Prasanta fire. He created the terrible _Asuras_
and various other creatures of the earth. Angiras, too created the
_Prajapati_ Bhanu, the son of Tapa. He is also called Vrihadbhanu (the
great Bhanu) by Brahmanas learned in the _Vedas_. Bhanu married Supraja,
and Brihadbhanu the daughter of Surya (the sun-god). They gave birth to
six sons; do thou hear of their progeny. The fire who gives strength to
the weak is called Valada (or the giver of strength). He is the first
son of Bhanu, and that other fire who looks terrible when all the
elements are in a tranquil state is called the Manjuman fire; he is the
second son of Bhanu. And the fire in whose honour oblations of clarified
butter are enjoined to be made here at the _Darsa_ and _Paurnamasya_
sacrifices and who is known as Vishnu in this world, is (the third son
of Bhanu) called Angiras, or Dhritiman. And the fire to whom with Indra,
the _Agrayana_ oblation is enjoined to be made is called the Agrayana
fire. He is the (fourth) son of Bhanu. The fifth son of Bhanu is Agraha
who is the source of the oblations which are daily made for the
performance of the _Chaturmasya_ (four-monthly) rites. And Stuva is the
sixth son of Bhanu. Nisa was the name of another wife of that Manu who
is known by the name of Bhanu. She gave birth to one daughter, the two
Agnishtomas, and also five other fire-gods. The resplendent fire-god who
is honoured with the first oblations in company with the presiding deity
of the clouds is called Vaiswanara. And that other fire who is called
the lord of all the worlds is Viswapati, the second son of Manu. And the
daughter of Manu is called Swistakrit, because by oblations unto her one
acquires great merit. Though she was the daughter of Hiranyakasipu, she
yet became his wife for her evil deeds. She is, however, one of the
Prajapatis. And that other fire which has its seats in the vital airs of
all creatures and animates their bodies, is called Sannihita. It is the
cause of our perceptions of sound and form. That divine spirit whose
course is marked with black and white stains, who is the supporter of
fire, and who, though free from sin, is the accomplisher of desired
_karma_, whom the wise regard as a great _Rishi_, is the fire Kapila,
the propounder of the _Yoga_ system called Sankhya. The fire through
whom the elementary spirits always receive the offerings called _Agra_
made by other creatures at the performance of all the peculiar rites in
this world is called Agrani. And these other bright fires famous in the
world, were created for the rectification of the _Agnihotra_ rites when
marred by any defects. If the fires interlap each other by the action of
the wind, then the rectification must be made with the _Ashtakapala_
rites in honour of the fire Suchi. And if the southern fire comes in
contact with the two other fires, then rectification must be made by the
performance of the _Ashtakapala_ rites in honour of the fire Viti. If
the fires in their place called Nivesa come in contact with the fire
called Devagni, then the _Ashtakapala_ rites must be performed in honour
of the fire Suchi for rectification. And if the perpetual fire is
touched by a woman in her monthly course, then for rectification the
_Ashtakapala_ rites must be performed in honour of the fire called
Dasyuman. If at the time of the performance of this _Agnihotra_ rites
the death of any creature is spoken of, or if animals die, then
rectification must be made with the performance of the _Ashtakapala_
rites in honour of the Suraman fire. The Brahmana, who while suffering
from a disease is unable to offer oblations to the sacred fire for three
nights, must make amends for the same by performing the _Ashtakapala_
rites in honour of the northern fire. He who has performed the _Darsa_
and the _Paurnamasya_ rites must make the rectification with the
performance of the _Ashtakapala_ rites in honour of the Patikrit fire.
