and Kripa, and the high-souled Bhishma pacified Drona.

"Drona said, 'Appeased I have already been at the words first spoken by
Bhishma, the son of Santanu. Let such arrangements be made that Partha
may not be able to approach Duryodhana in battle. And let such
arrangements be made that king Duryodhana may not be captured by the
foe, in consequence either of his rashness or want of judgment. Arjuna
hath not, to be sure, revealed himself before the expiry of the term of
exile. Nor will he pardon this act (of ours) today, having only
recovered the kine. Let such arrangements, therefore, be made that he
may not succeed in attacking Dhritarashtra's son and defeating our
troops. Like myself (who am doubtful of the completion of period of
exile) Duryodhana also had said so before. Bearing it in mind, it
behoveth the son of Ganga to say what is true.'"


SECTION LII

"Bhishma said, 'The wheel of time revolves with its divisions, viz.,
with _Kalas_ and _Kasthas_ and _Muhurtas_ and days and fortnights and
months and constellations and planets and seasons and years. In
consequence of their fractional excesses and the deviations of also of
the heavenly bodies, there is an increase of two months in every five
years. It seems to me that calculating this wise, there would be an
excess of five months and twelve nights in thirteen years. Everything,
therefore, that the sons of Pandu had promised, hath been exactly
fulfilled by them. Knowing this to be certain, Vibhatsu hath made his
appearance. All of them are high-souled and fully conversant with the
meanings of the scriptures. How would they deviate from virtue that have
Yudhishthira for their guide? The sons of Kunti do not yield to
temptation. They have achieved a difficult feat. If they had coveted the
possession of their kingdom by unfair means, then those descendants of
the Kuru race would have sought to display their prowess at the time of
the match at dice. Bound in bonds of virtue, they did not deviate from
the duties of the Kshatriya order. He that will regard them to have
behaved falsely will surely meet with defeat. The sons of Pritha would
prefer death to falsehood. When the time, however, comes, those bulls
among men--the Pandavas--endued with energy like that of Sakra, would
not give up what is theirs even if it is defended by the wielder himself
of the thunderbolt. We shall have to oppose in battle the foremost of
all wielders of weapons. Therefore, let such advantageous arrangements
as have the sanction of the good and the honest be now made without loss
of time so that our possessions may not be appropriated by the foe. O
king of kings, O Kaurava, I have never seen a battle in which one of the
parties could say,--_we are sure to win_. When a battle occurs, there
must be victory or defeat, prosperity or adversity. Without doubt, a
party to a battle must have either of the two. Therefore, O king of
kings, whether a battle be now proper or not consistent with virtue or
not, make thy arrangements soon, for Dhananjaya is at hand.'

"Duryodhana said, 'I will not, O grandsire, give back the Pandavas their
kingdom. Let every preparation, therefore, for battle be made without
delay.'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to what I regard as proper, if it pleases thee. I
should always say what is for thy good, O Kaurava. Proceed thou towards
the capital, without loss of time, taking with thee a fourth part of the
army. And let another fourth march, escorting the kine. With half the
troops we will fight the Pandava. Myself and Drona, and Karna and
Aswatthaman and Kripa will resolutely withstand Vibhatsu, or the king of
the Matsyas, or Indra himself, if he approaches. Indeed, we will
withstand any of these like the bank withstanding the surging sea.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "These words spoken by the high-souled Bhishma
were acceptable to them, and the king of the Kauravas acted accordingly
without delay. And having sent away the king and then the kine, Bhishma
began to array the soldiers in order of battle. And addressing the
preceptor, he said, 'O preceptor, stand thou in the centre, and let
Aswatthaman stand on the left, and let the wise Kripa, son of Saradwata,
defend the right wing, and let Karna of the _Suta_ caste, clad in mail,
stand in the van. I will stand in the rear of the whole army, protecting
it from that point.'"


SECTION LIII

Vaisampayana said, "After the Kauravas, O Bharata, had taken their stand
in this order, Arjuna, filling the air with the rattle and din of his
car, advanced quickly towards them. And the Kurus beheld his banner-top
and heard the rattle and din of his car as also the twang of the
_Gandiva_ stretched repeatedly by him. And noting all this, and seeing
that great car-warrior--the wielder of the _Gandiva_--come, Drona spoke
thus, 'That is the banner-top of Partha which shineth at a distance, and
this is the noise of his car, and that is the ape that roareth
frightfully. Indeed, the ape striketh terror in the troops. And there
stationed on that excellent car, the foremost of car-warriors draweth
that best of bows, the _Gandiva_, whose twang is as loud as the thunder.
Behold, these two shafts coming together fall at my feet, and two others
pass off barely touching my ears. Completing the period of exile and
having achieved many wonderful feats, Partha saluteth me and whispereth
in my ears. Endued with wisdom and beloved of his relatives, this
Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu, is, indeed, beheld by us after a long
time, blazing with beauty and grace. Possessed of car and arrows,
furnished with handsome fences and quiver and conch and banner and coat
of mail, decked with diadem and scimitar and bow, the son of Pritha
shineth like the blazing (_Homa_) fire surrounded with sacrificial
ladles and fed with sacrificial butter.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Beholding the Kurus ready for battle, Arjuna
addressing Matsya's son in words suitable to the occasion, said, 'O
charioteer, restrain thou the steeds at such a point whence my arrows
may reach the enemy. Meanwhile, let me see, where, in the midst of this
army, is that vile wretch of the Kuru race. Disregarding all these, and
singling out that vainest of princes I will fall upon his head, for upon
the defeat of that wretch the others will regard themselves as defeated.
There standeth Drona, and thereafter him his son. And there are those
great bowmen--Bhishma and Kripa and Karna. I do not see, however, the
king there. I suspect that anxious to save his life, he retreateth by
the southern road, taking away with him the kine. Leaving this array of
car-warriors, proceed to the spot where Suyodhana is. There will I
fight, O son of Virata, for there the battle will not be fruitless,
Defeating him I will come back, taking away the kine.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed, the son of Virata restrained
the steeds with an effort and turned them by a pull at the bridle from
the spot where those bulls of the Kuru race were, and urged them on
towards the place where Duryodhana was. And as Arjuna went away leaving
that thick array of cars, Kripa, guessing his intention, addressed his
own comrades, saying, 'This Vibhatsu desireth not to take up his stand
at a spot remote from the king. Let us quickly fall upon the flanks of
the advancing hero. When inflamed with wrath, none else, unassisted, can
encounter him in battle save the deity of a thousand eyes, or Krishna
the son of Devaki. Of what use to us would the kine be or this vast
wealth also, if Duryodhana were to sink, like a boat, in the ocean of
_Partha_?' Meanwhile, Vibhatsu, having proceeded towards that division
of the army, announced himself speedily by name, and covered the troops
with his arrows thick as locusts. And covered with those countless
shafts shot by Partha, the hostile warriors could not see anything, the
earth itself and the sky becoming overwhelmed therewith. And the
soldiers who had been ready for the fight were so confounded that none
could even the flee from the field. And beholding the light-handedness
of Partha they all applauded it mentally. And Arjuna then blew his conch
which always made the bristles of the foe stand erect. And twanging his
best of bows, he urged the creatures on his flagstaff to roar more
frightfully. And at the blare of his conch and the rattle of his
car-wheels, and the twang of the _Gandiva_, and the roar of the
superhuman creatures stationed on his flagstaff, the earth itself began
to tremble. And shaking their upraised tails and lowing together, the
kine turned back, proceeding along the southern road.'"


SECTION LIV

Vaisampayana said, "Having disorganised the hostile host by force and
having recovered the kine, that foremost of bowmen, desirous of fighting
again, proceeded towards Duryodhana. And beholding the kine running wild
towards the city of the Matsyas, the foremost warriors of the Kurus
regarded Kiritin to have already achieved success. And all of a sudden
they fell upon Arjuna who was advancing towards Duryodhana. And
beholding their countless divisions firmly arrayed in order of battle
with countless banners waving over them, that slayer of foes, addressing
the son of the king of the Matsyas, said, 'Urge on, to the best of their
speed by this road, these white steeds decked with golden bridles.
Strive thou well, for I would approach this crowd of Kuru lions. Like an
elephant desiring an encounter with another, the _Suta's_ son of wicked
soul eagerly desireth a battle with me. Take me, O prince, to him who
hath grown so proud under the patronage of Duryodhana.' Thus addressed,
the son of Virata by means of those large steeds endued with the speed
of the wind and furnished with golden armour, broke that array of cars
and took the Pandava into the midst of the battle-field. And seeing this
those mighty car-warriors, Chitrasena and Sangramajit and Satrusaha and
Jaya, desirous of aiding Karna, rushed with arrows and long shafts,
towards the advancing hero of Bharata's race. Then that foremost of men,
inflamed with wrath, began to consume by means of fiery arrows shot from
his bow, that array of cars belonging to those bulls among the Kurus,
like a tremendous conflagration consuming a forest. Then, when the
battle began to rage furiously, the Kuru hero, Vikarna, mounted on his
car, approached that foremost of car-warriors, Partha, the younger
brother of Bhima,--showering upon him terrible shafts thick and long.
Then cutting Vikarna's bow furnished with a tough string and horns
overlaid with gold, Arjuna cut off his flagstaff. And Vikarna, beholding
his flagstaff cut off, speedily took to flight. And after Vikarna's
flight, Satruntapa, unable to repress his ire, began to afflict Partha,
that obstructer of foes and achiever of super-human feats, by means of a
perfect shower of arrows. And drowned, as it were, in the midst of the
Kuru-array, Arjuna, pierced by that mighty car-warrior,--king
Satruntapa--pierced the latter in return with five and then slew his
car-driver with ten shafts, and pierced by that bull of the Bharata race
with an arrow capable of cleaving the thickest coat of mail, Satruntapa
fell dead on the field of battle, like a tree from a mountain-top torn
up by the wind. And those brave bulls among men, mangled in battle by
that braver bull among men, began to waver and tremble like mighty
forests shaken by the violence of the wind that blows at the time of the
universal dissolution. And struck in battle by Partha, the son of
Vasava, those well-dressed heroes among men--those givers of wealth
endued with the energy of Vasava--defeated and deprived of life, began
to measure their lengths on the ground, like full-grown Himalayan
elephants clad in mails of black steel decked with gold. And like unto a
raging fire consuming a forest at the close of summer, that foremost of
men, wielding the _Gandiva_, ranged the field in all directions, slaying
his foes in battle thus. And as the wind rangeth at will, scattering
masses of clouds and fallen leaves in the season of spring, so did that
foremost of car-warriors--Kiritin--ranged in that battle, scattering all
his foes before him. And soon slaying the red steeds yoked unto the car
of Sangramajit, the brother of Vikartana's son, that hero decked in
diadem and endued with great vigour then cut off his antagonist's head
by a crescent-shaped arrow. And when his brother was slain, Vikartana's
son of the _Suta_ caste, mustering all his prowess, rushed at Arjuna,
like a huge elephant with out-stretched tusks, or like a tiger at a
mighty bull. And the son of Vikarna quickly pierced the son of Pandu
with twelve shafts and all his steeds also in every part of their bodies
and Virata's son too in his hand. And rushing impetuously against
Vikarna's son who was suddenly advancing against him, Kiritin attacked
him fiercely like Garuda of variegated plumage swooping down upon a
snake. And both of them were foremost of bowmen, and both were endued
with great strength, and both were capable of slaying foes. And seeing
that an encounter was imminent between them, the Kauravas, anxious to
witness it, stood aloof as lookers on. And beholding the offender Karna,
the son of Pandu, excited to fury, and glad also at having him, soon
made him, his horses, his car, and car-driver invisible by means of a
frightful shower of countless arrows. And the warriors of the Bharatas
headed by Bhishma, with their horses, elephants, and cars, pierced by
Kiritin and rendered invisible by means of his shafts, their ranks also
scattered and broken, began to wail aloud in grief. The illustrious and
heroic Karna, however counteracting with numberless arrows of his own
those shafts by Arjuna's hand, soon burst forth in view with bow and
arrows like a blazing fire. And then there arose the sound of loud
clapping of hands, with the blare of conchs and trumpets and
kettle-drums made by the Kurus while they applauded Vikartana's son who
filled the atmosphere with the sound of his bow-string flapping against
his fence. And beholding Kiritin filling the air with the twang of
_Gandiva_, and the upraised tail of the monkey that constituted his flag
and that terrible creature yelling furiously from the top of his
flagstaff, Karna sent forth a loud roar. And afflicting by means of his
shafts, Vikartana's son along with his steeds, car and car-driver,
Kiritin impetuously poured an arrowy shower on him, casting his eyes on
the grandsire and Drona and Kripa. And Vikartana's son also poured upon
Partha a heavy shower of arrows like a rain-charged cloud. And the
diadem-decked Arjuna also covered Karna with a thick down-pour of
keen-edged shafts. And the two heroes stationed on their cars, creating
clouds of keen-edged arrows in a combat carried on by means of countless
shafts and weapons, appeared to the spectators like the sun and the moon
covered by clouds, and the light-handed Karna, unable to bear the sight
of the foe, pierced the four horses of the diadem-decked hero with
whetted arrows, and then struck his car-driver with three shafts, and
his flagstaff also with three. Thus struck, that grinder of all
adversaries in battle, that bull of the Kuru race, Jishnu wielding the
_Gandiva_, like a lion awaked from slumber, furiously attacked Karna by
means of straight-going arrows. And afflicted by the arrowy shower (of
Karna), that illustrious achiever of super-human deeds soon displayed a
thick shower of arrows in return. And he covered Karna's car with
countless shafts like the sun covering the different worlds with rays.
And like a lion attacked by an elephant, Arjuna, taking some keen
crescent-shaped arrows from out of his quiver and drawing his bow to his
ear, pierced the _Suta's_ son on every part of his body. And that
grinder of foes pierced Karna's arms and thighs and head and forehead
and neck and other principal parts of his body with whetted shafts
endued with the impetuosity of the thunderbolt and shot from the
_Gandiva_ in battle. And mangled and afflicted by the arrows shot by
Partha the son of Pandu, Vikartana's son, quitted the van of battle, and
quickly took to flight, like one elephant vanquished by another.'"


SECTION LV

Vaisampayana said, "After the son of Radha had fled from the field,
other warriors headed by Duryodhana, one after another, fell upon the
son of Pandu with their respective divisions. And like the shore
withstanding the fury of the surging sea, that warrior withstood the
rage of that countless host rushing towards him, arrayed in order of
battle and showering clouds of arrows. And that foremost of
car-warriors, Kunti's son Vibhatsu of white steeds, rushed towards the
foe, discharging celestial weapons all the while. Partha soon covered
all the points of the horizon with countless arrows shot from the
_Gandiva_, like the sun covering the whole earth with his rays. And
amongst those that fought on cars and horses and elephants, and amongst
the mail-clad foot-soldiers, there was none that had on his body a space
of even two finger's breadth unwounded with sharp arrows. And for his
dexterity in applying celestial weapons, and for the training of the
steeds and the skill of Uttara, and for the coursing of his weapons, and
his prowess and light-handedness, people began to regard Arjuna as the
fire that blazeth forth during the time of the universal dissolution for
consuming all created things. And none amongst the foe could cast his
eyes on Arjuna who shone like a blazing fire of great effulgence. And
mangled by the arrows of Arjuna, the hostile ranks looked like
newly-risen clouds on the breast of a hill reflecting the solar rays, or
like groves of _Asoka_ trees resplendent with clusters of flowers.
Indeed, afflicted by the arrows of Partha, the soldiers looked like
these, or like a beautiful garland whose flowers gradually wither and
drop away: And the all-pervading wind bore on its wings in the sky the
torn flags and umbrellas of the hostile host. And affrighted at the
havoc amongst their own ranks, the steeds fled in all directions, freed
from their yokes by means of Partha's arrows and dragging after them
broken portions of cars and elephants, struck on their ears and ribs and
tusks and nether lips and other delicate parts of the body, began to
drop down on the battle-field. And the earth, bestrewn in a short time
with the corpses of elephants belonging to the Kauravas, looked like the
sky overcast with masses of black clouds. And as that fire of blazing
flames at the end of the _yuga_ consumeth all perishable things of the
world, both mobile and immobile, so did Partha, O king, consumeth all
foes in battle. And by the energy of his weapons and the twang of his
bow, and the preter-natural yells of the creatures stationed on his
flagstaff, and the terrible roar of the monkey, and by the blast of his
conch, that mighty grinder of foes, Vibhatsu, struck terror into the
hearts of all the troops of Duryodhana. And the strength of every
hostile warrior seemed, as it were, to be levelled to the dust at the
very sight of Arjuna. And unwilling to commit the daring act of sin of
slaying them that were defenceless, Arjuna suddenly fell back and
attacked the army from behind by means of clouds of keen-edged arrows
proceeding towards their aims like hawks let off by fowlers. And he soon
covered the entire welkin with clusters of blood-drinking arrows. And as
the (infinite) rays of the powerful sun, entering a small vessel, are
contracted within it for want of space, so the countless shafts of
Arjuna could not find space for their expansion even within the vast
welkin. Foes were able to behold Arjuna's car, when near, only once, for
immediately after, they were with their horses, sent to the other world.
And as his arrows unobstructed by the bodies of foes always passed
through them, so his car, unimpeded by hostile ranks, always passed
through the latter. And, indeed, he began to toss about and agitate the
hostile troops with great violence like the thousand-headed Vasuki
sporting in the great ocean. And as Kiritin incessantly shot his shafts,
the noise of the bow-string, transcending every sound, was so loud that
the like of it had never been heard before by created beings. And the
elephants crowding the field, their bodies pierced with (blazing) arrows
with small intervals between looked like black clouds coruscated with
solar rays. And ranging in all directions and shooting (arrows) right
and left, Arjuna's bow was always to be seen drawn to a perfect circle.
And the arrows of the wielder of the _Gandiva_ never fell upon anything
