[Illustration: FACHADA OF MISSION SAN JUAN BAUTISTA]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN JUAN BAUTISTA, FROM THE PLAZA]

[Illustration: THE ARCHED CORRIDOR, MISSION SAN JUAN BAUTISTA]

This did not prevent the Ansayames, however, from killing two Mutsunes
at San Benito Creek, burning a house and some wheat-fields, and
seriously threatening the Mission. Moraga was sent against them and
captured eighteen hostiles and the chiefs of the hostile rancherias.

Almost as bad as warlike Indians were the earthquakes of that year,
several in number, which cracked all the adobe walls of the buildings
and compelled everybody--friars and Indians--to sleep out of doors
for safety.

In 1803 the governor ordered the padres of San Juan to remove their
stock from La Brea rancho, which had been granted to Mariano Castro.
They refused on the grounds that the rancho properly belonged to the
Mission and should not have been granted to Castro, and on appeal the
viceroy confirmed their contention.

In June of this year the corner-stone of a new church was laid. Padre
Viader conducted the ceremonies, aided by the resident priests. Don Jose
de la Guerra was the sponsor, and Captain Font and Surgeon
Morelos assisted.

In June, 1809, the image of San Juan was placed on the high altar in the
sacristy, which served for purposes of worship until the completion of
the church.

By the end of the decade the population had grown to 702, though the
number of deaths was large, and it continued slowly to increase until in
1823 it reached its greatest population with 1248 souls.

The new church was completed and dedicated on June 23, 1812. In 1818 a
new altar was completed, and a painter named Chavez demanded six reals a
day for decorating. As the Mission could not afford this, a Yankee,
known as Felipe Santiago--properly Thomas Doak--undertook the work,
aided by the neophytes. In 1815 one of the ministers was Esteban Tapis,
who afterwards became the presidente.

In 1836 San Juan was the scene of the preparations for hostility begun
by Jose Castro and Alvarado against Governor Gutierrez. Meetings were
held at which excited speeches were made advocating revolutionary
methods, and the fife and drum were soon heard by the peaceful
inhabitants of the old Mission. Many of the whites joined in with
Alvarado and Castro, and the affair ultimated in the forced exile of the
governor; Castro took his place until Alvarado was elected by the
_diputacion_.

The regular statistics of San Juan cease in 1832, when there were 916
Indians registered. In 1835, according to the decree of secularization,
63 Indians were "emancipated." Possibly these were the heads of
families. Among these were to be distributed land valued at $5120,
live-stock, including 41 horses, $1782, implements, effects,
etc., $1467.

The summary of statistics from the founding of the Mission in 1797 to
1834 shows 4100 baptisms, 1028 marriages, 3027 deaths. The largest
number of cattle owned was 11,000 in 1820, 1598 horses in 1806, 13,000
sheep in 1816.

In 1845, when Pico's decree was issued, San Juan was considered a
pueblo, and orders given for the sale of all property except a curate's
house, the church, and a court-house. The inventory gave a value of
$8000. The population was now about 150, half of whom were whites and
the other half Indians.

It will be remembered that it was at San Juan that Castro organized his
forces to repel what he considered the invasion of Fremont in 1846. From
Gavilan heights, near by, the explorer looked down and saw the warlike
preparations directed against him, and from there wrote his declaration:
"I am making myself as strong as possible, in the intention that if we
are unjustly attacked we will fight to extremity and refuse quarter,
trusting to our country to avenge our death."

In 1846 Pico sold all that remained of San Juan Bautista--the
orchard--to O. Deleisseques for a debt, and though he did not obtain
possession at the time, the United States courts finally confirmed his
claim. This was the last act in the history of the once
prosperous Mission.

The entrance at San Juan Bautista seems more like that of a prison than
a church. The Rev Valentin Closa, of the Company of Jesus, who for many
years has had charge here, found that some visitors were so
irresponsible that thefts were of almost daily occurrence. So he had a
wooden barrier placed across the church from wall to wall, and floor to
ceiling, through which a gate affords entrance, and this gate is kept
padlocked with as constant watchfulness as is that of a prison. Passing
this barrier, the two objects that immediately catch one's eye are the
semicircular arch dividing the church from the altar and the old wooden
pulpit on the left.

Of the modern bell-tower it can only be said that it is a pity necessity
seemed to compel the erection of such an abortion. The old padres
seldom, if ever, failed in their architectural taste. However one may
criticise their lesser work, such as the decorations, he is compelled to
admire their _large_ work; they were right, powerful, and dignified in
their straightforward simplicity. And it is pathetic that in later days,
when workmen and money were scarce, the modern priests did not see some
way of overcoming obstacles that would have been more harmonious with
the old plans than is evidenced by this tower and many other similar
incongruities, such as the steel bell-tower at San Miguel.

[Illustration: DOORWAY, MISSION SAN JUAN BAUTISTA.]

[Illustration: STAIRWAY LEADING TO PULPIT, MISSION SAN JUAN BAUTISTA.]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN MIGUEL ARCANGEL, FROM THE SOUTH.]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN MIGUEL ARCANGEL AND CORRIDORS.]

At San Juan Bautista the old reredos remains, though the altar is new.
The six figures of the saints are the original ones placed there when it
was first erected. In the center, at the top, is Our Lady of
Guadalupe; to the left, San Antonio de Padua; to the right, San Isadore
de Madrid (the patron saint of all farmers); below, in the center, is
the saint of the Mission, San Juan Bautista, on his left, St. Francis,
and on his right, San Buenaventura.

The baptistery is on the left, at the entrance. Over its old, solid,
heavy doors rises a half-circular arch. Inside are two bowls of heavy
sandstone.

In the belfry are two bells, one of which is modern, cast in San
Francisco. The other is the largest Mission bell, I believe, in
California. It bears the inscription: "Ave Maria Purisima S. Fernando
RVELAS me Fecit 1809."

There is a small collection of objects of interest connected with the
old Mission preserved in one room of the monastery. Among other things
are two of the chorals; pieces of rawhide used for tying the beams,
etc., in the original construction; the head of a bass-viol that used to
be played by one of the Indians; a small mortar; and quite a number of
books. Perhaps the strangest thing in the whole collection is an old
barrel-organ made by Benjamin Dobson, The Minories, London. It has
several barrels and on one of them is the following list of its tunes:
Go to the Devil; Spanish Waltz; College Hornpipe; Lady Campbell's Reel.
One can imagine with what feelings one of the sainted padres, after a
peculiarly trying day with his aboriginal children, would put in this
barrel, and while his lips said holy things, his hand instinctively
ground out with vigor the first piece on the list.



CHAPTER XXV

SAN MIGUEL, ARCANGEL

Lasuen's third Mission, of 1797, was San Miguel, located near a large
rancheria named _Sagshpileel_, and on the site called _Vahia_. One
reason for the selection of the location is given in the fact that there
was plenty of water at Santa Isabel and San Marcos for the irrigation of
three hundred fanegas of seed. To this day the springs of Santa Isabel
are a joy and delight to all who know them, and the remains of the old
irrigating canals and dams, dug and built by the padres, are still to
be seen.

On the day of the founding, Lasuen's heart was made glad by the
presentation of fifteen children for baptism. At the end of 1800 there
were 362 neophytes, 372 horses and cattle, and 1582 smaller animals. The
crop of 1800 was 1900 bushels.

Padre Antonio de la Concepcion Horra, who was shortly after deported as
insane, and who gave Presidente Lasuen considerable trouble by
preferring serious charges against the Missions, was one of the first
ministers.

In February of 1801 the two padres were attacked with violent pains in
the stomach and they feared the neophytes had poisoned them, but they
soon recovered. Padre Pujol, who came from Monterey to aid them, did not
fare so well for he was taken sick in a similar manner and died. Three
Indians were arrested, but it was never decided whether poison had been
used or not. The Indians escaped when being taken north to the presidio,
and eventually the padres pleaded for their release, asking however that
they be flogged in the presence of their families for having boasted
that they had poisoned the padres.

In August, 1806, a disastrous fire occurred, destroying all the
manufacturing part of the establishment as well as a large quantity of
wool, hides, cloth, and 6000 bushels of wheat. The roof of the church
was also partially burned. At the end of the decade San Miguel had a
population of 973, and in the number of its sheep it was excelled only
by San Juan Capistrano.

In 1818 a new church was reported as ready for roofing, and this was
possibly built to replace the one partially destroyed by fire in 1806.
In 1814 the Mission registered its largest population in 1076 neophytes,
and in live-stock it showed satisfactory increase at the end of the
decade, though in agriculture it had not been so successful.

Ten years later it had to report a great diminution in its flocks and
herds and its neophytes. The soil and pasture were also found to be
poor, though vines flourished and timber was plentiful. Robinson, who
visited San Miguel at this time, reports it as a poor establishment and
tells a large story about the heat suffocating the fleas. Padre Martin
died in 1824.

In 1834 there were but 599 neophytes on the register. In 1836 Ignacio
Coronel took charge in order to carry out the order of secularization,
and when the inventory was made it showed the existence of property,
excluding everything pertaining to the church, of $82,000. In 1839 this
amount was reduced to $75,000. This large valuation was owing to the
fact that there were several ranches and buildings and two large
vineyards belonging to the Mission. These latter were Santa Isabel and
Aguage, with 5500 vines, valued at $22,162.

The general statistics from the founding in 1797 to 1834 give 2588
baptisms, 2038 deaths; largest population was 1076 in 1814. The largest
number of cattle was 10,558 in 1822, horses 1560 in 1822, mules 140 in
1817, sheep 14,000 in 1820.

In 1836 Padre Moreno reported that when Coronel came all the available
property was distributed among the Indians, except the grain, and of
that they carried off more than half. In 1838 the poor padre complained
bitterly of his poverty and the disappearance of the Mission property.
There is no doubt but that here as elsewhere the Mission was plundered
on every hand, and the officers appointed to guard its interests were
among the plunderers.

In 1844 Presidente Duran reported that San Miguel had neither lands nor
cattle, and that its neophytes were demoralized and scattered for want
of a minister. Pico's 1845 decree warned the Indians that they must
return within a month and occupy their lands, or they would be disposed
of; and in 1846 Pico reported the Mission sold, though no consideration
is named, to P. Rios and Wm. Reed. The purchasers took possession, but
the courts later declared their title invalid. In 1848 Reed and his
whole family were atrociously murdered. The murderers were pursued; one
was fatally wounded, one jumped into the sea and was drowned, and the
other three were caught and executed.

The register of baptisms at San Miguel begins July 25, 1797, and up to
1861 contains 2917 names. Between the years 1844 and 1851 there is a
vacancy, and only one name occurs in the latter year. The title-page is
signed by Fr. Fermin Franco de Lasuen, and the priests in charge are
named as Fr. Buenaventura Sitjar and Fr. Antonio de la Conception.

At the end of this book is a list of 43 children of the "gentes de
razon" included in the general list, but here specialized for reference.

The registry of deaths contains 2249 names up to 1841. The first entry
is signed by Fr. Juan Martin and the next two by Fr. Sitjar.

The old marriage register of the Mission of San Miguel is now at San
Luis Obispo. It has a title-page signed by Fr. Lasuen.

In 1888 some of the old bells of the Mission were sent to San Francisco
and there were recast into one large bell, weighing 2500 pounds. Until
1902 this stood on a rude wooden tower in front of the church, but in
that year an incongruous steel tower took its place. Packed away in a
box still remains one of the old bells, which has sounded its last call.
A large hole is in one side of it. The inscription, as near as I can
make out, reads "A. D. 1800, S.S. Gabriel."

In 1901 the outside of the church and monastery was restored with a coat
of new plaster and cement. Inside nearly everything is as it was left by
the robber hand of secularization.

On the walls are the ten oil paintings brought by the original founders.
They are very indistinct in the dim light of the church, and little can
be said of their artistic value without further examination.

There is also an old breviary with two heavy, hand-made clasps, dated
Antwerp, 1735, and containing the autograph of Fr. Man. de Castaneda.

There is a quadrangle at San Miguel 230 feet square, and on one side of
it a corridor corresponding to the one in front, for six pillars of
burnt brick still remain.

At the rear of the church was the original church, used before the
present one was built, and a number of remains of the old houses of the
neophytes still stand, though in a very dilapidated condition.

San Miguel was always noted for its proximity to the Hot Springs and
Sulphur Mud Baths of Paso Robles. Both Indians and Mission padres knew
of their healthful and curative properties, and in the early days scores
of thousands enjoyed their peculiar virtues. Little by little the
"superior race" is learning that in natural therapeutics the Indian is a
reasonably safe guide to follow; hence the present extensive use by the
whites of the Mud and Sulphur Baths at Paso Robles. Methinks the Indians
of a century ago, though doubtless astonished at the wonderful temple to
the white man's God built at San Miguel, would wonder much more were
they now to see the elaborate and splendid house recently erected at
Paso Robles for the purpose of giving to more white people the baths,
the virtue of which they so well knew.

[Illustration: SEEKING TO PREVENT THE PHOTOGRAPHER FROM MAKING A
PICTURE OF MISSION SAN MIGUEL ARCANGEL.]

[Illustration: OLD PULPIT AT MISSION SAN MIGUEL ARCANGEL.]

[Illustration: RESTORED MONASTERY AND MISSION CHURCH OF SAN FERNANDO
REY.]

[Illustration: CORRIDORS AT SAN FERNANDO REY.]



CHAPTER XXVI

SAN FERNANDO, REY DE ESPAGNA

On September 8, 1797, the seventeenth of the California Missions was
founded by Padre Lasuen, in the Encino Valley, where Francisco Reyes had
a rancho in the Los Angeles jurisdiction. The natives called it _Achois
Comihavit_. Reyes' house was appropriated as a temporary dwelling for
the missionary. The Mission was dedicated to Fernando III, King of
Spain. Lasuen came down from San Miguel to Santa Barbara, especially for
the foundation, and from thence with Sergeant Olivera and a military
escort. These, with Padre Francisco Dumetz, the priest chosen to have
charge, and his assistant, Francisco Favier Uria, composed, with the
large concourse of Indians, the witnesses of the solemn ceremonial.

On the fourth of October Olivera reported the guard-house and storehouse
finished, two houses begun, and preparations already being made for
the church.

From the baptismal register it is seen that ten children were baptized
the first day, and thirteen adults were received early in October. By
the end of 1797 there were fifty-five neophytes.

Three years after its founding 310 Indians were gathered in, and its
year's crop was 1000 bushels of grain. The Missions of San Juan
Capistrano, San Gabriel, San Buenaventura, and Santa Barbara had
contributed live-stock, and now its herds had grown to 526 horses,
mules, and cattle, and 600 sheep.

In December, 1806, an adobe church, with a tile roof, was consecrated,
which on the 21st of December, 1812, was severely injured by the
earthquake that did damage to almost all the Missions of the chain.
Thirty new beams were needed to support the injured walls. A new chapel
was built, which was completed in 1818.

In 1834 Lieutenant Antonio del Valle was the comisionado appointed to
secularize the Mission, and the next year he became majordomo and served
until 1837.

It was on his journey north, in 1842, to take hold of the governorship,
that Micheltorena learned at San Fernando of Commodore Jones's raising
of the American flag at Monterey. By his decree, also, in 1843, San
Fernando was ordered returned to the control of the padres, which was
done, though the next year Duran reported that there were but few cattle
left, and two vineyards.

Micheltorena was destined again to appear at San Fernando, for when the
Californians under Pio Pico and Castro rose to drive out the Mexicans,
the governor finally capitulated at the same place, as he had heard the
bad news of the Americans' capture of Monterey. February 21, 1845, after
a bloodless "battle" at Cahuenga, he "abdicated," and finally left the
country and returned to Mexico.

In 1845 Juan Manso and Andres Pico leased the Mission at a rental of
$1120, the affairs having been fairly well administered by Padre Orday
after its return to the control of the friars. A year later it was sold
by Pio Pico, under the order of the assembly, for $14,000, to Eulogio
Celis, whose title was afterwards confirmed by the courts. Orday
remained as pastor until May, 1847, and was San Fernando's last minister
under the Franciscans.

In 1847 San Fernando again heard the alarm of war. Fremont and his
battalion reached here in January, and remained until the signing of the
treaty of Cahuenga, which closed all serious hostilities against the
United States in its conquest of California.

Connected with the Mission of San Fernando is the first discovery of
California gold. Eight years before the great days of '49 Francisco
Lopez, the _mayordomo_ of the Mission, was in the canyon of San
Feliciano, which is about eight miles westerly from the present town of
Newhall, and according to Don Abel Stearns, "with a companion, while in
search of some stray horses, about midday stopped under some trees and
tied their horses to feed. While resting in the shade, Lopez with his
sheath knife dug up some wild onions, and in the dirt discovered a piece
of gold. Searching further, he found more. On his return to town he
showed these pieces to his friends, who at once declared there must be a
placer of gold there."

Then the rush began. As soon as the people in Los Angeles and Santa
Barbara heard of it, they flocked to the new "gold fields" in hundreds.
And the first California gold dust ever coined at the government mint at
Philadelphia came from these mines. It was taken around Cape Horn in a
sailing-vessel by Alfred Robinson, the translator of Boscana's _Indians
of California_, and consisted of 18.34 ounces, and made $344.75, or over
$19 to the ounce.

Davis says that in the first two years after the discovery not less than
from $80,000 to $100,000 was gathered. Don Antonio Coronel, with three
Indian laborers, in 1842, took out $600 worth of dust in two months.
