had watched Christ's corpse, and been with the first to examine the
report of his resurrection, and among the first who believed it--and
that even then, at that appearance of his Lord, he only of those
present, when they saw him standing on the shore, could not wait till
the boat should convey him to the land, but had thrown himself into
the sea, leaving the fish which they had enclosed, to continue in
their own element, and swam to the shore, not perhaps, without
endangering his life, that he might not delay to receive and welcome
his Lord.

* Matthew xv. 12-19.

These, and probably many other things, evidential of the reality and
strength of his love to Christ, Simon might have alleged,
notwithstanding his late defection--distinctions, which perhaps none
of his fellow disciples could have pleaded; and which, had any share
of the pharisaic spirit rested on him, might have induced him to claim
that superiority to his brethren, which a certain church afterwards
attributed to him.

To have mentioned these, might have strengthened the charity of his
fellow disciples towards him; but he knew that none of them were
requisite, to convince Christ of his love. Though he had done, and
suffered, and exposed himself for Christ, more than others, he put in
no claim to a reward--he had done less than was his duty. His
dependence was on grace. Therefore did he decline the mention, of what
some would have boasted, and appealed directly to his Savior, as the
searcher of hearts, to judge of the matter in question--of his love,
and the measure of it--appealed to him who had put the question,
_lovest thou me more than these?_ To clear up his character and bear
witness to the reality and measure of his affection toward him--_Yea
Lord, thou knowest that I love thee_.

In this appeal he not only shewed his sincerity, but reflected honor
on Christ, by an acknowledgement of his divinity. The knowledge of the
heart is the prerogative of Deity. "I the Lord search the heart, I try
the reins, to give to every man according to his way, and according to
the fruit of his doings. The Lord searcheth all hearts, and
understandeth the imaginations of the thoughts." The exalted Savior,
afterwards made himself known as possessing this power, and appointed
to exercise it, in adjusting the rewards of another life. "All the
churches shall know that I am he who searcheth the hearts and reins;
and I will give to every one of you according to your works." But this
had not been clearly revealed, when Christ paid the visit to his
disciples at the sea of Tiberias. The Christian dispensation was then
scarcely set up. Darkness still brooded on the minds, even of the
apostles. It continued till the outpouring of the Spirit, on the day
of Pentecost, when the promise of "the Comforter, to teach them all
things, and bring all things to their remembrance," was fulfilled. But
Simon seems to have anticipated these public manifestations and
discoveries--to have at this time been convinced, that Christ was
omniscient--THOU KNOWEST ALL THINGS; _thou knowest that I love thee_.

In this appeal, Christ was farther honored, by Simon's open, public
reliance on his goodness. He had then lately dishonored Christ, by a
shameful denial--a denial, when to have acknowledged him, would have
done him the greatest honor. But such was his confidence in the
goodness of his Lord, that he dared to trust himself with him--had no
concern, that resentment of the part he had acted, would induce him,
in whom he trusted, to overlook his penitence, and pass his humble
confidence unnoticed--did not fear to trust himself in Christ's hands,
and leave it to him to make known his character to his fellow
disciples.

In these things the faith of Simon, and the nature of his faith
appeared. He not only believed Jesus to be the Christ, but he believed
the divinity of Christ. His faith did not terminate in a bare assent,
but convinced of his sufficiency, and of his justice, and mercy and
readiness to forgive the returning penitent, he gave himself up to
Christ and trusted in him to pardon his sins and save him by his
grace. Though sensible of his own demerit, fear did not drive him away
from the Savior, but induced him to return to him and put his whole
trust in him.

Such is the nature of justifying faith. Those who are subjects of it,
deeply sensible of their sins, "look to the Lamb of God, who taketh
away the sin of the world," and place all their dependence on him; and
they are not disappointed--; "Whoso believeth shall not be ashamed."

Thus Simon's faith and love were owned of Christ; and this late
offender not only pardoned, but continued in his office; a pastor of
Christ's flock. _Feed my lambs--Feed my sheep_, were the replies to
the appeals made by the offender, that he loved the Savior. In this
manner was he directed,

III. To manifest his love to Christ.--It might have been thought
that Simon had fallen from his office when he denied his Lord; with
oaths and imprecations, denied his knowledge of him. If so, he was
here restored; Christ entrusted him again with the care "of his flock
--which he had purchased with his blood;" and reappointed him to "give
them their meat in due season." His having had this charge here given
him, argued the pardon of his offences, and his restoration to favor.
He would not have been required to do the work of an apostle, had not
his transgression been forgiven, and his sin been blotted out. Judas
had no such trust reposed in him after his fall; no such duty required
of him. "By his transgression he fell from his ministry and
apostleship, that he might go to his own place, and another take his
office." Judas repented; but not with repentance unto life. His
repentance led to death by his own hand. Diverse was that of Simon,
both in its nature and effects. His was "Godly sorrow, which wrought
repentance unto life"--which caused him to devote himself wholly to
the service of the Redeemer, and at last to lay down his life for his
sake.

REFLECTIONS

I. Our subject teacheth the folly of felt dependence. Who ever
appeared to have stronger confidence in himself than Peter? Yet few
have fallen more shamefully than he.

If we lean to ourselves, like things will probably befall us. Our
strength is weakness. Our enemies are many and powerful; they are long
versed in the arts of deception; well acquainted with our weakness;
know how, and when, and where to attack us to advantage. Left to
ourselves, we should doubtless be snared and taken by them.

Simon was naturally bold and resolute; had great love to Christ, and
zeal for his honor: Yet all did not enable him "to stand in the evil
day." If Peter fell, who, left to himself, can stand? Not one. But God
is able to make the weakest and most feeble stand, and will make them
stand if they trust in him. "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness." Blessed are they who trust in
him.

II. An high opinion of a person's own strength, or love to God and the
Redeemer, is most commonly the prelude to a fall. When one thinks
himself strong, and feels secure, he is soon taught weakness and
dependence, and the need he stands in of a divine guardian, by some
advantage gained over him by the enemy: Whereas, those who are
sensible of their own weakness, and trust in God, are holden up, and
made to stand. "Most gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon--me for when I am
weak, then am I strong."

III. As self knowledge is of great importance, unnecessary to our
reforming that which is amiss, and to our trading in him who is able
to keep us, we should often try ourselves, as in his presence--his, to
whom our hearts are open. It becomes us often to retire inward, and
examine whether the love of Christ dwelleth in us? _Whether we love
him more than these_? Than the world and the things of it? If Christ
is not uppermost in our hearts, "we are not worthy of him." But if we
can answer the question put to Simon, as he answered it, _Lord thou
knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee_, happy are we. We
remain in a state of imperfection--may often have occasion to mourn
some practical denial of Christ; still, if _he who knoweth all things,
knoweth that we love him_, our love to him will not he overlooked; he
will own us before his Father, and reward us with eternal rewards.

IV. Christ's disciples, while in the body, often err; if acquainted
with ourselves, we must often know this of ourselves; do we then see
our faults?

If any who call themselves Christians live in neglect of self
examination, and are consequently strangers to themselves, there is
great reason to fear that they are strangers also to the Christian
life. The Christian communes much with his own heart, and finds daily
occasion to mourn before God, that his service is so defective, and
that he so often denies his Lord, by heedless lapses, or by suffering
temptation to have such power over him. When the Lord looked on Peter,
and thereby brought to his remembrance the warnings which he had given
him, his confidence in himself, and then his fall, he went out and
wept bitterly.

Every Christian hath a measure of this spirit, and is grieved at his
heart, when he calls to mind his shameful denials of his Lord. If any,
who think themselves his disciples are blind to their faults, or
little affected with them--ready to excuse or extenuate them,
especially if hidden from the world; or feel reluctant to take shame
to themselves, when they have fallen, it nearly concerns them to
examine the grounds of their hope toward God; there is reason to fear
that they "hold a lie in their right hands." Those who are Christ's
discern their faults; confess and forsake them. Their falls art made
the occasion of greater watchfulness, and care to keep themselves from
every wicked thing, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. May he
grant this to be our temper, for his mercy's sake in Christ. Amen.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XIV.

Gifts no certain Evidence of Grace.

Luke x. 20

"In this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you; but
rather rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven."


Abundant notice of Christ's coming preceded that interesting' event.
"To him gave all the prophets witness."

Neither was his entrance here unattended. It was announced by an
angelic choir; by a miraculous star; and by a band of eastern magi.
The manger which contained him, was particularly pointed out to the
shepherds, and his person designated by inspired Simon and Anna.
Again,

When entering on his ministry, witness was given for him, both from
heaven, and on earth; from heaven by the visible descent of the Holy
Ghost, which rested on him, and by a voice testifying that he was the
Son in God; on earth by John, and soon after by the seventy: For these
were sent to prepare his way, and introduce him to his work.

John was sent before, "to make ready a people prepared for the Lord"
--"Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." The seventy, to
declare him then entering on his ministry--"The kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you."--John did no miracles; but the seventy witnessed
Christ's truth, and their own by wonders wrought in his name. In the
orders given to them at their mission, we find them only directed to
heal the sick, as an evidence of Christ's arrival, and their being
sent of him; but by the report made at their return they appeared to
have been empowered to cast out devils. They probably did all the
mighty works done by the twelve, and by their Lord. Thus they prepared
his way.

Doing miracles in Christ's name would raise in those who witnessed it,
a desire to see him of whom they spake, and whose power they
displayed: And "they were sent two and two before his face into every
city and place whither he himself would come."

Had they only proclaimed his arrival, some might have listened; but
few would have "believed their report." Greater evidence than their
word would have been demanded; as was afterwards of Christ--"What sign
shewest thou, that we may believe thee?" Neither would the demand have
been unreasonable. Special messages require special evidence; and it
is always given to those who are sent of God.

Every deceiver may pretend to a divine mission; but we are forbidden
to "believe every spirit, and commanded to try the spirits." The
church at Ephesus is commended for having obeyed this command--"Thou
hast tried them which say that they are apostles, and are not, and
hast found them liars."

Our Savior speaking of the Jews' rejection of him, aggravates their
guilt, by a consideration or the plenitude of the evidence which had
been given them of his truth. "If I had not done among them the works
which none other man did, they had not had sin--but now they have no
cloak for their sin--they have both seen and hated both me and my
Father." *

* John xv. 22-24.

At the return of the seventy they appear to have been elated with the
exercise of the miraculous powers which had been delegated to them--"And
the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject unto us through thy name."

They had witnessed Christ's miracles, but seem not to have wrought
miracles themselves till now; and when they found themselves able to
do the mighty works which they had admired in their Lord they were
filled with joy.

Having made their report, Christ enlarged their powers and promised them
protection--"Behold I give you power to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means
hurt you." But to prevent them from setting an undue value on these
distinctions, the caution in the text is subjoined--"_Notwithstanding,
in this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather,
rejoice because your names are written in heaven_".

In discussing the subject, we will, first _consider the caution or
prohibition--In this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto
you; then the command--But rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven_.

I. WE are to consider the caution, or prohibition--_In this rejoice
not, &c_.

But why not? Was it not matter of joy that spirits, evil spirits were
subject to them? That they were able to dislodge them from the bodies
of men, by commanding them in Christ's name? Certainly. This enabled
them to answer the ends of their mission, which had been but very
partially answered without it. Wherefore then the prohibition?

It is rather the excess of their joy, than the joy itself which is
here forbidden. They seem to have placed an undue value on this power;
to have exalted it above it's place, particularly as it concerned
themselves. This was the first thing they mentioned at their return;
nothing beside seems to have made so deep an impression upon them, or
to have given them equal self importance.

To them there were other things more interesting and important; that
they were accepted of God, and numbered among the faithful, and that
their _names were written_ in heaven, were to them occasions of much
greater joy. The gift of miracles proved their mission, and drew the
attention of those who witnessed their mighty works; but this was not
a saving gift. A person might possess it, yet remain unrenewed, and
perish in his sins.

Some appear to have exercised this power, who professed no relation to
Christ, but were openly connected with his enemies. This is evident
from his expostulation with those who attributed to infernal agency,
the authority with which he extorted obedience from evil spirits--"If
I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?
Therefore shall they be your judges." * The same appears from another
incident, recorded by St. Mark--"And John answered, saying, Master, we
saw one casting on devils in thy name, and he followed not us, and we
forbid him, because he followeth not us. And Jesus said,
Forbid him not: For there is no man who shall do a miracle in my name,
that can lightly speak evil of me." +

* Luke xi. 19. + St. Mark ix. 38, 39.

It seems that some who had seen the disciples cast out devils in
Christ's name, though not themselves his disciples, attempted to do
the same and succeeded; and that things of this nature were not
uncommon after Christ began his ministry; though it did not always, if
at all succeed, after his sufferings and exaltation. ++

++ Acts xix. 13.

The gift of miracles, like other gifts, was distinct from sanctifying
grace. This grace was often joined with that gift; but not always.
There was no necessary connexion between them.

Under the former dispensation, the gift of prophecy did not certainly
argue a renewed nature. It was sometimes given without it. Balaam had
this gift. The deceiver who brought back the man of God who was sent
from Judah to reprove Jeroboam, had it. By divine order he told the
Jew what would happen to him, because he disobeyed the word of the
Lord, and returned to eat bread in that place. Neither is there a
trait of sanctity visible on the prophet Jonah, though he was
compelled to bear God's messages to Ninevah, and used to make other
special communications to men.

Under the gospel dispensation divine administration hath seen the
same. Judas had doubtless the gift of miracles in common with his
fellow disciples; and many will appeal to the judge in the great day,
that they "have prophesied in his name, in his name cast out devils,
and in his name done many wonderful works, to whom he will profess, I
never knew you," and whom he will send away among the workers of
iniquity.

Men are too often estimated by their gifts. Many consider those as the
best men who possess the most enlarged, and especially the most showy
talents; and despise those of a different description, as though their
gifts and graces must be equal. But this is wrong. A person may
possess the talents of an angel of light, who hath the temper of an
infernal. Such is probably the state of apostate spirits. And some of
the greatest of mankind have been some of the worst and most
abandoned.

Though this must be evident to the considerate, there is yet a
disposition in man to judge others, yea, and himself too, by gifts
apart from the grace which falsifies gifts, and renders them
beneficial, both to the possessor, and to the world; and at the same
time keeps the possessor humble, and prevents him from thinking of
himself, above that which he ought to think.

Neither are the renewed out of danger from this quarter.
Sanctification being imperfect, distinguished gifts, or usefulness, or
uncommon divine communications, are liable to be abused and made to
foster pride and raise in the worm too high an opinion of himself. St.
Paul "though not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles," needed
something to keep him humble and prevent him from being elated by the
revelations which were made to him. And he left these things on record
as a warning to others; and particularly noted them to the church at
Corinth, which abounded with miraculous gifts, and among whom they
were exceedingly abused. He declared them not only inferior to
charity, or holy love, but, considered in themselves, as of no
estimation in a moral view; that a person might possess them in the
highest degree, and yet be nothing in religion--"Though I speak with
the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of
