subsequently visited Arabia, Palestine, Syria, Asia Minor, and Greece.
As he passed through Palestine in A.D. 228, when he was in the
forty-third year of his age, he was ordained a presbyter by some of the
bishops of that country. He was now teacher of the catechetical school
of Alexandria--an office in which he had succeeded Clement--and his
ordination by the foreign pastors gave great offence to Demetrius, his
own bishop. It has been said that this haughty churchman was galled by
the superior reputation of the great scholar; and Origen, on his return
to Egypt, was exposed to an ecclesiastical persecution. An indiscreet
act of his youth was now converted into a formidable accusation, [377:1]
whilst some incautious speculations in which he had indulged were urged
as evidences of his unsoundness in the faith. His ordination was
pronounced invalid; he was deprived of his appointment as president of
the catechetical school; and he was excommunicated as a heretic. He now
retired to Caesarea, where he appears to have spent the greater portion
of the remainder of his life. The sentence of excommunication was
announced by Demetrius to the Churches abroad; but though it was
approved at Rome and elsewhere, it was not recognised in Palestine,
Phoenice, Arabia, and Achaia. At Caesarea, Origen established a
theological seminary such as that over which he had so long presided at
Alexandria; and, in this institute, some of the most eminent pastors of
the third century received their education.

This great man throughout life practised extraordinary self-denial. His
clothing was scarcely sufficient to protect him from the cold; he slept
on the ground; he confined himself to the simplest fare; and for years
he persisted in going barefoot. [377:2] But his austerities did not
prevent him from acquiring a world-wide reputation. Pagan philosophers
attended his lectures, and persons of the highest distinction sought his
society. When Julia Mammaea, the mother of Alexander Severus, invited
him to visit her, and when, in compliance with this summons, he
proceeded to Antioch [377:3] escorted by a military guard, he must have
been an object of no little curiosity to the Imperial courtiers. It
could now no longer be said that the Christians were an illiterate
generation; as, in all that brilliant throng surrounding the throne of
the Master of the Roman world, there was not, perhaps, one to be
compared, with the poor catechist of Alexandria for varied and profound
scholarship. But his theological taste was sadly vitiated by his study
of the pagan philosophy. Clement, his early instructor, led him to
entertain far too high an opinion of its excellence; and a subsequent
teacher, Ammonius Saccas, the father of New Platonism, thoroughly imbued
his mind with many of his own dangerous principles. According to
Ammonius all systems of religion and philosophy contain the elements of
truth; and it is the duty of the wise man to trace out and exhibit their
harmony. The doctrines of Plato formed the basis of his creed, and it
required no little ingenuity, to shew how all other theories quadrated
with the speculations of the Athenian sage. To establish his views, he
was obliged to draw much on his imagination, and to adopt modes of
exegesis the most extravagant and unwarrantable. The philosophy of
Ammonius exerted a very pernicious influence upon Origen, and seduced
him into not a few of those errors which have contributed so greatly to
lower his repute as a theologian.

Origen was a most prolific author; and, if all his works were still
extant, they would be far more voluminous than those of any other of the
fathers. But most of his writings have been lost; and, in not a few
instances, those which remain have reached us either in a very mutilated
form, or in a garbled Latin version. His treatise "Against Celsus,"
which was composed when he was advanced in life, and which is by far the
most valuable of his existing works, has come down to us in a more
perfect state than, perhaps, any of his other productions. It is a
defence of Christianity in reply to the publication of a witty heathen
philosopher who wrote against it in the time of the Antonines. [378:1]
Of his celebrated "Hexapla," to which he is said to have devoted much of
his time for eight and twenty years, only some fragments have been
preserved. This great work appears to have been undertaken to meet the
cavils of the Jews against the Septuagint--the Greek translation of the
Old Testament in current use in the days of the apostles, and still most
appreciated by the Christians. The unbelieving Israelites now pronounced
it a corrupt version; and, that all might have an opportunity of judging
for themselves, Origen exhibited the text in six consecutive
columns--the first, containing the original Hebrew--the second, the same
in Greek letters--and the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, four of the
most famous of the Greek translations, including the Septuagint. [379:1]
The labour employed in the collation of manuscripts, when preparing this
work, was truly prodigious. The expense, which must also have been
great, is said to have been defrayed by Ambrosius, a wealthy Christian
friend, who placed at the disposal of the editor the constant services
of seven amanuenses. By his "Hexapla" Origen did much to preserve the
purity of the sacred text, and he may be said to have thus laid the
foundations of the science of Scripture criticism.

This learned writer cannot be trusted as an interpreter of the inspired
oracles. Like the Jewish Cabbalists, of whom Philo, whose works he had
diligently studied, [379:2] is a remarkable specimen, he neglects the
literal sense of the Word, and betakes himself to mystical expositions.
[379:3] In this way the divine record may be made to support any
crotchet which happens to please the fancy of the commentator. Origen
may, in fact, be regarded as the father of Christian mysticism; and, in
after-ages, to a certain class of visionaries, especially amongst the
monks, his writings long continued to present peculiar attractions.

On doctrinal points his statements are not always consistent, so that it
is extremely difficult to form anything like a correct idea of his
theological sentiments. Thus, on the subject of the Trinity, he
sometimes speaks most distinctly in the language of orthodoxy, whilst
again he employs phraseology which rather savours of the creed of
Sabellius or of Arius. In his attempts to reconcile the gospel and his
philosophy, he miserably compromised some of the most important truths
of Scripture. The fall of man seems to be not unfrequently repudiated in
his religious system; and yet, occasionally, it is distinctly
recognized. [380:1] He maintained the pre-existence of human souls; he
held that the stars are animated beings; he taught that all men shall
ultimately attain happiness; and he believed that the devils themselves
shall eventually be saved. [380:2] It is abundantly clear that Origen
was a man of true piety. His whole life illustrates his self-denial, his
single-mindedness, his delight in the Word of God, and his zeal for the
advancement of the kingdom of Christ. In the Decian persecution he
suffered nobly as a confessor; and the torture which he then endured
seems to have hastened his demise. But with all his learning he was
obviously deficient in practical sagacity; and though both his genius
and his eloquence were of a high order, he possessed scarcely even an
average share of prudence and common sense. His writings diffused, not
the genial light of the Sun of Righteousness, but the mist and darkness
of a Platonized Christianity. Though he induced many philosophers to
become members of the Church, the value of these accessions was greatly
deteriorated by the daring spirit of speculation which they were still
encouraged to cultivate. Of his Christian courage, his industry, and his
invincible perseverance, there can be no doubt. He closed a most
laborious career at Tyre, A.D. 254, in the seventieth year of his age.

About the time of the death of Origen, a Latin author, whose writings
are still perused with interest, was beginning to attract much notice.
CYPRIAN of Carthage, before his conversion to Christianity, was a
professor of rhetoric and a gentleman of property. When he renounced
heathenism, he is supposed to have reached the mature age of forty-five
or forty-six; and as he possessed rank, talent, and popular eloquence,
he was deemed no ordinary acquisition to the Church. About two years
after his baptism, the chief pastor of the metropolis of the Proconsular
Africa was removed by death; and Cyprian, by the acclamations of the
Christian people, was called to the vacant office. At that time there
seem to have been only eight presbyters, [381:1] or elders, connected
with the bishopric of Carthage; but the city contained probably some
hundreds of thousands of a population; and, though the episcopal dignity
was not without its perils, it did not want the attractions of wealth
and influence. The advancement of Cyprian gave great offence to the
other elders, who appear to have conceived that one of themselves, on
the ground of greater experience and more lengthened services, had a
better title to promotion. Though the new bishop was sustained by the
enthusiastic support of the multitude, the presbytery contrived,
notwithstanding, to give him considerable annoyance. Five of them,
constituting a majority, formed themselves into a regular opposition;
and for several years the Carthaginian Church was distracted by the
struggles between the bishop and his eldership.

The pastorate of Cyprian extended over a period of about ten years; but
meanwhile persecution raged, and the bishop was obliged to spend nearly
the one-third of his episcopal life in retirement and in exile. From his
retreat he kept up a communication by letters with his flock. [382:1]
The worship and constitution of the Church about the middle of the third
century may be ascertained pretty clearly from the Cyprianic
correspondence. Some of the letters addressed to the Carthaginian
bishop, as well as those dictated by him, are still extant; and as he
maintained an epistolary intercourse with Rome, Cappadocia, and other
places, the documents known as the Cyprianic writings, [382:2] are
amongst the most important of the ancient ecclesiastical memorials. This
eminent pastor has also left behind him several short treatises on
topics which were then attracting public attention. Among these may be
mentioned his tracts on "The Unity of the Church," "The Lord's Prayer,"
"The Vanity of Idols," "The Grace of God," "The Dress of Virgins," and
"The Benefit of Patience."

The writings of Cyprian have long been noted for their orthodoxy; and
yet it must be admitted that his hierarchical prejudices stunted his
charity and obscured his intellectual vision. Tertullian was his
favourite author; and it is evident that he possessed much of the
contracted spirit and of the stiff formalism of the great Carthaginian
presbyter. He speaks in more exalted terms of the authority of bishops
than any preceding writer. It is not improbable that the attempts of his
discontented elders to curb his power inflamed his old aristocratic
hauteur, and thus led to a reaction; and that, supported by the popular
voice, he was tempted absurdly to magnify his office, and to stretch his
prerogative beyond the bounds of its legitimate exercise. His name
carried with it great influence, and from his time episcopal pretensions
advanced apace.

Cyprian was martyred about A.D. 258 in the Valerian persecution. As he
was a man of rank, and perhaps personally related to some of the
imperial officers at Carthage, he seems to have been treated, when a
prisoner, with unusual respect and indulgence. On the evening before his
death an elegant supper was provided for him, and he was permitted to
enjoy the society of a numerous party of his friends. When he reached
the spot where he was to suffer, he was subjected to no lingering
torments; for his head was severed from his body by a single stroke of
the executioner. [383:1]

The only other writer of note who flourished after Cyprian, in the third
century, [383:2] was _Gregory_, surnamed _Thaumaturgus_, or _The
Wonder-Worker_. He belonged to a pagan family of distinction; and, when
a youth, was intended for the profession of the law; but, becoming
acquainted with Origen at Caesarea in Palestine, he was induced to
embrace the Christian faith, and relinquish flattering prospects of
secular promotion. He became subsequently the bishop of Neo-Caesarea in
Pontus. When he entered on his charge he is said to have had a
congregation of only seventeen individuals; but his ministry must have
been singularly successful; for, according to tradition, all the
inhabitants of the city, with seventeen exceptions, were, at the time of
his death, members of the Church. The reports respecting him are
obviously exaggerated, and no credit can be attached to the narrative of
his miracles. [384:1] He wrote several works, of which his "Panegyric on
Origen," and his "Paraphrase on Ecclesiastes," are still extant. The
genuineness of some other tracts ascribed to him may be fairly
challenged.

The preceding account of the fathers of the second and third centuries
may enable us to form some idea of the value of these writers as
ecclesiastical authorities. Most of them had reached maturity before
they embraced the faith of the gospel, so that, with a few exceptions,
they wanted the advantages of an early Christian education. Some of
them, before their conversion, had bestowed much time and attention on
the barren speculations of the pagan philosophers; and, after their
reception into the bosom of the Church, they still continued to pursue
the same unprofitable studies. Cyprian, one of the most eloquent of
these fathers, had been baptized only about two years before he was
elected bishop of Carthage; and, during his comparatively short
episcopate, he was generally in a turmoil of excitement, and had,
consequently, little leisure for reading or mental cultivation. Such a
writer is not entitled to command confidence as an expositor of the
faith once delivered to the saints. Even in our own day, with all the
facilities supplied by printing for the rapid accumulation of knowledge,
no one would expect much spiritual instruction from an author who would
undertake the office of an interpreter of Scripture two years after his
conversion from heathenism. The fathers of the second and third
centuries were not regarded as safe guides even by their Christian
contemporaries. Tatian was the founder of a sect of extreme
Teetotallers. [383:1] Tertullian, who, in point of learning, vigour, and
genius, stands at the head of the Latin writers of this period, was
connected with a party of gloomy fanatics. Origen, the most voluminous
and erudite of the Greek fathers, was excommunicated as a heretic. If we
estimate these authors, as they were appreciated by the early Church of
Rome, we must pronounce their writings of little value. Tertullian, as a
Montanist, was under the ban of the Roman bishop. Hippolytus could not
have been a favourite with either Zephyrinus or Callistus, for he
denounced both as heretics. Origen was treated by the Roman Church as a
man under sentence of excommunication. Stephen deemed even Cyprian
unworthy of his ecclesiastical fellowship, because the Carthaginian
prelate maintained the propriety of rebaptizing heretics.

Nothing can be more unsatisfactory, or rather childish, than the
explanations of Holy Writ sometimes given by these ancient expositors.
According to Tertullian, the two sparrows mentioned in the New Testament
[383:2] signify the soul and the body; [383:3] and Clemens Alexandrinus
gravely pleads for marriage [383:4] from the promise-"Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them."
[383:5] Cyprian produces, as an argument in support of the doctrine of
the Trinity, that the Jews observed "the third, sixth, and ninth hours"
as their "fixed and lawful seasons for prayer." [383:6] Origen
represents the heavenly bodies as literally engaged in acts of devotion.
[386:1] If these authorities are to be credited, the Gihon, one of the
rivers of Paradise, was no other than the Nile. [386:2] Very few of the
fathers of this period were acquainted with Hebrew, so that, as a class,
they were miserably qualified for the interpretation of the Scriptures.
Even Origen himself must have had a very imperfect knowledge of the
language of the Old Testament. [386:3] In consequence of their literary
deficiencies, the fathers of the second and third centuries occasionally
commit the most ridiculous blunders. Thus, Irenaeus tells us that the
name Jesus in Hebrew consists of two letters and a half, and describes
it as signifying "that Lord who contains heaven and earth!" [386:4] This
father asserts also that the Hebrew word _Adonai_, or the Lord, denotes
"utterable and wonderful." [386:5] Clemens Alexandrinus is not more
successful as an interpreter of the sacred tongue of the chosen people;
for he asserts that Jacob was called _Israel_ "because he had seen the
Lord God," [386:6] and he avers that _Abraham_ means "the elect father
of a sound!" [386:7] Justin Martyr errs egregiously in his references to
the Old Testament; as he cites Isaiah for Jeremiah, [386:8] Zechariah
for Malachi, [386:9] Zephaniah for Zechariah, [386:10] and Jeremiah for
Daniel. [386:11] Irenaeus repeats, as an apostolic tradition, that when
our Lord acted as a public teacher He was between forty and fifty years
of age; [387:1] and Tertullian affirms that He was about thirty years of
age at the time of His crucifixion. [387:2] The opinion of this same
writer in reference to angels is still more extraordinary. He maintains
that some of these beings, captivated by the beauty of the daughters of
men, came down from heaven and married them; and that, out of
complaisance to their brides, they communicated to them the arts of
polishing and setting precious stones, of preparing cosmetics, and of
using other appliances which minister to female vanity. [387:3] His
ideas upon topics of a different character are equally singular. Thus,
he affirms that the soul is corporeal, having length, breadth, height,
and figure. [387:4] He even goes so far as to say that there is no
substance which is not corporeal, and that God himself is a body.
[387:5]

It would seem as if the Great Head of the Church permitted these early
writers to commit the grossest mistakes, and to propound the most
foolish theories, for the express purpose of teaching us that we are not
implicitly to follow their guidance. It might have been thought that
authors, who flourished on the borders of apostolic times, knew more of
the mind of the Spirit than others who appeared in succeeding ages; but
the truths of Scripture, like the phenomena of the visible creation, are
equally intelligible to all generations. If we possess spiritual
discernment, the trees and the flowers will display the wisdom and the
goodness of God as distinctly to us as they did to our first parents;
and, if we have the "unction from the Holy One," we may enter into the
meaning of the Scriptures as fully as did Justin Martyr or Irenaeus. To
assist us in the interpretation of the New Testament, we have at command
a critical apparatus of which they were unable to avail themselves.
Jehovah is jealous of the honour of His Word, and He has inscribed in
letters of light over the labours of its most ancient interpreters--
"CEASE YE FROM MAN." The "opening of the Scriptures," so as to exhibit
their beauty, their consistency, their purity, their wisdom, and their
power, is the clearest proof that the commentator is possessed of "the
key of knowledge." When tried by this test, Thomas Scott or Matthew
Henry is better entitled to confidence than either Origen or Gregory
Thaumaturgus. The Bible is its own safest expositor. "The law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple."





CHAPTER II.

THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES AND THEIR CLAIMS. THE EXTERNAL EVIDENCE.


The Epistles attributed to Ignatius have attracted greater notice, and
have created more discussion, than any other uninspired writings of the
same extent in existence. The productions ascribed to this author, and
now reputed genuine by the most learned of their recent editors, might
all be printed on the one-fourth of a page of an ordinary newspaper; and
yet, the fatigue of travelling thousands of miles has been encountered,
[389:1] for the special purpose of searching after correct copies of
these highly-prized memorials. Large volumes have been written, either
to establish their authority, or to prove that they are forgeries; and,
if collected together, the books in various languages to which they have
given birth, would themselves form a considerable library. Recent
discoveries have thrown new light on their pretensions, but though the
controversy has now continued upwards of three hundred years, it has not
hitherto reached a satisfactory termination. [390:1]

The Ignatian letters owe almost all their importance to the circumstance
that they are alleged to have been written on the confines of the
apostolic age. As very few records remain to illustrate the
ecclesiastical history of that period, it is not strange that epistles,
purporting to have emanated from one of the most distinguished ministers
who then flourished, should have excited uncommon attention. But doubts
regarding their genuineness have always been entertained by candid and
competent scholars. The spirit of sectarianism has entered largely into
the discussion of their claims; and, whilst certain distinct references
to the subject of Church polity, which they contain, have greatly
enhanced their value in the estimation of one party, the same passages
have been quoted, by those who repudiate their authority, as so many
decisive proofs of their fabrication. The annals of literature furnish,
perhaps, scarcely any other case in which ecclesiastical prejudices have
been so much mixed up with a question of mere criticism.

The history of the individual to whom these letters have been ascribed,
has been so metamorphosed by fables, that it is now, perhaps, impossible
to ascertain its true outlines. There is a tradition that he was the
child whom our Saviour set in the midst of His disciples as a pattern of
humility; [390:2] and as our Lord, on the occasion, took up the little
personage in His arms, it has been asserted that Ignatius was therefore
surnamed _Theophorus_, that is, _borne or carried by God_. [390:3]
Whatever may be thought as to the truth of this story, it probably gives
a not very inaccurate view of the date of his birth; for he was, in all
likelihood, far advanced in life [391:1] at the period when he is
supposed to have written these celebrated letters. According to the
current accounts, he was the second bishop of Antioch at the time of his
martyrdom; and as his age would lead us to infer that he was then the
senior member of the presbytery, [391:2] the tradition may have thus
originated. It is alleged that when Trajan visited the capital of Syria
in the ninth year of his reign, or A.D. 107, Ignatius voluntarily
presented himself before the imperial tribunal, and avowed his
Christianity. It is added, that he was in consequence condemned to be
carried a prisoner to Rome, there to be consigned to the wild beasts for
the entertainment of the populace. On his way to the Western metropolis,
he is said to have stopped at Smyrna. The legend represents Polycarp as
then the chief pastor of that city; and, when there, Ignatius is
described as having received deputations from the neighbouring churches,
and as having addressed to them several letters. From Smyrna he is
reported to have proceeded to Troas; where he dictated some additional
epistles, including one to Polycarp. The claims of these letters to be
considered his genuine productions have led to the controversy which we
are now to notice.

The story of Ignatius exhibits many marks of error and exaggeration; and
yet it is no easy matter to determine how much of it should be
pronounced fictitious. Few, perhaps, will venture to assert that the
account of his martyrdom is to be rejected as altogether apocryphal; and
still fewer will go so far as to maintain that he is a purely imaginary
character. There is every reason to believe that, very early in the
second century, he was connected with the Church of Antioch; and that,
about the same period, he suffered unto death in the cause of
Christianity. Pliny, who was then Proconsul of Bithynia, mentions that,
as he did not well know, in the beginning of his administration, how to
deal with the accused Christians, he sent those of them who were Roman
citizens to the Emperor, that he might himself pronounce judgment.
[392:1] It is possible that the chief magistrate of Syria pursued the
same course; and that thus Ignatius was transmitted as a prisoner into
Italy. But, upon some such substratum of facts, a mass of incongruous
fictions has been erected. The "Acts of his Martyrdom," still extant,
and written probably upwards of a hundred years after his demise, cannot
stand the test of chronological investigation; and have evidently been
compiled by some very superstitious and credulous author. According to
these Acts, Ignatius was condemned by Trajan at Antioch in the _ninth_
[392:2] year of his reign; but it has been contended that, not until
long afterwards, was the Emperor in the Syrian capital. [392:3] In the
"Acts," Ignatius is described as presenting himself before his sovereign
_of his own accord_, to proclaim his Christianity--a piece of
foolhardiness for which it is difficult to discover any reasonable
apology. The report of the interview between Ignatius and Trajan, as
given in this document, would, if believed, abundantly warrant the
conclusion that the martyr must have entirely lost the humility for
which he is said to have obtained credit when a child; as his conduct,
in the presence of the Emperor, betrays no small amount of boastfulness
and presumption. The account of his transmission to Rome, that he might
be thrown to wild beasts, presents difficulties with which even the most
zealous defenders of his legendary history have found it impossible to
grapple. He was sent away, say they, to the Italian metropolis that the
sight of so distinguished a victim passing through so many cities on his
way to a cruel death might strike terror into the hearts of the
Christian inhabitants. But we are told that he was conveyed from Syria
to Smyrna _by water_, [393:1] so that the explanation is quite
unsatisfactory; and, had the journey been accomplished by land, it would
still be insufficient, as the disciples of that age were unhappily only
too familiar with spectacles of Christian martyrdom. Our perplexity
increases as we proceed more minutely to investigate the circumstances
under which the epistles are reported to have been composed. Whilst
Ignatius is said to have been hurried with great violence and barbarity
from the East to the West, he is at the same time represented, with
strange inconsistency, as remaining for many days together in the same
place, [393:2] as receiving visitors from the churches all around, and
as writing magniloquent epistles. What is still more remarkable, though
he was pressed by the soldiers to hasten forward, and though a
prosperous gale speedily carried his vessel into Italy, [394:1] one of
these letters is supposed to outstrip the rapidity of his own progress,
and to reach Rome before himself and his impatient escort!

Early in the fourth century at least seven epistles attributed to
Ignatius were in circulation, for Eusebius of Caesarea, who then
flourished, distinctly mentions so many, and states to whom they were
addressed. From Smyrna the martyr is said to have written four
letters--one to the Ephesians, another to the Magnesians, a third to the
Trallians, and a fourth to the Romans. From Troas he is reported to have
written three additional letters--one to Polycarp, a second to the
Smyrnaeans, and a third to the Philadelphians. [394:2] At a subsequent
period eight more epistles made their appearance, including two to the
Apostle John, one to the Virgin Mary, one to Maria Cassobolita, one to
the Tarsians, one to the Philippians, one to the Antiochians, and one to
Hero the deacon. Thus, no less than fifteen epistles claim Ignatius of
Antioch as their author.

It is unnecessary to discuss the merits of the eight letters unknown to
Eusebius. They were probably all fabricated after the time of that
historian; and critics have long since concurred in rejecting them as
spurious. Until recently, those engaged in the Ignatian controversy were
occupied chiefly with the examination of the claims of the documents
mentioned by the bishop of Caesarea. Here, however, the strange
variations in the copies tended greatly to complicate the discussion.
The letters of different manuscripts, when compared together, disclosed
extraordinary discrepancies; for, whilst all the codices contained much
of the same matter, a letter in one edition was, in some cases, about
double the length of the corresponding letter in another. Some writers
contended for the genuineness of the shorter epistles, and represented
the larger as made up of the true text extended by interpolations;
whilst others pronounced the larger letters the originals, and condemned
the shorter as unsatisfactory abridgments. [395:1] But, though both
editions found most erudite and zealous advocates, many critics of
eminent ability continued to look with distrust upon the text, as well
of the shorter, as of the larger letters; whilst not a few were disposed
to suspect that Ignatius had no share whatever in the composition of any
of these documents.

In the year 1845 a new turn was given to this controversy by the
publication of a Syriac version of three of the Ignatian letters. They
were printed from a manuscript deposited in 1843 in the British Museum,
and obtained, shortly before, from a monastery in the desert of Nitria
in Egypt. The work was dedicated by permission to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the views propounded in it were understood to have the
sanction of the English metropolitan. [395:2] Dr Cureton, the editor,
has since entered more fully into the discussion of the subject in his
"Corpus Ignatianum" [395:3]--a volume dedicated to His Royal Highness
the Prince Albert, in which the various texts of all the epistles are
exhibited, and in which the claims of the three recently discovered
letters, as the only genuine productions of Ignatius, are ingeniously
maintained. In the Syriac copies, [396:1] these letters are styled "_The
Three_ Epistles of Ignatius, Bishop, and Martyr," and thus the inference
is suggested that, at one time, they were _the only three_ epistles in
existence. Dr Cureton's statements have obviously made a great
impression upon the mind of the literary public, and there seems at
present to be a pretty general disposition in certain quarters [396:2]
to discard all the other epistles as forgeries, and to accept those
preserved in the Syriac version as the veritable compositions of the
pastor of Antioch.

It must be obvious from the foregoing explanations that increasing light
has wonderfully diminished the amount of literature which once obtained
credit under the name of the venerable Ignatius. In the sixteenth
century he was reputed by many as the author of fifteen letters: it was
subsequently discovered that eight of them must be set aside as
apocryphal: farther investigation convinced critics that considerable
portions of the remaining seven must be rejected: and when the short
text of these epistles was published, [396:3] about the middle of the
seventeenth century, candid scholars confessed that it still betrayed
unequivocal indications of corruption. [396:4] But even some Protestant
writers of the highest rank stoutly upheld their claims, and the learned
Pearson devoted years to the preparation of a defence of their
authority. [397:1] His "Vindiciae Ignatianae" has long been considered
by a certain party as unanswerable; and, though the publication has been
read by very few, [397:2] the advocates of what are called "High-Church
principles" have been reposing for nearly two centuries under the shadow
of its reputation. The critical labours of Dr Cureton have somewhat
disturbed their dream of security, as that distinguished scholar has
adduced very good evidence to shew that about three-fourths of the
matter [397:3] which the Bishop of Chester spent a considerable portion
of his mature age in attempting to prove genuine, is the work of an
impostor. It is now admitted by the highest authorities that _four_ of
the seven short letters must be given up as spurious; and the remaining
three, which are addressed respectively to Polycarp, to the Ephesians,
and to the Romans, and which are found in the Syriac version, are much
shorter even than the short epistles which had already appeared under
the same designations. The Epistle to Polycarp, the shortest of the
seven letters in preceding editions, is here presented in a still more
abbreviated form; the Epistle to the Romans wants fully the one-third of
its previous matter; and the Epistle to the Ephesians has lost nearly
three-fourths of its contents. Nor is this all. In the Syriac version a
large fragment of one of the four recently rejected letters reappears;
as the new edition of the Epistle to the Romans contains two entire
paragraphs to be found in the discarded letter to the Trallians.

It is only due to Dr Cureton to acknowledge that his publications have
thrown immense light on this tedious and keenly agitated controversy.
But, unquestionably, he has not exhausted the discussion. Instead of
abruptly adopting the conclusion that the three letters of the Syriac
version are to be received as genuine, we conceive he would have argued
more logically had he inferred that they reveal one of the earliest
forms of a gross imposture. We are persuaded that the epistles he has
edited, as well as all the others previously published, are fictitious;
and we shall endeavour to demonstrate, in the sequel of this chapter,
that the external evidence in their favour is most unsatisfactory.

When discussing the testimonies from the writers of antiquity in their
support, it is not necessary to examine any later witness than Eusebius.
The weight of his literary character influenced all succeeding fathers,
some of whom, who appear never to have seen these documents, refer to
them on the strength of his authority. [398:1] In his "Ecclesiastical
History," which was published as some think about A.D. 325, he asserts
that Ignatius wrote seven letters, and from these he makes a few
quotations. [398:2] But his admission of the genuineness of a
correspondence, bearing date upwards of two hundred years before his own
appearance as an author, is an attestation of very doubtful value. He
often makes mistakes respecting the character of ecclesiastical
memorials; and in one memorable case, of far more consequence than that
now under consideration, he has blundered most egregiously; for he has
published, as genuine, the spurious correspondence between Abgarus and
our Saviour. [399:1] He was under strong temptations to form an unduly
favourable judgment of the letters attributed to Ignatius, inasmuch as,
to use the words of Dr Cureton, "they seemed to afford evidence to the
apostolic succession in several churches, an account of which he
professes to be one of the chief objects of his history." [399:2] His
reference to them is decisive as to the fact of their _existence_ in the
early part of the fourth century; but those who adopt the views
propounded in the "Corpus Ignatianum," are not prepared to bow to his
critical decision; for, on this very occasion, he has given his sanction
to four letters which they pronounce apocryphal.

The only father who notices these letters before the fourth century, is
Origen. He quotes from them twice; [399:3] the citations which he gives
are to be found in the Syriac version of the three epistles; [399:4] and
it would appear from his writings that he was not acquainted with the
seven letters current in the days of Eusebius. [399:5] Those to which he
refers were, perhaps, brought under his notice when he went to Antioch
on the invitation of Julia Mammaea, the mother of the Emperor; as, for
reasons subsequently to be stated, it is probable that they were
manufactured in that neighbourhood not long before his visit. If
presented to him at that time by parties interested in the recognition
of their claims, they were, under the circumstances, exactly such
documents as were likely to impose upon him; for the student of Philo,
and the author of the "Exhortation to Martyrdom," could not but admire
the spirit of mysticism by which they are pervaded, and the anxiety to
die under persecution which they proclaim. Whilst, therefore, his
quotation of these letters attests their existence in his time, it is of
very little additional value. Again and again in his writings we meet
with notices of apocryphal works unaccompanied by any intimations of
their spuriousness. [400:1] He asserts that Barnabas, the author of the
epistle still extant under his name, [400:2] was the individual
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles as the companion of Paul; and he
frequently quotes the "Pastor" of Hermas [400:3] as a book given by
inspiration of God. [400:4] Such facts abundantly prove that his
recognition of the Ignatian epistles is a very equivocal criterion of
their genuineness.

Attempts have been made to shew that two other writers, earlier than
Origen, have noticed the Ignatian correspondence; and Eusebius himself
has quoted Polycarp and Irenaeus as if bearing witness in its favour.
Polycarp in early life was contemporary with the pastor of Antioch; and
Irenaeus is said to have been the disciple of Polycarp; and, could it be
demonstrated that either of these fathers vouched for its genuineness,
the testimony would be of peculiar importance. But, when their evidence
is examined, it is found to be nothing to the purpose. In the Treatise
against Heresies, Irenaeus speaks, in the following terms, of the
heroism of a Christian martyr--"One of our people said, when condemned
to the beasts on account of his testimony towards God--As I am the wheat
of God, I am also ground by the teeth of beasts, that I may be found the
pure bread of God." [400:5] These words of the martyr are found in the
Syriac Epistle to the Romans, and hence it has been inferred that they
are a quotation from that letter. But it is far more probable that the
words of the letter were copied out of Irenaeus, and quietly
appropriated, by a forger, to the use of his Ignatius, with a view to
obtain credit for a false document. The individual who uttered them is
not named by the pastor of Lyons; and, after the death of that writer, a
fabricator might put them into the mouth of whomsoever he pleased
without any special danger of detection. The Treatise against Heresies
obtained extensive circulation; and as it animadverted on errors which
had been promulgated in Antioch, [401:1] it, no doubt, soon found its
way into the Syrian capital. [401:2] But who can believe that Irenaeus
describes Ignatius, when he speaks of "_one of our people_?" The martyr
was not such an insignificant personage that he could be thus ignored.
He was one of the most eminent Christians of his age--the companion of
apostles--and the presiding minister of one of the most influential
Churches in the world. Irenaeus is obviously alluding to some disciple
who occupied a very different position. He is speaking, not of what the
martyr _wrote_, but of what he _said_--not of his letters, but of his
words. Any reader who considers the situation of Irenaeus a few years
before he published this treatise, can have no difficulty in
understanding the reference. He had witnessed at Lyons one of the most
terrible persecutions the disciples ever had endured; and, in the letter
to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, he had graphically described its
horrors. [401:3] He there tells how his brethren had been condemned to
be thrown to wild beasts, and he records with simplicity and pathos the
constancy with which they suffered. But in such an epistle he could not
notice every case which had come under his observation, and he here
mentions a new instance of the Christian courage of some believer
unknown to fame, when he states--"one of our people when condemned to
the beasts, said, 'As I am the wheat of God, I am also ground by the
teeth of beasts, that I may be found the pure bread of God.'"

The Treatise against Heresies supplies the clearest evidence that
Irenaeus was quite ignorant of the existence of the Ignatian epistles.
These letters contain pointed references to the errorists of the early
Church, and had they been known to the pastor of Lyons, he could have
brought them to bear with most damaging effect against the heretics he
assailed. Ignatius was no ordinary witness, for he had heard the truth
from the lips of the apostles; he had spent a long life in the society
of the primitive disciples; and he filled one of the most responsible
stations that a Christian minister could occupy. The heretics boldly
affirmed that they had tradition on their side, [402:1] and therefore
the testimony of Ignatius, as of an individual who had received
tradition at the fountain-head, would have been regarded by Irenaeus as
all-important. And the author of the Treatise against Heresies was not
slow to employ such evidence when it was in any way available. He plies
his antagonists with the testimony of Clement of Rome, [402:2] of
Polycarp [402:3] of Papias, [402:4] and of Justin Martyr. [402:5] But
throughout the five books of his discussion he never adduces any of the
words of the pastor of Antioch. He never throws out any hint from which
we can infer that he was aware of the existence of his Epistles. [402:6]
He never even mentions his name. Could we desire more convincing proof
that he had never heard of the Ignatian correspondence?

The only other witness now remaining to be examined is Polycarp. It has
often been affirmed that he distinctly acknowledges the authority of
these letters; and yet, when honestly interrogated, he will be found to
deliver quite a different deposition. But, before proceeding to consider
his testimony, let us inquire his _age_ when his epistle was written. It
bears the following superscription:--"Polycarp, _and the elders who are
with him_, to the Church of God which is at Philippi." At this time,
therefore, though the early Christians paid respect to hoary hairs, and
were not willing to permit persons without experience to take precedence
of their seniors, Polycarp must have been at the head of the presbytery.
But, at the death of Ignatius, when according to the current theory he
dictated this letter, he was a young man of six and twenty. [403:1] Such
a supposition is very much out of keeping with the tone of the document.
In it he admonishes the widows to be sober; [403:2] he gives advice to
the elders and deacons; [403:3] he expresses his great concern for
Valens, an erring brother, who had once been a presbyter among them;
[403:4] and he intimates that the epistle was written at the urgent
request of the Philippians themselves. [403:5] Is it at all probable
that Polycarp, at the age of six and twenty, was in a position to
warrant him to use such a style of address? Are we to believe he was
already so well known and so highly venerated that a Christian community
on the other side of the Aegean Sea, and the oldest Church in all
Greece, would apply to him for advice and direction? We must be prepared
to admit all this, before we can acknowledge that his epistle refers to
Ignatius of Antioch.

Let us attend now to that passage in the letter to the Philippians where
he is supposed to speak of the Syrian pastor. "I exhort all of you that
ye obey the word of righteousness, and exercise all patience, which ye
have seen set forth before your eyes, _not only in the blessed Ignatius,
and Zosimus, and Rufus, but also in others of you_." [404:1] These words
would suggest to an ordinary reader that Polycarp is here speaking, not
of Ignatius of Antioch, but of an Ignatius of Philippi. If this Ignatius
did not belong to the Philippian Church, why, when addressing its
members, does he speak of Ignatius, Zosimus, Rufus, and "others of you?"
Ignatius of Antioch could not have been thus described. But who, it may
be asked, were Zosimus and Rufus here mentioned as fellow-sufferers with
Ignatius? They were exactly in the position which the words of Polycarp
literally indicate; they were men _of Philippi_; and, as such, they are
commemorated in the "Martyrologies." [404:2] It is impossible,
therefore, to avoid the conclusion that the Ignatius of Polycarp was
also a Philippian.

It appears, then, that this testimony of the pastor of Smyrna has been
strangely misunderstood. Ignatius, as is well known, was not a very
uncommon name; and it would seem that several martyrs of the ancient
Church bore this designation. Cyprian, for example, tells us of an
Ignatius in Africa who was put to death for the profession of
Christianity in the former part of the third century. [405:1] It is
apparent from the words of Polycarp that there was also an Ignatius of
Philippi, as well as an Ignatius of Antioch.

It may, however, be objected that the conclusion of this letter clearly
points to Ignatius of Antioch, inasmuch as Polycarp there speaks
apparently of _Syria_, and of some one interested about Ignatius who
might shortly visit that country. [405:2] Some critics of high name have
maintained that this portion of the epistle is destitute of authority,
and that it has been added by a later hand to countenance the Ignatian
forgery. [405:3] But every candid and discriminating reader may see that
the charge is destitute of foundation. An Ignatian interpolator would
not have so mismanaged his business. He would not have framed an
appendix which, as we shall presently shew, testifies against himself.
The passage to which such exception has been taken is unquestionably the
true postscript of the letter, for it bears internal marks of
genuineness.

In this postscript Polycarp says--"What you know certainly both of
Ignatius himself, and of those _who are with him_, communicate." [405:4]
Here is another proof that the Ignatius of Polycarp is not Ignatius of
Antioch. The Syrian pastor is said to have been hurried with the utmost
expedition to Rome that he might be thrown to the beasts before the
approaching termination of the public spectacles; and it is reported
that when he reached the great city, he was forthwith consigned to
martyrdom. [406:1] But, though letters had been meanwhile passing
between Philippi and Smyrna, this Ignatius is understood to be still
alive. It would appear, too, that Zosimus and Rufus, previously named as
his partners in tribulation, continued to be his companions. Polycarp,
therefore, must be speaking of the "patience" of confessors who were yet
"in bonds," [406:2] and not of a man who had already been devoured by
the lions.

Other parts of this postscript are equally embarrassing to those who
contend for the authority of the Ignatian Epistles. Thus, Polycarp
says--"The Epistles of Ignatius _which were sent to you by him_, and
whatever others we have by us, we have sent to you." [406:3] If these
words apply to Ignatius of Antioch, it follows that he must have written
_several_ letters to the _Philippians_; and yet it in now almost
universally admitted that even the one extant epistle addressed to them
in his name is an impudent fabrication. Again, Polycarp states--"Ye have
written to me, both ye and Ignatius, that when any one goes to Syria, he
can carry my letters to you." [406:4] But no such suggestion is to be
found, either in the Syriac version of the Three Epistles, or in the
larger edition known to Eusebius. Could we desire clearer proof that
Polycarp must here be speaking of another Ignatius, and another
correspondence?

The words which we have last quoted deserve an attentive consideration.
Were a citizen of New York, in the postscript of a letter to a citizen
of London, to suggest that his correspondent should take an opportunity
of writing to him, when any common friend went to Jerusalem, the
Englishman might well feel perplexed by such a communication. Why should
a letter from London to New York travel round by Palestine? Such an
arrangement would not, however, be a whit more absurd than that
seemingly pointed out in this postscript. Philippi and Smyrna were not
far distant, and there was considerable intercourse between them; but
Syria was in another quarter of the Empire, and Polycarp could have
rarely found an individual passing to Antioch from "the chief city" of a
"part of Macedonia," and travelling to and fro by Smyrna. This
difficulty admits, however, of a very simple and satisfactory solution.
We have no entire copy of the epistle in the original Greek, [407:1] and
the text of the old Latin version in this place is so corrupt that it is
partially unintelligible; [407:2] but as the context often guides us in
the interpretation of a manuscript where it is blotted or torn, so here
it may enable us to spell out the meaning. The insertion of one letter
and the change of another in a single word [407:3] will render the
passage intelligible. If we read _Smyrna_ for Syria, the obscurity
vanishes. Polycarp then says to the Philippians--"Ye have written to me,
both ye and Ignatius, that, when any one goes to Smyrna, he can carry my
letters to you." The postscript, thus understood, refers to the desire
of his correspondents, that he should write frequently, and that, when a
friend went from Philippi to Smyrna, he should not be permitted to
return without letters.

As it can be thus shewn that the letter of Polycarp, when tested by
impartial criticism, refuses to accredit the Epistles ascribed to
Ignatius of Antioch, it follows that, with the single exception of
Origen, no father of the first three centuries has noticed this
correspondence. Had these letters, at the alleged date of their
appearance, attracted such attention as they would themselves lead us to
believe, is it possible that no writer for upwards of a century after
the demise of their reputed author, would have bestowed upon them even a
passing recognition? They convey the impression that, when Ignatius was
on his way to Rome, all Asia Minor was moved at his presence--that
Greece caught the infection of excitement--and that the Western capital
itself awaited, with something like breathless anxiety, the arrival of
the illustrious martyr. Strange, indeed, then that even his letter to
the Romans is mentioned by no Western father until between two and three
hundred years after the time of its assumed publication! Nor were
Western writers wanting who would have sympathised with its spirit. It
would have been quite to the taste of Tertullian, and he could have
quoted it to shew that some of the peculiar principles of Montanism had
been held by a man of the apostolic era. Nor can it be said that had the
letter then been in existence, it was likely to have escaped his
observation. He had lived for years in Rome, and we have good reason to
believe that he was a presbyter of the Church of the Imperial city. A
man of his inquiring spirit, and literary habits, must have been well
acquainted with the Epistle had it obtained currency in Italy. But in
not one of his numerous treatises does he ever speak of it, or even name
its alleged author. [409:1] Hippolytus of Portus is another writer who
might have been expected to know something of this production. He lived
within a few miles of Rome, and he was conversant with the history of
its Church and with its ecclesiastical memorials. He, as well as
Tertullian, could have sympathised with the rugged and ascetic spirit
pervading the Ignatian correspondence. But, even in his treatise against
all heresies, he has not fortified his arguments by any testimony from
these letters. He had evidently never heard, of the now far famed
documents. [409:2]

The conclusion to be drawn from these facts must be sufficiently
obvious. The Ignatian Epistles began to be fabricated in the time of
Origen; and the first edition of them appeared, not at Troas or Smyrna,
but in Syria or Palestine. At an early period festivals were kept in
honour of the martyrs; and on his natal day, [409:3] why should not the
Church of Antioch have something to tell of her great Ignatius? The Acts
of his Martyrdom were probably written in the former part of the third
century--a time when the work of ecclesiastical forgery was rife
[409:4]--and the Epistle to the Romans, which is inserted in these Acts,
is in all likelihood of earlier date than any of the other letters. The
Epistle to the Ephesians, perhaps, next made its appearance, and then
followed the Epistle to Polycarp. These letters gradually crept into
circulation as "The Three Epistles of Ignatius, Bishop, and Martyr."
There is every reason to believe that, as edited by Dr Cureton, they are
now presented to the public in their original _language_, as well as in
their original form. Copies of these short letters are not known to be
extant in any manuscript either Greek or Latin. Dr Cureton has not
attempted any explanation of this emphatic fact. If the Epistle to the
Romans, in its newly discovered form, is genuine, how does it happen
that there are no previous traces of its existence in the Western
Church? How are we to account for the extraordinary circumstance that
the Church of Rome can produce no copy of it in either Greek or Latin?
She had every reason to preserve such a document had it ever come into
her possession; for, even considered as a pious fraud of the third
century, the address "_to her who sitteth at the head_ in the place of
the country of the Romans," [410:1] is one of the most ancient
testimonies to her early pre-eminence to be found in the whole range of
ecclesiastical literature. Why should she have permitted it to be
supplanted by an interpolated document? Can any man, who adopts the
views of Dr Cureton, fairly answer such an inquiry?
