Jesus Christ."

Now, here it is represented, that our victory, over _sin and death_,
is _when_ we rise to immortal glory. Our _victory_ over sin is at the
_same instant_ with our victory over _death_; and who will deny that
our _victory over death_ will be at the resurrection? The objector may
as well deny our victory over _death_ at the resurrection, as to deny
our _victory over sin_ at that period. The whole is said to be
"through Christ." He was our "forerunner" and "first fruits" to
represent our condition _there_. When he expired, he was free from
_pain_, and when he arose, he was free from _temptation_. So when we
pass the same scene, we shall be like _him_, who is our "resurrection
and life," otherwise the harvest will not be like "the first fruits."

God, then pardoned the human race, _in Christ_, when he made them.
How? Ans. By ordering their existence in such a manner, that they
should be freed from sin through death and the resurrection. That is
the day of our final discharge--the day, when the prisoner shall be
set free--the day, when our redemption shall come. But asks the
objector, are we not to _realize_ our pardon in this world? Ans. Only
_through faith_ in the _reality_. We look forward, and anchor our hope
within the veil of death, and enjoy our pardon, or redemption, only by
an eye of faith. This "faith works by love and purifies the heart." It
causes us, in a great measure, to break off our sins by righteousness.
But this has no influence, whatever, over the sins already committed.
For _them_, we must still continue to feel miserable. Punishment is
_certain_. From the sins that are committed, we only enjoy our pardon
or redemption from them through faith in Christ the resurrection. Paul
told the believers, that if there were no resurrection, their faith
was vain, they were yet in their sins. This proves that they only
enjoyed the pardon of their sins through faith in the resurrection,
otherwise I see no force in his language.

But inquires, the reader, why do you pray that God would pardon our
sins? Ans. I do not pray to turn the Almighty from his will and
purpose; but humbly trust, that I spend my days in searching out what
"that perfect will of God is," and then pray in reconciliation to his
revealed will. It is wicked to pray what we do not believe.
"Whatsoever is not of faith is sin." I believe that God pardoned us
from the beginning, and that this pardon will be realized through
death and the resurrection. And when I pray that God would pardon our
sins, I mean that he would grant us an evidence of that pardon, which
unchangeably existed in his eternal mind, by enlightening our
understanding in the Scriptures of truth, and giving us correct views
of his character as a Being of tenderness and compassion to the
children of men. So when we say, God has pardoned us, we do not mean
that he has been moved by our petitions to do a new act; but that
through the appointed means, he has so far enlightened our minds, that
we have received an evidence of that pardon which existed with him
from the beginning, and by faith we look forward, believing it will
take place through death and the resurrection, as Christ has proved.
By this faith we perceive the love of God, and break off our sins by
righteousness. But while in the flesh, we feel a thorn--a hell of
conscious guilt for the sins we have committed, and though the
penitent may beseech God, that this messenger of satan, buffeting him,
may depart from him, yet the answer will be, "my grace is sufficient
for thee."

We now perceive how God pardons sin, and yet punishes us for it. The
misery, sin brings upon us, is our just punishment, and to be released
from it, by the free grace of God, through death and the resurrection,
is our pardon and redemption--For example--we say, in a cloudy day,
"the sun does not shine;" but still he does. The clouds, just above
our heads, prevent his rays from shining upon us. The change is not in
the sun. The clouds disperse, and we say, "the sun shines," while in
fact he is ever the same. The Scriptures say, "our God is a sun." He
is unchangeably the same in all his brilliant perfections. "Sin like a
cloud, and transgression like a thick cloud," rise over the mind and
darken the understanding. Through this dark medium we look up to God,
and think he has changed--that he is angry, and thunders are rolling
from his hand, while in fact the whole change is in us. The moment our
minds are enlightened by the beams of truth we rejoice, and say God
has forgiven us. We receive an evidence of pardon, and enjoy it
through faith, while God has remained unchangeably the same.

While we are children in christianity, we speak and act like children;
and think if we join together, and pray as loud as we can as though
the Lord were "deaf, or all asleep or on a journey," that we can
prevail, and make him do as we wish. And while we are children, if we
sin, we think the Lord is our enemy, and is angry. Now, this is all
well enough for those whose experience has gone no further. We are not
to "despise the day of small things," but kindly receive such an one
as a babe in Christ, and feed him with milk. But still it does appear
to be a pity that thousands, under the gospel, should live and die
children.

"Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." Now, we are to
forgive as God does. How is that--To hold a grudge one day, and if
they ask our pardon, to forgive them the next? No, we must uniformly
possess a kind, tender-hearted, forgiving spirit, laying up nought
against any one. Forgiveness does not consist in laying up a store of
malice and vengeance, till our enemy come, and formally ask our
forgiveness. No--he might never come, and then we could never forgive
him. We are commanded to love and forgive our enemies whether they ask
it, or not. So did our Saviour on the cross, and we are to exercise
the same spirit of benevolence and meekness. We must, as our context
says--put away all malice, wrath, and evil speaking from among us, and
be kind, tender-hearted and forgiving.

Our Father in heaven is the most lovely and adorable of all beings!
Under the light of his character, every uncomfortable thought
vanishes, and the dawn of a blessed eternity bursts upon us in a flood
of glory. By faith we penetrate the veil of immortality, and read our
pardon, and justification in letters of blood. Within that veil, we
anchor our hope. Faith triumphs over the ruins of death, smiles at the
darkness of the tomb, and through Christ within, the hope of glory,
bids defiance to the crushing hand of death, and lights up its dreary
mansions with the cheering beams of immortal day.

SERMON XIX

"For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God;
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey
not the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" 1 Peter iv:17, 18.

Upon this passage, the believers in endless misery lean for the
support of that sentiment, and on many occasions it is quoted with an
air of triumph as though the passage itself, without comment, were
sufficient to silence all objections. Here they have one advantage of
Universalists; and of this advantage they do not forget to avail
themselves--viz: the prejudices of early education. But we sincerely
call their application of this passage in question, and shall stand
forth in defense of the triumphs of Jesus Christ over all sin, and
pain and death, fully believing that the hand of heaven "shall wipe
tears from off all faces." We will attempt to show,--

First--What we are to understand by _judgment_ beginning at the house
of God.

Second--Who were the _righteous_, and in what sense they were scarcely
saved.

Third--Show who were the _ungodly_, and where they appeared.

_First--What we are to understand by judgment beginning at the house
of God_. Jesus Christ chose him twelve disciples and commenced the
great work the Father sent him to do. To them he disclosed many
events, that God would in a future day bring upon the world. He
pointed them forward with more than human accuracy into the
approaching revolutions of time, and painted out in noon-day light
those astonishing disasters that would one day burst like a
thunderclap on the thoughtless nations. He marked their certainty, and
warned them accordingly. Among the many things, that lay buried in the
vista of future years, was the destruction of Jerusalem. This was a
point that most solemnly concerned the disciples of Jesus. It was no
less than the destruction of their nation.

Christ was with his disciples in the temple, that splendid edifice
which was forty and six years in building, and, in their presence and
for the last time, addressed the stubborn Jews. He pointed out the
many crimes of which they and their fathers had been guilty in
shedding the blood of the prophets, and persecuting those who were
sent unto them as the messengers of Jehovah. They had also made void
the law of God through their traditions. While pointing out these
things, and setting them home like a thunderbolt to their hearts, he
pronounced them hypocrites, blind guides, devourers of widows' houses,
and declared that all the righteous blood shed upon the earth should
be required of of that generation. While rehearsing these things to
them, Jesus had a perfect view of all their approaching sufferings.
Many of them were to be starved to death. He saw by a prophetic eye
the indulgent father and fond mother weeping over their infant train,
who were begging for bread, but no way to procure it. Eleven hundred
thousand he saw in a state of starvation, who were to fall by famine,
sword and pestilence. He saw their cruel enemies surround the walls of
their city, who would allow no sustenance to be given them, but
determined to reduce them by hunger and sword to one common grave. All
these things, that were coming upon them, rushed at once upon the mind
of the compassionate Redeemer of the world. The affecting scene moved
so strongly upon his heavenly feelings, that he dropped the the
melancholy subject and burst into a flood of tears. He beheld the city
and wept over it--"O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! Thou that killest the
prophets and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, but ye would not!" He then left the temple
for the last time; but as he was departing from it, his disciples,
astonished at his denunciation, and regretting that such a magnificent
edifice should be destroyed, exclaimed--"Master, see what manner of
stones and what buildings are here!" And he said unto them "there
shall not be left here one stone upon another that shall not be thrown
down." The disciples immediately asked him saying, "tell us when shall
these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming and of the
end of the world?" By the end of the _world_ we are to understand the
end of the Jewish _age_. As they asked him the _signs_ portending this
terrible destruction, so that they might know when it was nigh at
hand, he immediately proceeded to point them out, and warned them to
flee to the mountains of Judea for safety.

The signs are as follows--many false Christs should arise, there
should be wars and rumors of wars, nation should rise against nation,
kingdom against kingdom, and there should be famines, pestilences and
earthquakes in diverse places. Then shall they deliver you up to be
afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all nations
for my name sake. Then shall there be great tribulation such as was
not since the beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever shall
be. The most prominent _sign_ he gave them, and one that more
immediately concerned his disciples, was that they should deliver them
up to be afflicted, and they should be brought before kings and
governors for his name's sake. "But, (says Jesus) when they persecute
you in one city, then flee ye to another."

Christ gave his disciples plainly to understand, that when the Jews
began their persecutions against his followers, then the destruction
of Jerusalem was nigh at hand. After giving these instructions to his
disciples, he laid down his life, and on the third day he arose,
triumphing over death and leading captivity captive. His disciples
soon after commenced the spread of the gospel of peace, and waived the
banners of the cross over kings and subjects, calling upon them to bow
to the reign of Jesus Christ, who was King of kings, and Lord of
lords. They proclaimed a religion so contrary to the partial notions
of the Jews and the traditions of the Elders, that it began at length
to meet with violent opposition. The disciples agreeably to the
direction of Jesus fled for safety from city to city, till the tumult
and opposition became general. Christianity gathered force and
popularity so rapidly, that the Romans, it appears, gave permission to
the Jews to imprison and take life. The disciples and christians had
now no place of safety to flee to, from the gathering storm of
persecution and death. Amidst these disastrous scenes, Peter called to
mind the _warnings and signs_ his risen Lord had pointed out as a
solemn premonition that the destruction of Jerusalem and of their
persecutors, was nigh at hand, and in view of the approaching calamity
over which Jesus wept, Peter exclaims, "The time is come that judgment
must begin at the house of God, and if it begin first at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?" Thus we,
see that what is meant by _judgment_ beginning at the _house_ of God,
is _persecution_ beginning at the _christians_, which persecution was
a _sign_ to them that the destruction of that nation was nigh at hand.
The reader will perceive that what the apostle calls "_house of God_,"
he afterwards calls "_us_," in the same sentence, and must refer to
the christians, who are in many scriptures called the _house, temple,
and building_ of God. [See Heb. iii:6. Eph. ii:21, 22.] That the
persecutions were stated by Christ as a _sign_ of the impending
judgment of God upon the Jews, is evident from the words of Paul, 2
Thess. i:5, where he calls them "a manifest _token_ of the righteous
judgment of God" upon the unbelieving Jews, the persecutors of the
christians.

_Second--Who were the righteous, and in what sense they were scarcely
saved_. The righteous, mentioned in the 18th verse, mean the same
persons called "_the house of God_," and "_us_," in verse 17th, and
has reference to those christians _only_, who lived previous to the
destruction of the temple, and not to any christians that lived
subsequent to that event, much less does it refer to all the righteous
that have ever existed or shall hereafter exist, as common opinion
asserts.

Under this head, we were also to show in what sense these righteous
were _scarcely_ saved. It could not mean that their salvation in the
future world was _scarce_ or uncertain; for it is _certain_ in the
counsels of God, and in all things well ordered and _sure_. He has
given to his Son the heathen for an inheritance and the uttermost
parts of the earth for a possession. And all the Father hath given him
shall come unto him, and he will raise them up the last day. He is
mighty to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him; and no
one will deny that the righteous come unto him. How then can their
eternal salvation be denominated _scarce_? Impossible. How then are
the scriptures to be reconciled with our text, when they declare
eternal life to be the gift of God--that we are saved by grace--that
help is laid upon one mighty to save--that his arm is not shortened
that it cannot save; and that the power of God is to be exerted at the
resurrection in making them equal unto the angels? The answer is
easily given--our text has no reference whatever to the immortal
world, to a judgment at the end of time, nor to the final condition of
the human family; but simply refers to the narrow escape of the
christians from the destruction of Jerusalem, when they fled with
their lives in their hands to the mountains of Judea for safety.

In the 24th chapter of Matthew Jesus clearly describes the dreadful
scene. He says--"Then let them which be in Judea flee into the
mountains. Let him which is on the house top not come down to take any
thing out of his house. And woe unto them that are with children and
to them that give suck in those days!" [Why? Because they could not
remain in the mountains during the period that the city was besieged
by the Romans.] "But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter
neither on the Sabbath day." [Why? Because in the winter you would
perish with cold--and if your flight from the city be on the Sabbath
day, the Jews will stone you to death for traveling more than three
miles.] "For there shall be great tribulation, such as was not since
the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And
except those days should be shortened there should no flesh be saved;"
[Saved from what? Ans. From death.] "but for the elect's sake those
days shall be shortened." That is, for the sake of the christians who
fled to the mountains, God shortened the days of the siege. Let us
hear Dr. Adam Clarke, a Methodist Commentator, on this--"Josephus
computes the number of those who perished in the siege at eleven
hundred thousand, besides those who were slain in other places; and if
the Romans had gone on destroying in this manner, the whole nation of
the Jews would in a short time have been entirely extirpated [destroy
completely, as if down to the roots]; but for the sake of the elect,
the Jews, that _they_ might not be utterly destroyed, and for the
christians particularly, the days were shortened. These partly through
the fury of the zealots on the one hand, and the hatred of the Romans
on the other; and partly through the difficulty of subsisting in the
mountains without houses or provisions, would in all probability, have
all been destroyed, either by sword or famine, if the days had not
been shortened."

Let us hear Clarke explain how these christians were _scarcely_ saved.
"But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved." "It
is very remarkable that not a single christian perished in the
destruction of Jerusalem, though there were many there when Cestius
Gallus invested the city; and had he persevered in the siege, he would
