The hushed audience listened spell-bound as the sweet singer went on,
their interest growing to feverish eagerness until the climax was
reached in the fifth stanza:

    If you cannot in the conflict
      Prove yourself a soldier true,
    If where fire and smoke are thickest
      There's no work for you to do,
    When the battlefield is silent
      You can go with careful tread;
    You can bear away the wounded,
      You can cover up the dead.

In the storm of enthusiasm that followed, President Lincoln handed a
hastily scribbled line on a bit of paper to Chairman Seward,

"Near the close let us have 'Your Mission' repeated."

Mr. Phillips' great success on this occasion brought him so many calls
for his services that he gave up everything and devoted himself to his
tuneful art. "Your Mission" so gladly welcomed at Washington made him
the first gospel songster, chanting round the world the divine message
of the hymns. It was the singing by Philip Phillips that first impressed
Ira D. Sankey with the amazing power of evangelical solo song, and
helped him years later to resign his lucrative business as a revenue
officer and consecrate his own rare vocal gift to the Christian ministry
of sacred music. Heaven alone can show the birth-records of souls won to
God all along the journeys of the "Singing Pilgrims," and the rich
succession of Mr. Sankey's melodies, that can be traced back by a chain
of causes to the poem that "wrote itself" and became a hymn. And the
chain may not yet be complete. In the words of that providential poem--

    Though they may forget the singer
      They will not forget the song.

Mrs. Ellen M.H. Gates, whose reputation as an author was made by this
beautiful and always timely poem, was born in Torrington, Ct., and is
the youngest sister of the late Collis P. Huntington. Her
hymns--included in this volume and in other publications--are much
admired and loved, both for their sweetness and elevated religious
feeling, and for their poetic quality. Among her published books of
verse are "Night," "At Noontide," and "Treasures of Kurium." Her address
is New York City.


_THE TUNE._

Sidney Martin Grannis, author of the tune, was born Sept. 23, 1827, in
Geneseo, Livingston county, N.Y. Lived in Leroy, of the same state, from
1831 to 1884, when he removed to Los Angeles, Cal., where several of his
admirers presented him a cottage and grounds, which at last accounts he
still occupies. Mr. Grannis won his first reputation as a popular
musician by his song "Do They Miss Me at Home," and his "Only Waiting,"
"Cling to the Union," and "People Will Talk You Know," had an equally
wide currency. As a solo singer his voice was remarkable, covering a
range of two octaves, and while travelling with members of the "Amphion
Troupe," to which he belonged, he sang at more than five thousand
concerts. His tune to "Your Mission" was composed in New Haven, Ct., in
1864.


"TOO LATE! TOO LATE! YE CANNOT ENTER NOW."

"Too Late" is a thrilling fragment or side-song of Alfred Tennyson's,
representing the vain plea of the five Foolish Virgins. Its tune bears
the name of a London lady, "Miss Lindsay" (afterwards Mrs. J.
Worthington Bliss). The arrangement of air, duo and quartet is very
impressive[20].

[Footnote 20: _Methodist Hymnal_, No. 743.]

     "Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill:
      Late, late, so late! but we can enter still."
   "Too late! too late! ye cannot enter now!"

     "No light! so late! and dark and chill the night--
      O let us in that we may find the light!"
   "Too late! too late! ye cannot enter now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

     "Have we not heard the Bridegroom is so sweet?
      O let us in that we may kiss his feet!"
   "No, No--! too late! ye cannot enter now!"

The words are found in "Queen Guinevere," a canto of the "Idyls of the
King."


"OH, GALILEE, SWEET GALILEE."

This is the chorus of a charming poem of three stanzas that shaped
itself in the mind of Mr. Robert Morris while sitting over the ruins on
the traditional site of Capernaum by the Lake of Genneseret.

    Each cooing dove, each sighing bough,
      That makes the eve so blest to me,
    Has something far diviner now,
      It bears me back to Galilee.

  CHORUS
    Oh, Galilee, sweet Galilee,
      Where Jesus loved so much to be;
    Oh, Galilee, blue Galilee,
      Come sing thy song again to me.

Robert Morris, LL.D., born Aug. 31, 1818, was a scholar, and an expert
in certain scientific subjects, and wrote works on numismatics and the
"Poetry of Free Masonry." Commissioned to Palestine in 1868 on historic
and archaeological service for the United Order, he explored the scenes
of ancient Jewish and Christian life and event in the Holy Land, and
being a religious man, followed the Saviour's earthly footsteps with a
reverent zeal that left its inspiration with him while he lived. He died
in the year 1888, but his Christian ballad secured him a lasting place
in every devout memory.


_THE TUNE._

The author wrote out his hymn in 1874 and sent it to his friend, the
musician, Mr. Horatio R. Palmer,[21] and the latter learned it by heart,
and carried it with him in his musings "till it floated out in the
melody you know," (to use his own words.)

[Footnote 21: See page 311.]




CHAPTER VII.

OLD REVIVAL HYMNS.


The sober churches of the "Old Thirteen" states and of their successors
far into the nineteenth century, sustained evening prayer-meetings more
or less commonly, but necessity made them in most cases "cottage
meetings" appointed on Sunday and here and there in the scattered homes
of country parishes. Their intent was the same as that of "revival
meetings," since so called, though the method--and the music--were
different. The results in winning sinners, so far as they owed anything
to the hymns and hymn-tunes, were apt to be a new generation of
Christian recruits as sombre as the singing. "Lebanon" set forth the
appalling shortness of human life; "Windham" gave its depressing story
of the great majority of mankind on the "broad road," and other minor
tunes proclaimed God's sovereignty and eternal decrees; or if a psalm
had His love in it, it was likely to be sung in a similar melancholy
key. Even in his gladness the good minister, Thomas Baldwin, of the
Second Baptist Church, at Boston, North End, returning from Newport,
N.H., where he had happily harmonized a discordant church, could not
escape the strait-lace of a C minor for his thankful hymn--

    From whence doth this union arise,
    That hatred is conquered by love.

"The Puritans took their pleasures seriously," and this did not cease to
be true till at least two hundred years after the Pilgrims landed or
Boston was founded.

Time, that covered the ghastly faces on the old grave-stones with moss,
gradually stole away the unction of minor-tune singing.

The songs of the great revival of 1740 swept the country with positive
rather than negative music. Even Jonathan Edwards admitted the need of
better psalm-books and better psalmody.

Edwards, during his life, spent some time among the Indians as a
missionary teacher; but probably neither he nor David Brainerd ever saw
a Christian hymn composed by an Indian. The following, from the early
years of the last century, is apparently the first, certainly the only
surviving, effort of a converted but half-educated red man to utter his
thoughts in pious metre. Whoever trimmed the original words and measure
into printable shape evidently took care to preserve the broken English
of the simple convert. It is an interesting relic of the Christian
thought and sentiment of a pagan just learning to prattle prayer and
praise:

    In de dark wood, no Indian nigh,
    Den me look heaben, send up cry,
      Upon my knees so low.
    Dat God on high, in shinee place,
    See me in night, with teary face,
      De priest, he tell me so.

    God send Him angel take me care;
    Him come Heself and hear um prayer,
      If Indian heart do pray.
    God see me now, He know me here.
    He say, poor Indian, neber fear,
      Me wid you night and day.

    So me lub God wid inside heart;
    He fight for me, He take my part,
      He save my life before.
    God lub poor Indian in de wood;
    So me lub God, and dat be good;
      Me pray Him two times more.

    When me be old, me head be gray,
    Den He no lebe me, so He say:
      Me wid you till you die.
    Den take me up to shinee place,
    See white man, red man, black man's face,
      All happy 'like on high.

    Few days, den God will come to me,
    He knock off chains, He set me free,
      Den take me up on high.
    Den Indian sing His praises blest,
    And lub and praise Him wid de rest,
      And neber, neber cry.

The above hymn, which may be found in different forms in old New England
tracts and hymn-books, and which used to be sung in Methodist conference
and prayer-meetings in the same way that old slave-hymns and the
"Jubilee Singers" refrains are sometimes sung now, was composed by
William Apes, a converted Indian, who was born in Massachusetts, in
1798. His father was a white man, but married an Indian descended from
the family of King Philip, the Indian warrior, and the last of the
Indian chiefs. His grandmother was the king's granddaughter, as he
claimed, and was famous for her personal beauty. He caused his
autobiography and religious experience to be published. The original
hymn is quite long, and contains some singular and characteristic
expressions.

The authorship of the tune to which the words were sung has been claimed
for Samuel Cowdell, a schoolmaster of Annapolis Valley, Nova Scotia,
1820, but the date of the lost tune was probably much earlier.

In the early days of New England, before the Indian missions had been
brought to an end by the sweeping away of the tribes, several fine hymns
were composed by educated Indians, and were used in the churches. The
best known is that beginning--

    When shall we all meet again?

It was composed by three Indians at the planting of a memorial pine on
leaving Dartmouth College, where they had been studying. The lines
indicate an expectation of missionary life and work.

    When shall we all meet again?
    When shall we all meet again?
    Oft shall glowing hope expire,
    Oft shall wearied love retire,
    Oft shall death and sorrow reign
    Ere we all shall meet again.

    Though in distant lands we sigh,
    Parched beneath a burning sky,
    Though the deep between us rolls,
    Friendship shall unite our souls;
    And in fancy's wide domain,
    There we all shall meet again.

    When these burnished locks are gray,
    Thinned by many a toil-spent day,
    When around this youthful pine
    Moss shall creep and ivy twine,
    (Long may this loved bower remain!)
    Here may we all meet again.

    When the dreams of life are fled,
    When its wasted lamps are dead,
    When in cold oblivion's shade
    Beauty, health, and strength are laid,
    Where immortal spirits reign,
    There we all shall meet again.

This parting piece was sung in religious meetings as a hymn, like the
other once so common, but later,--

   "When shall we meet again,
      Meet ne'er to sever?"

--to a tune in B flat minor, excessively plaintive, and likely to sadden
an emotional singer or hearer to tears. The full harmony is found in the
_American Vocalist_, and the air is reprinted in the _Revivalist_
(1868). The fact that minor music is the natural Indian tone in song
makes it probable that the melody is as ancient as the hymn--though no
date is given for either.

Tradition says that nearly fifty years later the same three Indians were
providentially drawn to the spot where they parted, and met again, and
while they were together composed and sang another ode. Truth to tell,
however, it had only one note of gladness, and that was in the first
stanza:

    Parted many a toil-spent year,
    Pledged in youth to memory dear,
    Still to friendship's magnet true,
    We our social joys renew;
    Bound by love's unsevered chain,
    Here on earth we meet again.

The remaining three stanzas dwell principally on the ravages time has
made. The reunion ode of those stoical college classmates of a stoical
race could have been sung in the same B flat minor.


"AWAKED BY SINAI'S AWFUL SOUND."

The name of the Indian, Samson Occum, who wrote this hymn (variously
spelt Ockom, Ockum, Occam, Occom) is not borne by any public
institution, but New England owes the foundation of Dartmouth College to
his hard work. Dartmouth College was originally "Moore's Indian Charity
School," organized (1750) in Lebanon, Ct., by Rev. Eleazer Wheelock and
endowed (1755) by Joshua Moore (or More). Good men and women who had at
heart the spiritual welfare of a fading race contributed to the school's
support and young Indians resorted to it from both New England and the
Middle States, but funds were insufficient, and it was foreseen that the
charity must inevitably outgrow its missionary purpose and if continued
at all must depend on a wider and more liberal patronage.

Samson Occum was born in Mohegan, New London Co., Ct., probably in the
year 1722. Converted from paganism in 1740 (possibly under the preaching
of Whitefield, who was in this country at that time) he desired to
become a missionary to his people, and entered Eleazer Wheelock's
school. After four years study, then a young man of twenty-two, he began
to teach and preach among the Montauk Indians, and in 1759 the
Presbytery of Suffolk Co., L.I., ordained him to the ministry. A
benevolent society in Scotland, hearing of, his ability and zeal, gave
him an appointment, under its auspices, among the Oneidas in 1761, where
he labored four years. The interests of the school at Lebanon, where he
had been educated, were dear to him, and he was tireless in its cause,
procuring pupils for it, and working eloquently as its advocate with
voice and pen. In 1765 he crossed the Atlantic to solicit funds for the
Indian school, and remained four years in England and Scotland,
lecturing in its behalf, and preaching nearly four hundred sermons. As a
result he raised ten thousand pounds. The donation was put in charge of
a Board of Trustees of which Lord Dartmouth was chairman. When it was
decided to remove the school from Lebanon, Ct., the efforts of Governor
Wentworth, of New Hampshire, secured its location at Hanover in that
state. It was christened after Lord Dartmouth--and the names of Occum,
Moore and Wheelock retired into the encyclopedias.

The Rev. Samson Occum died in 1779, while laboring among the Stockbridge
(N.Y.) Indians. Several hymns were written by this remarkable man, and
also "An Account of the Customs and Manners of the Montauks." The hymn,
"Awaked by Sinai's Awful Sound," set to the stentorian tune of "Ganges,"
was a tremendous sermon in itself to old-time congregations, and is
probably as indicative of the doctrines which converted its writer as of
the contemporary belief prominent in choir and pulpit.

    Awaked by Sinai's awful sound,
    My soul in bonds of guilt I found,
      And knew not where to go,
    Eternal truth did loud proclaim
   "The sinner must be born again.
      Or sink in endless woe."

    When to the law I trembling fled,
    It poured its curses on my head:
      I no relief could find.
    This fearful truth increased my pain,
   "The sinner must be born again,"
      And whelmed my troubled mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But while I thus in anguish lay,
    Jesus of Nazareth passed that way;
      I felt His pity move.
    The sinner, once by justice slain,
    Now by His grace is born again,
      And sings eternal Love!

The rugged original has been so often and so variously altered and
"toned down," that only a few unusually accurate aged memories can
recall it. The hymn began going out of use fifty years ago, and is now
seldom seen.

The name "S. Chandler," attached to "Ganges," leaves the identity of the
composer in shadow. It is supposed he was born in 1760. The tune
appeared about 1790.


"WHERE NOW ARE THE HEBREW CHILDREN?"

This quaint old unison, repeating the above three times, followed by the
answer (thrice repeated) and climaxed with--

    Safely in the Promised Land,

--was a favorite at ancient camp-meetings, and a good leader could keep
it going in a congregation or a happy group of vocalists, improvising a
new start-line after every stop until his memory or invention gave out.

    They went up from the fiery furnace,
    They went up from the fiery furnace,
    They went up from the fiery furnace,
      Safely to the Promised Land.

Sometimes it was--

    Where now is the good Elijah?

--and,--

    He went up in a chariot of fire;

--and again,--

    Where now is the good old Daniel?

    He went up from the den of lions;

--and so on, finally announcing--

    By and by we'll go home for to meet him, [three times]
      Safely in the Promised Land.

The enthusiasm excited by the swinging rhythm of the tune sometimes rose
to a passionate pitch, and it was seldom used in the more controlled
religious assemblies. If any attempt was ever made to print the song[22]
the singers had little need to read the music. Like the ancient runes,
it came into being by spontaneous generation, and lived in phonetic
tradition.

[Footnote 22: Mr. Hubert P. Main believes he once saw "The Hebrew
Children" in print in one of Horace Waters' editions of the _Sabbath
Bell_.]

A strange, wild paean of exultant song was one often heard from Peter
Cartwright, the muscular circuit-preacher. A remembered fragment shows
its quality:

    Then my soul mounted higher
      In a chariot of fire,
    And the moon it was under my feet.

There is a tradition that he sang it over a stalwart blacksmith while
chastising him for an ungodly defiance and assault in the course of one
of his gospel journeys--and that the defeated blacksmith became his
friend and follower.

Peter Cartwright was born in Amherst county, Va., Sept. 1, 1785, and
died near Pleasant Plains, Sangamon county, Ill., Sept., 1872.


"THE EDEN OF LOVE."

This song, written early in the last century, by John J. Hicks, recalls
the name of the eccentric traveling evangelist, Lorenzo Dow, born in
Coventry, Ct., October 16, 1777; died in Washington, D.C., Feb. 2,
1834. It was the favorite hymn of his wife, the beloved Peggy Dow, and
has furnished the key-word of more than one devotional rhyme that has
uplifted the toiling souls of rural evangelists and their greenwood
congregations:

    How sweet to reflect on the joys that await me
      In yon blissful region, the haven of rest,
    Where glorified spirits with welcome shall greet me,
      And lead me to mansions prepared for the blest.
    There, dwelling in light, and with glory enshrouded,
      My happiness perfect, my mind's sky unclouded,
    I'll bathe in the ocean of pleasure unbounded,
      And range with delight through the Eden of love.

The words and tune were printed in _Leavitt's Christian Lyre_, 1830.

The same strain in the same metre is continued in the hymn of Rev. Wm.
Hunter, D.D., (1842) printed in his _Minstrel of Zion_ (1845). J.W.
Dadmun's _Melodian_ (1860) copied it, retaining, apparently, the
original music, with an added refrain of invitation, "Will you go? will
you go?"

    We are bound for the land of the pure and the holy,
      The home of the happy, the kingdom of love;
    Ye wand'rers from God on the broad road of folly,
      O say, will you go to the Eden above?

The old hymn-tune has a brisk out-door delivery, and is full of revival
fervor and the ozone of the pines.


"O CANA-AN, BRIGHT CANA-AN"

Was one of the stimulating melodies of the old-time awakenings, which
were simply airs, and were sung unisonously. "O Cana-an" (pronounced in
three syllables) was the chorus, the hymn-lines being either improvised
or picked up miscellaneously from memory, the interline, "I am bound for
the land of Cana-an," occurring between every two. John Wesley's "How
happy is the pilgrim's lot" was one of the snatched stanzas swept into
the current of the song. An example of the tune-leader's improvisations
to keep the hymn going was--

    If you get there before I do,--
     _I am bound for the land of Cana-an!_
    Look out for me, I'm coming too--
     _I am bound for the land of Cana-an!_

And then hymn and tune took possession of the assembly and rolled on in
a circle with--

    O Cana-an, bright Cana-an!
    I am bound for the land of Cana-an;
    O Cana-an it is my hap-py home,
    I am bound for the land of Cana-an

--till the voices came back to another starting-line and began again.
There was always a movement to the front when that tune was sung,
and--with all due abatement for superficial results in the sensation of
the moment--it is undeniable that many souls were truly born into the
kingdom of God under the sound of that rude woodland song.

Both its words and music are credited to Rev. John Maffit, who probably
wrote the piece about 1829.


"A CHARGE TO KEEP I HAVE."

This hymn of Charles Wesley was often heard at the camp grounds, from
the rows of tents in the morning while the good women prepared their
pancakes and coffee, and


_THE TUNE._

was invariably old "Kentucky," by Jeremiah Ingalls. Sung as a solo by a
sweet and spirited voice, it slightly resembled "Golden Hill," but
oftener its halting bars invited a more drawling style of execution
unworthy of a hymn that merits a tune like "St. Thomas."

Old "Kentucky" was not field music.


"CHRISTIANS, IF YOUR HEARTS ARE WARM."

Elder John Leland, born in Grafton, Mass., 1754, was not only a
strenuous personality in the Baptist denomination, but was well known
everywhere in New England, and, in fact, his preaching trip to
Washington (1801) with the "Cheshire Cheese" made his fame national. He
is spoken of as "the minister who wrote his own hymns"--a peculiarity in
which he imitated Watts and Doddridge. When some natural shrinking was
manifest in converts of his winter revivals, under his rigid rule of
immediate baptism, he wrote this hymn to fortify them:

    Christians, if your hearts are warm,
    Ice and cold can do no harm;
    If by Jesus you are prized
    Rise, believe and be baptized.

He found use for the hymn, too, in rallying church-members who staid
away from his meetings in bad weather. The "poetry" expressed what he
wanted to say--which, in his view, was sufficient apology for it. It was
sung in revival meetings like others that he wrote, and a few hymnbooks
now long obsolete contained it; but of Leland's hymns only one survives.
Gray-headed men and women remember being sung to sleep by their mothers
with that old-fashioned evening song to Amzi Chapin's[23] tune--

    The day is past and gone,
      The evening shades appear,
    O may we all remember well
      The night of death draws near;

--and with all its solemnity and other-worldness it is dear to
recollection, and its five stanzas are lovingly hunted up in the few
hymnals where it is found. Bradbury's "Braden," (_Baptist Praise Book_,
1873,) is one of its tunes.

[Footnote 23: Amzi Chapin has left, apparently, nothing more than the
record of his birth, March 2, 1768, and the memory of his tune. It
appeared as early as 1805.]

Elder Leland was a remarkable revival preacher, and his prayers--as was
said of Elder Jabez Swan's fifty or sixty years later--"brought heaven
and earth together." He traveled through the Eastern States as an
evangelist, and spent a season in Virginia in the same work. In 1801 he
revisited that region on a curious errand. The farmers of Cheshire,
Mass., where Leland was then a settled pastor, conceived the plan of
sending "the biggest cheese in America" to President Jefferson, and
Leland (who was a good democrat) offered to go to Washington on an
ox-team with it, and "preach all the way"--which he actually did.

The cheese weighed 1450 lbs.

Elder Leland died in North Adams, Mass., Jan. 14, 1844. Another of his
hymns, which deserved to live with his "Evening Song," seemed to be
answered in the brightness of his death-bed hope:

    O when shall I see Jesus
      And reign with Him above,
    And from that flowing fountain
      Drink everlasting love?


"AWAKE, MY SOUL, TO JOYFUL LAYS."

This glad hymn of Samuel Medley is his thanksgiving song, written soon
after his conversion. In the places of rural worship no lay of
Christian praise and gratitude was ever more heartily sung than this at
the testimony meetings.

    Awake, my soul, to joyful lays,
    And sing thy great Redeemer's praise;
    He justly claims a song from me:
    His loving-kindness, oh, how free!
    Loving-kindness, loving-kindness,
    His loving-kindness, oh, how free!


_THE TUNE,_

With its queer curvet in every second line, had no other name than
"Loving-Kindness," and was probably a camp-meeting melody in use for
some time before its publication. It is found in _Leavitt's Christian
Lyre_ as early as 1830. The name "William Caldwell" is all that is known
of its composer, though he is supposed to have lived in Tennessee.


"THE LORD INTO HIS GARDEN COMES."

Was a common old-time piece sure to be heard at every religious rally,
and every one present, saint and sinner, had it by heart, or at least
the chorus of it--

    Amen, amen, my soul replies,
    I'm bound to meet you in the skies,
      And claim my mansion there, etc.

The anonymous[24] "Garden Hymn, as old, at least, as 1800," has nearly
passed out of reach, except by the long arm of the antiquary; but it
served its generation.

[Footnote 24: A "Rev." Mr. Campbell, author of "The Glorious Light of
Zion," "There is a Holy City," and "There is a Land of Pleasure," has
been sometimes credited with the origin of the Garden Hymn.]

Its vigorous tune is credited to Jeremiah Ingalls (1764-1838).

    The Lord into His garden comes;
