  We are still sitting in a circle.
    [A Mid[-e]/ sitting within the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n; the circle is
    shown.]

  [Illustration]
  A-ya/-a-bi-ta/ pa/-ke-zh[)i]k/, [-u]/, h[-u]/, a/,
  Half the sky
    [The hand is shown reaching toward the sky, imploring the assistance
    of Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] that the candidate may receive advancement in
    power. He has only two degrees, one-half of the number desired.]

  [Illustration]
  Ba/-be-ke/ o/-gi-m[^a]n nish/-a-we, h[-e]/,
  ne/-me-ke-h[-e]/, nish/-a-we/-ni-m[)i]k o/-gi-m[^a]n.
  The spirit has pity on me now,
    [The "Great Spirit" is descending upon the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, to be
    present during the ceremony.]

  [Illustration]
  Nin-dai/-a, nin-dai/-a, ha/,
  we/-ki-ma/, ha/, w[^a]-no-kwe/.
  In my heart, in my heart, I have the spirit.
    [The hand is holding the m[-i]/gis, to which reference is made.]

  [Illustration]
  I-ke/-u-ha/-ma man-ta-na/-ki-na ni-ka/-ni
  I take the earth, my Mid[-e]/ friends.
    [The earth furnishes the resources necessary to the maintenance of
    life, both food and medicines.]

  [Illustration]
  Wi/-a-ya/-din shin-da/, h[-a]n/,
  man-da/-ha-ni/, o-h[-o]/ ni-b[)i]/.
  Let us get him to take this water.
    [The figure sees medicine in the earth, as the lines from the eyes
    to the horizontal strokes indicate.]

  [Illustration]
  H[)u]e/-sh[)i]-shi-kwa/-ni-an nin-ga/-ga-m[-u]n/.
  I take this rattle.
    [The rattle is used when administering medicine.]

  [Illustration]
  Wi-wa/-ba-mi/na h[-e]/-na ko/-ni-a/-ni, ka/,
  ko/-ni-a/-ho-n[-a]/, n[-i]/, k[-a]/.
  See how I shine in making medicine.
    [The speaker likens himself to the Makwa/ Man/id[-o], one of the
    most powerful Mid[-e]/ spirits. His body shines as if it were ablaze
    with light--due to magic power.]

This song is sung ad libitum according to the inspired condition of the
person singing it. Many of the words are archaic, and differ from the
modern forms.

Then the officiating priests arise and the one lowest in rank grasps his
Mid[-e]/ sack and goes through the gestures, described in connection
with the previous degrees, of shooting into the joints and forehead of
the candidate the sacred m[-i]/gis. At the attempt made by the chief
priest the candidate falls forward apparently unconscious. The priests
then touch his joints and forehead with the upper end of their Mid[-e]/
sacks whereupon he recovers and rises to a standing posture. The chief
then addresses him and enjoins him to conduct himself with propriety and
in accordance with the dignity of his profession. The following is the
text, viz: Gi-gan/-bis-s[)i]n dau/-g[-e]-in/-ni-n[^a]n/
kish-bin/-bish-in dau/-o-[^a]n-n[)i]n da/-ki-ka-wa/-bi-kwe ga/-k[)i]-ne
ke-ke/-wi-bi/-na-m[-o]n ki-ma/-dzh[)i]-zhi we/-b[)i]-zi-w[)i]n/.

The translation is as follows: "You heed to what I say to you; if you
are listening and will do what is right you will live to have white
hair. That is all; you will do away with all bad actions."

The Mid[-e]/ priest second in rank then says to the candidate:
Ke/-go-wi/-ka-za/-gi-to-wa/-kin ki-da/-no-ka/tsh[)i]-g[^a]n
kai-[-e]/-gi-g[-i]t/ a-s[-e]/-ma, kai/-e-m[-i]/-dz[)i]m, which
signifies: "Never begrudge your goods, neither your tobacco, nor your
provisions." To this the candidate responds [-e][n]/--yes, by this
signifying that he will never regret what he has given the Mid[-e]/ for
their services. The candidate remains standing while the members of the
society take seats, after which he goes to the pile of blankets, skins,
and other presents, and upon selecting appropriate ones for the
officiating priests he carries them to those persons, after which he
makes presents of less value to all other Mid[-e]/ present. Tobacco is
then distributed, and while all are preparing to make an offering to
Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] of tobacco, the newly accepted member goes around to
each, member present, passes his hands downward over the sides of the
Mid[-e]'s head and says:

  Mi-gw[)e]tsh/ ga/shi-t[-o]/-win   bi-ma/-d[)i]-si-w[-i]n/,
  Thanks     for giving to me life,

then, stepping back, he clasps his hands and bows toward the Mid[-e]/,
adding: Ni-ka/-ni, ni-ka/-ni, ni-ka/-ni, ka-na/,--"My Mid[-e]/ friend,
my Mid[-e]/ friend, my Mid[-e]/ friend, friend." To this the Mid[-e]/
responds in affirmation, hau/, [-e][n]/--yes.

The new member then finds a seat on the southern side of the inclosure,
whereupon the ushers--Mid[-e]/ appointed to attend to outside
duties--retire and bring in the vessels of food which are carried around
to various persons present, four distinct times.

The feast continues for a considerable length of time, after which the
kettles and dishes are again carried outside the Mid[-e]/wi-g[^a]n, when
all who desire indulge in smoking. Mid[-e]/ songs are chanted by one of
the priests, the accompanying, reproduced pictorially in Pl. XIV C,
being an example. The lines, as usual, are repeated ad libitum, the
music being limited to but few notes, and in a minor key. The following
are the words with translation:

  [Illustration]
  He/-ne-wi/-a ni/-na mi/-si-man/-i-d[-e]-ge/
  Their bodies shine over the world
  he-wa/-we-a/-ne-kan/.
  unto me as unto you, my Mid[-e]/ friend.
    [This refers to the sun, and moon, whose bodies are united in the
    drawing.]

  [Illustration]
  Ma/-na-wi-na/ hai/-e-ne-h[-a]/ be-wa/-bik-kun kan-din/-a-we.
  Your eyes see them both eyes made of iron, piercing eyes.
    [The figure is that of the crane, whose loud, far-reaching voice is
    indicated by the short lines radiating from the mouth. The eyes of
    the crane Man/id[-o] are equally penetrating.]

  [Illustration]
  Ta-be/-n[)e]-wa/ he-shi-wa/, h[-a]/ ma/-si-ni/-ni-he/-shi-wa/, h[-a]/.
  Calm it leads you to guides you to your food.
    [Knowledge of superior powers gained through familiarity with the
    rites of the Mid[-e]/wiwin is here referred to. The figure points to
    the abode of Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]; three short lines indicating three
    degrees in the Mid[-e]/wiwin, which the candidate has taken.]

  [Illustration]
  Ha-nin/-di he-bik/-k[)i]n-he/ man/-i-d[-o] ni-kan/
  Whence does he rise spirit Mid[-e]/ friend
  wa-ba-n[)u]nk/, mi-d[-e]/-man/-i-d[-o] wa-ba-n[)u]nk/.
  from the east, mid[-e]/ man/id[-o] from the east.
    [The hand reaches up as in making the gesture for rising sun or day,
    the "sky lines" leaning to the left, or east; one making signs is
    always presumed to face the south, and signs referring to periods of
    day, sun, sunrise, etc., are made from the left side of the body.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest.

  [Illustration]
  Wa-dzhi-wan/, wa-dzhi-wan/-na,
  Wa-dahi-wan/ ni-ka/-na-h[-e]/.
  There is a mountain, there is a mountain,
  There is a mountain, my friends.
    [The upright outline represents a mountain upon which a powerful
    Mid[-e]/ is seated, symbolical of the distinction attainable by a
    Mid[-e]/.]

  [Illustration]

  Wa/-b[)e]-ku/[)e]-be-a/, wa/-b[)e]-ku/-[)e]-be-a/,
  Shot it was, shot it was
  na/-b[)e]-ku/-[)e]-be-a/ man/-i-d[-o]/-/a n[)i]n-d[-e]/.
  and it hit body, your man/ido your heart.
  man/-i-d[-o]/-a nin-d[-e]/.
  man/ido your heart.
    [The M[-i]/gis is represented in the illustration by the small
    rings; the arrow indicating that it was "shot" with velocity.]

  [Illustration]
  Hwe/-kwo-nin/-na-ta, ki-w[-i]/-kash/-ka-man;
  En-do/-ge-m[-a]/ wesh/-in-[-e]/.
  What am I going around?
  I am going around the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.
    [The oblong structure represents the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. The
    otter-skin Mid[-e]/ sack is taken around it, as is shown by the
    outline of that animal and the line or course indicated. The Makwa/
    Man/id[-o] (bear spirit) is shown at the left, resting upon the
    horizontal line, the earth, below which are magic lines showing his
    power, as also the lines upon the back of the bear. The speaker
    compares himself to the bear spirit.]

  [Illustration]
  Nen/-do-ne/-ha-m[-a]n-ni/ n[-i]/-[)o],
  What am I looking at.
    [The figure denotes a leg, signifying powers of transporting one's
    self to remote places; the magic power is indicated by the three
    transverse lines and the small spots, the m[-i]/gis, upon it.]

  [Illustration]
  Ba/bin-ke/-en non/-do-wa-w[-e]/, h[-i]/,
  I soon heard him, the one who
  did not listen to them.
    [The Mid[-e]/, as a superior personage, is shown by having the horns
    attached to the head. The line of hearing has small rings, at
    intervals, indicating that something is heard.]

  [Illustration]
  Hin/-ta-na/-wi ni-ka/-na-gi/, [-e]/, h[-e]/,
  p[-i]/-na-n[-i]/, hin/-ta-na/-wi ni-ka/-na-ga/ na/-ge-ka-na/
  [-e]/, h[-e]/.
  The Nika/ni are finding fault with me, inside of my lodge.
    [The arm at the side of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n points to the interior,
    the place spoken of.]

  [Illustration]
  O[n]sh/-ko[n]sh-na-n[-a]/ pi-na/-wa ni[n]-bosh/-i-na/-na.
  With the bear's claws I almost hit him.
    [The Mid[-e]/ used the bear's claw to work a charm, or exorcism,
    and would seem to indicate that he claimed the powers of a
    W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/. The one spoken of is an evil man/id[-o], referred
    to in the preceding line, in which he speaks of having heard him.]

At the conclusion of this protracted ceremony a few speeches may be made
by a Mid[-e]/, recounting the benefits to be enjoyed and the powers
wielded by the knowledge thus acquired, after which the chief priest
intimates to his colleagues the advisability of adjourning. They then
leave the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n by the western door, and before night all
movable accessories are taken away from the structure.

The remainder of the evening is spent in visiting friends, dancing,
etc., and upon the following day they all return to their respective
homes.

DESCRIPTIVE NOTES.

Although the m[-i]/gis shell of the several degrees is generally of the
same species, some of the older Mid[-e]/ priests claim that there were
formerly specific shells, each being characteristic and pertaining
specially to each individual grade. The objects claimed by
Sika/s-sig[)e] as referring to the third degree are, in addition to the
Cypraea monata, L., a piece of purple wampum, and one shell of elongated
form, both shown on Pl. XI, Nos. 3 and 5, respectively.

The fact of a Mid[-e]/ having been subjected to "m[-i]/gis shooting" for
the third time is an all-sufficient reason to the Indian why his powers
are in a corresponding manner augmented. His powers of exorcism and
incantation are greater; his knowledge and use of magic medicines more
extended and certain of effect; and his ability to do harm, as in the
capacity of a W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/, is more and more lauded and feared.
He becomes possessed of a greater power in prophecy and prevision,
and in this state enters the class of personages known as the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, or jugglers. His power over darkness and obscurity is
indicated on Pl. III, A, No. 77, upon which the head, chest, and arms
are represented as being covered with lines to designate obscurity, the
extended arms with outstretched hands denoting ability to grasp and
control that which is hidden to the eye.

  [Illustration: Fig. 26.--J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/ or juggler's lodge.]

The J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ and his manner of performing have already been
mentioned. This class of sorcerers were met with by the Jesuit Fathers
early in the seventeenth century, and referred to under various
designations, such as jongleur, magicien, consulteur du manitou, etc.
Their influence in the tribe was recognized, and formed one of the
greatest obstacles encountered in the Christianization of the Indians.
Although the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ may be a seer and prophet as well as a
practitioner of exorcism without becoming a member of the Mid[-e]/wiwin,
it is only when a Mid[-e]/ attains the rank of the third degree that he
begins to give evidence of, or pretends to exhibit with any degree of
confidence, the powers accredited to the former. The structure erected
and occupied by the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ for the performance of his powers
as prophet or oracle has before been described as cylindrical, being
made by planting four or more poles and wrapping about them sheets of
birch bark, blankets, or similar material that will serve as a covering.
This form of structure is generally represented in pictographic records,
as shown in Fig. 26.

  [Illustration: Fig. 27.--J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/, or juggler's lodge.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 28.--J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/, or juggler's lodge.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 29.--J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/, juggler's lodge.]

The accompanying illustrations, Figs. 27, 28, and 29, reproduced from
birch-bark etchings, were the property of J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, who were
also Mid[-e]/ of the third and fourth degrees. It will be noticed that
the structure used by them is in the form of the ordinary wig/iwam, as
their profession of medical magic is apparently held in higher esteem
than the art of prophecy; their status and claims as J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/
being indicated by the great number of ma/nid[-o]s which they have the
power of invoking. These man/id[-o]s, or spirits, are indicated by the
outline of their material forms, the heart being indicated and connected
with the interior of the structure to show the power of the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ over the life of the respective spirits. The
Thunder-bird usually occupies the highest position in his estimation,
and for this reason is drawn directly over the wig/iwam. The Turtle is
claimed to be the man/id[-o] who acts as intermediary between the
J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ and the other man/id[-o]s, and is therefore not found
among the characters on the outside of the wig/iwam, but his presence is
indicated within, either at the spot marking the convergence of the
"life lines," or immediately below it. Fig. 30 is a reproducton of an
etching made by a J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ at White Earth, Minnesota. The two
curved lines above the J[)e]s/sakkan/ represent the sky, from which
magic power is derived, as shown by the waving line extending downward.
The small spots within the structure are "magic spots," i.e., the
presence of man/id[-o]s. The juggler is shown upon the left side near
the base. When a prophet is so fortunate as to be able to claim one of
these man/id[-o]s as his own tutelary daimon, his advantage in invoking
the others is comparatively greater. Before proceeding to the
J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/--or the "Jugglery," as the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ wig/iwam
is commonly designated, a prophet will prepare himself by smoking and
making an offering to his man/id[-o], and by singing a chant, of which
an example is presented on Pl. XIV, D. It is a reproduction of one made
by a J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ who was also a Mid[-e]/ of the third degree. Each
line is chanted as often as may be desired, or according to the effect
which it may be desirable to produce or the inspired state of the
singer.

  [Illustration: Fig. 30.--J[)e]s/sakk[^a]n/, or juggler's lodge.]

  [Illustration]
  Me-we/-yan, ha/, ha/, ha/,
  I go into the J[)e]s/sakkan/ to see the medicine.
    [The circle represents the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ as viewed from above;
    the short lines denote the magic character of the structure, and the
    central ring, or spot, the magic stone used by the prophet who
    appears entering from the side.]

  [Illustration]
  Tschi-nun/-d[-o]n/, he/, he/, he/, he/,
  I was the one who dug up life.
    [The Otter Man/id[-o] emerging from the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n; he
    received it from Ki/tshi Mani/d[-o].]

  [Illustration]
  Ni/ka-n[-i]/ we-do-ko[n]/-a, ha/, ha/,
  The spirit put down medicine on earth to grow.
    [The sacred or magic lines descending to the earth denote
    supernatural origin of the m[-i]/gis, which is shown by the four
    small rings. The short lines at the bottom represent the ascending
    sprouts of magic plants.]

  [Illustration]
  Te-ti-ba/-tshi m[)u]t/-[^a]-wit/, t[-e]/, h[-e]/, h[-e]/,
  I am the one that dug up the medicine.
    [The otter shown emerging from the jugglery. The speaker represents
    himself "like unto the Otter Man/id[-o]."]

  [Illustration]
  Ki/wa[n]-win/-da ma/-kwa-nan/, na/, ha/,
  I answer my brother spirit.
    [The Otter Man/id[-o] responds to the invocation of the speaker. The
    diagonal line across the body signifies the "spirit character" of
    the animal.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest or pause.

  [Illustration]
  Wa/-a-so/-at w[)e]n/-ti/-na-man, ha/, ha,
  The spirit has put life into my body.
    [The speaker is represented as being in the Mid[-e]/-wig[^a]n, where
    Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] placed magic power into his body; the arms denote
    this act of putting into his sides the m[-i]/gis. The line crossing
    the body denotes the person to be possessed of supernatural power.]

  [Illustration]
  Ki-to/-na-bi/-in, n[-e]/, h[-e]/, h[-e]/,
  This is what the medicine has given us.
    [The Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, showing on the upper line the guardian
    man/id[-o]s.]

  [Illustration]
  Ni/-sha-we/-ni-b[)i]-ku/, h[-u]/, h[-u]/, h[-e]/,
  I took with two hands what was thrown down to us.
    [The speaker grasped life, i.e., the mig[-i]s/, to secure the
    mysterious power which he professes.]

In addition to the practice of medical magic, the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/
sometimes resorts to a curious process to extract from the patient's
body the malevolent beings or man/id[-o]s which cause disease. The
method of procedure is as follows: The J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ is provided
with four or more tubular bones, consisting of the leg bones of large
birds, each of the thickness of a finger and 4 or 5 inches in length.
After the priest has fasted and chanted prayers for success, he gets
down upon all fours close to the patient and with his mouth near the
affected part. After using the rattle and singing most vociferously to
cause the evil man/id[-o] to take shelter at some particular spot, so
that it may be detected and located by him, he suddenly touches that
place with the end of one of the bones and immediately thereafter
putting the other end into his mouth, as if it were a cigar, strikes it
with the flat hand and sends it apparently down his throat. Then the
second bone is treated in the same manner, as also the third and fourth,
the last one being permitted to protrude from the mouth, when the end is
put against the affected part and sucking is indulged in amid the most
violent writhings and contortions in his endeavors to extract the
man/id[-o]. As this object is supposed to have been reached and
swallowed by the J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ he crawls away to a short distance
from the patient and relieves himself of the demon with violent
retchings and apparent suffering. He recovers in a short time, spits out
the bones, and, after directing his patient what further medicine to
swallow, receives his fee and departs. Further description of this
practice will be referred to below and illustrated on Pl. XVIII.

The above manner of disposing of the hollow bones is a clever trick and
not readily detected, and it is only by such acts of jugglery and other
delusions that he maintains his influence and importance among the
credulous.

  [Illustration: Fig. 31.--J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ curing woman.]

Fig. 31 represents a J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ curing a sick woman by sucking
the demon through a bone tube. The pictograph was drawn upon a piece of
birch bark which was carried in the owner's Mid[-e]/ sack, and was
intended to record an event of importance.

  No. 1 represents the actor, holding a rattle in hand. Around his head
    is an additional circle, denoting quantity (literally, more than an
    ordinary amount of knowledge), the short line projecting to the
    right indicating the tube used.

  No. 2 is the woman operated upon.

  [Illustration: Fig. 32.--J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/ curing man.]

Fig. 32 represents an exhibition by a J[)e]s/sakk[-i]d/, a resident of
White Earth, Minnesota. The priest is shown in No. 1 holding his rattle,
the line extending from his eye to the patient's abdomen signifying that
he has located the demon and is about to begin his exorcism. No. 2 is
the patient lying before the operator.


FOURTH DEGREE.

  [Illustration: Fig. 33.--Diagram of Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n of the fourth
  degree.]

The Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, in which this degree is conferred, differs from
the preceding structures by having open doorways in both the northern
and southern walls, about midway between the eastern and western
