of the experience of others who have previously overcome the
difficulties to be encountered. In other words, we need to obtain all
the preparation and discipline we can possibly have in order to do our
work well; and especially is this true of Christian work, which demands
the highest service that the heart and soul of humanity can give. Many
individuals will come to the home to be trained and fitted to work in
their own homes, and will start new lines of Christian activity that
will win the sympathies and efforts of many who are eager to be employed
in good works, if only they can have competent direction.

A pamphlet entitled _The Deaconess Institution and Training Home_ says:
"Are there not many parts all over Scotland--mines, quarries,
etc.--where the population is poor and hard-working? Would it not in
such places be an advantage both to minister and people to have a
Christian lady, trained, experienced, and devoted, to live and work
among them? Or, which would be possible in every parish, would it not be
a great advantage that in case of need--in a mining accident, an
outbreak of sickness--a trained Christian nurse should be available
during the emergency?"

The General Assembly provided that deaconesses should be solemnly
inducted into their office at a religious service in church. It also
provided "that along with the application for the admission of any
person to the office of a deaconess there shall be submitted a
certificate from a committee of the General Assembly intrusted with that
duty stating that the candidate is qualified in respect of education,
and that she has had seven years' experience in Christian work, or two
years' training in the Deaconess Institution and Training Home." Also,
"Before granting the application, the kirk session shall intimate to the
presbytery their intention of doing so, unless objection be offered by
the presbytery at its first meeting thereafter." On Sunday, December 9,
1888, the first deaconess was set apart to her duties. The kirk session
was already in possession of the necessary certificates testifying to
her "character, education, experience, devotedness, and power to serve
and co-operate with others." Due intimation had been made to the
presbytery. The questions were put that were appointed by the General
Assembly:

"Do you desire to be set apart as a deaconess, and as such to serve the
Lord Jesus Christ in the Church, which is his body?

"Do you promise, as a deaconess of the Church of Scotland, to work in
connection with that Church, subject to its courts, and in particular to
the kirk session of the parish in which you work?

"Do you humbly engage, in the strength and grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, our Lord and Master, faithfully and prayerfully to discharge the
duties of this office?"

The lady who, by answering the above questions, received the sanction of
the Church as one of its appointed officers was Lady Grisell Baillie, of
Dryburgh Abbey. She writes to the author of this book: "I count it a
great honor to be permitted to serve in the Church of my fathers, and I
pray that I may be enabled faithfully and prayerfully to fulfill the
duties to which I am called, and that it maybe for the glory of our God
and Saviour that I am permitted to work in his vineyard."

Miss Davidson, who was temporary superintendent of the home, but who is
now engaged in organizing branches of the Women's Guild throughout
Scotland, and Miss Alice Maud Maxwell, the present superintendent of the
home, have also been set apart to the same office. As has been said,
"Each represents an old Scottish family, whose members have been
distinguished for Christian and philanthropic labors;" and "each
represents a different type of deaconess work." Lady Grisell Baillie is
engaged in gentle ministrations among the people of her own home. Miss
Davidson is at the service of every minister who desires aid in
organizing women's work in his parish. And Miss Maxwell is at the
training-home, leading a busy life in directing the class labors and
missionary activities that center around it and in impressing her life
and spirit upon a band of workers who are to further Christ's cause both
at home and in the mission field.

The mention of any facts that can bring before us the varied character
that the deaconess work can assume is valuable. For to be truly useful,
this cause needs to provide a place for women of very unlike qualities,
and also to allow a certain degree of freedom which will insure the
individuality of each worker.

The action of the Church of Scotland has had its influence upon the
Reformed Churches throughout the world holding the presbyterial system.
At the session of the London Council of the Alliance of Reformed and
Presbyterian Churches during the summer of 1888, Dr. Charteris presented
a report embracing many of the features of the elaborate scheme which
he had previously devised for the Church of Scotland. And the Council,
in receiving the report, not only approved it, but "commended the
details of the scheme stated in the report to the consideration of the
churches represented in the Alliance." We may regard the Presbyterian
churches of Great Britain, therefore, as committed, not only to the
indorsement of deaconesses as officers in the service of the Church, but
to the organization of the whole work of women in the churches, under
ecclesiastical authority and direction.

There is one feature of the deaconess cause as it has been developed in
the Church of Scotland that is of especial interest to the Methodists of
America. Most of the great deaconess houses of England have sprung from
the personal faith and works of earnest-souled individuals. Mildmay, for
example, is a living testimony to the faithfulness and energy of the
Rev. Mr. Pennefather and those associated with him. Within the Church of
England the recognition accorded deaconesses is a partial one, resting
on the principles and rules signed by the archbishops and eighteen
bishops, and suggested for adoption in 1871. But as yet the English
Church has not formally accepted this utterance, and made it
authoritative. The German deaconess houses, while receiving the
practical indorsement of the State Church of Germany, are not in any
way officially connected with it. Even Kaiserswerth itself is solely
responsible to those who contribute to its support for a right use of
the means placed at its command. The same fact applies to the Paris
deaconess houses. They are all detached efforts, not parts of a general
system. But the Scotch deaconesses are responsible to a church, and a
church is responsible for their work. The Church of Scotland is,
therefore, justified in its claim when it says that the adoption of the
scheme of the organization of women's work by the assembly of 1888, "is
the first attempt since the Reformation to make the organization of
women's work a branch of the general organization of the Church, under
the control of her several judicatories."[77] The second attempt was
made, which was the first also for any Church in America, when, May 18,
1888, the Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States instituted the
office of deaconess, and made it an inherent part of the Church economy,
under the direction and control of the Annual Conferences.


  [75] _Organization of Women's Work in the Church of Scotland._
       Notes by A. H. Charteris, D.D.; p. 4.
  [76] _Report of Committee on Christian Life and Work_, 1888, p. 36.
  [77] Nearly all of the facts, both printed and personal, concerning
       the deaconess cause in Scotland have been furnished the writer
       through the kindness of Lady Grisell Baillie, Dryburgh Abbey,
       Scotland.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE DEACONESS CAUSE IN AMERICA.


It was no part of the plan of this book, when first projected, to treat
of the deaconess cause as it is developing within the United States of
America, but gradually, through the kindness of many friends belonging
to different denominations, a number of facts have been obtained which
bear directly upon the question of how the example of European deaconess
houses has influenced and is influencing the Protestant Churches of
America; and it seems unwise to omit them from the consideration of the
subject.

Naturally the German Lutherans, who were well acquainted with the
deaconess work in their native land, were the first to try to introduce
it among their churches. In the yearly report sent out from
Kaiserswerth, January 1, 1847, Fliedner mentions that an urgent appeal
had been made to him to send deaconesses to an important city in the
United States, there to have the oversight of a hospital, and to found a
mother-house for the training of deaconesses. In the report for the
following year Fliedner again refers to the call from America, and
states his intention to extend his travels to the New World, and to take
with him sisters who shall aid in founding a mother-house. In the summer
of 1849 he was enabled to carry out his intention, and July 14, 1849,
accompanied by four deaconesses, he reached Pittsburg, Pa., where Rev.
Dr. W. A. Passavant, who had written so many urgent appeals for his aid,
was awaiting him. The building had already been secured for a hospital
and deaconess home, and, July 17, was solemnly dedicated at a service
where Fliedner delivered the principal address, and a large audience
testified to their interest.

Before his return to Europe Fliedner visited the New York Synod, and, in
an English discourse, described the character and aims of Kaiserswerth,
and commended the newly founded institution at Pittsburg to the sympathy
and aid of the German Lutheran Church in America. No further results
were reached, as the synod contented itself with resolving that "this
Ministerium awaits with deep interest the result of the work made in
behalf of the institution of Protestant deaconesses at Pittsburg."[78]

The institution is occasionally heard of afterward in the proceedings
of the Pittsburg Synod, and in the paper, _The Missionary_, published
under the auspices of the same Church. Urgent appeals were also sent out
for devoted Christian women to come to the aid of the sisters and to
join their numbers; but although the hospital, commended by their
skillful and able ministrations as nurses, had the full approval of the
public, there were few, if any, who came to join them, and they were
unduly burdened by a task too great for their small number.

In 1854 Dr. Passavant resigned his pastoral charge, and devoted his
entire time to the furtherance of the cause, but, up to the present, it
has not attained the complete organization and wide extension that its
friends in the German Lutheran Church have desired.

The institutions which owe their existence to Dr. Passavant's efforts
are the infirmary at Pittsburg; the hospital and deaconess home in
Milwaukee; the hospital in Jacksonville, Ill.; the orphanages for girls
in Rochester and Mount Vernon, N. Y., and one for boys in Pennsylvania.

There is, at the present time, only one of the original Kaiserswerth
sisters left, and that is Sister Elizabeth, the head deaconess at
Rochester. Dr. Passavant still continues to labor at forming a complete
organization on the basis of the Kaiserswerth system, and, to quote the
words of Dr. A. Spaeth, "As he succeeded forty years ago in bringing the
first sisters over from Kaiserswerth to Pittsburg, I have no doubt that
now, when the Church is at last awakening to the importance of this
work, he will succeed in the completion of his undertaking."

A more recent development of the deaconess work in the German Lutheran
Church has arisen in connection with the German hospital in
Philadelphia. The hospital was well equipped for its work, but there was
much dissatisfaction with the nursing, which was inefficient and
unskillful. In the fall of 1882 the hospital authorities turned for
advice and co-operation to Dr. W. J. Mann, Dr. A. Spaeth, and other
clergymen of the denomination in Philadelphia. It was determined to
secure German deaconesses as nurses. Several attempts were made to
induce Kaiserswerth, or some other large mother-house in Germany, to
give up a few sisters to the hospital, but on all sides the applications
were refused. The deaconesses were too greatly needed in the Old World
to be spared for work in the New. At length, through the unremitting
efforts of Consul Meyer, and of John D. Lankenau, president of the board
of managers, a small independent community of sisters under the
direction of Marie Krueger, who had herself been trained in
Kaiserswerth, acceded to the proposal, and the head-deaconess, with six
sisters, arrived in Philadelphia June 19, 1884. They left the field of
their self-denying work in the hospital and poor-house at Iserlohn, in
Westphalia, sadly to the regret of the authorities and citizens of the
place, but to the hospital at Philadelphia they gave invaluable aid.
From the first their good services met with appreciation. The efficiency
of the hospital service was greatly increased; and from physicians and
hospital authorities there was only one testimony, and that a most
favorable one, to the value of deaconesses as trained nurses. Mr.
Lankenau, who has ever been the wise and munificent patron of the
institution, determined to insure a succession of these admirable nurses
for the service of the hospital, and, at an expense of over five hundred
thousand dollars, he built an edifice of palace-like proportions, and
made over this munificent gift to the hospital corporation. It was
accepted by them January 10, 1887. The western wing of the building is
used as a home for aged men and women; the eastern wing is a residence
and training-school for the deaconesses, the chapel uniting the two, and
the whole being known as the Mary J. Drexel Home and Philadelphia
Mother-house of Deaconesses.

A visit to the Home convinced me that the regulations of the house, the
work of the sisters, and the devotion to duty that characterize the
mother-houses in Germany rule also in this home in the New World. The
imposing entrance hall with the great stair-way, the floor and stairs of
white marble, the wide halls and spacious reception-rooms and offices
seemed at first almost incongruous surroundings for the modest active
deaconesses, some of whom were busy in the hospital wards, others
hanging clothes on the line, and others occupied in duties within the
building. But place and environments are only incidental matters; the
spirit within is the determining quality; and a conversation with the
_Oberin_ (head deaconess) and the rector left me with the persuasion
that the spirit of earnest devotion to God and humanity is the
main-spring of duty in this house.

The arrangement of the rooms for the sisters is similar to that at
Kaiserswerth; each consecrated sister has a small apartment simply
furnished for her own use. The older probationers are divided two and
three in a room. Those who have recently entered are placed in two large
rooms, but here every one has her own four walls--even if they are only
made by linen curtains. When Elizabeth Fry first visited Kaiserswerth,
among the arrangements that she at once recognized and commended was
that by which each deaconess was given the privacy of her own apartment.
In the deaconess houses that are so rapidly springing up in different
parts of the United States this provision ought to be guarded with care,
for a life that is so constantly drawn out in ministrations to others
should have some moments of absolute privacy upon which no one can
intrude.

There are at present thirty-two deaconesses at the Philadelphia
Mother-house, twenty of whom are probationers. The house was admitted to
the Kaiserswerth Association, and will henceforth be represented at the
Conferences. The direction is vested in a rector and head deaconess,
neither of whom can be removed except on just cause of complaint. The
distinctive dress is black, with blue or white aprons, white caps and
collars. There is one addition to their garb which Fliedner would have
looked upon with disfavor, and that is a cross--worn by the sisters from
the time they are fully accepted as deaconesses.

The first consecration took place in the beautiful chapel of the Home,
January 13, 1889, when three deaconesses were accepted as members of the
order.

For those who desire to form a good conception of the deaconess
institutions as they are conducted in Germany, a visit to the
Philadelphia Mother-house of Deaconesses will be fruitful of valuable
suggestions.[79]

In July, 1887, a Swedish Lutheran pastor in Omaha sent a probationer to
Philadelphia to be trained as a sister for a deaconess house to be
established in that central city of the United States. In 1888 four
others joined her, and the building of a hospital and deaconess home is
now progressing by the generous support of all classes of
philanthropists in Omaha. A deaconess home has also recently been
founded by Norwegian Lutherans in South Brooklyn, L. I.

In the German Reformed Church a layman endeavored in 1866 to arouse
interest in the deaconess office. The Hon. J. Dixon Roman, of
Hagerstown, Md., at Christmas gave five thousand dollars to the
congregation, and with it sent a proposition to the consistory that
three ladies of the congregation should be chosen and ordained to the
order of deaconesses, with absolute control of the income of said fund
for the purposes and duties as practiced in the early days of the
Church.[80] This, and the action of the Lebanon Classis in 1867,
requesting the synod "to take into consideration the propriety of
restoring the apostolic society of deaconesses," seem to have been the
only steps taken by those connected with this denomination.

In the Protestant Episcopal Church of America the bishop of Maryland
first instituted an order of deaconesses in connection with St. Andrew's
Parish, Baltimore, Md. Two ladies gave themselves to ministering to the
poor, and, with the sanction and approval of the bishop, a house was
obtained and given the name of St. Andrew's Infirmary. In 1873 there
were four resident deaconesses and four associates.[81] An early report
of the infirmary says: "The deaconesses look to no organization of
persons to furnish the pecuniary aid required by the demands of their
position. Their first efforts have been for the destitute and sick. At
the home they minister daily to the suffering and destitute sick
wherever found; some requiring only temporary medical aid and nursing;
others, whom God has chastened with more continuous suffering,
requiring, in their penury, constant care and continual ministration."
There is also under their charge a church school for vagrant children,
and one also for the children of those comfortably situated in life.

The "Forms for Setting Apart Deaconesses," the "Rules for
Self-Examination," and the "Rules of Discipline" in the order of
deaconesses in Maryland are largely patterned after the Kaiserswerth
rules. In truth, the general questions for self-examination in regard to
external duties, spiritual duties to the sick, the conduct of the
deaconesses or sisters to those whom they meet, and the means for
improving in the duties of the office are in many cases selected, and
but slightly altered, from the series prepared by Pastor Fliedner.[82]
The influence of the devout German pastor is indelibly stamped upon the
deaconess cause in whatever denomination it has developed during the
nineteenth century.

In 1864 the deaconesses of the Diocese of Alabama were organized by
Bishop Wilmer. Under the supervision of the bishop the three deaconesses
with whom the order originated were associated in taking charge of an
orphanage and boarding-school for girls. In 1873 there were five
deaconesses, one probationer, and two resident associates.[83]

