Fourth, from the 28th, _v._ 9: Sixth, from the 51st, _vv._ 10 and 11.
The First couplet is that which anticipates the First Collect.

The Second couplet agrees with the Vulgate (Latin), and Septuagint
(Greek) Versions of the Psalms.  Our Bible and Prayer Book Psalms
follow {133} the Hebrew division of the verse: _Save, Lord: let the
King hear us when we call_.  The couplet in this place, being taken
from the Sarum Service, as a prayer for the King and people, was left
in its old form, when the correction was made in the Psalms.

In the Third couplet '_endue_' means 'clothe.'

In the Fifth couplet the Respond appears to allege the want of earthly
helps as the reason why we ask God to give us peace.  Since it is
obviously impossible that this is the meaning, it will be well to
enquire what other meaning there may be.  The last verse of the 4th
Psalm has the same thought; _I will lay me down in peace, and take my
rest: for it is thou, Lord, only, that makest me dwell in safety_.  If
the word only be omitted, the reason appears at once to be that God's
protection suffices to assure us of safety.  The introduction of the
word, _only_, adds the thought that no other protection would suffice.
The same two thoughts are united in the Respond _Because there is none
other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God_.  It is as though we
said, 'Give us Peace, because thou hast the power; and we trust no
other power.'

This couplet was the Antiphon, in the Day Hours, to both the collects
for Peace; and must be taken as including both peace from "the assaults
of our enemies," and "that peace which the world cannot give."  It is
suitable both to a time of External Peace, and also to a time when war,
with Peace for its object, is raging round us: the assaults, also, of
temptation are at times disturbing to our peace, in the sense which is
involved in this couplet.

The Sixth Couplet belongs to the Third Collects {134} which ask for
spiritual guidance, and spiritual light--_Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God_.


B. The Collects.

The Books formerly used in Church.

In a passage of the Prayer Book Preface of 1549, which was not struck
out until the last Revision in 1662, it was said that "by this order
the Curates shall need none other books for their public service, but
this book and the Bible."  The simplification of the Services has made
it possible for everyone to find his way easily through the Prayer
Book.  The progressive inventions of printing, and of fine paper, have
made it possible for him to have the books always with him.

Before the reign of Edward VI. the Services, though printed, were not
contained in one book.  Before the invention of printing the books were
of necessity numerous.  We may mention some of them.

A book of Lessons--Legenda; of Antiphons--Antiphonarium; of Psalms--the
Psalter: these were required for the Day Hours.  As an abbreviation of
them, sufficient for practical purposes, the Breviary was arranged.  A
portable form of it was called Portiforium.  The Breviary was printed
in four volumes on the Continent, but in England had only a Winter
Volume and a Summer Volume.

For the Occasional Services,--the Services which mark the great events
of a Christian's life, beginning with Baptism and ending with Burial,
they had the Manual.

{135}

For the Holy Communion, they had the Missal; including (1) the Gradual,
which was an Antiphoner, or book of the musical parts of the Service;
(2) the Lectionary, or book of the Epistles; (3) the Evangelistarium,
or book of the Gospels; and (4) the Sacramentary.  The Sacramentary
contained, amongst other things, the Collects.

We have already referred to the combination and simplification of the
Breviary Services, which have given us our Morning and Evening Prayer.
We must now observe that many of our Collects come from the
Sacramentaries.


Three celebrated Sacramentaries.

Three of the Sacramentaries deserve here special mention.

I. Gregory the Great, who was Pope of Rome from 590 to 604, was the
author of one of them.  The English Church owes him gratitude for
sending missionaries to this country at a time when the older British
Church was deficient in missionary zeal: and we must here notice our
debt to him for a number of our best-known collects, as well as other
improvements in the Services.  Canon Bright gives a list of 32 or 33
taken from Gregory's Book.  Some of them may perhaps have been added
after Gregory's time; for it is often difficult to distinguish between
the original passages of an ancient Service-book and the additions
which were quickly made to it.

Twenty-eight Collects in that list are in our book amongst the Epistles
and Gospels.  Besides these there are: one in the Baptism
Service--_Almighty and {136} immortal God_: the first part of _We
humbly beseech thee_ in the Litany: _O God, whose nature and property_
in the Occasional Prayers: _Prevent us, O Lord_ at the end of the
Communion Service.

II. The Sacramentary of Gelasius (who was Pope of Rome 492 to 496) had
provided much material which Gregory adopted.  From this ancient source
we have our _Second Collect, for Peace_ in the Morning Service; and the
_Third Collect, for Grace_: the _Second Collect, for Peace_ in the
Evening Service: the _Third Collect, for Aid_: the Collect _for the
Clergy and People: Assist us mercifully_, at the end of the Communion
Service: the Confirmation Collect, _Almighty and everlasting God_: a
Collect in the Visitation Service: _O Lord we beseech thee_, in the
Commination: and 21 of those which are placed with the Epistles and
Gospels.

III. We go back still further for seven of the Sunday Collects, which
are taken from the Sacramentary of Leo the Great (Pope of Rome, 440 to
461).

Thus, five-sixths of our Sunday Collects are from these three
Service-books: although we do not purpose here to say much of the
Collects used in the Communion Service, and ranking as the "First
Collects" of Morning and Evening Prayer, we think it useful to note
their derivation from the 5th and 6th centuries.  Even those which are
not so derived owe their form and manner to the same models.

This last remark applies to all the prayers which have the Collect
form.  We may suppose that, in the years which preceded Leo the Great,
the Collects were being made.  Perhaps the dignity of their {137}
diction grew by the survival of the simplest and best; by the falling
away of superfluous words; and of words of effort: in any case the
absence of small auxiliary words, in Latin sentences, contributed much
to their tone of modest dependence on God, as well as to their poetic
force.

To take an illustration, our Second Collect at Mattins is translated
from the following Gelasian Collect: _Deus auctor pacis et amator, Quem
nosse vivere, Cui servire regnare est, protege ab omnibus
impugnationibus supplices tuos; ut qui defensione tua fidimus, nullius
hostilitatis arma timeamus: Per &c_.

These 27 Latin words are equivalent to the 51 English words which we
use.  We do not, however, suggest that the tone has been altered in the
translation.  On the contrary, our Translators had so learnt the right
tone of the old prayers, that they not only translated them and the
tone, into a language of a very different sort; they also composed new
prayers, in English, which rank with the old ones, and have the same
great excellences.  The Collects for Easter Eve, and Christmas Day, may
be taken as good examples of this.


What then are the characteristics which we must expect in a Collect?

1. It has three simple parts: (_a_) the Name of God; (_b_) what we ask;
(_c_) our appeal to Christ's advocacy.

2. It makes no effort to instruct the congregation, but speaks with
simplicity and directness, to Him who knows all things.

{138}

3. It asks for grace and help for our souls, whereby we may do what is
right.

Other prayers imitate Collects in one or more of these respects; and
may be called Collects, though not satisfying all the conditions.


The Three parts of a Collect.

Our Lord taught us (St John xiv. 13, 14; xv. 16; xvi. 23-26) to ask God
in His name.  A Collect is a prayer made on that model.  It has three
parts:

  (_a_) God is addressed; and
  (_b_) petition made,
  (_c_) in the Name of Jesus.

(_a_) God is addressed.  This may be expressed in one word, or expanded
into a sentence.  It is always the reason for our prayer, that God is
able and willing to hear us: every name of God when named by His
children is an appeal to Him.

When we expand the address, we do so in order to include a claim, to be
heard because some quality in God has a special relation to that which
we are about to ask.  Because God loves peace, we can ask Him for
Peace: because He is merciful, we can ask Him for forgiveness: because
He gave at Pentecost, we can ask Him for the same gift on Whitsun Day.
Thus the name of God at the beginning of a Collect often includes some
title upon which we build our hope.

(_b_) What we ask.  This may be simple, or complex: it is Simple when
we ask for something without saying anything of the means, or the
results, {139} of our obtaining it: Complex, when we ask for some thing
in order that we may also have something else.

(_c_) Appeal to Christ's Advocacy.  Our claim upon God is "in the name"
of Jesus Christ.  Here again we vary the thought in agreement with the
petition: sometimes it is His mediation, sometimes His might, or His
love, which we mention: but not haphazard--the words are chosen to suit
what has been asked for.

One variety of this part deserves special mention--when we claim the
Saviour's advocacy, by words which recognise Him as One of the Blessed
Trinity.  When His Godhead is thus mentioned, an ascription of praise
is often added.


Origin of the word 'Collect.'

It is impossible to speak with confidence about the origin of the word
Collect.  We find in old Services both Collecta and Collectio.  It
might be conjectured that these were references to Books of Collects
bearing those names as their titles.  But the explanations which have
been offered for a thousand years, though very various, do not include
that as a possibility.  Some derive it from people,

  (1) collected for worship:
  (2) collected in the unity of the Church:
  (3) having collectedness of mind.

Others from:

  (4) the sense collected from Scripture:
  (5) the desires collected from the congregation.

{140}

Canon Bright[1] decides in favour of (1) as the explanation of
_Collecta_, and (5) as that of _Collectio_, preferring the former as
the source of our English word _Collect_.

Canon Bright quotes Alcuin the Northumbrian boy, the York Scholar
(735-804), who became the most learned man in Europe, and the friend,
adviser, and teacher, of the great Emperor Charlemagne.  Alcuin derived
the word from _Collecta_, an assembly for worship.


The Morning and Evening Collects.

The First Collect is the Collect of the Day.  The Preface (last rubric
before the Table of Lessons) orders that the Collect "appointed for the
Sunday shall serve all the week after, where it is not in this Book
otherwise ordered."  The Book 'orders otherwise' for Saints' Days, and
at such special times as Christmas, Ash-Wednesday, Good Friday, Easter
Even, but has omitted, by some accident, to provide for the two days
after Ascension Day, for the week days between The Epiphany and the
First Sunday after, and for the three days after Ash-Wednesday.

A rubric at the beginning of the _Collects, Epistles, and Gospels_
provides that the Collect for a Sunday, or for a Holy Day having a
Vigil or Eve, shall be said at the Evening Service next before.

We have said something of the source of these Collects: their detailed
consideration belongs to a {141} book on the Communion Service, or on
the Epistles and Gospels.

The Second Collect, both at Mattins and Evensong, is a Collect for
Peace.  Both are taken from the same chapter of Prayers for Peace in
the Gelasian Sacramentary.

The Morning Collect, desiring that our trust in God, and our
fearlessness, may be strengthened by continual knowledge of God's
protection, addresses Him as the author and lover of peace, and also as
the One whom we know and serve, and thereby have life and freedom.

_Standeth our eternal life_.  Notice the phrase standeth in as a
substitute for is.  We could not have said _whose knowledge is eternal
life_, because of the momentary doubt whether it referred to the
knowledge which God has, or to the knowledge which we have of Him.  By
the use of an idiom not now in common use, we express the belief taught
by the Saviour's words S. John xvii. 3.

Notice also the phrase _whose service is perfect freedom_: here the
Latin original has _whom to serve is to reign_.  Our eagerness to do
God's Will is, on the one hand, a service or bondage to Him; but, on
the other hand, it is what makes us masters of ourselves, and, in the
spiritual sense, kings (1 Cor. iv. 8; Rev. i. 6).

The prayer for defence from external assault has for its real motive
the attainment of trust and fearlessness.

The Evening Collect for Peace asks more plainly for spiritual peace; in
relation to (1) the tumults {142} occasioned in our consciences by
disobedience to God's commands, (2) the tumults occasioned in our lives
by outward interference.  For (1), we appeal to God as the author of
good and holy desires within us: for (2), we appeal to Him as the
counsellor who helps us against our enemies.  For both, we appeal to
Him who enables us, and others, to do what is just.

The Third Collect in the Morning is styled a Collect _for Grace_.
Because He is Almighty and Everlasting; because He is our Father and
our God and Lord; and, in particular, because He has brought us to the
beginning of the day; we ask Him to keep us from harm, and sin, and
danger, as the day goes on.

The corresponding Evening Collect is styled a Collect _for Aid against
all Perils_.  Accepting the figure suggested by the close of the day,
we ask God to defend us from the perils and dangers of darkness.  The
light which we seek is evidently inward and spiritual light; the
defence, in like manner, a defence from spiritual perils, though not
excluding the others: cf. Psalm xviii. 28: xxvii. i.


C. The other Prayers.

The change from the Three Collects to the Three Prayers which follow
may be softened by the Anthem, (or Hymn), which comes between.  The
spiritual gifts, desired in the Collects, are the qualities which guide
the lives of men.  When we pray that we may have a good King, or a good
Bishop, or a good People, we have evidently passed from the general to
the particular; from that which is within us to that which is external.

{143}

The Prayer for the King was inserted in 1559.

_Health and wealth_=To be hale or whole, and to be well.  They are
Saxon words which include all prosperity of body and condition.

The Prayer for the Royal Family was inserted in 1604.  The persons
mentioned by name have been the Consort of the Sovereign, the Queen
Dowager, and the next King and Queen.  Thus in Queen Anne's reign,
Princess Sophia was mentioned until she died, eight months before the
Queen.

The Prayer for the Clergy and People.  This is, in the Gelasian
Sacramentary, a prayer in a Monastery; or, in a private house.
Afterwards, the persons for whom it was said, were "an abbat or his
congregation"; then Bishops and their congregations; and finally,
Curates (i.e. the Clergy in _charge_ of parishes) were introduced in
1544.  In Titus ii. 11 _The grace of God bringeth salvation_, the word
'healthful' is translated differently, but the phrase is the same as
here.

_the continual dew of thy blessing_: see Ps. cxxxiii. 3, where the
consecration of Aaron suggested Hermon (=consecration), and called up
thoughts of the dew and the clouds, running and floating from its
