with the daughter of Maurice of Saxony he sought to assure himself of
the support of the German Protestant princes, while at the same time
he was intimately connected with the Huguenots of France, and was on
terms of the closest friendship with Counts Egmont and Horn, both of
them, though for different reasons, hostile to Philip II. For William
and for many of his abettors religion was but a secondary issue,
provided only that by means of a religious revolution the power of
Spain could be overthrown. Cardinal Granvelle, the minister of the
Duchess of Parma,[2] who was then regent of the country, was a strong
man and a dangerous opponent, for whose removal the party of William
of Orange strove with all their might. They succeeded at last in 1564,
but despite all their efforts they could not prevent the publication
of the decrees of the Council of Trent. They met together in the
following year (1565) and formed the union known as the Compromise of
Breda, nominally for the preservation of their constitutional rights
but in reality to promote a political and religious rebellion. Many
earnest Catholics unaware of the motives that inspired the leaders of
this movement lent them their support. Having strengthened themselves
by negotiations with some of the Protestant princes of Germany, the
revolutionary party presented themselves before Margaret of Parma at
Brussels to demand redress (1566). During the course of the interview
Count de Berlaymont referred to them as a crowd of "gueux" or beggars,
and this was the name they adopted to designate their party (/Les
Gueux/).

Though they professed themselves willing to maintain the Catholic
religion the friends of William of Orange had strong leanings towards
Protestantism. Calvinist preachers flocked in from France; Calvinist
communities began to be formed; and in districts where the party found
itself powerful enough to do so, attacks were made on Catholic
churches and Catholic worship. These outrages served to indicate the
real tendency of the movement, and to drive into the opposite camp
many Catholics who had joined the party merely to secure redress of
political grievances. The Duchess of Parma, having failed to put an
end to the disturbances by friendly negotiations, determined to employ
force against the rebels. She was completely successful. William of
Orange fled to Germany, and Counts Egmont and Horn surrendered
themselves to the mercy of the king (1567). Had Philip II. known how
to take advantage of this victory he might have put an end to
Calvinism in the Netherlands, for as yet the vast majority of the
inhabitants were at heart loyal to the Catholic church.

But instead of coming to make a personal appeal for the allegiance of
his subjects and of trying to win over the malcontents by a policy of
moderation Philip II., more concerned for the suppression of heresy
than for the maintenance of Spanish rule, sent the Duke of Alva[3]
(1567-72) with an army of ten thousand men to punish the offenders and
to wipe out all traces of Calvinism. Alva was a soldier who had
distinguished himself on many a field against the Turks and against
France. His character is sufficiently indicated by the title "the iron
duke" given him by those who knew him best. He had no faith in
diplomacy or concession. For him martial law was the only means of
reducing rebels to subjection. The Duchess of Parma, unwilling to
share the responsibility of government with such an associate,
petitioned for her recall, and the Duke of Alva was appointed regent
of the Netherlands. Two leaders of the rebellion, Counts Egmont and
Horn, were tried and put to death (1568), as were also many of their
followers. The goods of the rebels were confiscated, soldiers were
quartered on the districts which were supposed to be sympathetic with
the movement, and martial law became the order of the day. But the
cruel measures adopted by the Duke of Alva did not put an end to the
rebellion in the Netherlands. On the contrary, the contempt shown by
him for the constitution of the country and the rights of individual
citizens, the excessive taxation, and the license given to the
soldiers in their treatment of civilians served only to embitter the
issue and to drive even moderate men into the path of rebellion.
William of Orange, backed by his brother, Louis of Nassau, made
descents upon the country, while vessels manned by their supporters
set themselves to do as much harm as possible to Spanish trade. With
the aid of England they managed to capture the city and port of Briel
(1572). Several of the northern states threw off the yoke of Spain and
acknowledged William of Orange as their ruler, so that in a short time
the Provinces of Holland and Zeeland were practically lost to Philip
II. William of Orange tried to obscure the religious nature of the
campaign by proclaiming religious freedom, but his followers could not
be restrained. The Catholic churches were attacked, the clergy were
expelled, and in 1572 nineteen priests were martyred for the faith at
Gorcum. Holland and Zeeland went over completely to Calvinism, nor
were the southern provinces, which were still Catholic, contented with
the rule of Alva. Driven to desperation by his taxation and
unconstitutional policy they formed a league with the followers of
William of Orange to put an end to Spanish rule in the Netherlands.
Philip II. began to realise that he had been unfortunate in his
selection of a governor. A deputation that was sent from the
insurgents was received kindly, and Alva's resignation of his office
was accepted.

In his place Don Louis Requesens was sent as governor of the
Netherlands (1573-5). Though inferior to Alva in military skill he was
much superior to him in the arts of diplomacy and conciliation. He
withdrew promptly the financial decrees that had caused such general
discontent, yielded to most of the demands made by the people, and
offered a general amnesty to those who would return to their
allegiance. It required all the skill of William of Orange to prevent
the submission of his adherents. Disappointed by the removal of the
grievances that had provoked a national uprising, he was forced to
have recourse more and more to the religious issues in order to
maintain his power. He proclaimed himself the protector and champion
of Calvinism, and as such he could still count on the aid of the
northern provinces. Unfortunately, too, at the very time when the
success of his policy of mildness seemed assured, Requesens died
leaving it to his successor to complete his work.

Don Juan of Austria, the natural son of Charles V., who had won renown
throughout the world by his annihilation of the Turkish fleet at
Lepanto, was appointed in his place. Before his arrival the southern
and northern provinces had bound themselves together in the
Pacification of Ghent (1576). Don Juan was obliged to accept the terms
of the Pacification and to dismiss the Spanish troops before his
authority would be recognised. William of Orange, secure in the north,
determined to occupy the southern provinces, but his public profession
of Calvinism and the religious intolerance of his followers prevented
a combined national effort. The Catholic nobles of the Walloon
provinces objected to the Protestant campaign that was being carried
on in the name of liberty, and showed themselves not unwilling to come
to terms with Don Juan. The latter, only too glad to meet them half-
way, issued a very conciliatory decree (1577), which secured him the
support of many of the Catholic party, and partly by force, partly by
negotiation he succeeded in winning back much of what had been lost.

On the death of Don Juan (1578) Alexander Farnese, son of the former
regent Margaret of Parma, was appointed his successor. Being something
of a statesman as well as a soldier he lost no opportunity of
endeavouring to break the power of the Prince of Orange. He devoted a
great deal of his energies to the work of detaching the southern
provinces, which still remained Catholic, from the northern, which had
gone over to Calvinism. The intolerance of the Calvinists and their
open violation of the religious freedom guaranteed to all parties
tended to the success of his plans. During his term of office Belgium
returned its allegiance to Spain, and this step put an end to the
hopes entertained by the Calvinists of winning that country to their
side. Meanwhile the northern provinces were entirely in the hands of
William of Orange. In 1579 the five provinces Holland, Zeeland,
Friesland, Geldern, and Zutphen bound themselves together by a solemn
compact in the Union of Utrecht under the name of the United
Provinces, and practically speaking established a Dutch republic. They
agreed to make common cause in war and in peace, and appointed William
of Orange as Stadtholder for life. A short time later (1581) William
of Orange, notwithstanding all his proclamations regarding religious
liberty, forbade the public exercise of the Catholic religion, and
refused to allow the new Archbishop of Utrecht to take possession of
his See. In these circumstances nothing remained for the Pope except
to appoint a vicar-apostolic to take charge of the religious interests
of the Catholics, who formed two-fifths of the population of Holland,
but even the vicar-apostolic was soon banished from the country.

In 1584 William of Orange was assassinated, and his son Maurice was
appointed to succeed him. The English Government anxious to strike a
blow at Spain encouraged the Dutch to continue the war, and despatched
troops to their assistance. After the defeat of the Spanish Armada the
situation was much more favourable to the rebels, and at last in 1609
a twelve years' truce was concluded. On the expiration of the truce
the war was renewed without any very striking success on either side.
Finally in the Peace of Westphalia (1648) the independence of the
Dutch republic was acknowledged by Spain. From the very beginning of
the religious revolt in the Netherlands Calvinism was the sect most
favoured by the people, as is evidenced by the /Confessio Belgica/ in
1562. The University of Leyden decided in its favour, as did also the
Synods of Dordrecht in 1574 and 1618. The Catholic minority in Holland
were treated with the greatest severity, but in spite of all the
efforts to induce them to change their faith many of the districts
remained completely Catholic.

The Catholic provinces, which remained true to Spain and to the
Catholic Church, suffered very severely from the long-drawn-out
struggle, but despite the ravages of war they were soon the centre of
a great religious, literary and artistic revival. The University of
Louvain, founded in 1425, developed rapidly under the generous
patronage of the civil rulers. During the sixteenth century it was
recognised as an important centre of learning whither scholars flocked
not merely from the Low Countries but from all parts of Europe.
Throughout the Reformation struggle Louvain and Douay, the latter of
which was founded in 1562 by Philip II. to assist in stemming the
rising tide of Calvinism, remained staunch defenders of Catholic
orthodoxy, though the unfortunate controversies waged round the
doctrines of Baius and Jansenius did something to dim the glory of the
university to which both belonged. The Jesuits, too, rendered
invaluable service to religion and learning, particularly the men who
hastened to offer their services to Father van Bolland in his famous
/Acta Sanctorum/. Nor can it be forgotten that it was in these days
Catholic Belgium gave to the world the great Flemish school of
artists, amongst whom must be reckoned such men as Rubens, Van Dyck,
and Jordaens.
                              ----------

[1] Lacheret, /L'evolution religieuse de Guillaume le Taciturne/,
    1904.

[2] Rachfal, /Margareta von Parma/, 1898.

[3] /Vita Ferdinandi Toletani, ducis Albani/, 1669.



                              CHAPTER IV

                       THE COUNTER-REFORMATION

For more than thirty years the new religious movement continued to
spread with alarming rapidity. Nation after nation either fell away
from the centre of unity or wavered as to the attitude that should be
adopted towards the conflicting claims of Rome, Wittenberg, and
Geneva, till at last it seemed not unlikely that Catholicism was to be
confined within the territorial boundaries of Italy, Spain, and
Portugal. That the world was well prepared for such an outburst has
been shown already,[1] but it is necessary to emphasise the fact that
the real interests of religion played but a secondary part in the
success of the Protestant revolt. Luther, Calvin, Zwingli, and Knox
may be taken as typical of the new apostles, and however gifted and
energetic these men may have been, yet few would care to contend that
either in their own lives or in the means to which they had recourse
for propagating their views they can be regarded as ideal religious
reformers.

Protestantism owed its success largely to political causes, and
particularly in the case of Lutheranism to its acknowledgment of the
principle of royal supremacy. At its inception it was favoured by the
almost universal jealousy of the House of Habsburg and by the danger
of a Turkish invasion. If attention be directed to the countries where
it attained its largest measure of success, it will be found that in
Germany this success was due mainly to the distrust of the Emperor
entertained by the princes and their desire to strengthen their own
authority against both the Emperor and the people; in Switzerland to
the political aspirations of the populous and manufacturing cantons
and their eagerness to resist the encroachments of the House of Savoy;
in the Scandinavian North to the efforts of ambitious rulers anxious
to free themselves from the restrictions imposed upon their authority
by the nobles and bishops; in the Netherlands to the determination of
the people to maintain their old laws and constitutions in face of the
domineering policy of Philip II.; in France to the attitude of the
rulers who disliked the Catholic Church as being the enemy of
absolutism, and who were willing to maintain friendly relations with
the German Protestants in the hope of weakening the Empire by civil
war; in England, at first to the autocratic position of the sovereign,
and later to a feeling of national patriotism that inspired Englishmen
to resent the interference of foreigners in what they regarded as
their domestic affairs; and in Scotland to the bitter rivalry of two
factions one of which favoured an alliance with France, the other, a
union with England. In all these countries the hope of sharing in the
plunder of the Church had a much greater influence in determining the
attitude of both rulers and nobles than their zeal for reform, as the
leaders of the so-called Reformation had soon good reason to recognise
and to deplore.

Protestantism had reached the zenith of its power on the Continent in
1555. At that time everything seemed to indicate its permanent
success, but soon under the Providence of God the tide began to turn,
and instead of being able to make further conquests it found it
impossible to retain those that had been made. The few traces of
heresy that might have been detected in Italy, Spain, and Portugal
disappeared. France, thanks largely to the energy of the League and
the political schemes of Cardinal Richelieu, put an end to the
Calvinist domination. Hungary and Poland were wrested to a great
extent from the influence of the Protestant preachers by the labours
of the Jesuits. Belgium was retained for Spain and for Catholicity
more by the prudence and diplomacy of Farnese than by the violence of
Alva; and in the German Empire the courageous stand made by some of
the princes, notably Maximilian of Bavaria, delivered Austria,
Bohemia, Bavaria and the greater part of Southern Germany from
Protestantism.

Many causes helped to bring about this striking reaction towards
Catholicism. Amongst the principal of these were the reforms initiated
by the Council of Trent, the rise of zealous ecclesiastics and above
all of zealous popes, the establishment of new religious orders,
especially the establishment of the Society of Jesus, and finally the
determination of some of the Catholic princes to meet force by force.
Mention should be made too of the wonderful outburst of missionary
zeal that helped to win over new races and new peoples in the East and
the West at a time when so many of the favoured nations of Europe had
renounced or were threatening to renounce their allegiance to the
Church of Rome.
                              ----------

[1] Chap. I.


                      (a) The Council of Trent.

  Le Plat, /Monumentorum ad historiam concilii Tridentini
  spectantium amplissima collectio/, 7 vols., 1781-5. Theiner, /Acta
  genuina S. oecumenici Concilii Tridentini/, etc., 1874. /Concilium
  Tridentinum Diariorum, Actorum, Epistularum, Tractatuum Nova
  Collectio Edidit Societas Goerresiana/, vols. i., ii., iii.
  (/Diariorum/), iv., v. (/Actorum/), 1901-14. Pallavicino, /Istoria
  del Concilio di Trento/, 3 vols., 1664. Maynier, /Etude historique
  sur le concile de Trent/, 1874. Mendham, /Memoirs of the Council
  of Trent/, 1834. Marchese, /La riforma del clero secondo il
  concilio de Trento/, 1883. Deslandres, /Le concile de Trente, et
  la reforme du clerge/, 1906. /Canones et decreta sacrosancti
  oecumenici concilii Tridentini/.

For more than a century and a half reform of the Church "in its head
and members" was the watchword both of the friends and the enemies of
religion. Earnest men looked forward to this as the sole means of
stemming the tide of neo-paganism that threatened to engulf the
Christian world, while wicked men hoped to find in the movement for
reform an opportunity of wrecking the divine constitution that Christ
had given to His Church. Popes and Councils had failed hitherto to
accomplish this work. The bishops had met at Constance and Basle, at
Florence and at Rome (5th Lateran Council), and had parted leaving the
root of the evil untouched. Notwithstanding all these failures the
feeling was practically universal that in a General Council lay the
only hope of reform, and that for one reason or another the Roman
Curia looked with an unfavourable eye on the convocation of such an
assembly. Whether the charge was true or false it was highly
prejudicial to the authority of the Holy See, and as a consequence of
it, when Luther and his followers appealed from the verdict of Leo X.
to the verdict of a General Council, they evoked the open or secret
sympathy of many, who had nothing but contempt for their religious
innovations. Charles V., believing in the sincerity of their offer to
submit themselves to the judgment of such a body, supported strongly
the idea of a council, as did also the Diets held at Nurnberg in 1523
and 1524.

The hesitation of Adrian VI. (1522-3) and of Clement VII. (1523-34) to
yield to these demands was due neither to their inability to
appreciate the magnitude of the abuses nor of their desire to oppose
any and every proposal of reform. The disturbed condition of the
times, when so many individuals had fallen away from the faith and
when whole nations formerly noted for their loyalty to the Pope
threatened to follow in their footsteps, made it difficult to decide
whether the suggested remedy might not prove worse than the disease.
The memory, too, of the scenes that took place at Constance and Basle
and of the revolutionary proposals put forward in these assemblies,
made the Popes less anxious to try a similar experiment with the
possibility of even worse results, particularly at a time when the
unfriendly relations existing between the Empire, France, and England
held out but little hope for the success of a General Council. As
events showed the delay was providential. It afforded an opportunity
for excitement and passion to die away; it helped to secure moderation
in the views both of the radical and conservative elements in the
Church; and it allowed the issues in dispute to shape themselves more
clearly and to be narrowed down to their true proportions, thereby
enabling the Catholic theologians to formulate precisely the doctrines
of the Church in opposition to the opinions of the Lutherans.

Clement VII. (1523-34), one of the de' Medici family, succeeded to the
Papacy at a most critical period in the civil and religious history of
Europe. The time that he spent at the court of his cousin, Leo X., and
the traditions of his family and of his native city of Florence made
it almost impossible for him to throw himself into the work of reform
or to adopt the stern measures that the situation demanded. Instead of
allying himself closely with Charles V. or Francis I. of France, or
better still of preserving an attitude of strict neutrality towards
both, he adopted a policy of vacillation joining now one side now the
other, until the terrible sack of Rome by the infuriated and half-
savage soldiery of Germany forced him to conclude an agreement with
the Emperor. During the earlier years of Clement VII.'s reign the
German people, Catholic as well as Lutheran, demanded the convocation
of a general or at least a national council, and their demands met
with the approval of Charles V. The naturally indolent temperament of
the Pope, the fear that the eagerness for reform might develop into a
violent revolution, and the danger that a council dominated by the
Emperor might be as distasteful to France and England as dangerous to
the rights and prerogatives of the Holy See, made him more willing to
accept the counsels of those who suggested delay. When peace was at
last concluded between the Pope and the Emperor (1529) Charles V. had
changed his mind about the advisability of a General Council, having
convinced himself in the meantime that more could be done for the
cause of peace in his territories by private negotiations between the
different parties.

It was only on the accession of Paul III. (1534-49) that a really
vigorous effort was made to undertake the work of reform. The new
Pope, a member of the Farnese family, was himself a brilliant
Humanist, a patron of literature and art, well known for his strict
and exemplary life as a priest, and deservedly popular both with the
clergy and people of Rome. His one outstanding weakness was his
partiality towards his own relatives, on many of whom he conferred
high positions both in church and state. In justice to him it should
be said, however, that the position of affairs in Rome and in Italy
made such action less reprehensible than it might seem at first sight,
and that he dealt severely with some of them, as for example, the Duke
of Parma and Piacenza, once he discovered that they were unworthy of
the confidence that had been reposed in them. He signalised his
pontificate by the stern measures he took for the reform of the Roman
Curia, by the appointment of learned and progressive ecclesiastics
like Reginald Pole, Sadoleto, Caraffa, and Contarini to the college of
cardinals, and by the establishment of special tribunals to combat
heresy.

After a preliminary agreement with the Emperor, Paul III. convoked the
General Council to meet at Mantua in 1537; but the refusal of the
Lutheran princes to send representatives, the prohibition issued by
Francis I. against the attendance of French bishops, and the
unwillingness of the Duke of Mantua to make the necessary arrangements
for such an assembly in his territory unless under impossible
conditions, made it necessary to prorogue the council to Vicenza in
1538. As hardly any bishops had arrived at the time appointed it was
adjourned at first, and later on prorogued indefinitely. Negotiations
were, however, continued regarding the place of assembly. The Pope was
anxious that the council should be held in an Italian city, while
Charles V., believing that the Lutherans would never consent to go to
Italy or to accept the decrees of an Italian assembly, insisted that a
German city should be selected. In the end as a compromise Trent was
agreed upon by both parties, and the council was convoked once more to
meet there in 1542. The refusal of the Lutherans to take part in the
proposed council, the unwillingness of Francis I. to permit any of his
subjects to be present, and the threatened war between France and the
Empire, made it impossible for the council to meet. Finally, on the
conclusion of the Peace of Crepy (1544), which put an end to the war
with France, the council was convoked to meet at Trent in March 1545,
and Cardinals del Monte, Reginald Pole, and Marcello Cervini were
appointed to represent the Pope. When the day fixed for the opening
ceremony arrived, a further adjournment was rendered imperative owing
to the very sparse attendance of bishops. The First Session was held
on the 13th December 1545, and the second in January 1546. There were
then present in addition to the legates and theologians only four
archbishops, twenty-one bishops, and five generals of religious
orders.

These two preliminary sessions were given over almost entirely to a
discussion of the procedure that should be followed. In the end it was
agreed that the legates should propose to the council the questions on
which a decision should be given, that these questions should be
examined by committees of bishops aided by theologians and jurists,
that the results of these discussions should be brought before a full
congregation of the bishops, and that when a decision had been agreed
to the formal decrees should be promulgated in a public session. The
novel method of voting by nations, introduced for the first time at
Constance and Basle, was rejected in favour of individual voting, a
definitive vote being allowed only to bishops, generals of religious
orders and abbots (one vote to every three abbots). Procurators of
absent bishops were not allowed to vote, though later on a special
concession was made in favour of some German bishops detained at home
by the serious religious condition of their dioceses. The legates were
anxious that the dogmatic issues raised by the Lutherans should be
dealt with at once, while the Emperor was strongly in favour of
beginning with a comprehensive scheme of reform. By this time he had
made up his mind to put down his opponents in Germany by force of
arms, and he believed that if nothing were done in the meantime to
widen the breach the defeat of the Lutheran princes might make them
more willing to take part in the council. As a compromise it was
agreed that doctrine and discipline should be discussed
simultaneously, and, hence, at most of the public sessions two decrees
were published, one on matters of faith, the other on reform (/De
Reformatione/).

It was only at the 4th public session (8th April 1546) that the first
doctrinal decree could be issued. Since the Lutherans had called in
question the value of Tradition as a source of divine revelation, and
had denied the canonicity of several books accepted hitherto as
inspired, it was fitting that the council should begin its work by
defining that revelation has been handed down by Tradition as well as
by the Scriptures, of which latter God is the author both as regards
the Old Testament and the New. In accordance with the decrees of
previous councils a list of the canonical books of the Scriptures was
drawn up. Furthermore, it was defined that the sacred writings should
not be interpreted against the meaning attached to them by the Church,
nor against the unanimous consent of the Fathers, that the Vulgate
Version, a revised edition of which should be published immediately,
is authentic, that is to say, accurate as regards faith and morals,
and that for the future no one was to print, publish, or retain an
edition of the Scriptures unless it had been approved by the local
bishop.

The next subject proposed for examination was Original Sin. The
Emperor showed the greatest anxiety to secure a delay, and at a hint
from him several of the Spanish bishops tried to postpone a decision
by prolonging the discussions and by raising the question of the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin. That the Fathers of Trent
were not opposed to this doctrine is clear enough from the decrees
they formulated, but the majority of them were of opinion that purely
domestic controversies among Catholic theologians should be left
untouched. In the fifth general session (17th June 1546) it was
defined that by his transgression of the commandment of God the head
of the human race had forfeited the sanctity and justice in which he
had been created, and had suffered thereby in both soul and body, that
in doing so he had injured not merely himself but all his descendants,
to whom Original Sin is transmitted not by imitation merely but by
propagation, that the effects of this sin are removed by the sacrament
of Baptism, necessary alike for adults and infants, and that the
concupiscence, which still remains in a man even after baptism has
produced its effects, is not in itself sinful. It was declared,
