
Chapter XIII.


 Showing That Jesus Christ Is The True Book Of Life, And That His Poverty
              Teaches Us To Despise The Glory Of The World.


    _Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was
    rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
    poverty might be rich._--2 COR. 8:9.


All who believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, are written "in the book
of life" (Phil. 4:3), or as the Lord expresses it, "in heaven." Luke
10:20. This shall be made manifest in that great day, when the Lord will
"confess their names before his Father, and before his angels." Rev. 3:5.
But besides this, the Lord Jesus himself is a most complete Book of a
truly Christian life: he being, as the word and wisdom of the Father, made
man, and come into the world to teach us by his life and death; and by his
conduct and conversation, to set a pattern before us for our imitation.

2. The whole of his life, from his tender infancy to his death, was made
up of nothing but a continual series of crosses and afflictions; insomuch
that he took hardly any step without the inseparable attendance either of
a pressing poverty, or of great contempt, or of most exquisite pains and
sufferings: and into these three heads the entire extent of the life of
Christ may be fitly resolved.

3. The poverty which the Lord endured, may be considered again under a
threefold aspect. In the first place, he was poor in relation to outward
things. This he himself declared: "The foxes," says he, "have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay
his head." Matt. 8:20.

4. This indigence in worldly goods was attended by another, which was a
poverty of friends. Nothing was more visible in his birth than meanness
and poverty. He was born at Bethlehem, the least among the cities of
Judah, and of a mother that was destitute of all wealth and worldly
greatness. Luke 2:4, 7. Nor did he ever court the favor and friendship of
the great and wealthy of this world. It is true, that Lazarus of Bethany
was his friend, the Evangelist taking particular notice, that the Lord
_loved him_, and thought him worthy of the title of his _friend_ (John
11:3, 5, 11, 36); but this friendship was not founded on any worldly
advantage which the Lord expected from him, but on that faith, whereby he
was induced to believe, that Jesus was really the true Messiah.

5. The third degree of the Lord's poverty, was the state of his
humiliation, whereby, laying aside the _form of God, he humbled himself,
and made himself of no reputation_. Phil. 2:6, 7. He thereby entered into
the depth of our misery. He was wearied in the journeys he undertook, when
he "went about doing good" (Acts 10: 38); but particularly, when he healed
multitudes of sick and diseased, that continually crowded to him from all
parts, and surrounded him often to that degree, that he could not so much
as eat bread, and even his very friends thought him beside himself. Mark
3:20, 21. He fulfilled also what was said by the prophet, and is repeated
in the Gospel: "Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses"
(Isa. 53:4; Matt. 8:17); never withdrawing from any hardship or
approaching calamity, never shrinking under the burden of poverty, or
cruel mockings, or unjust reproaches, or other evils, though they were
sharp and numerous. And whereas he might have been served by all the
creatures of God, and waited on by legions of angels, yet he dispensed
with all this glory, and did not exert that sovereign power which he
possessed. He suffered his head to be torn by thorns, his hands to be
bound, his sacred body to be scourged, his hands and feet to be nailed to
the cross, his side to be pierced with a spear. All this he freely
allowed, though it was in his power to prevent it, and with one word to
restrain all creatures from inflicting an injury on him.

6. In a word, for our sakes, he made himself subject to all creatures. He
took upon him the form of a servant, that by his lowliness, he might
repair our losses, and reinstate us in that sovereign dominion over all
the creatures, which we had lost. He rose from the dead again, and gained
a perfect conquest at last, thereby to purchase for us an everlasting
victory. He suffered himself to be tempted by the devil (Matt. 4:1, 8),
hurried about by his malice, tormented by his instruments, the Jews,
fastened to the cross by their cruelty; and all this he underwent, in
order to rescue mankind from the power of the devil and all his
subordinate tools and agents.

7. Thus the Strongest became weak; the Almighty infirm; the most Glorious,
became most despicable; the most Beautiful, most abhorred and hated; the
most Exalted, most exposed himself to temptations of all kinds, to
sufferings and difficulties, to pains and hardships. Hereby he designed to
check and put to shame our sinful tenderness and effeminacy. We are, alas!
so tender and delicate that the smallest cross is now complained of as an
insufferable burden, and a little trouble and toil undergone for the sake
of God and our neighbor, seems a sufficient plea why men should start back
into the smooth way, and forsake the Lord; whereas he sends such trials
upon men for the purpose of promoting thereby the recovery of their own
souls, and the glory of his name.

8. Thus the Lord laid aside for a while the form of God. But this was not
all. He did no less lay aside the use of the divine wisdom which resided
in him. His conversation with others was plain and easy; and he behaved
himself like a man _who had not learned letters_, as the Jews expressed
it. John 7:15. He did not assume to himself the wonted formalities of a
great doctor, or of an acute reasoner and disputer. Neither did he act
like men that value themselves on account of their parts, skill, polite
learning, and high descent. Nothing was more visible in his life and
conduct than that quiet serenity of mind which he enjoyed in the midst of
all the storms of the world. This was attended, however, by a divine
power, an unaffected holiness of manners, an unfeigned charity, meekness,
and humility. He made use of plain and easy terms when he "taught the way
of God in truth" (Matt. 22:16); therefore he was despised by the proud
Jews as an unlearned man. Thus the eternal WISDOM of God, speaking through
the prophets of old, was cast aside as folly, and the true light of souls
rejected as deception: all which may serve to instruct us not to overvalue
ourselves upon our parts and abilities; but to consider that they are not
given us for the gratification of pride; and to employ them solely for
advancing the glory of God, and the good of our fellow-creatures.

9. This simplicity of our Lord was manifested herein also, that he made no
display of his glory and majesty. So great was his condescension, that he
freely conversed with sinners. He did eat and drink with them; and this
for no other reason, but to complete thereby the great work for which he
was sent, which was, to "seek and to save that which was lost." Luke
19:10. It was on this account that he was so grievously defamed with a
multitude of odious names by his enemies, who called him "a gluttonous
man, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners" (Luke 7:34): and at
another time, they exclaimed against him as a Samaritan, that had a devil.
John 8:48. And, at last, he suffered them to crucify him between two
malefactors, as if he were the greatest criminal, whereas he then bore our
transgressions.

10. Now he might have gained a greater repute than John himself, who,
according to the Lord's own testimony, was a "burning and a shining
light." John 5:35. But he readily renounced any such honor, thereby to
give a check to all superficial pretenders to piety, who are too apt to
value themselves on account of an outward show of religion: though those
that busy themselves so much about form and appearance, may have but
little of the life and power of God within them.

11. In short, the Lord forsook all that is lofty and grand in the world.
He was a king, and yet would be subject to kings and magistrates, nay, to
Joseph and his mother, though they were so mean and indigent. "He went
down with them to Nazareth, and was subject unto them." Luke 2:51. He was
Lord over all, and yet when he came into the world, "He came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister" (Matt. 20:28), clothing himself in the
attire of poverty and meanness. He was the great and wise Prophet, and
chose disciples of the lowest rank, plain and simple people. And when it
was in his power to behave himself as a Lord and Master in the small
company of his followers, yet did he even there divest himself of that
right, being "among them as one that serveth." Luke 22:27. He assumed no
lordlike air over them, but chose rather to be a master in life and
doctrine, than to have any other distinguishing character of grandeur and
pre-eminence. Thus when he taught the duty of obedience, he showed at the
same time a pattern of obedience in his own conduct. When he endeavored to
instil into his disciples a sense of humility, of patience, of subjection
to their superiors, and of other Christian virtues; he practised them
first himself, that so his own example might have the greater influence
upon the lives of others. Being Head and Master, he thought it becoming
his character to be chief also in bearing affronts, reproaches, injuries,
poverty, misery, and in performing the most humble services, even such as
that of washing his disciples' feet. John 13:5. Thus he proved a Master,
Head, and Teacher, not in doctrine only; but in life, in example, and
practice.

12. Alas! how great is our folly! Our Head despised worldly honor, and lo!
we are in pursuit of it. He submitted to crosses and trials, and we shrink
back at the sight of them. He became obedient unto death; and we seek
liberty, so that we may follow our own will. But this does not agree with
the example which the Lord has set before us, nor with the spiritual
maxims contained in the Book of Life, which he has left us for imitation.

13. Consider, therefore, O man, whether the way wherein thou walkest
agrees with that excellent way wherein thy Lord and Master walked himself.
If thou despisest the narrow way of Jesus, and followest the way of the
world, then know certainly that thy way, though smooth and pleasing for a
while, will end in utter destruction at last! And thus the first part of
Christ's life of sorrow and poverty has been described.




Chapter XIV.


Showing How Christ, By The Shame And Contempt Which He Endured, And By His
   Self-Denial, Teaches Us To Despise The Honor And Glory Of The World.


    _He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
    acquainted with grief._--ISA. 53:3.


The second head of the life of poverty of Christ, is the contempt which he
endured from the world. After thou hast read over and seriously considered
the lesson of _poverty_ exhibited by the Lord, take also a view of the
deep and unaffected _humility_, which was so eminently seen in his whole
life and conduct. Never did he catch at the applause of men; never was he
actuated by ambition, or any thirst after temporal honor and greatness: on
the contrary, whenever men offered to bestow honors and praises upon him,
he refused them, both by word and by deed: never did he accept of any
honor from men; nay, not even when "they would take him by force to make
him a king." John 6:15. On the other hand, with what inexpressible
humility did he bear all the insults, the reproaches, and calumnies with
which his enemies loaded him? He was execrated as a Samaritan, and his
miracles were maliciously ascribed to the power of Beelzebub. John 8:48;
Matt. 12:24. The sound doctrine which he brought down from heaven, was
denounced as blasphemy; and he who taught it, was everywhere insulted by
foul and uncharitable censures, and such base lies and slanders as the
malice of men could contrive. He was betrayed and sold; he was denied and
buffeted; he was spit upon and crowned with thorns; he was derided and
scourged; he was smitten, and sentenced to death; he was rejected, and
condemned to undergo the ignominious "death of the cross." Phil. 2:8. He
was forsaken by God and men; and, in fine, being stripped of all, was
executed in the midst of scandalous malefactors, hanging on the tree like
one accursed. Gal. 3:13. He was made the common gazing-stock of all his
enemies, and derided by all. His prayers were turned into ridicule; his
garments were parted by lot; and at the approach of the very pangs of
death, he had nothing wherewith to refresh himself but vinegar mingled
with gall. Matt. 27:34. At last, when all was finished, he expired on the
cross, amid the reproaches, hatred, and indignation of the world; his body
was pierced with a spear, and he made his grave with the wicked. John
19:34; Isa. 53:9. Nay, his enemies continued to fume with rage and malice,
even now when he had given up the ghost; and called him a deceiver. Matt.
27:63. Being risen at last from the dead, and triumphing over his enemies;
they boldly denied the truth of his resurrection. Thus was the Lord, in
the beginning, progress, and end of his ever-blessed life, "despised and
rejected, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief."

2. In the course of our Lord's life, there is not only displayed to us the
abounding treasure of redemption gained by Christ; but it is also most
clearly demonstrated, that in this scene of suffering, he is our great
teacher and master, our prophet and shepherd, our instructor, light, and
constant monitor; that also we, by looking unto him, may learn to despise
earthly pomp and greatness; and by closely adhering to him, like true
members to their head, "grow up into him in all things" (Ephes. 4:15),
being rendered conformable unto his life, "and rooted and grounded in his
love." Ephes. 3:17.

3. But when our lives are contrary to the life of him who is designed to
be our Head; when in our actions, words, and endeavors, we do not entirely
aim at God's glory, but our own; it is more than evident, that Christ does
not live in us, but rather the prince of this world. It is then plain,
that we have not yet learned to love Christ, and that we are not yet loose
from the various ties of this world; for "whatsoever is born of God,
overcometh the world" (1 John 5:4); and so of course is not overcome by
it. Nor does such a one any longer love the world; for "if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him" (1 John 2:15); and
consequently, that of Christ must be absent likewise. For the whole life
of Christ teaches us how to die unto the world. Consider then the
beginning, together with the progress and conclusion of his life, and
remember the profound HUMILITY with which he bore the contempt and
reproaches of all those that love the world.




Chapter XV.


 Showing How We Should, Through Christ, Bear And Overcome The Trials And
                          Contempt Of The World.


    _Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
    himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds._--HEB. 12:3.


It is a most moving complaint uttered by the Messiah: "I became a reproach
unto them; when they looked upon me, they shaked their heads. Help me, O
Lord my God; O save me according to thy mercy; that they may know that
this is thy hand; that thou Lord hast done it. Let them curse, but bless
thou; when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame; and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle. I will greatly praise the Lord
with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude. For he shall
stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn
his soul." Ps. 109:25-31.

2. This pathetic complaint of the Lord our Redeemer, every Christian ought
to represent to himself as a mirror, in which to behold the life of Christ
under the cross, together with that of all the saints in general. This way
of the cross has been copiously set forth in the Book of Psalms, in order
to render it the more familiar to us, and to teach us betimes, that "we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God." Acts 14:22.
Such a consideration gives present ease and comfort under the contempt and
reproaches incident to the true followers of Christ, and accustoms them to
a conformity to the image of Christ (Rom. 8:29): which as it is one of the
greatest honors our Master bestows on his disciples; so it is by the world
abhorred and loathed, just as a healing medicine is by a distempered and
delicate palate. This conformity is, however, the grand duty of a
Christian, inuring him to bear his Master's reproach (Heb. 13:13) and
abject image in time, that he may also hereafter bear his glorious image
in eternity. Phil. 3:21.

3. Now, as the 109th Psalm above-mentioned, contains a prayer of Christ
poured out in the midst of his sufferings; so it mentions, in the latter
part, three kinds of trouble more particularly, with which the Lord found
himself oppressed.

4. In the first place, the Lord complaineth of a vehement anxiety of
heart, declared in this manner: "I am poor and needy, and my heart is
wounded within me." Ver. 22. Behold, what complaints this holy, this
eminent Person is reduced to! And what is the reason of them? Surely, to
acquaint us in the most affectionate terms, with all that he hath suffered
for our sake. He says, "I am poor;" and lo! thou toilest to get estates,
to hoard up riches; and yet when thou hast them, thou art still poor and
discontented in the possession of them. He says, "I am needy;" and thou, O
man, art entirely bent upon thy ease, prosperity, and fulness of bread! He
complains, "my heart is wounded within me;" how unreasonable is it then, O
man! that thou shouldest desire to be humored and gratified in all thy
vain and carnal propensities! Now, if nothing will awaken in thee a love
of the cross of Christ, let at least the consideration of the sacredness
of the afflicted Person, infinitely exalted above thee, work thee into a
ready compliance with his life. Such a consideration will give thee ease
and patience under any grief that may attend thee, and make thee relish
better those pure and untainted pleasures which will succeed the cross.
Therefore, think with thyself in this manner: "I am now put to trouble and
anxiety of heart; but the same befell also my Lord and Master, whose very
soul was surrounded with sorrows so heavy and acute, with pains so great,
that nothing of what I shall ever undergo can equal them." However, the
Lord, after his sufferings, entered into everlasting joy; after contempt,
into never-fading glory; through death into life; and through hell into
heaven. And thus will it be with the sincere followers of the Lord, to
whom their crosses will prove but as so many advances to a more excellent
glory, and their affliction will be the avenue to everlasting bliss and
happiness.

5. The Lord continues his complaint thus: "I am gone like the shadow when
it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the locust. My knees are weak
through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness." Ps. 109:23, 24. A most
expressive description of the common frailty of human nature! What is a
shadow, but a mere nothing, an empty lifeless appearance? To such an
abject lowliness, to such an inconceivable degree of humiliation, the Lord
suffered himself to be reduced whilst he dwelt among us! He who is life
and light itself, and the bottomless fountain of life and happiness, is
exposed to labor and infirmities; and should not men hereby learn so much
humility at least, as to think themselves far more emphatically as
shadows, or as nothing, than the Lord of life himself? At the same time,
it is to be remembered that the Lord here refers to his state of
humiliation alone, for, in his own glory he is our Lord and our life. He
says, "I am tossed up and down as the locust." The Lord had no settled
habitation upon earth, as men of the world have. He was in a constant
pilgrimage towards that kingdom which cannot be moved. For this reason he
is said to have only _dwelt or tabernacled_ among us (John 1:14), and is
here compared to a locust, which having no abiding place, is fearful, and
tossed to and fro with every wind. Nahum 3:17; Exod. 10:19. And even in
this our blessed Saviour has left us a pattern, to walk as he walked; and
since we have no continuing city here, to seek one to come, which "hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is God." Heb. 11:10. What is farther
added of the weakness of his knees, and the failing of his flesh,
abundantly appeared about the time of his passion, when his "strength was
dried up like a potsherd" (Ps. 22:15); and this may be a monitor to us
under bodily diseases and infirmities. Should we complain of a fit of
sickness, when the Lord of life pined away into weakness, and languished
in misery? What matters it, how languid, weak, and neglected our body be,
if our soul and spiritual life be but vigorous and sound? The soul ought
to "eat that which is good, and delight itself in spiritual fatness" (Isa.
55:2), that so it may grow "strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might." Ephes. 6:10.

6. Thirdly, the Lord complains of the great contempt he underwent in this
world, in order to stop us in our pursuit after vain honor, pride, and
self-esteem. "I became," says he, "a reproach unto them: when they looked
upon me they shaked their heads." What indignity is there like unto this!
But the Anointed of the Lord endured it all for no other end, than to
rescue mankind from eternal scorn and infamy; for man having become a
scorner and hater of God, Christ was designed to make atonement for so
heinous a sin, by the extreme contempt which he willingly endured.
However, as the Lord by his humble submission to the contempt of the
world, has laid a mighty obligation on all Christians to be his followers
therein; so the considerations here annexed, may be of use for supporting
a man under sufferings of that nature.

7. First consider, that in bearing the contempt of the world, thou bearest
no less than the very image of Christ, and followest him who is thy Head
and Master. Rom. 8:17.

8. (2) To be contemned and disrespectfully used by the world, is of great
efficacy for improving thyself in true humility; a virtue which finds
favor with God. "For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the
humble." 1 Peter 5:5.

9. (3) Thy suffering of reproaches for the sake of truth, is an evidence
that thou art ranked with that cloud of witnesses, who in all ages have
been made "as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things,"
and so continue to be esteemed "unto this day." 1 Cor. 4:13.

10. (4) Remember that those that are come out "of great tribulation, shall
be before the throne of God" at last (Rev. 7:14), and be there "confessed
before the angels of God." Luke 12:8; 1 Cor. 4:5.

11. (5) Of what consequence is it how contemptuously the world uses thee,
since thou art not to rise in the last day (as many shall), "to shame and
everlasting contempt" (Dan. 12:2), (the Lord having redeemed thee from
that), but to honor and glory!

12. (6) Remember that God does not withhold his grace from thee in this
world. When the world frowns, God favors. When men withdraw their
kindness, then God confers his mercy. For this purpose the Psalmist prays:
"Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy; that they may
know that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, hast done it." Ps.
109:26, 27. That is to say: As the Lord removed at last his Son from the
cross, from all the labors of his soul, from all the insults of his
enemies, and crowned him with glory in heaven; so will he deal with thee
also, if thou continuest faithful in bearing the cross, and all the
injuries of a profane world. All shall see and shall know, that it is the
Lord's hand that hath done it.

13. (7) It was God himself who suffered his beloved Son to be thus
contemned, reproached, and reviled, according to the words of the Psalm:
"Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face."
Ps. 69:7. Remember, therefore, that the same God, who gave a bitter cup to
his dear Son, hath also allotted thee thy trials, to humble thee, and to
know what is in thy heart.

14. (8) Be sure that the Lord will change all the undeserved reproaches
thrown upon thee, into so many blessings, and in his own time pour shame
and confusion upon the scoffers. This is expressed in the following verse:
"Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed; but
let thy servant rejoice." Ps. 109:28. Nay, if the wicked curse ever so
much, yet "shall the curse causeless never come" (Prov. 26:2), as plainly
appears from Balaam's attempt, who could not "curse, whom God had not
cursed." Numb. 23:8. Whereas, whosoever feareth the Lord, it shall go well
with him at the last, and he shall find favor in the day of his death. The
same blessing is bestowed on Abraham, and on all those that walk in the
steps of his faith: "I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curseth thee." Gen. 12:3. And in another place we have this encouragement:
"Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings." Isa. 51:7. And our Redeemer himself hath declared: "Blessed
are ye, when men shall revile you." Matt. 5:11. And his apostle says: "If
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of
glory and of God resteth upon you." 1 Pet. 4:14.

15. (9) The Lord goes on in the aforesaid Psalm: "I will greatly praise
the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude." Ps.
109:30. Christ now returns thanks to his heavenly Father for the very
crosses and reproaches that were allotted him. This is the temper of every
sincere Christian. He is thankful in the midst of afflictions and
reproaches, particularly when he looks on the hand of that kind Father who
entails all this upon him, but who also delivers him. And truly, the Lord
never inflicts a judgment on any soul, but he affords at the same time
sufficient reason for thanking and blessing him for that affliction. Thus
is gratitude the happy product of crosses and trials. And this
consideration is fit to sweeten the duty of resignation to the will of
God. He that for the love of Christ readily submits to the contempt of a
vain world, shall be honored by God again, both in this world and in the
world to come. There is a time, wherein the Lord "raiseth up the poor out
of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set
him with princes, even with the princes of his people." Ps. 113:7. Surely,
it argues an excellent spirit, when a man for Christ's sake bears the
insults of the wicked, and maintains an unshaken calmness of mind, in the
midst of all the calumnies of the world. This is "the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price." 1 Pet.
3:4.

16. (10) The Psalm concludes, "For he shall stand at the right hand of the
poor, to save him from those that condemn his soul." Ps. 109:31. Here is
comfort sufficient to make a Christian bear up against the hardships and
reproaches he is exposed to in his warfare. It is never said that the Lord
will stand at the right hand of the violent and great ones, of the
oppressors and persecutors; but he will stand at the right hand of the
poor, who being destitute of the arm or support of men, flee to the Lord
alone for help and refuge, as to the sole object of their faith and trust.
Those are "remembered, when he maketh inquisition for blood" (Ps. 9:12);
and those are the afflicted, or the humble, "whose cry the Lord doth not
forget." Tertullian tells us, "We are then absolved by God, when the world
condemns us." For though "the wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh
to slay him; yet will the Lord not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him
when he is judged." Ps. 37:32, 33. Thus will the Lord attend thee, O man!
with a wonderful deliverance, and afford thee reason enough to extol his
name among many, for his marvellous kindness. David himself "had fainted,
unless he had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. Wait, therefore, on the Lord; be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord." Ps. 27:13, 14.
"Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the heart: and then shall every man have praise of God." 1
Cor. 4:5.




Chapter XVI.


  Showing How Christians Are To Seek And Obtain Favor And Glory Through
                            Christ, In Heaven.


    _Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise, etc._--PS. 109:1, etc


This is a prayer of the eternal Son of God. The purport or substance of
this prayer, may be more fully expressed in this manner:

"My Heavenly Father! thou knowest that in this world I have not sought my
own glory, but the glory of thy holy name, and the salvation of all men:
and therefore am I so bitterly persecuted, blasphemed, contemned, and
vilified. Nevertheless, this is my comfort, that thou art my Father, and
that I am thy only begotten Son: lo! this is my glory, in heaven with
thee. And this my glory wilt thou in due time manifest and bring to light;
that by thy glorifying of me, the world may see who it is whom they have
blasphemed and persecuted." John 12:28.

2. Hence we are to learn, that such have the greatest glory and praise in
heaven, who in this world are the most persecuted for righteousness' sake.
This we may gather from the example of our Lord himself. From him, the
true Book of Life, we may learn true wisdom. But that we may the better
understand that his example and holy life are our Book of Life, let us
carefully observe the following considerations: (1) Christ never sought
upon earth his own glory in anything, but accounted it sufficient for him,
that God alone was his glory. So let us, in like manner, reject the empty
glory and praises of this world, in whatever we do; endeavoring only that
God be glorified in us, saying, "Ah, Lord God! give us also such a heart,
even the heart of Christ thy Son, that we may have our glory in _Thee_
alone, and not in _ourselves_; that we may have our glory in heaven, and
not upon earth."

3. (2) It was the highest glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he was the
only begotten Son of God. And for this reason did the world persecute,
vilify, and blaspheme him. Here let our prayer be like this: "Grant us
also, Holy Father, that we may count it our greatest glory and joy, that
we are thy children; that so we may also obtain the eternal enjoyment of
thy love and promise, and may, by virtue of our adoption, come to possess
in thee an everlasting inheritance. Remind us, also, that if the world
hate, envy, reproach, and persecute us, it has done the same to thy dear
and holy child Jesus."

4. (3) It is the glory of the Lord Jesus, that he wrought so many divine
works, that he went about continually doing the most wondrous acts of
grace and beneficence to mankind: and that he did this from pure love
only, and from the highest compassion for the miseries of fallen nature;
although he received nothing but hatred and most heinous ingratitude in
return. "Grant us, blessed God, grateful and faithful hearts, so that we
may be always ready to do good to as many as we possibly can; and that we
may never be deterred from acts of charity, by the unthankfulness of the
world, ascribing not to ourselves, but to thy name only, the glory of all
that we do."

5. (4) It is the highest glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, that out of pure
love, he laid down his life for us; that he purchased us with his own
blood; that he was obedient to the Father, even unto death; that with the
greatest meekness he endured the vilest reproach; and with the utmost
patience, bore the pains of the cross. "O God, our glory, help us, that we
may also overcome our enemy with love; that we may subdue our flesh with
godly obedience; bear the reproach of the world with the meekness and long
suffering of Christ; obtain the victory through patience; and being thus
made strong in the Lord, be more than conquerors through him that loved
us!"

6. (5) The highest glory of the blessed Jesus, is his exaltation to the
right hand of God, and the name given him, which is "above every name;
that, at the name of Jesus, every knee, both in heaven and in earth,
should bow, and all tongues confess him to be their Lord." Phil. 2:9-11.
"Help, O gracious God! that we may esteem it our highest glory to be made
conformable to our ever-blessed Head and Saviour; that so when he shall
hereafter appear in power and majesty, we also may appear with him in
glory, after we have here endured the contempt of the world, and continued
faithful to the end, when every man shall have praise of God." 1 Cor. 4:5;
2 Cor. 4:17.

7. (6) The glory of Christ the Lord is, that he is the only Head of his
Church in general, and of every member thereof in particular; a glorious
King of his people; and an everlasting High priest, making intercession
for us. "Help us with thy grace, O God most gracious, that we may evermore
account it our greatest glory, that we are members of thy Son, and
subjects of his kingdom, and that we may enjoy all the privileges and
benefits purchased by his high-priestly intercession, sacrifice, and
benediction."

8. (7) Another branch of the glory of Christ is, that God has most
wonderfully displayed and magnified his name throughout the whole world:
and has (in opposition to all his enemies, blasphemers, and persecutors,
who would not own him to be the Son of God), in the most public and solemn
manner attested his cause, declared him to be his Son by mighty signs and
wonders, and established faith in his name amongst many nations and
languages. Notwithstanding that God held his peace for a while, and vailed
the glory of his Son under the mystery of the cross; yet did it break
forth the more gloriously like the sun. For, "out of Zion, the perfection
of beauty, God hath shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep
silence." For though God, who is our glory, may seem now and then to be
silent, and to hold his peace when we are insulted and persecuted; yet is
there nothing more certain, than that after the short hour of probation,
he will no longer keep silence, but with a high hand deliver us from the
reproach which we suffered, and "remove his stroke away from us," that we
may rejoice in his salvation. Ps. 39:10. However, "it doth not yet appear
what we shall then be." 1 John 3:2.

9. The conclusion of the whole is this: It is God alone who is to be _our
glory_; it is not the world, nor wealth, nor honor, nor greatness, nor the
arm of flesh, that I may call my glory; but God, and only God, is my
glory! Wherefore, "let not the wise man glory in his wisdom" (as it is
written), "neither let the mighty man glory in his might, nor let the rich
man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he
understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord." Jer. 9:23, 24; 1 Cor.
1:31.




Chapter XVII.


   Showing How We May Through Christ, And After The Example Of All The
                  Saints, Overcome The Calumnies Of Men.


    _Mine enemies reproach me all the day, and they that are mad
    against me are sworn against me._--PS. 102:8.


Among the many crosses and troubles of a Christian, a false and slanderous
tongue is none of the least, as we may evidently see, from the example of
Christ himself, whom the Pharisees, with their envenomed tongues, both in
his life and at his death, did most maliciously sting.

2. Herein the Lord left a pattern of patience to every Christian, who must
not think to escape, since the great Master himself was wounded by
malicious tongues. The more conformable any one is to Christ, and the more
zealously he follows Christ's steps, the more is he also insulted by false
and deceitful tongues. This plainly appears from the example of holy
David, who was tormented by slanderers, as he himself complains in the
following Psalms: 3, 4, 10, 12, 15, 31, 50, 52, 55, 58, 64, 69, 102, 120,
and 140. Indeed, there is no one of the prophets of old who did not have
these deadly arrows shot against him by murderous tongues; for "their
tongue is an arrow shot out: he speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his
mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait." Jer. 9:8. All honest hearts
ought, therefore, to beware of back-biters. As he that toucheth a man
infected with leprosy, or any infectious distemper, must expect to be so
infected; so he that gives ear to lying tongues, too often catches the
same distemper.

3. Now, since a Christian is forbidden to retort evil for evil (Rom.
12:17; Matt 5:39), (this agreeing in no wise with the Christian faith);
there is no other counsel left, but that by a conscience void of offence,
he derives his comfort from those divine oracles with which the Lord has
furnished him for that purpose.

4. (1) Let thy first comfort be the example of Christ and of all the
saints. It fares no worse with us in this respect, than with Christ our
Head, and with all that have ever been most dear to him. Nothing of this
kind has befallen us, which has not been before in all ages undergone by
his followers. And since the examples of others have generally a strong
influence on our lives, and readily suggest themselves to our remembrance
in time of trouble; we ought, therefore, to improve all those instances
into an encouragement to bear our treatment with patience, for the sake of
the joy that usually springs up from the reproach of the cross. Look then
upon the Prince of thy salvation, look upon the lives of all the saints of
old, those who have been the greatest lights in their generation. Consider
the example of Moses, who esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures in Egypt (Heb. 11:26), and who, by reason of the
continual contradictions he underwent, is said to have been a man meek, or
afflicted, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth. Numb.
12:3. And what shall we say of David? He was truly, in his time, the very
mark, as it were, at which all the false tongues in the land shot their
murderous arrows. "Mine enemies," said he, "revile me all the day long:
and they that are mad against me, are sworn together against me." Ps.
102:8. They affronted him daily with the reproach of his misery, turning
him, as it were, into a proverb, and offering him the most heinous
indignity that can be offered to a man. What shall we say of Job? How was
he upbraided by his friends, and grieved with their tongues! And how fell
Daniel, that holy prophet, into an open sepulchre, yea, into a den of
lions! Yet how powerfully did the Lord rescue Moses, Job, and Daniel! All
these are gone before thee, and their examples, if duly considered, will
excite in thee a spirit of holy emulation, and draw thee into the same way
of the cross by which they entered into the kingdom of God. Acts 14:22.
Behold, thy Lord Jesus goeth before thee, pursued with the curses and
revilings of the Pharisees! There goeth Moses before, and the faction of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, following behind, with execrations in their
mouths, and stones in their hands, to rid themselves of him! Numb. 16.
There is David in sore trials, and Shimei behind, cursing his king! 2 Sam.
16:5. And there are the apostles of our Lord, and an unbelieving multitude
behind, stopping their ears, and running madly upon them.

5. (2) It is not enough, however, slightly and superficially to reflect on
the example of the saints; but we must learn also to be _followers_ of
them, when we are tried as they were, and in every tribulation copy after
their meekness and patience. How shall meekness appear, or how shall
patience be exercised, if thou be not contradicted; or if there be none to
deride, slander, or vilify thee? Thou must, therefore, patiently take up
thy cross with them, and meekly follow the Lord Christ in his steps. Thou
art called to _suffer_ with thy Saviour, and not to avenge thyself, not to
return evil for evil, not to revile again being reviled, not to threaten
being slandered, but quietly to commit thy cause "to him that judgeth
righteously." 1 Pet. 2:23. Evil tongues must give an account in the day of
judgment of every _idle_ word which they have spoken. Matt. 12:36. And
this will at the last day prove a burden heavy enough. Leave all,
therefore, to the Lord, to do as he pleaseth, who will not fail to do
right. Recompense and vengeance belong to him alone. Deut. 32:35. Fix
thine eye on the Lord Jesus: "He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet
he opened not his mouth: he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as
a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth." Isa.
53:7.

6. (3) From the examples of the saints, we are, in the next place, to
learn a sovereign remedy, which they made use of against the venom of evil
tongues. This is _prayer_. They prayed, and so they were healed and
comforted. When they were bitterly cursed by their adversaries, they sent
up only their cry to God, saying: "Let them curse; but bless thou." Ps.
109:28; Luke 6:28. Consider the whole Book of Psalms throughout. How did
David defend himself with prayer, as with a wall of iron, against false
tongues! They are all foolish marksmen, who bend their bow against the
innocent; and draw the sword to slay such as are of a right conversation:
for their lies and slanders shall return at last upon their own heads, and
shall enter into their own bowels; as it is written: "Their sword shall
enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken." Ps. 37:15.
All this can be obtained by prayer. Whenever any one prays earnestly
against an evil speaker or a liar, it is as if he wrestled and fought with
him; even as David wrestled with Goliath (1 Sam. 17:48, 49), or as Moses
contended with the Egyptian sorcerers. Ex. 7:12. Here two spirits fight
with each other; that is, the prayer of faith proceeding from the Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Truth; and the spirit of lies proceeding from the
devil, the father of lies. But all these devilish serpents of the
Egyptians shall eventually be subdued, and, as it were, swallowed up by
the divine rod of Moses; that is, by prayer.

7. (4) Another remedy against the poison of a wicked tongue, is the
frequent _reading and meditating upon the Word of God_. This is an
excellent means of consolation and refreshment, whenever a soul is
insulted and pursued by enemies. An upright heart hunted by men of
falsehood and malice, is like a hart, whose thirst increases by being
hunted; and as this pants after the water brooks (Ps. 42:1), so must a
soul in affliction long after the cooling streams of the divine Word, and
thirst for the living waters of grace, thereby to be quickened and
refreshed. For by this word of grace the Lord revives a drooping soul,
speaking to her in a kind and gracious manner. "Blessed are ye," says our
Master, "when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for
great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which
were before you." Matt. 5:11, 12. In this saying of our Lord, there is a
threefold ground of comfort. 1. Blessed are ye. 2. Rejoice. 3. Great is
your reward. Who would not be willing, for the sake of so great and
endless a good, to endure here reproach and persecution for a short
period? Yea, who would not even rejoice, since he is made by this means a
partaker of Christ's sufferings, in order, "that when the glory of Christ
shall be revealed," he may also partake with his Lord in that joy? "If ye
be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of
glory and of God resteth upon you." 1 Pet. 4:13, 14. Remember also, that
"it is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth;" that he "sit
alone and keep silence," when he hath anything laid upon him to bear; yea,
that he "put his mouth in the dust," and wait in hope; and that he "give
his cheek to him that smiteth him," when he is "filled full with reproach.
For the Lord will not cast off for ever." Lam. 3:27-31.

8. (5) Thou art further to learn, that such calumny is a hellish storm,
which soon rises, and soon blows over. As a traveller is not disheartened
at any tempestuous weather he is liable to meet with upon the road, but
provides himself the more against it: so let the spiritual pilgrim never
be cast down by storms and tempests; but let him go on in hope, and
continue faithful to the end of his journey. This has been uniformly the
state of the true church. "O thou afflicted," says the prophet, "tossed
with tempest, and not comforted!" Isaiah 54:11. Is it a "strange" thing
that has happened unto thee? 1 Pet. 4:12. What is more common to a
traveller, than to be overtaken by foul and stormy weather? A persevering
diligence will, notwithstanding, bring him home at last. The world makes
every one a gazing-stock, that looks with concern upon the vain follies of
men, and drops a serious word in favor of virtue. What is to-day the fate
of one good Christian, may to-morrow be the fate of another, according as
the humor of the world works, which allows no one to pass uncensured that
is not in league with it. The best method a Christian can adopt in all
these storms, is to be quiet under them, and to keep his mind free from
anger and bitterness. He that considers every hard word to be a stain on
his character, which ought to be wiped off, will by so doing only render
things worse. Hence it remains, that the most effectual way to stop the
fury of slanderous tongues, is to yield to it for the present, and
patiently wait till time itself shall set things in a better light. He
that will dispute every thing at the sword's point, as it were, is like a
man that is stung by a bee, and being thereby put in a passion, runs
headlong upon the whole hive in order to be revenged, by turning it upside
down. Had he not better have borne it, than feel the smart which must
attend an attempt so rash? The fire of malicious tongues burns the more
fiercely when we seek to quench it by too hasty efforts. An evil tongue is
like that serpent called the Hydra, which, as some tell us, brought forth
seven other heads when, in order to destroy it, you cut off one. Thus a
wicked tongue is so far from being restrained by contradiction, that it
spreads the farther by it, and broaches seven lies instead of one. Whereas
he that is deaf to popular rumors, and is not easily alarmed at every
little noise, will not only better repel the darts of wicked tongues, but
enjoy also an unshaken tranquillity both of soul and body. This is a truly
noble method to overcome the worst of our enemies. He that rejects this
heroic meekness of soul, sets himself entirely out of God's protection,
and whilst he eagerly endeavors to save his name and reputation, must be
the more harassed by the perpetual alarms of malignant tongues.

9. (6) Besides this, there are some other particular reasons, why the Lord
permits his children to be persecuted by virulent tongues. When David in
his sore troubles was cursed by Shimei, he said no more than, "Let him
curse; for the Lord hath bidden him." 2 Sam. 16:11. And what other reason
can be assigned for this, but that the Lord hereby seeks to preserve his
children from exalting themselves above measure, on account of such
eminent gifts as have been conferred upon them; and that they may at the
same time improve themselves in the practice of mutual love, mildness, and
humility? What is said by David of Shimei, namely, that he was bidden to
curse his king, is expressed by Job in more general terms: "He poureth
contempt upon princes." Job 12:21. Now, who is able to fathom all the
mysterious depths of divine judgments? The carnal mind by no means likes
to be reviled, insulted, or undervalued. Pride and self-love so naturally
adhere to us, that they taint all our works and actions. Every one loves
to be extolled, and to be made much of, to be esteemed and admired. Alas!
it is this natural self-love, which having once led man astray, now
propagates nothing but error and folly in the world. It was this self-love
that ruined both Lucifer and Adam, and stripped them of the divine love
and life with which they were once adorned. In order that we may obtain
the victory over this spirit of self-love, and with a view to facilitate
this conquest, the Lord thinks, as it were, with himself: "I will permit a
lying tongue to assail thee, as I formerly permitted Satan to harass my
servants Job and Paul, for their greater humiliation. This slandering
tongue shall be thy devil, thy scourge, thy plague, to buffet thee (2 Cor.
12:7), and help to beat down that proud heart, that haughty look, that
aspiring temper, which, without this curb, would at last carry all before
it." Thus the Lord leaves nothing untried to accustom the soul to that
excellent spirit of humility, and to restrain the spirit of self-love, by
which men become allies to Lucifer, who, endeavoring to have a will of his
own, opposite to that of his Maker, entirely lost his principality, and
that original state in which he was at first created. Jude, ver. 6.

10. (7) Therefore as the Lord is faithful on his side, so he seeks to
convert the venom of impious tongues thrown upon his children, into a
precious medicine, by which to heal that self-love which is fostered
within, and which engenders abundance of other spiritual diseases in the
mind. When the world meditates evil against them, then God brings good out
of the evil. As out of a certain poisonous serpent an antidote is prepared
against poison itself, so God overrules the worst of counsels, and makes
them turn to the greatest good to his children. Thus "all things work
together for good to them that love God." Rom. 8:28. They are taught
thereby to practise one of the noblest of the works of charity, which is,
to "bless their enemies, and to pray for them who despitefully use them."
Matt. 5:44. He that has thus far gained the conquest over corrupt nature,
so as to pray heartily for his enemies, is almost arrived at the sublimest
degree of true evangelical charity, which alone is able to soften our
stubborn hearts into the mild and compassionate heart of Christ, who has
also set us a blessed pattern to follow: "Father!" said he, "forgive them;
for they know not what they do." Luke 23:34. For wherever true love is
rooted in a soul, it will most certainly produce a tender commiseration
towards enemies; who, as the Christian knows, whilst they hate men, render
themselves entirely unfit for any communion with God and Christ, and give
up their hearts to the devil, that great hater of souls. And this should
influence every Christian to commiserate such evil men, who are not of
God, but of their father the devil; and lest they should forever sink into
the jaws of Satan, the Lord commands his people to pray for them, with
this motive annexed to the command: "That ye may be the children of your
Father who is in heaven." Matt. 5:45. What has been said of the overruling
power of God, whereby he converts the venom of lying tongues into a
healing medicine, will more fully appear from the following instances.
Joseph would never have been exalted to the dignity of ruler over the land
of Egypt, had he not fallen under the malicious lashes of a wanton tongue,
and thereby been condemned to prison. Gen. 39:17; 41:40. Had Moses not
been persecuted by the violent accusations of his enemies, and obliged to
flee from the face of Pharaoh (Exod. 2:15), he had never seen the Lord in
the bush, after having led Jethro's flock to Horeb. Exod. 3:2. The
spiteful tongue of Doeg the Edomite, and of other enemies of David (1 Sam.
22:9; Ps. 52), drew many a noble Psalm from the latter. Thus Doeg's
poisonous tongue was David's medicine. The same overruling wisdom of God
appeared for Daniel, when, by the virulence of his accusers, he was cast
into the den of lions, but was most triumphantly exalted again by divine
Providence, for many good and noble ends; his enemies themselves being
made to lay the foundation of his greatness. Dan. 6. Mordecai had the same
experience. His ruin was devised by the murderous tongue of Haman (Esther
3:6); but the Lord returned his wickedness upon his own head, and his
bloody machinations only hastened the destruction of their contriver.
Esther 7:10. Therefore, "commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him,
and he shall bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday." Ps. 37:5, 6. Only endeavor
to be in constant union with the Lord thy God, and to love him with all
thy heart, and then he will direct thy steps. For "when a man's ways
please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him."
Prov. 16:7. If the world be permitted to stain thy reputation here, and to
detract from thy honor, what matters it, provided the Lord dignify thee
with a crown of glory hereafter? It is he that will deliver and honor thee
at last (Ps. 91:15); and it is he that will give thee both grace here, and
glory hereafter. Ps. 84:11.

11. (8) Another comfort in trials of this nature, may be drawn from the
control which the Lord exercises over the hearts of all men. It is he that
"looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth, from the place of his
habitation." He "fashioneth their hearts; he considereth all their works"
(Ps. 33:14, 15); and he "will not deliver thee unto the will of thine
enemies." Ps. 41:2. A man is often transported with rage and malice to
such a degree, that he would bear down all that comes in his way; but a
little while after, you will find that the man is altogether cooled; his
heat is allayed, and he is reduced to such a moderation of temper, as if
he were become quite another man. Nay, how often do we see that a bad man,
designing nothing but spite and malice, is stopped in the midst of his
passionate pursuit, and, as it were, obliged not only to drop his wicked
design, but also to bestow tokens of favor upon the person whom he was
about to affront. This is an operation peculiar to the wisdom of God, who,
by his secret power, often renders abortive the most malicious projects
conceived against his children. Thus the Lord came to Laban, when incensed
against Jacob, and commanded him to "speak not to him; either good or
bad." Gen. 31:24. And Esau, who bore his brother no good will, when he
came within sight of him, must needs run and meet him, embrace him, fall
on his neck, kiss him, and receive him with the most endearing expressions
of love and kindness. Gen. 33:4.

12. (9) Lastly, it is the nature of a malignant tongue, to swell high
suddenly, and by rage and fury to gain universal applause and admiration;
but its downfall is as sudden as its rise. Calumny is like a fire, the
flame of which mounts up to the very sky; but the want of fuel will soon
make it go down again. The reason is, because God, who is the everlasting
Truth, hates a spirit of lies, and cannot endure it. And this is also the
reason, why those that have raised their greatness on no other foundation
than lying and self-conceit, may indeed dazzle the eyes of others for a
season; but when they flatter themselves as fixed in an unshaken
condition, then generally their ruin is ready at hand, and the Lord's
judgment destroys all. Then "the lying lips are put to silence, which
spoke grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous"
(Ps. 31:18); a text which plainly shows, that pride and disdain of others,
are wont to accompany a slandering and lying tongue. But "woe unto thee
that dealest treacherously; when thou shalt make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee." Isa. 33:1. "For
the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity." Ps. 125:3. Though a
treacherous man may go on in quest of more honor and greatness; yet shall
"evil hunt the violent man at last, and overthrow him." Ps. 140:11.

_Sundry consolatory passages, selected from the Psalms, for those who are
assailed by the reproaches of enemies._

13. Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine
head. Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine
enemies upon the cheek-bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
Ps. 3:3, 7.--O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame?
how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing (lying)? But know
that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself; the Lord will
hear when I call unto him. Ps. 4:2, 3.

14. Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man.--There is no faithfulness in their mouth; their
inward part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they
flatter with their tongue. Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by
their own counsels.--But let all those that put their trust in thee
rejoice: let them also that love thy name be joyful in thee. For thou,
Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favor wilt thou compass him as with a
shield. Ps. 5:6, 9, 10, 11, 12.

15. Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be
ashamed suddenly. Ps. 6:10.

16. O Lord, my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me: lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it
in pieces, while there is none to deliver.--Behold, he travaileth with
iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. He
made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made. His
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate. Ps. 7:1, 2, 14, 15, 16.

17. Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy
wings, from the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who
compass me about. Ps. 17:8, 9.

18. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be
saved from mine enemies.--In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried
unto my God; he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before
him, even unto his ears. Ps. 18:3, 6.

19. The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even
mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled
and fell. Though a host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear:
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.--For in the
time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his
tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.--Teach me thy
way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies.--For
false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. Wait on the Lord. Ps. 27:1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 12, 13,
14.

20. But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God. My times are
in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that
persecute me.--Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous
things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.--Oh how great is
thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee; which thou
