not cast out the demon that was lurking in the bottom of the empty pail,
by tracing on it, before pouring in the milk, the sign of the Lord's
cross; and now not enduring, thou seest, the virtue of the sign, he has
quickly fled away in terror, while at the same time the whole of the
vessel has been violently shaken, and the milk spilled. Bring then the
pail nearer to me, that I may bless it.' When the half-empty pail was
blessed, in the same moment it was refilled with milk. At another time,
the saint, to destroy the practice of sorcery, commanded Silnan, a
peasant sorcerer, to draw a vessel full of milk from a bull; and by his
diabolical art Silnan drew the milk. Then Columba took it and
said:--'Now it shall be proved that this, which is supposed to be true
milk, is not so, but is blood deprived of its colour by the fraud of
demons to deceive men; and straightway the milky colour was turned into
its own proper quality, that is, into blood.' And it is added that 'The
bull also, which for the space of one hour was at death's door, wasting
and worn by a horrible emaciation, in being sprinkled with water blessed
by the Saint, was cured with wonderful rapidity.'[190]

And to-day, as in the times of Patrick and Columba, exorcism is
practised in Ireland and in the Western Hebrides of Scotland by the
clergy of the Roman Church against fairies, demons, or evil spirits,
when a person is possessed by them--that is to say, 'fairy-struck,' or
when they have entered into some house or place; and on the Scotch
mainland individual Protestants have been known to practise it. A
haunted house at Balechan, Perthshire, in which certain members of the
Psychical Research Society had taken up summer quarters to
'investigate', was exorcized by the late Archbishop of Edinburgh,
assisted by a priest from the Outer Isles.[191]

Among the nine orders of the Irish ecclesiastical organization of
Patrick's time, one was composed of exorcists.[192] The official
ceremony for the ordination of an exorcist in the Latin Church was
established by the Fourth Council of Carthage, and is indicated in
nearly all the ancient rituals. It consists in the bishop giving to the
candidate the book of exorcisms and saying as he does so:--'Receive and
understand this book, and have the power of laying hands upon demoniacs,
whether they be baptized, or whether they be catechumens.'[193] By a
decree of the Church Council of Orange, making men possessed of a demon
ineligible to enter the priesthood, it would seem that the number of
demoniacs must have been very great.[193] As to the efficacy of
exorcisms, the church Fathers during the first four centuries, when the
Platonic philosophy was most influential in Christianity, are
agreed.[193]

In estimating the shaping influences, designated by us as fundamental,
which undoubtedly were exerted upon the Fairy-Faith through the practice
of exorcism, it is necessary to realize that this animistic practice
holds a very important position in the Christian religion which for
centuries the Celtic peoples have professed. One of the two chief
sacraments of Christianity, that of Baptism, is preceded by a definitely
recognized exorcism, as shown in the Roman Ritual, where we can best
study it. In the Exhortation preceding the rite the infant is called a
slave of the demon, and by baptism is to be set free. The salt which is
placed in the mouth of the infant by the priest during the ceremony has
first been exorcized by special rites. Then there follows before the
entrance to the baptismal font a regular exorcism pronounced over the
child: the priest taking some of his own saliva on the thumb of his
right hand, touches the child's ears and nostrils, and commands the
demon to depart out of the child. After this part of the ceremony is
finished, the priest makes on the child's forehead a sign of the cross
with holy oil. Finally, in due order, comes the actual baptism.[194] And
even after baptismal rites have expelled all possessing demons,
precautions are necessary against a repossession: St. Augustine has said
that exorcisms of precaution ought to be performed over every Christian
daily; and it appears that faithful Roman Catholics who each day employ
holy water in making the sign of the cross, and all Protestants who pray
'lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil', are employing
such exorcisms:[195] St. Gregory of Nazianzus writes, 'Arm yourself with
the sign of the cross which the demons fear, and before which they take
their flight'[196]; and by the same sign, said St. Athanasius, 'All the
illusions of the demon are dissipated and all his snares
destroyed.'[197] An eminent Catholic theologian asserts that saints who,
since the time of Jesus Christ, have been endowed with the power of
working miracles, have always made use of the sign of the cross in
driving out demons, in curing maladies, and in raising the dead. In the
_Instruction sur le Rituel_,[198] it is said that water which has been
blessed is particularly designed to be used against demons; in the
_Apostolic Constitutions_, formulated near the end of the fourth
century, holy water is designated as a means of purification from sin
and of putting the demon to flight.[199] And nowadays when the priest
passes through his congregation casting over them holy water, it is as
an exorcism of precaution; or when as in France each mourner at a grave
casts holy water over the corpse, it is undoubtedly--whether done
consciously as such or not--to protect the soul of the deceased from
demons who are held to have as great power over the dead as over the
living. Other forms of exorcism, too, are employed. For example, in the
_Lebar Brecc_, it is said of the Holy Scripture that 'By it the snares
of devils and vices are expelled from every faithful one in the
Church'.[200] And from all this direct testimony it seems to be clear
that many of the chief practices of Christians are exorcisms, so that,
like the religion of Zoroaster, the religion founded by Jesus has come
to rest, at least in part, upon the basic recognition of an eternal
warfare between good and bad spirits for the control of Man.

The curing of diseases through Christian exorcism is by no means rare
now, and it was common a few centuries ago. Thus in the eighteenth
century, beginning with 1752 and till his death, Gassner, a Roman priest
of Closterle, diocese of Coire, Switzerland, devoted his life to curing
people of possessions, declaring that one third of all maladies are so
caused, and fixed his head-quarters at Elwangen, and later at Ratisbon.
His fame spread over many countries of Europe, and he is said to have
made ten thousand cures solely by exorcism.[201] And not only are human
ills overcome by exorcism, but also the maladies of beasts: at Carnac,
on September 13, there continues to be celebrated an annual fete in
honour of St. Cornely, the patron saint of the country and the saint who
(as his name seems to suggest) presides over domestic _horned_ animals;
and if there is a cow, or even a sheep suffering from some ailment which
will not yield to medicine, its owner leads it to the church door
beneath the saint's statue, and the priest blesses it, and, as he does
so, casts over it the exorcizing holy water. The Church Ritual
designates two forms of Benediction for such animals, one form for those
who are ordinarily diseased, and another for those suffering from some
contagious malady. In each ceremony there comes first the sprinkling of
the animal with holy water as it stands before the priest at the church
door; and then there follows in Latin a direct invocation to God to
bless the animal, 'to extinguish in it all diabolical powers,' to defend
its life, and to restore it to health.[202]

In 1868, according to Dr. Evans, an old cow-house in North Wales was
torn down, and in its walls was found a tin box containing an exorcist's
formula. The box and its enclosed manuscript had been hidden there some
years previously to ward off all evil spirits and witchcraft, for
evidently the cattle had been dying of some strange malady which no
doctors could cure. Because of its unique nature, and as an illustration
of what Welsh exorcisms must have been like, we quote the contents of
the manuscripts both as to spelling and punctuation as checked by Sir
John Rhys with the original, except the undecipherable symbols which
come after the archangels' names:--

  '[C] Lignum sanctae crusis defendat me a malis presentibus
  preateritus & futuris; interioribus & exterioribus [C] [C]
  Daniel Evans [C] [C] Omnes spiritus laudet Dominum: Mosen
  habent & prophetas. Exergat Deus & disipenture inimiciessus
  [C] . [C] O Lord Jesus Christ I beseech thee to preserve
  me Daniel Evans; and all that I possess from the power
  of all evil men, women; spirits, or wizards, or hardness of
  heart, and this I will trust thou will do by the same power
  as thou didst cause the blind to see the lame to walk and
  they that were possesed with unclean spirits to be in their
  own minds Amen Amen [C] [C] [C] [C] pater pater pater Noster
  Noster Noster aia aia aia Jesus [C] Christus [C] Messyas [C]
  Emmanuel [C] Soter [C] Sabaoth [C] Elohim [C] on [C] Adonay
  [C] Tetragrammaton [C] Ag : : [C] Panthon [C] ... reaton
  [C] Agios [C] Jasper [C] Melchor [C] Balthasar Amen [C][C][C]
  [*][J][*][V][*][M][T][S][T][J][T][Mo].[O][*][J][*][Mo][C][C] And by
  the power of our Lord Jesus Christ and His Hevenly Angels
                        being our Redeemer and Saviour from
  Gabriel [_symbols_]   all witchcraft and from assaults of the
  Michail [_symbols_]   Devil Amen [C] O Lord Jesus Christ
  I beseech thee to preserve me and all that I possess from
  the power of all evil men; women; spirits; or wizards
  past, present, or to come inward and outward Amen [C] [C].'[203]

From India Mr. W. Crooke reports similar exorcisms and charms to cure
and to protect cattle.[204] Thus there is employed in Northern India the
_Ajaypal jantra_, i. e. 'the charm of the Invincible Protector,' one of
Vishnu's titles, in his character as the earth-god Bhumiya--in Scotland
it would be the charm of the Invincible Fairy who presides over the
flocks and to whom libations are poured--in order to exorcize diseased
cattle or else to prevent cattle from becoming diseased. This _Ajaypal
jantra_ is a rope of twisted straw, in which chips of wood are inserted.
'In the centre of the rope is suspended an earthen platter, inside which
an incantation is inscribed with charcoal, and beside it is hung a bag
containing seven kinds of grain.' The rope is stretched between two
poles at the entrance of a village, and under it the cattle pass to and
fro from pasture. The following is the incantation found on one of the
earthen saucers:--'O Lord of the Earth on which this cattle-pen stands,
protect the cattle from death and disease! I know of none, save thee,
who can deliver them.' In the Morbihan, Lower Brittany, we seem to see
the same folk-custom, somewhat changed to be sure; for on St. John's
Day, the christianized pagan sun-festival in honour of the summer
solstice, in which fairies and spirits play so prominent a part in all
Celtic countries, just outside a country village a great fire is lit in
the centre of the main road and covered over with green branches, in
order to produce plenty of smoke, and then on either side of this fire
and through the exorcizing smoke are made to pass all the domestic
animals in the district as a protection against disease and evil
spirits, to secure their fruitful increase, and, in the case of cows,
abundant milk supply. Mr. Milne, while making excavations in the Carnac
country, discovered the image of a small bronze cow, now in the Carnac
Museum, and this would seem to indicate that before Christian times
there was in the Morbihan a cult of cattle, preserved even until now,
no doubt, in the Christian fete of St. Cornely, just as in St. Cornely's
Fountain there is preserved a pagan holy well.

It ought now to be clear that both pre-Christian and Christian exorcisms
among Celts have shaped the Fairy-Faith in a very fundamental manner.
And anthropologically the whole subject of exorcism falls in line with
the Psychological Theory of the nature and origin of the belief in
fairies in Celtic countries.


TABOOS

We find that taboos, or prohibitions of a religious and social
character, are as common in the living Fairy-Faith as exorcisms. The
chief one is the taboo against naming the fairies, which inevitably
results in the use of euphemisms, such as 'good people', 'gentry',
'people of peace', _Tylwyth Teg_ ('Fair Folk'), or _bonnes dames_ ('good
ladies'). A like sort of taboo, with its accompanying use of euphemisms,
existed among the Ancients, e. g. among the Egyptians and Babylonians,
and early Celts as well, in a highly developed form; and it exists now
among the native peoples of Australia, Polynesia, Central Africa,
America, in Indian systems of Yoga, among modern Greeks, and, in fact,
almost everywhere where there are vestiges of a primitive culture.[205]
And almost always such a taboo is bound up with animistic and magical
elements, which seem to form its background, just as it is in our own
evidence.

To discuss name taboo in all its aspects would lead us more deeply into
magic and comparative folk-lore than we have yet gone, and such
discussion is unnecessary here. We may therefore briefly state that the
root of the matter would seem to be that the name and the dread power
named are so closely associated in the very concrete thought of the
primitive culture that the one virtually is the other: just as one
inevitably calls up the other for the modern thinker, so it is that, in
the world of objective fact, for the primitive philosopher the one is
equivalent to the other. The primitive man, in short, has projected his
subjective associations into reality. As regards euphemisms, the process
of development possibly is that first you employ any substitute name,
and that secondly you go on to employ such a substitute name as will at
the same time be conciliatory. In the latter case, a certain
anthropomorphosing of the power behind the taboo would seem to be
involved.[206]

Next in prominence comes the food taboo; and to this, also, there are
non-Celtic parallels all the world over, now and in ancient times. We
may take notice of three very striking modern parallels:--A woman
visited her dead brother in Panoi, the Polynesian Otherworld, and 'he
cautioned her to eat nothing there, and she returned'.[207] A Red Man,
Ahak-tah, after an apparent death of two days' duration, revived, and
declared that he had been to a beautiful land of tall trees and
singing-birds, where he met the spirits of his forefathers and uncle.
While there, he felt hunger, and seeing in a bark dish some wild rice,
wished to eat of it, but his uncle would allow him none. In telling
about this psychical adventure, Ahak-tah said:--'Had I eaten of the food
of spirits, I never should have returned to earth.'[208] Also a New
Zealand woman visited the Otherworld in a trance, and her dead father
whom she met there ordered her to eat no food in that land, so that she
could return to this world to take care of her child.[209]

All such parallels, like their equivalents in Celtic belief, seem to
rest on this psychological and physiological conception in the
folk-mind. Human food is what keeps life going in a human body; fairy
food is what keeps life going in a fairy body; and since what a man eats
makes him what he is physically, so eating the food of Fairyland or of
the land of the dead will make the eater partake of the bodily nature
of the beings it nourishes. Hence when a man or woman has once entered
into such relation or communion with the Otherworld of the dead, or of
fairies, by eating their food, his or her physical body[210] by a subtle
transformation adjusts itself to the new kind of nourishment, and
becomes spiritual like a spirit's or fairy's body, so that the eater
cannot re-enter the world of the living. A study of food taboos confirms
this conclusion.[211]

A third prominent taboo, the iron taboo, has been explained by exponents
of the Pygmy Theory as pointing to a prehistoric race in Celtic lands
who did not know iron familiarly, and hence venerated it so that in time
it came to be religiously regarded as very efficacious against spirits
and fairies. Undoubtedly there may be much reason in this explanation,
which gives some ethnological support to the Pygmy Theory. Apparently,
however, it is only a partial explanation of iron taboo in general,
because, in many cases, iron in ancient religious rites certainly had
magical properties attributed to it, which to us are quite unexplainable
from this ethnological point of view;[212] and in Melanesia and in
Africa, where iron is venerated now, the same explanation through
ethnology seems far-fetched. But at present there seem to be no
available data to explain adequately this iron taboo, though we have
strong reasons for thinking that the philosophy underlying it is based
on mystical conceptions of virtues attributed--reasonably or
unreasonably--to various metals and precious stones, and that a careful
examination of alchemical sciences would probably arrive at an
explanation wholly psychological.

Besides many other miscellaneous taboos noticeable in the evidence,
there is a place taboo which is prominent. Thus, if an Irishman cuts a
thorn tree growing on a spot sacred to the fairies, or if he violates a
fairy preserve of any sort, such as a fairy path, or by accident
interferes with a fairy procession, illness and possibly death will come
to his cattle or even to himself. In the same way, in Melanesia,
violations of sacred spots bring like penalties: 'A man planted in the
bush near Olevuga some coco-nut and almond trees, and not long after
died,' the place being a spirit preserve;[213] and a man in the Lepers'
Island lost his senses, because, as the natives believed, he had
unwittingly trodden on ground sacred to Tagaro, and 'the ghost of the
man who lately sacrificed there was angry with him'.[213] In this case
the wizards were called in and cured the man by exorcisms,[213] as
Irishmen, or their cows, are cured by the exorcisms of 'fairy-doctors'
when 'fairy-struck' for some similar violation. The animistic background
of place taboos in the Fairy-Faith is in these cases apparent.

_Among Ancient Celts_

In the evidence soon to be examined from the recorded Fairy-Faith, we
shall find taboos of various kinds often more prominent than in the
living Fairy-Faith.[214] So essential are they to the character of much
of the literary and mythological matter with which we shall have to deal
in the following chapters, that at this point some suggestions ought to
be made concerning their correct anthropological interpretation.

Almost every ancient Irish taboo is connected with a king or with a
great hero like Cuchulainn; and, in Ireland especially, all such kings
and heroes were considered of divine origin, and as direct incarnations,
or reincarnations of the Tuatha De Danann, the true Fairies, originally
inhabitants of the Otherworld. (See our chapter vii.) As Dr. Frazer
points out to have been the case among non-Celts, with whom the same
theory of incarnated divinities has prevailed, royal taboos are to
isolate the king from all sources of danger, especially from all magic
and witchcraft, and they act in many cases 'so to say, as electrical
insulators' to preserve him or heroes who are equally divine.[215]

The early Celts recognized an intimate relationship between man and
nature: unperceived by man, unseen forces--not dissimilar to what
Melanesians call _Mana_--(looked on as animate and intelligent and
frequently individual entities) guided every act of human life. It was
the special duty of Druids to act as intermediaries between the world of
men and the world of the Tuatha De Danann; and, as old Irish literature
indicates clearly, it was through the exercise of powers of divination
on the part of Druids that these declared what was taboo or what was
unfavourable, and also what it was favourable for the divine king or
hero to perform. As long as man kept himself in harmony with this unseen
fairy-world in the background of nature, all was well; but as soon as a
taboo was broken, disharmony in the relationship--which was focused in a
king or hero--was set up; and when, as in the case of Cuchulainn, many
taboos were violated, death was inevitable and not even the Tuatha De
Danann could intercede.

Breaking of a royal or hero taboo not only affects the violator, but his
subjects or followers as well: in some cases the king seems to suffer
vicariously for his people. Almost every great Gaelic hero--a god or
Great Fairy Being incarnate--is overshadowed with an impending fate,
which only the strictest observance of taboo can avoid.[216]

Irish taboo, and inferentially all Celtic taboo, dates back to an
unknown pagan antiquity. It is imposed at or before birth, or again
during life, usually at some critical period, and when broken brings
disaster and death to the breaker. Its whole background appears to rest
on a supernatural relationship between divine men and the Otherworld of
the Tuatha De Danann; and it is very certain that this ancient
relationship survives in the living Fairy-Faith as one between ordinary
men and the fairy-world. Therefore, almost all taboos surviving among
Celts ought to be interpreted psychologically or even psychically, and
not as ordinary social regulations.


FOOD-SACRIFICE

Food-sacrifice plays a very important role in the modern Fairy-Faith,
being still practised, as our evidence shows, in each one of the Celtic
countries. Without any doubt it is a survival from pagan times, when, as
we shall observe later (in chapter iv. 291, and elsewhere), propitiatory
offerings were regularly made to the Tuatha De Danann as gods of the
earth, and, apparently, to other orders of spiritual beings. The
anthropological significance of such food-sacrifice is unmistakable.

With the same propitiatory ends in view as modern Celts now have in
offering food to fairies, ancient peoples, e. g. the Greeks and Romans,
maintained a state ritual of sacrifices to the gods, genii, daemons, and
to the dead. And such sacrifices, so essential a part of most ancient
religions, were based on the belief, as stated by Porphyry in his
_Treatise Concerning Abstinence_, that all the various orders of gods,
genii or daemons, enjoy as nourishment the odour of burnt offerings. And
like the Fairy-Folk, the daemons of the air live not on the gross
substance of food, but on its finer invisible essences, conveyed to them
most easily on the altar-fire.[217] Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, and other
leading Greeks, as well as the Romans of a like metaphysical school,
unite in declaring the fundamental importance to the welfare of the
State of regular sacrifices to the gods and to the daemons who control
all natural phenomena, since they caused, if not neglected, abundant
harvests and national prosperity. For unto the gods is due by right a
part of all things which they give to man for his happiness.

The relation which the worship of ancestors held to that of the gods
above, who are the Olympian Gods, the great Gods, and to the Gods below,
who are the Gods of the Dead, and also to the daemons, and heroes or
divine ancestors, is thus set forth by Plato in his _Laws_:--'In the
first place, we affirm that next after the Olympian Gods, and the Gods
of the State, honour should be given to the Gods below.... Next to these
Gods, a wise man will do service to the daemons or spirits, and then to
the heroes, and after them will follow the sacred places of private and
ancestral Gods, having their ritual according to law. Next comes the
honour of living parents.'[218]

It is evident from this direct testimony that the same sort of
philosophy underlies food-sacrifice among the Celts and other peoples as
we discovered underlying human-sacrifice, in our study of the Changeling
Belief; and that the Tuatha De Danann in their true mythological nature,
and fairies, their modern counterpart, correspond in all essentials to
Greek and Roman gods, genii, and daemons, and are often confused with
the dead.


THE CELTIC LEGEND OF THE DEAD

The animistic character of the Celtic Legend of the Dead is apparent;
and the striking likenesses constantly appearing in our evidence between
the ordinary apparitional fairies and the ghosts of the dead show that
there is often no essential and sometimes no distinguishable difference
between these two orders of beings, nor between the world of the dead
and fairyland. We reserve for our chapter on _Science and Fairies_ the
scientific consideration of the psychology of this relationship, and of
the probability that fairies as souls of the dead and as ghosts of the
dead actually exist and influence the living.


GENERAL CONCLUSION

The chief anthropological problems connected with the modern
Fairy-Faith, as our evidence presents it, have now been examined, at
sufficient length, we trust, to explain their essential significance;
and problems, to some extent parallel, connected with the ancient
Fairy-Faith have likewise been examined. There remain, however, very
many minor anthropological problems not yet touched upon; but several of
the most important of these, e. g. various cults of gods, spirits,
fairies, and the dead, and folk-festivals thereto related (see Section
III); the circular fairy-dance (see pp. 405-6); or the fairy world as
the Otherworld (see chap. vi), or as Purgatory (see chap. x), will
receive consideration in following chapters, and so will certain very
definite psychological problems connected with dreams, and trance-like
states, with supernormal lapse of time, and with seership. We may now
sum up the results so far attained.

Whether we examine the Fairy-Faith as a whole or whether we examine
specialized parts of it like those relating to the smallness of fairies,
to changelings, to witchcraft and magic, to exorcisms, to taboos, and to
food-sacrifice, in all cases comparative folk-lore shows that the
beliefs composing it find their parallels the world over, and that
fairy-like beings are objects of belief now not only in Celtic
countries, but in Central Australia, throughout Polynesia, in Africa,
among American Red Men, in Asia generally, in Southern, Western, and
Northern Europe, and, in fact, wherever civilized and primitive men hold
religious beliefs. From a rationalist point of view anthropologists
would be inclined to regard the bulk of this widespread belief in
spiritual beings as being purely mythical, but for us to do so and stop
there would lead to no satisfactory solution: the origin of myth itself
needs to be explained, and one of the chief objects of our study
throughout the remainder of this book is to make an attempt at such an
explanation, especially of Celtic myth.

Again, if we examine all fairy-like beings from a certain superficial
point of view, or even from the mythological point of view, it is easy
to discern that they are universally credited with precisely the same
characters, attributes, actions, or powers as the particular peoples
possess who have faith in them; and then the further fact emerges that
this anthropomorphosing is due directly to the more immediate social
environment: we see merely an anthropomorphically coloured picture of
the whole of an age-long social evolution of the tribe, race, or nation
who have fostered the particular aspect of this one world-wide
folk-religion. But if we look still deeper, we discover as background to
the myths and the social psychology a profound animism. This animism
appears in its own environment in the shading away of the different
fairy-like beings into spirits and ghosts of the departed. Going deeper
yet, we find that such animistic beliefs as concern themselves
exclusively with the realm of the dead are in many cases apparently so
well founded on definite provable psychical experiences on the part of
living men and women that the aid of science itself must be called in to
explain them, and this will be done in our chapter entitled _Science and
Fairies_.

So far it ought to be clear that already our evidence points to a very
respectable residue in the experiences of percipients, which cannot be
explained away--as can the larger mass of the evidence--as due to
ethnological, anthropomorphic, naturalistic, or sociological influences
on the Celtic mind; and for the present this must be designated as the
_x_ or unknown quantity in the Fairy-Faith. In chapter xi this _x_
quantity, augmented by whatever else is to be elicited from further
evidence, will be specifically discussed.

These points of view derived from our anthropological examination of the
chief parts of the evidence presented by the living Fairy-Faith will be
kept constantly before us as we proceed further; and what has been
demonstrated anthropologically in this chapter will serve to interpret
what is to follow until chapter xi is reached. With this tentative
position we pass to Section II of this study, and shall there begin to
examine, as we have just done with their modern Fairy-Faith, the ancient
Fairy-Faith of the Celts.




SECTION II

THE RECORDED FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER IV

THE PEOPLE OF THE GODDESS DANA (_TUATHA DE DANANN_) OR THE _SIDHE_
(PRONOUNCED _SHEE_)[219]

     'So firm was the hold which the ethnic gods of Ireland had taken
     upon the imagination and spiritual sensibilities of our ancestors
     that even the monks and christianized bards never thought of
     denying them. They doubtless forbade the people to worship them,
     but to root out the belief in their existence was so impossible
     that they could not even dispossess their own minds of the
     conviction that the gods were real supernatural beings.'--STANDISH
     O'GRADY.

     The Goddess Dana and the modern cult of St. Brigit--The Tuatha De
     Danann or _Sidhe_ conquered by the Sons of Mil--But Irish seers
     still see the _Sidhe_--Old Irish MSS. faithfully represent the
     Tuatha De Danann--The _Sidhe_ as a spirit race--_Sidhe_
     palaces--The 'Taking' of mortals--Hill visions of _Sidhe_
     women--_Sidhe_ minstrels and musicians--Social organization and
     warfare among the _Sidhe_--The _Sidhe_ war-goddesses, the
     _Badb_--The _Sidhe_ at the Battle of Clontarf, A. D.
     1014--Conclusion.


The People of the Goddess Dana, or, according to D'Arbois de
Jubainville, the People of the god whose mother was called Dana,[220]
are the Tuatha De Danann of the ancient mythology of Ireland. The
Goddess Dana, called in the genitive Danand, in middle Irish times was
named Brigit.[220] And this goddess Brigit of the pagan Celts has been
supplanted by the Christian St. Brigit[220]; and, in exactly the same
way as the pagan cult once bestowed on the spirits in wells and
fountains has been transferred to Christian saints, to whom the wells
and fountains have been re-dedicated, so to St. Brigit as a national
saint has been transferred the pagan cult rendered to her predecessor.
Thus even yet, as in the case of the minor divinities of their sacred
fountains, the Irish people through their veneration for the good St.
Brigit, render homage to the divine mother of the People who bear her
name Dana,--who are the ever-living invisible Fairy-People of modern
Ireland. For when the Sons of Mil, the ancestors of the Irish people,
came to Ireland they found the Tuatha De Danann in full possession of
the country. The Tuatha De Danann then retired before the invaders,
without, however, giving up their sacred Island. Assuming invisibility,
with the power of at any time reappearing in a human-like form before
the children of the Sons of Mil, the People of the Goddess Dana became
and are the Fairy-Folk, the _Sidhe_ of Irish mythology and romance.[221]
Therefore it is that to-day Ireland contains two races,--a race visible
which we call Celts, and a race invisible which we call Fairies. Between
these two races there is constant intercourse even now; for Irish seers
say that they can behold the majestic, beautiful _Sidhe_, and according
to them the _Sidhe_ are a race quite distinct from our own, just as
living and possibly more powerful. These _Sidhe_ (who are the 'gentry'
of the Ben Bulbin country and have kindred elsewhere in Ireland,
Scotland, and probably in most other countries as well, such as the
invisible races of the Yosemite Valley) have been described more or less
accurately by our peasant seer-witnesses from County Sligo and from
North and East Ireland. But there are other and probably more reliable
seers in Ireland, men of greater education and greater psychical
experience, who know and describe the _Sidhe_ races as they really are,
and who even sketch their likenesses. And to such seer Celts as these,
Death is a passport to the world of the _Sidhe_, a world where there is
eternal youth and never-ending joy, as we shall learn when we study it
as the Celtic Otherworld.

The recorded mythology and literature of ancient Ireland have, very
faithfully for the most part, preserved to us clear pictures of the
Tuatha De Danann; so that disregarding some Christian influence in the
texts of certain manuscripts, much rationalization, and a good deal of
poetical colouring and romantic imagination in the pictures, we can
easily describe the People of the Goddess Dana as they appeared in pagan
days, when they were more frequently seen by mortals than now. Perhaps
the Irish folk of the olden times were even more clairvoyant and
spiritual-minded than the Irish folk of to-day. So by drawing upon these
written records let us try to understand what sort of beings the _Sidhe_
were and are.


NATURE OF THE _SIDHE_

In the _Book of Leinster_[222] the poem of _Eochaid_ records that the
Tuatha De Danann, the conquerors of the Fir-Bolgs, were hosts of
_siabra_; and _siabra_ is an Old Irish word meaning fairies, sprites, or
ghosts. The word fairies is appropriate if restricted to mean fairies
like the modern 'gentry'; but the word _ghosts_ is inappropriate,
because our evidence shows that the only relation the _Sidhe_ or real
Fairies hold to ghosts is a superficial one, the _Sidhe_ and ghosts
being alike only in respect to invisibility. In the two chief Irish
MSS., the _Book of the Dun Cow_ and the _Book of Leinster_, the Tuatha
De Danann are described as 'gods and not-gods'; and Sir John Rhys
considers this an ancient formula comparable with the Sanskrit _deva_
and _adeva_, but not with 'poets (_dee_) and husbandmen (_an dee_)' as
the author of _Coir Anmann_ learnedly guessed.[223] It is also said, in
the _Book of the Dun Cow_, that wise men do not know the origin of the
Tuatha De Danann, but that 'it seems likely to them that they came from
heaven, on account of their intelligence and for the excellence of their
knowledge'.[224] The hold of the Tuatha De Danann on the Irish mind and
spirit was so strong that even Christian transcribers of texts could not
deny their existence as a non-human race of intelligent beings
inhabiting Ireland, even though they frequently misrepresented them by
placing them on the level of evil demons,[225] as the ending of the
story of the _Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn_ illustrates:--'So that this was a
vision to Cuchulainn of being stricken by the people of the _Sid_: for
the demoniac power was great before the faith; and such was its
greatness that the demons used to fight bodily against mortals, and they
used to show them delights and secrets of how they would be in
immortality. It was thus they used to be believed in. So it is to such
phantoms the ignorant apply the names of _Side_ and _Aes Side_.'[226] A
passage in the _Silva Gadelica_ (ii. 202-3) not only tends to confirm
this last statement, but it also shows that the Irish people made a
clear distinction between the god-race and our own:--In _The Colloquy
with the Ancients_, as St. Patrick and Caeilte are talking with one
another, 'a lone woman robed in mantle of green, a smock of soft silk
being next her skin, and on her forehead a glittering plate of yellow
gold,' came to them; and when Patrick asked from whence she came, she
replied: 'Out of _uaimh Chruachna_, or "the cave of Cruachan".' Caeilte
then asked: 'Woman, my soul, who art thou?' 'I am _Scothniamh_ or
"Flower-lustre", daughter of the Daghda's son Bodhb derg.' Caeilte
proceeded: 'And what started thee hither?' 'To require of thee my
marriage-gift, because once upon a time thou promisedst me such.' And as
they parleyed Patrick broke in with: 'It is a wonder to us how we see
you two: the girl young and invested with all comeliness; but thou
Caeilte, a withered ancient, bent in the back and dingily grown grey.'
'Which is no wonder at all,' said Caeilte, 'for no people of one
generation or of one time are we: _she is of the Tuatha De Danann, who
are unfading and whose duration is perennial; I am of the sons of
Milesius, that are perishable and fade away_.' The exact distinction is
between Caeilte, a withered old ancient--in most ways to be regarded as
a ghost called up that Patrick may question him about the past history
of Ireland--and a fairy-woman who is one of the _Sidhe_ or Tuatha De
Danann.[227]

In two of the more ancient Irish texts, the _Echtra Nerai_[228] or
'Expedition of Nera', a preliminary tale in the introduction to the
_Tain bo Cuailnge_ or 'Theft of the Cattle of Cuailnge'; and a passage
from the _Togail Bruidne da Derga_, or 'Destruction of Da Derga's
Hostel',[229] there seems no reasonable doubt whatever about the Tuatha
De Danann or _Sidhe_ being a race like what we call spirits. The first
text describes how Ailill and Medb in their palace of Cruachan
celebrated the feast of _Samain_ (November Eve, a feast of the dead even
in pre-Christian times). Two culprits had been executed on the day
before, and their bodies, according to the ancient Irish custom, were
left hanging from a tree until the night of _Samain_ should have passed;
for on that night it was dangerous to touch the bodies of the dead while
demons and the people of the _Sidhe_ were at large throughout all
Ireland, and mortals found near dead bodies at such a time were in great
danger of being _taken_ by these spirit hosts of the Tuatha De Danann.
And so on this very night, when thick darkness had settled down, Ailill
desired to test the courage of his warriors, and offered his own
gold-hilted sword to any young man who would go out and tie a coil of
twisted twigs around the leg of one of the bodies suspended from the
tree. After many had made the attempt and failed, because unable to
brave the legions of demons and fairies, Nera alone succeeded; but his
success cost him dear, for he finally fell under the power both of the
dead man, round whose legs he had tied the coil, and of an elfin host:
with the dead man's body on his back, Nera was obliged to go to a
strange house that the thirst of the dead man might be assuaged therein;
and the dead man in drinking scattered 'the last sip from his lips at
the faces of the people that were in the house, so that they all died'.
Nera carried back the body; and on returning to Cruachan he saw the
fairy hosts going into the cave, 'for the fairy-mounds of Erinn are
always opened about Halloween.' Nera followed after them until he came
to their king in a palace of the Tuatha De Danann, seemingly in the
cavern or elsewhere underground; where he remained and was married to
one of the fairy women. She it was who revealed to Nera the secret
hiding-place, in a mysterious well, of the king's golden crown, and then
betrayed her whole people by reporting to Nera the plan they had for
attacking Ailill's court on the Halloween to come. Moreover, Nera was
permitted by his fairy wife to depart from the _sid_; and he in taking
leave of her asked: 'How will it be believed of me that I have gone into
the _sid_?' 'Take fruits of summer with thee,' said the woman. 'Then he
took wild garlic with him and primrose and golden fern.' And on the
following November Eve when the _sid_ of Cruachan was again open, 'the
men of Connaught and the black hosts of exile' under Ailill and Medb
plundered it, taking away from it the crown of Briun out of the well.
But 'Nera was left with his people in the _sid_, and has not come out
until now, nor will he come till Doom.'

All of this matter is definitely enough in line with the living
Fairy-Faith: there is the same belief expressed as now about November
Eve being the time of all times when ghosts, demons, spirits, and
fairies are free, and when fairies _take_ mortals and marry them to
fairy women; also the beliefs that fairies are living in secret places
in hills, in caverns, or under ground--palaces full of treasure and open
only on November Eve. In so far as the real fairies, the _Sidhe_, are
concerned, they appear as the rulers of the Feast of the Dead or
_Samain_, as the controllers of all spirits who are then at large; and,
allowing for some poetical imagination and much social psychology and
anthropomorphism, elements as common in this as in most literary
descriptions concerning the Tuatha De Danann, they are faithfully enough
presented.

The second text describes how King Conaire, in riding along a road
toward Tara, saw in front of him three strange horsemen, three men of
the _Sidhe_:--'Three red frocks had they, and three red mantles: three
red steeds they bestrode, and three red heads of hair were on them. Red
were they all, both body and hair and raiment, both steeds and men.'
'Who is it that fares before us?' asked Conaire. 'It was a taboo of mine
for those Three to go before me--the three Reds to the house of Red. Who
will follow them and tell them to come towards me in my track?' 'I will
follow them,' says Le fri flaith, Conaire's son. 'He goes after them,
lashing his horse, and overtook them not. There was the length of a
spearcast between them: but they did not gain upon him and he did not
gain upon them.' All attempts to come up with the red horsemen failed.
But at last, before they disappeared, one of the Three said to the
king's son riding so furiously behind them, 'Lo, my son, great the news.
Weary are the steeds we ride. We ride the steeds of Donn Tetscorach (?)
from the elfmounds. Though we are alive we are dead. Great are the
signs: destruction of life: sating of ravens: feeding of crows, strife
of slaughter: wetting of sword-edge, shields with broken bosses in hours
after sundown. Lo, my son!' Then they disappear. When Conaire and his
followers heard the message, fear fell upon them, and the king said:
'All my taboos have seized me to-night, since those Three [Reds] [are
the] banished folks (?).' In this passage we behold three horsemen of the
_Sidhe_ banished from their elfmound because guilty of falsehood.
Visible for a time, they precede the king and so violate one of his
taboos; and then delivering their fearful prophecy they vanish. These
three of the Tuatha De Danann, majestic and powerful and weird in their
mystic red, are like the warriors of the 'gentry' seen by contemporary
seers in West Ireland. Though dead, that is in an invisible world like
the dead, yet they are living. It seems that in all three of the textual
examples already cited, the scribe has emphasized a different element in
the unique nature of the Tuatha De Danann. In the _Colloquy_ it is their
eternal youth and beauty, in the _Echtra Nerai_ it is their supremacy
over ghosts and demons on _Samain_ and their power to steal mortals away
at such a time, and in this last their respect for honesty. And in each
case their portrayal corresponds to that of the 'gentry' and _Sidhe_ by
modern Irishmen; so that the old Fairy-Faith and the new combine to
prove the People of the God whose mother was Dana to have been and to be
a race of beings who are like mortals, but not mortals, who to the
objective world are as though dead, yet to the subjective world are
fully living and conscious.

O'Curry says:--'The term (_sidh_, pron. _shee_), as far as we know it,
is always applied in old writings to the palaces, courts, halls, or
residences of those beings which in ancient Gaedhelic mythology held the
place which ghosts, phantoms, and fairies hold in the superstitions of
the present day.'[230] In modern Irish tradition, 'the People of the
_Sidhe_,' or simply the _Sidhe_, refer to the beings themselves rather
than to their places of habitation. Partly perhaps on account of this
popular opinion that the _Sidhe_ are a subterranean race, they are
sometimes described as gods of the earth or _dei terreni_, as in the
_Book of Armagh_; and since it was believed that they, like the modern
fairies, control the ripening of crops and the milk-giving of cows, the
ancient Irish rendered to them regular worship and sacrifice, just as
the Irish of to-day do by setting out food at night for the fairy-folk
to eat.

Thus after their conquest, these _Sidhe_ or Tuatha De Danann in
retaliation, and perhaps to show their power as agricultural gods,
destroyed the wheat and milk of their conquerors, the Sons of Mil, as
fairies to-day can do; and the Sons of Mil were constrained to make a
treaty with their supreme king, Dagda, who, in _Coir Anmann_ (Sec. 150),
is himself called an earth-god. Then when the treaty was made the Sons of
Mil were once more able to gather wheat in their fields and to drink the
milk of their cows;[231] and we can suppose that ever since that time
their descendants, who are the people of Ireland, remembering that
treaty, have continued to reverence the People of the Goddess Dana by
pouring libations of milk to them and by making them offerings of the
fruits of the earth.


THE PALACES OF THE _SIDHE_

The marvellous palaces to which the Tuatha De Danann retired when
conquered by the race of Mil were hidden in the depths of the earth, in
hills, or under ridges more or less elevated.[232] At the time of their
conquest, Dagda their high king made a distribution of all such palaces
in his kingdom. He gave one _sid_ to Lug, son of Ethne, another to Ogme;
and for himself retained two--one called _Brug na Boinne_, or Castle of
the Boyne, because it was situated on or near the River Boyne near Tara,
and the other called _Sid_ or _Brug Maic ind Oc_, which means Enchanted
Palace or Castle of the Son of the Young. And this Mac ind Oc was
