making this explanation we arrive at the Psychological Theory, which
this study--perhaps the first one of its kind--attempts to set forth.


VII. THE IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING THE FAIRY-FAITH

I have made a very careful personal investigation of the surviving
Celtic Fairy-Faith by living for many months with and among the people
who preserve it; I have compared fairy phenomena and the phenomena said
to be caused by gods, genii, daemons, or spirits of different kinds and
recorded in the writings of ancient, mediaeval, and modern metaphysical
philosophers, Christian and pagan saints, mystics, and seers, and now
more or less clearly substantiated by from thirty to forty years of
experimentation in psychical sciences by eminent scientists of our own
times, such as Sir William Crookes and Sir Oliver Lodge in England, and
M. Camille Flammarion in France. As a result, I am convinced of the very
great value of a serious study of the Fairy-Faith. The Fairy-Faith as
the folk-religion of the Celts ought, like all religions, to be studied
sympathetically as well as scientifically. To those who take a
materialistic view of life, and consequently deny the existence of
spirits or invisible intelligences such as fairies are said to be, we
should say as my honoured American teacher in psychology, the late Dr.
William James, of Harvard, used to say in his lectures at Stanford
University, 'Materialism considered as a system of philosophy never tries
to explain the _Why_ of things.' But in our study of the Fairy-Faith we
shall attempt to deal with this _Why_ of things; and, then, perhaps the
value of studying fairies and Fairyland will be more apparent, even to
materialists.

The great majority of men in cities are apt to pride themselves on their
own exemption from 'superstition', and to smile pityingly at the poor
countrymen and countrywomen who believe in fairies. But when they do so
they forget that, with all their own admirable progress in material
invention, with all the far-reaching data of their acquired science,
with all the vast extent of their commercial and economic conquests,
they themselves have ceased to be natural. Wherever under modern
conditions great multitudes of men and women are herded together there
is bound to be an unhealthy psychical atmosphere never found in the
country--an atmosphere which inevitably tends to develop in the average
man who is not psychically strong enough to resist it, lower at the
expense of higher forces or qualities, and thus to inhibit any normal
attempts of the Subliminal Self (a well-accredited psychological entity)
to manifest itself in consciousness. In this connexion it is highly
significant to note that, as far as can be determined, almost all
professed materialists of the uncritical type, and even most of those
who are thinking and philosophizing sceptics about the existence of a
supersensuous realm or state of conscious being, are or have been
city-dwellers--usually so by birth and breeding. And even where we find
materialists of either type dwelling in the country, we generally find
them so completely under the hypnotic sway of city influences and mould
of thought in matters of education and culture, and in matters touching
religion, that they have lost all sympathetic and responsive contact
with Nature, because unconsciously they have thus permitted
conventionality and unnaturalness to insulate them from it. The Celtic
peasant, who may be their tenant or neighbour, is--if still uncorrupted
by them--in direct contrast unconventional and natural. He is normally
always responsive to psychical influences--as much so as an Australian
Arunta or an American Red Man, who also, like him, are fortunate enough
to have escaped being corrupted by what we egotistically, to distinguish
ourselves from them, call 'civilization'. If our Celtic peasant has
psychical experiences, or if he sees an apparition which he calls one of
the 'good people', that is to say a fairy, it is useless to try to
persuade him that he is under a delusion: unlike his
materialistically-minded lord, he would not attempt nor even desire to
make himself believe that what he has seen he has not seen. Not only has
he the will to believe, but he has the right to believe; because his
belief is not a matter of being educated and reasoning logically, nor a
matter of faith and theology--it is a fact of his own individual
experiences, as he will tell you. Such peasant seers have frequently
argued with me to the effect that 'One does not have to be educated in
order to see fairies'.

Unlike the natural mind of the uncorrupted Celt, Arunta, or American Red
Man, which is ever open to unusual psychical impressions, the mind of
the business man in our great cities tends to be obsessed with business
affairs both during his waking and during his dream states, the
politician's with politics similarly, the society-leader's with society;
and the unwholesome excitement felt by day in the city is apt to be
heightened at night through a satisfying of the feeling which it
morbidly creates for relaxation and change of stimuli. In the slums,
humanity is divorced from Nature under even worse conditions, and
becomes wholly decadent. But in slum and in palace alike there is
continually a feverish nerve-tension induced by unrest and worry; there
is impure and smoke-impregnated air, a lack of sunshine, a substitution
of artificial objects for natural objects, and in place of solitude the
eternal din of traffic. Instead of Nature, men in cities (and
paradoxically some conventionalized men in the country) have
'civilization'--and 'culture'.

Are city-dwellers like these, Nature's unnatural children, who grind out
their lives in an unceasing struggle for wealth and power, social
position, and even for bread, fit to judge Nature's natural children who
believe in fairies? Are they right in not believing in an invisible
world which they cannot conceive, which, if it exists, they--even though
they be scientists--are through environment and temperament alike
incapable of knowing? Or is the country-dwelling, the sometimes
'unpractical' and 'unsuccessful', the dreaming, and 'uncivilized'
peasant right? These questions ought to arouse in the minds of
anthropologists very serious reflection, world-wide in its scope.

At all events, and equally for the unbeliever and for the believer, the
study of the Fairy-Faith is of vast importance historically,
philosophically, religiously, and scientifically. In it lie the germs of
much of our European religions and philosophies, customs, and
institutions. And it is one of the chief keys to unlock the mysteries of
Celtic mythology. We believe that a greater age is coming soon, when all
the ancient mythologies will be carefully studied and interpreted, and
when the mythology of the Celts will be held in very high esteem. But
already an age has come when things purely Celtic have begun to be
studied; and the close observer can see the awakening genius of the
modern Celt manifesting itself in the realm of scholarship, of
literature, and even of art--throughout Continental Europe, especially
France and Germany, throughout Great Britain and Ireland, and throughout
the new Celtic world of America, as far west as San Francisco on the
great calm ocean of the future facing Japan and China. In truth the
Celtic empire is greater than it ever was before Caesar destroyed its
political unity; and its citizens have not forgotten the ancient faith
of their ancestors in a world invisible.

W. Y. E. W.




SECTION I

THE LIVING FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER I

ENVIRONMENT

     'In the Beauty of the World lies the ultimate redemption of our
     mortality. When we shall become at one with nature in a sense
     profounder even than the poetic imaginings of most of us, we shall
     understand what now we fail to discern.'--FIONA MACLEOD.

     Psychical interpretation--The mysticism of Erin and Armorica--In
     Ireland--In Scotland--In the Isle of Man--In Wales--In Cornwall--In
     Brittany.


As a preliminary to our study it is important, as we shall see later, to
give some attention to the influences and purely natural environment
under which the Fairy-Faith has grown up. And in doing so it will be
apparent to what extent there is truth in the Naturalistic Theory;
though from the first our interpretation of Environment is fundamentally
psychical. In this first chapter, then, in so far as they can be
recorded, we shall record a few impressions, which will, in a way, serve
as introductory to the more definite and detailed consideration of the
Fairy-Faith itself.

Ireland and Brittany, the two extremes of the modern Celtic world, are
for us the most important points from which to take our initial
bearings. Both washed by the waters of the Ocean of Atlantis, the one an
island, the other a peninsula, they have best preserved their old racial
life in its simplicity and beauty, with its high ideals, its mystical
traditions, and its strong spirituality. And, curious though the
statement may appear to some, this preservation of older manners and
traditions does not seem to be due so much to geographical isolation as
to subtle forces so strange and mysterious that to know them they must
be felt; and their nature can only be suggested, for it cannot be
described. Over Erin and Armorica, as over Egypt, there hovers a halo
of romance, of strangeness, of mysticism real and positive; and, if we
mistake not the language of others, these phrases of ours but echo
opinions common to many Celts native of the two countries--they who have
the first right to testify; and not only are there poets and seers among
them, but men of the practical world as well, and men of high rank in
scholarship, in literature, in art, and even in science.


IN IRELAND

If anyone would know Ireland and test these influences--influences which
have been so fundamental in giving to the Fairy-Faith of the past
something more than mere beauty of romance and attractive form, and
something which even to-day, as in the heroic ages, is ever-living and
ever-present in the centres where men of the second-sight say that they
see fairies in that strange state of subjectivity which the peasant
calls Fairyland--let him stand on the Hill of Tara silently and alone at
sunset, in the noonday, in the mist of a dark day. Let him likewise
silently and alone follow the course of the Boyne. Let him enter the
silence of New Grange and of Dowth. Let him muse over the hieroglyphics
of Lough Crew. Let him feel the mystic beauty of Killarney, the
peacefulness of Glendalough, of Monasterboise, of Clonmacnois, and the
isolation of Aranmore. Let him dare to enter the rings of fairies, to
tempt the 'good folk' at their _raths_ and _forts_. Let him rest on the
ancient cairn above the mountain-palace of Finvara and look out across
the battlefields of Moytura. Let him wander amid the fairy dells of
gentle Connemara. Let him behold the Irish Sea from the Heights of
Howth, as Fionn Mac Cumhail used to do. Let him listen to the
ocean-winds amid Dun Aengus. Let him view the stronghold of Cuchulainn
and the Red Branch Knights. Let him linger beside that mysterious lake
which lies embosomed between two prehistoric cairns on the summit of
enchanted Slieve Gullion, where yet dwells invisible the mountain's
Guardian, a fairy woman. Let him then try to interpret the mysticism of
an ancient Irish myth, in order to understand why men have been told
that in the plain beneath this magic mountain of Ireland mighty warfare
was once waged on account of a Bull, by the hosts of Queen Meave against
those of Cuchulainn the hero of Ulster. Let him be lost in the mists on
the top of Ben Bulbin. Let him know the haunts of fairy kings and queens
in Roscommon. Let him follow in the footsteps of Patrick and Bridgit and
Columba. When there are dark days and stormy nights, let him sit beside
a blazing fire of fragrant peat in a peasant's straw-thatched cottage
listening to tales of Ireland's golden age--tales of gods, of heroes, of
ghosts, and of fairy-folk. If he will do these things, he will know
Ireland, and why its people believe in fairies.

As yet, little has been said concerning the effects of clouds, of
natural scenery, of weird and sudden transformations in earth and sky
and air, which play their part in shaping the complete Fairy-Faith of
the Irish; but what we are about to say concerning Scotland will suggest
the same things for Ireland, because the nature of the landscape and the
atmospheric changes are much the same in the two countries, both inland
and on their rock-bound and storm-swept shores.


IN SCOTLAND

In the moorlands between Trossachs and Aberfoyle, a region made famous
by Scott's _Rob Roy_, I have seen atmospheric changes so sudden and so
contrasted as to appear marvellous. What shifting of vapours and clouds,
what flashes of bright sun-gleams, then twilight at midday! Across the
landscape, shadows of black dense fog-banks rush like shadows of flocks
of great birds which darken all the earth. Palpitating fog-banks wrap
themselves around the mountain-tops and then come down like living
things to move across the valleys, sometimes only a few yards above the
traveller's head. And in that country live terrible water-kelpies. When
black clouds discharge their watery burden it is in wind-driven vertical
water-sheets through which the world appears as through an ice-filmed
window-pane. Perhaps in a single day there may be the bluest of heavens
and the clearest air, the densest clouds and the darkest shadows, the
calm of the morning and the wind of the tempest. At night in Aberfoyle
after such a day, I witnessed a clear sunset and a fair evening sky; in
the morning when I arose, the lowlands along the river were inundated
and a thousand cascades, large and small, were leaping down the
mountain-highlands, and rain was falling in heavy masses. Within an hour
afterwards, as I travelled on towards Stirling, the rain and wind
ceased, and there settled down over all the land cloud-masses so
inky-black that they seemed like the fancies of some horrible dream.
Then like massed armies they began to move to their mountain-strongholds,
and stood there; while from the east came perfect weather and a flood of
brilliant sunshine.

And in the Highlands from Stirling to Inverness what magic, what
changing colours and shadows there were on the age-worn treeless hills,
and in the valleys with their clear, pure streams receiving tribute from
unnumbered little rills and springs, some dropping water drop by drop as
though it were fairy-distilled; and everywhere the heather giving to the
mountain-landscape a hue of rich purplish-brown, and to the air an odour
of aromatic fragrance.

On to the north-west beyond Inverness there is the same kind of a
treeless highland country; and then after a few hours of travel one
looks out across the water from Kyle and beholds Skye, where Cuchulainn
is by some believed to have passed his young manhood learning feats of
arms from fairy women,--Skye, dark, mountainous, majestic, with its
waterfalls turning to white spray as they tumble from cliff to cliff
into the sound, from out the clouds that hide their mountain-summit
sources.

In the Outer Hebrides, as in the Aranmore Islands off West Ireland,
influences are at work on the Celtic imagination quite different from
those in Skye and its neighbouring islands. Mountainous billows which
have travelled from afar out of the mysterious watery waste find their
first impediment on the west of these isolated Hebridean isles, and they
fling themselves like mad things in full fury against the wild rocky
islets fringing the coast. White spray flashes in unearthly forms over
the highest cliff, and the unrestrained hurricane whirls it far inland.
Ocean's eternally murmuring sounds set up a responsive vibration in the
soul of the peasant, as he in solitude drives home his flocks amid the
weird gloaming at the end of a December day; and, later, when he sits
brooding in his humble cottage at night, in the fitful flickering of a
peat fire, he has a mystic consciousness that deep down in his being
there is a more divine music compared with which that of external nature
is but a symbol and an echo; and, as he stirs the glowing peat-embers,
phantoms from an irretrievable past seem to be sitting with him on the
edge of the half-circle of dying light. Maybe there are skin-clad
huntsmen of the sea and land, with spears and knives of bone and flint
and shaggy sleeping dogs, or fearless sea-rovers resting wearily on
shields of brilliant bronze, or maybe Celtic warriors fierce and bold;
and then he understands that his past and his present are one.

Commonly there is the thickest day-darkness when the driving storms come
in from the Atlantic, or when dense fog covers sea and land; and, again,
there are melancholy sea-winds moaning across from shore to shore,
bending the bushes of the purple heather. At other times there is a
sparkle of the brightest sunshine on the ocean waves, a fierceness
foreign to the more peaceful Highlands; and then again a dead silence
prevails at sunrise and at sunset if one be on the mountains, or, if on
the shore, no sound is heard save the rhythmical beat of the waves, and
now and then the hoarse cry of a sea-bird. All these contrasted
conditions may be seen in one day, or each may endure for a day; and the
dark days last nearly all the winter. And then it is, during the long
winter, that the crofters and fisher-folk congregate night after night
in a different neighbour's house to tell about fairies and ghosts, and
to repeat all those old legends so dear to the heart of the Celt.
Perhaps every one present has heard the same story or legend a hundred
times, yet it is always listened to and told as though it were the
latest bulletin of some great world-stirring event. Over those little
islands, so far away to the north, out on the edge of the world, in
winter-time darkness settles down at four o'clock or even earlier; and
the islanders hurry through with their dinner of fish and oat-bread so
as not to miss hearing the first story. When the company has gathered
from far and near, pipes are re-filled and lit and the peat is heaped
up, for the story-telling is not likely to end before midnight. 'The
house is roomy and clean, if homely, with its bright peat fire in the
middle of the floor. There are many present--men and women, boys and
girls. All the women are seated, and most of the men. Girls are crouched
between the knees of fathers or brothers or friends, while boys are
perched wherever--boy-like--they can climb. The houseman is twisting
twigs of heather into ropes to hold down thatch, a neighbour crofter is
twining quicken root into cords to tie cows, while another is plaiting
bent grass into baskets to hold meal. The housewife is spinning, a
daughter is carding, another daughter is teazing, while a third
daughter, supposed to be working, is away in the background conversing
in low whispers with the son of a neighbouring crofter. Neighbour wives
and neighbour daughters are knitting, sewing, or embroidering.'[5] Then
when the bad weather for fishing has been fully discussed by the men,
and the latest gossip by the women, and the foolish talk of the youths
and maidens in the corners is finished, the one who occupies the chair
of honour in the midst of the _ceilidh_[6] looks around to be sure that
everybody is comfortable and ready; and, as his first story begins, even
the babes by instinct cease their noise and crying, and young and old
bend forward eagerly to hear every word. It does not matter if some of
the boys and girls do topple over asleep, or even some of the older folk
as the hour gets late; the tales meet no interruption in their even,
unbroken flow. And here we have the most Celtic and the most natural
environments which the Fairy-Faith enjoys in Scotland.

There are still the Southern Highlands in the country around Oban, and
the islands near them; and of all these isles none is so picturesque in
history as the one Columba loved so well. Though Iona enjoys less of the
wildness of the Hebrides furthest west, it has their storm-winds and
fogs and dark days, and their strangeness of isolation. On it, as
Adamnan tells us, the holy man fought with black demons who came to
invade his monastery, and saw angelic hosts; and when the angels took
his soul at midnight in that little chapel by the sea-shore there was a
mystic light which illuminated all the altar like the brightest
sunshine. But nowadays, where the saint saw demons and angels the
Islanders see ghosts and 'good people', and when one of these islanders
is taken in death it is not by angels--it is by fairies.


IN THE ISLE OF MAN

In the midst of the Irish Sea, almost equidistant from Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales, and concentrating in itself the psychical and
magnetic influences from these three Celtic lands, and from Celto-Saxon
England too, lies the beautiful kingdom of the great Tuatha De Danann
god, Manannan Mac Lir, or, as his loyal Manx subjects prefer to call
him, Mannanan-Beg-Mac-y-Leir. In no other land of the Celt does Nature
show so many moods and contrasts, such perfect repose at one time and at
another time the mightiness of its unloosed powers, when the baffled sea
throws itself angrily against a high rock-bound coast, as wild and
almost as weather-worn as the western coasts of Ireland and the
Hebrides.

But it is Nature's calmer moods which have greater effect upon the Manx
people: on the summit of his ancient stronghold, South Barrule Mountain,
the god Manannan yet dwells invisible to mortal eyes, and whenever on a
warm day he throws off his magic mist-blanket with which he is wont to
cover the whole island, the golden gorse or purple heather blossoms
become musical with the hum of bees, and sway gently on breezes made
balmy by the tropical warmth of an ocean stream flowing from the far
distant Mexican shores of a New World. Then in many a moist and
sweet-smelling glen, pure and verdant, land-birds in rejoicing bands add
to the harmony of sound, as they gather on the newly-ploughed field or
dip themselves in the clear water of the tinkling brook; and from the
cliffs and rocky islets on the coast comes the echo of the multitudinous
chorus of sea-birds. At sunset, on such a day, as evening calmness
settles down, weird mountain shadows begin to move across the
dimly-lighted glens; and when darkness has fallen, there is a mystic
stillness, broken only by the ceaseless throbbing of the sea-waves, the
flow of brooks, and the voices of the night.

In the moorland solitudes, even by day, there sometimes broods a deeper
silence, which is yet more potent and full of meaning for the peasant,
as under its spell he beholds the peaceful vision, happy and sunlit, of
sea and land, of gentle mountains falling away in land-waves into
well-tilled plains and fertile valleys; and he comes to feel
instinctively the old Druidic Fires relit within his heart, and perhaps
unconsciously he worships there in Nature's Temple. The natural beauty
without awakens the divine beauty within, and for a second of time he,
out of his subconsciousness, is conscious that in Nature there are
beings and inaudible voices which have no existence for the flippant
pleasure-seeking crowds who come and go. To the multitude, his ancestral
beliefs are foolishness, his fairies but the creatures of a fervid
Celtic imagination which readily responds to unusual phenomena and
environments. They will not believe with him that all beauty and harmony
in the world are but symbolic, and that behind these stand unseen
sustaining forces and powers which are conscious and eternal; and though
by instinct they willingly personify Nature they do not know the secret
of why they do so: for them the outer is reality, the inner
non-existent.

From the Age of Stone to the civilized era of to-day, the Isle of Man
has been, in succession, the home of every known race and people who
have flourished in Western Europe; and though subject, in turn, to the
Irish Gael and to the Welsh Brython, to Northmen and to Danes, to Scots
and to English, and the scene of sweeping transformations in religion,
as pagan cults succeeded one another, to give way to the teaching of St.
Patrick and his disciples St. German and St. Maughold, and this finally
to the Protestant form of Christianity, the island alone of Celtic lands
has been strangely empowered to maintain in almost primitive purity its
ancient constitution and freedom, and though geographically at the very
centre of the United Kingdom, is not a part of it. The archaeologist may
still read in mysterious symbols of stone and earth, as they lie strewn
over the island's surface, the history of this age-long panoramic
procession of human evolution; while through these same symbols the Manx
seer reads a deeper meaning; and sometimes in the superhuman realm of
radiant light, to which since long ago they have oft come and oft
returned, he meets face to face the gods and heroes whose early tombs
stand solitary on the wind-swept mountain-top and moorland, or hidden
away in the embrace of wild flowers and verdure amid valleys; and in the
darker mid-world he sees innumerable ghosts of many of these races which
have perished.


IN WALES

Less can be said of Wales than of Ireland, or of Scotland as a whole. It
has, it is true, its own peculiar psychic atmosphere, different, no
doubt, because its people are Brythonic Celts rather than Gaelic Celts.
But Wales, with conditions more modernized than is the case in Ireland
or in the Western Hebrides of Scotland, does not now exhibit in a
vigorous or flourishing state those Celtic influences which, when they
were active, did so much to create the precious Romances of Arthur and
his Brotherhood, and to lay the foundations for the Welsh belief in the
_Tylwyth Teg_, a fairy race still surviving in a few favoured
localities.

Wales, like all Celtic countries, is a land of long sea-coasts, though
there seems to be, save in the mountains of the north, less of mist and
darkness and cloud effects than in Ireland and Scotland. In the south,
perhaps the most curious influences are to be felt at St. David's Head,
and in St. David's itself--once the goal for thousands of pilgrims from
many countries of mediaeval Europe, and, probably, in pagan times the
seat of an oracle. And a place of like character is the peninsula of
Gower, south of Swansea. Caerphilly Castle, where the Green Lady reigns
now amid its ruined acres, is a strange place; and so is the hill near
Carmarthen, where Merlin is asleep in a cave with the fairy-woman
Vivian. But in none of these places to-day is there a strong living
faith in fairies as there is, for example, in West Ireland. The one
region where I found a real Celtic atmosphere--and it is a region where
everybody speaks Welsh--is a mountainous country rarely visited by
travellers, save archaeologists, a few miles from Newport; and its
centre is the Pentre Evan Cromlech, the finest cromlech in Wales if not
in Britain. By this prehistoric monument and in the country round the
old Nevern Church, three miles away, there is an active belief in the
'fair-folk', in ghosts, in death-warnings, in death-candles and
phantom-funerals, and in witchcraft and black magic. Thence on to
Newcastle-Emlyn and its valley, where many of the Mabinogion stories
took form, or at least from where they drew rich material in the way of
folk-lore,[7] are environments purely Welsh and as yet little disturbed
by the commercial materialism of the age.

There remain now to be mentioned three other places in Wales to me very
impressive psychically. These are: ancient Harlech, so famous in
recorded Welsh fairy-romance--Harlech with its strange stone-circles,
and old castle from which the Snowdon Range is seen to loom majestically
and clear, and with its sun-kissed bay; Mount Snowdon, with its memories
of Arthur and Welsh heroes; and sacred Anglesey or Mona, strewn with
tumuli, and dolmens, and pillar-stones--Mona, where the Druids made
their last stand against the Roman eagles--and its little island called
Holyhead, facing Ireland.

However, when all is said, modern Wales is poorer in its fairy
atmosphere than modern Ireland or modern Brittany. Certainly there is a
good deal of this fairy atmosphere yet, though it has become less vital
than the similar fairy atmosphere in the great centres of Erin and
Armorica. But the purely social environment under which the Fairy-Faith
of Wales survives is a potent force which promises to preserve
underneath the surface of Welsh national life, where the commercialism
of the age has compelled it to retire in a state of temporary latency,
the ancestral idealism of the ancient Brythonic race. In Wales, as in
Lower Brittany and in parts of Ireland and the Hebrides, one may still
hear in common daily use a language which has been continuously spoken
since unknown centuries before the rise of the Roman empire. And the
strong hold which the Druidic _Eisteddfod_ (an annual national congress
of bards and literati) continues to have upon the Welsh people, in spite
of their commercialism, is, again, a sign that their hearts remain
uncorrupted, that when the more favourable hour strikes they will sweep
aside the deadening influences which now hold them in spiritual bondage,
and become, as they were in the past, true children of Arthur.


IN CORNWALL

Strikingly like Brittany in physical aspects, Southern and Western
Cornwall is a land of the sea, of rolling plains and moorlands rather
than of high hills and mountains, a land of golden-yellow furze-bloom,
where noisy crowds of black crows and white sea-gulls mingle together
over the freshly-turned or new-sown fields, and where in the spring-time
the call of the cuckoo is heard with the song of the skylark. Like the
Isle of Man, from the earliest ages Cornwall has been a meeting-place
and a battle-ground for contending races. The primitive dark Iberian
peoples gave way before Aryan-Celtic invaders, and these to Roman and
then to Germanic invaders.

Nature has been kind to the whole of Cornwall, but chiefly upon the
peninsula whose ancient capital is Penzance (which possibly means 'the
Holy Headland'), and upon the land immediately eastward and northward of
it, she has bestowed her rarest gifts. Holding this territory embosomed
in the pure waters of Ocean, and breathing over it the pure air of the
Atlantic in spring and in summer calm, when the warm vapours from the
Gulf Stream sweep over it freely, and make it a land of flowers and of
singing-birds, Nature preserves eternally its beauty and its sanctity.
There are there ruined British villages whose builders are long
forgotten, strange prehistoric circular sun-temples like fortresses
crowning the hill-tops, mysterious underground passage-ways, and crosses
probably pre-Christian. Everywhere are the records of the mighty past of
this thrice-holy Druid land of sunset. There are weird legends of the
lost kingdom of Fair Lyonesse, which seers sometimes see beneath the
clear salt waves, with all its ancient towns and flowery fields; legends
of Phoenicians and Oriental merchants who came for tin; legends of gods
and of giants, of pixies and of fairies, of King Arthur in his castle at
Tintagel, of angels and of saints, of witches and of wizards.

On _Dinsul_, 'Hill dedicated to the Sun,' pagan priests and priestesses
kept kindled the Eternal Fire, and daily watched eastward for the rising
of the God of Light and Life, to greet his coming with paeans of
thanksgiving and praise. Then after the sixth century the new religion
had come proclaiming a more mystic Light of the World in the Son of God,
and to the pious half-pagan monks who succeeded the Druids the Archangel
St. Michael appeared in vision on the Sacred Mount.[8] And before St.
Augustine came to Britain the Celts of Cornwall had already combined in
their own mystical way the spiritual message of primitive Christianity
with the pure nature-worship of their ancestors; and their land was
then, as it most likely had been in pagan days, a centre of pilgrimages
for their Celtic kinsmen from Ireland, from Wales, from England, and
from Brittany. When in later times new theological doctrines were
superimposed on this mysticism of Celtic Christianity, the Sacred Fires
were buried in ashes, and the Light and Beauty of the pagan world
obscured with sackcloth.

But there in that most southern and western corner of the Isle of
Britain, the Sacred Fires themselves still burn on the divine hill-tops,
though smothered in the hearts of its children. The Cornishman's vision
is no longer clear. He looks upon cromlech and dolmen, upon ancient
caves of initiation, and upon the graves of his prehistoric ancestors,
and vaguely feels, but does not know, why his land is so holy, is so
permeated by an indefinable magic; for he has lost his ancestral mystic
touch with the unseen--he is 'educated' and 'civilized'. The hand of the
conqueror has fallen more heavily upon the people of Cornwall than upon
any other Celtic people, and now for a time, but let us hope happily
only for this dark period of transition, they sleep--until Arthur comes
to break the spell and set them free.


IN BRITTANY

As was pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, Ireland and
Brittany are to be regarded as the two poles of the modern Celtic world,
but it is believed by Celtic mystics that they are much more than this,
that they are two of its psychic centres, with Tara and Carnac as two
respective points of focus from which the Celtic influence of each
country radiates.[9] With such a psychical point of view, it makes no
difference at all whether one scholar argues Carnac to be Celtic and
another pre-Celtic, for if pre-Celtic, as it most likely is, it has
certainly been bequeathed to the people who were and are Celtic, and its
influence has been an unbroken thing from times altogether beyond the
horizon of history. According to this theory (and in following it we
are merely trying to put on record unique material transmitted to us by
the most learned of contemporary Celtic mystics and seers) there seem to
be certain favoured places on the earth where its magnetic and even more
subtle forces are most powerful and most easily felt by persons
susceptible to such things; and Carnac appears to be one of the greatest
of such places in Europe, and for this reason, as has been thought, was
probably selected by its ancient priest-builders as the great centre for
religious practices, for the celebration of pagan mysteries, for tribal
assemblies, for astronomical observations, and very likely for
establishing schools in which to educate neophytes for the priesthood.
Tara, with its tributary Boyne valley, is a similar place in Ireland, so
selected and so used, as, in our study of the cult of fairies and the
cult of the dead, manuscript evidence will later indicate. And thus to
such psychical and magnetic, or, according perhaps to others, religious
or traditional influences as focus themselves at Tara and Carnac, though
in other parts of the two countries as well, may be due in a great, even
in an essential measure, the vigorous and ever-living Fairy-Faith of
Ireland, and the innate and ever-conscious belief of the Breton people
in the Legend of the Dead and in a world invisible. For fairies and
souls of the dead, though, strictly speaking, not confused, are believed
to be beings of the subjective world existing to-day, and influencing
mortals, as they have always existed and influenced them according to
ancient and modern traditions, and as they appear now in the eyes even
of science through the work of a few pioneer scientists in psychical
research. And it seems probable that subjective beings of this kind,
granting their existence, were made use of by the ancient Druids, and
even by Patrick when the old and new religions met to do battle on the
Hill of Tara. The control of Tara, as a psychical centre, meant the
psychical control of all Ireland. To-day on the Hill of Tara the statue
of St. Patrick dwarfs the Liath Stone beside it; at Carnac the Christian
Cross overshadows dolmens and menhirs.

A learned priest of the Roman Church told me, when I met him in Galway,
that in his opinion those places in Ireland where ancient sacrifices
were performed to pagan or Druid gods are still, unless they have been
regularly exorcized, under the control of demons (daemons). And what the
Druids were at Tara and throughout Erin and most probably at Carnac as
well, the priests were in Egypt, and the pythonesses in Greece. That is
to say, Druids, Egyptian priests, priestesses in charge of Greek
oracles, are said to have foretold the future, interpreted omens, worked
all miracles and wonders of magic by the aid of daemons, who were
regarded as an order of invisible beings, intermediary between gods and
men, and as sometimes including the shades from Hades.

I should say as before, if he who knowing Ireland, the Land of Faerie,
would know in the same manner Brittany, the Land of the Dead, let him
silently and alone walk many times--in sun, in wind, in storm, in thick
mist--through the long, broad avenues of stone of the Alignements at
Carnac. Let him watch from among them the course of the sun from east to
west. Let him stand on St. Michael's Mount on the day of the winter
solstice, or on the day of the summer solstice. Let him enter the
silence of its ancient underground chamber, so dark and so mysterious.
Let him sit for hours musing amid cromlechs and dolmens, and beside
menhirs, and at holy wells. Let him marvel at the mightiest of menhirs
now broken and prostrate at Locmariaquer, and then let him ponder over
the subterranean places near it. Let him try to read the symbolic
inscriptions on the rocks in Gavrinis. Let him stand on the Ile de Sein
at sunrise and at sunset. Let him penetrate the solitudes of the Forest
of Broceliande, and walk through the Val-Sans-Retour (Vale-Without-Return).
And then let him wander in footpaths with the Breton peasant through
fields where good dames sit on the sunny side of a bush or wall,
knitting stockings, where there are long hedges of furze, golden-yellow
with bloom--even in January--and listen to stories about _corrigans_,
and about the dead who mingle here with the living. Let him enter the
peasant's cottage when there is fog over the land and the sea-winds are
blowing across the shifting sand-dunes, and hear what he can tell him.
Let him, even as he enjoys the picturesque customs and dress of the
Breton folk and looks on at their joyous _ronde_ (perhaps the relic of a
long-forgotten sun-dance), observe the depth of their nature, their
almost ever-present sense of the seriousness of human life and effort,
their beautiful characters as their mystic land has shaped them without
the artificiality of books and schools, their dreaminess as they look
out across the ocean, their often perfect physique and fine profiles and
rosy cheeks, and yet withal their brooding innate melancholy. And let
him know that there is with them always an overshadowing consciousness
of an invisible world, not in some distant realm of space, but here and
now, blending itself with this world; its inhabitants, their dead
ancestors and friends, mingling with them daily, and awaiting the hour
when the _Ankou_ (a King of the Dead) shall call each to join their
invisible company.




SECTION I

THE LIVING FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER II

THE TAKING OF EVIDENCE

     'During all these centuries the Celt has kept in his heart some
     affinity with the mighty beings ruling in the Unseen, once so
     evident to the heroic races who preceded him. His legends and faery
     tales have connected his soul with the inner lives of air and water
     and earth, and they in turn have kept his heart sweet with hidden
     influence.'--A. E.

     Method of presentation--The logical verdict--Trustworthiness of
     legends--The Fairy-Faith held by the highly educated Celt as well
     as by the Celtic peasant--The evidence is complete and
     adequate--Its analysis--The Fairy-Tribes dealt with--Witnesses and
     their testimony: from Ireland, with introduction by Dr. Douglas
     Hyde; from Scotland, with introduction by Dr. Alexander Carmichael;
     from the Isle of Man, with introduction by Miss Sophia Morrison;
     from Wales, with introduction by the Right Hon. Sir John Rhys;
     from Cornwall, with introduction by Mr. Henry Jenner; and from
     Brittany, with introduction by Professor Anatole Le Braz.


I. GENERAL INTRODUCTION

Various possible plans have presented themselves for setting forth the
living Fairy-Faith as I have found it during my travels in the six
Celtic countries among the people who hold it. To take a bit here and a
bit there from a miscellaneous group of psychological experiences, fairy
legends and stories which are linked together almost inseparably in the
mind of the one who tells them, does not seem at all satisfactory, nor
even just, in trying to arrive at a correct result. Classification under
various headings, such, for example, as Fairy Abductions, Changelings,
or Appearances of Fairies, seems equally unsatisfactory; for as soon as
the details of folk-lore such as I am presenting are isolated from one
another--even though brought together in related groups--they must be
rudely torn out of their true and natural environment, and divorced from
the psychological atmosphere amidst which they were first presented by
the narrator. The same objection applies to any plan of dividing the
evidence into (1) that which is purely legendary; (2) that which is
second-hand or third-hand evidence from people who claim to have seen
fairies, or to have been in Fairyland or under fairy influences; and (3)
that which is first-hand evidence from actual percipients: these three
classes of evidence are so self-evident that every reader will be able
to distinguish each class for himself as it occurs, and a mechanical
classification by us is unnecessary. So no plan seems so good as the
plan I have adopted of permitting all witnesses to give their own
testimony in their own way and in its native setting, and then of
classifying and weighing such testimony according to the methods of
comparative religion and the anthropological sciences.

In most cases, as examination will show, the evidence is so clear that
little or no comment is necessary. Most of the evidence also points so
much in one direction that the only verdict which seems reasonable is
that the Fairy-Faith belongs to a doctrine of souls; that is to say,
that Fairyland is a state or condition, realm or place, very much like,
if not the same as, that wherein civilized and uncivilized men alike
place the souls of the dead, in company with other invisible beings such
as gods, daemons, and all sorts of good and bad spirits. Not only do
both educated and uneducated Celtic seers so conceive Fairyland, but
they go much further, and say that Fairyland actually exists as an
invisible world within which the visible world is immersed like an
island in an unexplored ocean, and that it is peopled by more species of
living beings than this world, because incomparably more vast and varied
in its possibilities.

We should be prepared in hearing the evidence to meet with some
contradictions and a good deal of confusion, for many of the people who
believe in such a strange world as we have just described, and who think
they sometimes have entered it or have seen some of its inhabitants,
have often had no training at all in schools or colleges. But when we
hear legendary tales which have never been recorded save in the minds
of unnumbered generations of men, we ought not on that account to
undervalue them; for often they are better authorities and more
trustworthy than many an ancient and carefully inscribed manuscript in
the British Museum; and they are probably far older than the oldest book
in the world. Let us, then, for a time, forget that there are such
things as libraries and universities, and betake ourselves to the Celtic
peasant for instruction, living close to nature as he lives, and
thinking the things which he thinks.

But the peasant will not be our only teacher, for we shall also hear
much of first importance from city folk of the highest intellectual
training. It has become, perhaps always has been in modern times, a
widespread opinion, even among some scholars, that the belief in fairies
is the property solely of simple, uneducated country-folk, and that
people who have had 'a touch of education and a little common sense
knocked into their heads', to use the ordinary language, 'wouldn't be
caught believing in such nonsense.' This same class of critics used to
make similar remarks about people who said there were ghosts, until the
truth of another 'stupid superstition' was discovered by psychical
research. So in this chapter we hope to correct this erroneous opinion
about the Fairy-Faith, an opinion chiefly entertained by scholars and
others who know not the first real fact about fairies, because they have
never lived amongst the people who believe in fairies, but derive all
their information from books and hearsay. In due order the proper sort
of witnesses will substantiate this position, but before coming to their
testimony we may now say that there are men and women in Dublin, in
other parts of Ireland, in Scotland, in the Isle of Man, and in
Brythonic lands too, whom all the world knows as educated leaders in
their respective fields of activity, who not only declare their belief
that fairies were, but that fairies are; and some of these men and women
