
TEXT: _One Lord, one faith, one baptism._--EPHESIANS iv. 5.


Every step of progress is a step more spiritual. The great element of
reform is not born of human wisdom; it draws not its life from human
organizations; rather is it the crumbling away of material elements
from reason, the translation of law back to its original
language,--Mind, and the final unity between man and God. The
footsteps of thought, as they pass from the sensual side of existence
to the reality and Soul of all things, are slow, portending a long
night to the traveller; but the guardians of the gloom are the angels
of His presence, that impart grandeur to the intellectual wrestling
and collisions with old-time faiths, as we drift into more spiritual
latitudes. The beatings of our heart can be heard; but the ceaseless
throbbings and throes of thought are unheard, as it changes from
material to spiritual standpoints. Even the pangs of death disappear,
accordingly as the understanding that we are spiritual beings here
reappears, and we learn our capabilities for good, which insures
man's continuance and is the true glory of immortality.

The improved theory and practice of religion and of medicine are
mainly due to the people's improved views of the Supreme Being. As the
finite sense of Deity, based on material conceptions of spiritual
being, yields its grosser elements, we shall learn what God is, and
what God does. The Hebrew term that gives another letter to the word
_God_ and makes it _good_, unites Science and Christianity, whereby we
learn that God, good, is universal, and the divine Principle,--Life,
Truth, Love; and this Principle is learned through goodness, and of
Mind instead of matter, of Soul instead of the senses, and by
revelation supporting reason. It is the false conceptions of Spirit,
based on the evidences gained from the material senses, that make a
Christian only in theory, shockingly material in practice, and form
its Deity out of the worst human qualities, else of wood or stone.

Such a theory has overturned empires in demoniacal contests over
religion. Proportionately as the people's belief of God, in every age,
has been dematerialized and unfinited has their Deity become good; no
longer a personal tyrant or a molten image, but the divine Life,
Truth, and Love,--Life without beginning or ending, Truth without a
lapse or error, and Love universal, infinite, eternal. This more
perfect idea, held constantly before the people's mind, must have a
benign and elevating influence upon the character of nations as well
as individuals, and will lift man ultimately to the understanding
that our ideals form our characters, that as a man "thinketh in his
heart, so is he." The crudest ideals of speculative theology have made
monsters of men; and the ideals of _materia medica_ have made helpless
invalids and cripples. The eternal roasting amidst noxious vapors; the
election of the minority to be saved and the majority to be eternally
punished; the wrath of God, to be appeased by the sacrifice and
torture of His favorite Son,--are some of the false beliefs that have
produced sin, sickness, and death; and then would affirm that these
are natural, and that Christianity and Christ-healing are
preternatural; yea, that make a mysterious God and a natural devil.

Let us rejoice that the bow of omnipotence already spans the moral
heavens with light, and that the more spiritual idea of good and Truth
meets the old material thought like a promise upon the cloud, while it
inscribes on the thoughts of men at this period a more metaphysical
religion founded upon Christian Science. A personal God is based on
finite premises, where thought begins wrongly to apprehend the
infinite, even the quality or the quantity of eternal good. This
limited sense of God as good limits human thought and action in their
goodness, and assigns them mortal fetters in the outset. It has
implanted in our religions certain unspiritual shifts, such as
dependence on personal pardon for salvation, rather than obedience to
our Father's demands, whereby we grow out of sin in the way that our
Lord has appointed; namely, by working out our own salvation. It has
given to all systems of _materia medica_ nothing but materialism,--more
faith in hygiene and drugs than in God. Idolatry sprang from the belief
that God is a form, more than an infinite and divine Mind; sin,
sickness, and death originated in the belief that Spirit materialized
into a body, infinity became finity, or man, and the eternal entered
the temporal. Mythology, or the myth of ologies, said that Life, which
is infinite and eternal, could enter finite man through his nostrils,
and matter become intelligent of good and evil, because a serpent said
it. When first good, God, was named a person, and evil another person,
the error that a personal God and a personal devil entered into
partnership and would form a third person, called material man,
obtained expression. But these unspiritual and mysterious ideas of God
