
Babylon, the most ancient and renowned city of the world, was
pleasantly situated on the banks of a majestic river, that flowed
through the plains of Shinar, near to which the tower of Babel once
stood. It was laid out four square, and surrounded with a wall upwards
of three hundred feet high, and sixty miles in circumference; having a
hundred gates of brass with bars of iron; twenty-five gates on each
side, which opened to streets running through the city, a distance of
fifteen miles; thus forming the whole city into exact squares of equal
size. In the midst of these squares were beautiful gardens, adorned
with trees and walks, diversified with flowers of varied hue; while
the houses were built upon the borders of the squares, directly
fronting on the streets. In the midst of this city sat Nebuchadnezzar,
enthroned in royal splendor and magnificence, and swaying his sceptre
over all the kingdoms of the world, when it pleased God, in a vision
of the night, to unveil the dark curtain of the future, and to present
before him, at one view, the history of the world, even down to the
consummation of all things. Behold, a great image stood before him,
whose head was of fine gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly
and thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet and toes part of iron
and part of miry clay. He beheld, till a stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, which smote the image upon the feet, which
were part of iron and part of clay, and brake them in pieces; then was
the iron, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces
together, and became as the chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and
the wind carried them away, and there was no place found for them; but
the stone which smote the image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth. When Daniel was brought in before the king, to tell
the dream and the interpretation, he exclaimed, "There is a God in
heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king,
Nebuchadnezzar, what shall be in the latter days." Then, after telling
the dream, he continues thus: "Thou, O king, art a king of kings; for
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and
glory. And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and
hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou _art_ this head of gold. And
after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another
third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth. And
the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh
in pieces and subdueth all _things_; and as iron that breaketh all
these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. And whereas thou sawest
the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the
kingdom shall be divided: but there shall be in it of the strength of
the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay. And
_as_ the toes of the feet _were_ part of iron, and part of clay, _so_
the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. And whereas
thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves
with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even
as iron is not mixed with clay. And in the days of these kings shall
the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed:
and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, _but_ it shall
break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand
forever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter; and the dream
_is_ certain, and the interpretation thereof sure."

In this great view of the subject we have presented before us, in
succession, first, the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar; second, the Medes
and Persians, who took Babylon from Belshazzar, and reigned over all
the earth; third, the Greeks under Alexander, who conquered the world,
and reigned in the midst of Babylon; and fourth, the Roman empire,
which subdued all things; fifth, its division into eastern and western
empires, and its final breaking up or subdivision into the various
kingdoms of modern Europe, represented by the feet and toes, part of
iron and part of clay. And, lastly, we have presented before us an
entirely new kingdom, organized by the God of heaven in the last days,
or during the reign of these kings, represented by the feet and toes.
This last kingdom was never to change masters, like all the kingdoms
which had gone before it. It was never to be left to another people.
It was to break in pieces all these kingdoms, and stand forever. Many
suppose that this last kingdom alluded to was the kingdom of God which
was organized in the days of Christ, or his Apostles. But a greater
_blunder_ could not exist; the kingdom of God set up in the days of
Christ, or his Apostles, did not break in pieces any of the kingdoms
of the world: it was itself warred against and overcome, in fulfilment
of the words of Daniel, chapter vii, 21; "I beheld, and the same horn
made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;" also 22d verse,
"Until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints
of the Most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the
kingdom;" also verse 27th, "And the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heaven, shall be given to
the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom; and all dominions shall serve and obey him."

John records, Rev. xiii. 7, "And it was given unto him to make war
with the saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him over
all kindreds, and tongues, and nations." In fulfilment of these
sayings, power has been given, to the authorities of the earth to kill
the Apostles and inspired men, until, if any remained, they were
banished from among men, or forced to retire to the desolate islands,
or the dens and caves of the mountains of the earth, being men of whom
the world was not worthy; while at the same time, many false prophets
and teachers were introduced in their place, whom men heaped to
themselves, because they would not endure sound doctrine. In this way
the kingdom of God became _disorganized_, and _lost_ from among men,
and the doctrines and churches of men instituted in its place. But we
design to speak more fully on this subject when we come to treat on
the subject of the kingdom of God. Suffice it to say, that the kingdom
spoken of by Daniel is something to be organized in the last days, by
the God of heaven Himself, without the aid of human institutions or
the precepts of men. And, when once organized, it will never cease to
roll; all the powers of earth and hell will not impede its progress,
until at length the Ancient of Days shall sit, and the Lord Jesus will
come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, as the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, and destroy all these kingdoms, and give
the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heaven,
to the Saints. Then there will be but one Lord, and His name one, and
He shall be King over all the earth.

We will now return to Nebuchadnezzar, whom the Lord, by the mouth of
Jeremiah, calls His servant, to execute His judgment upon the nations.
It seems that the Lord exalted this great man, and made him a king of
kings, and lord of lords, arming him with His own sword, and clothing
him with power and authority, for the express purpose of executing His
judgments, and scourging and humbling all the nations of the earth.
Jeremiah, chapter xxv, says that the Lord purposed to bring
Nebuchadnezzar and his army against Jerusalem, and against all the
nations round about, that he might bring them to desolation and
captivity for seventy years; and after seventy years, He would turn
and punish the king of Babylon and that nation for their iniquity.
Now, who can trace the history of the fulfilment of these great
events, so exactly pointed out by Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel, and
not be struck with astonishment and wonder at the marvellous _gift of
prophecy_ enabling men in those days to read the history of the future
as they read the history of the past? Indeed, the reader of history in
the nineteenth century, holding in his hand the history of the
Babylonians, Medes and Persians, Greeks, Romans and Egyptians,
together with that of the Jews, will hardly render himself more
familiar with the events which transpired among those nations, than
the Prophets were seventy years previous to their accomplishment.

The Jews were reduced to subjection by Nebuchadnezzar; their city,
Jerusalem, was burned, together with their temple; their princes,
nobles, and people were carried to Babylon, together with all their
holy things. All the particulars of this destruction and captivity
were distinctly foretold by Jeremiah, and the time of its continuance,
viz., seventy years. After subduing the Jews, the king of Babylon
marched his army against Tyre, the city of merchants, situated at the
haven of the sea, surrounded not only by the sea, but by a strong
wall. A hold so strong required the utmost skill and perseverance of
Nebuchadnezzar and his whole army, who labored incessantly for a long
time, and at length succeeded in taking Tyre, and bringing it into
captivity for seventy years. After which they returned and established
their city, for Jeremiah had previously foretold the reduction of
Tyre, its captivity for seventy years, and its restoration at the
expiration of that time. After the restoration of Tyre, the city
flourished for a time, but was afterwards reduced to an entire
desolation. Its ruined fragments are seen to this day in the bottom of
the sea; its site has become a barren rock, only occupied by poor
fishermen. All this desolation, and even its present appearance of
desolation and perpetual waste, were clearly pointed out by the
Prophets.

But when the king of Babylon had succeeded in taking Tyre, after many
a bald head and peeled shoulder, caused by the hard service of his
army in the siege, the Lord, by the mouth of Ezekiel, promised to give
the spoils of Egypt unto him, for wages for his army, in order to pay
him for the great service, wherewith he had served God, against Tyre.
Next, witness his war in the taking of Egypt, and bringing it into
captivity, until the seventy years were accomplished.

And, finally, trace him executing the Lord's vengeance and anger
against Uz, upon the kings of the Philistines, and Askelon, Azaah;
Ekrom, Edom, Moab, Ammon; Dedan, Tema, and Buz; and upon the kings of
Arabia, Zimri and Elam; and upon all the kings of the Medes; and upon
all the kings of the north, far and near; and finally upon all the
kingdoms of the world, who were to be drunken, and spew, and fall to
rise no more, because of the sword which He would send among them.
But, when the Lord had accomplished all his mind on these nations, He
purposed, in turn, to punish this great monarch, and those who
succeeded him; and also the city and nation over which he reigned; and
finally to make it perpetual desolations. And all this for their pride
and haughtiness. The Lord exclaims: "Shall the ax boast itself against
him that heweth therewith, or shall the saw boast itself against him
that shaketh it?" etc. But, in order to trace the events of the return
of the Jews, and the other nations, from their seventy years'
captivity and bondage, and the punishment of Babylon, another and very
different character from that of Nebuchadnezzar is introduced by the
Prophets--one who is in Scripture termed the Lord's anointed. He may
be considered one of the most extraordinary characters that ever the
heathen world produced: his mildness, courage, perseverance, success,
and, above all, his strict obedience to the command of _that_ God
which neither he nor his fathers had known, all go to prove that
Isaiah was not mistaken when he called him by name, as the Lord's
anointed, to deliver the nations from bondage, to scourge and subdue
the greatest city and monarchy that have at any time existed on the
earth, and to restore the Jews, and rebuild their city and temple.
Indeed, he was one of those few whom the world never produces except
for extraordinary purposes. But let us hear the Prophet's own
description of him, Isaiah, chapter xlv: "Thus saith the Lord to his
anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue nations
before him: and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him
the two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut. I will go
before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in
pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. And I
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret
places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy
name, am the God of Israel. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel
mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee,
though thou hast not known me. I am the Lord, and there is none else,
there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known
me: that they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west,
that there is none besides me." In the 13th verse, he says: "I have
raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he
shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price
nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts." The reader will bear in mind
that Isaiah lived about one hundred years before the Jewish captivity,
and one hundred and seventy years before Cyrus caused their return.

Here I would pause and inquire, What power but the power of the great
God could enable one man to call another by name, a century before his
birth, and also to foretell correctly the history of his life? What
must have been his wonder and astonishment, when, after many years of
wars and commotions, during which he marched forth, conquering and to
conquer, gathering as a nest the riches of the nations, he at last
pitched his camp near the walls of the strongest hold in all the
earth? He gazed upon its walls of upwards of three hundred feet in
height, with its gates of brass and its bars of iron: the people
within feeling perfectly safe, with provisions enough to last the
inhabitants of the city for several years. How could he think of
taking that city? Who would not have shrunk from such an undertaking,
unless inspired by the great Jehovah? But, turning the river Euphrates
from its course, and marching under the walls of the city, in the
dried bed of the river, he found himself in possession of the city,
without any difficulty; for Belshazzar, the king, was drinking himself
drunk, with his nobles and concubines, and that, too, from the vessels
of the House of the Lord which his father had taken from Jerusalem,
and his knees had already smote together with horror, from the
handwriting on the wall, which Daniel had just been called in to
interpret, giving his kingdom to the Medes and Persians. Having
subdued this great monarchy, he seated himself upon the throne of
kingdoms; and, becoming familiar with Daniel, he was, no doubt,
introduced to an acquaintance with the Jewish records, and then the
mystery was unfolded: he could then see that God had called him by
name, that the Almighty hand girded him for the battle, and directed
all his work; he could then understand why the treasures of the earth
poured themselves into his bosom, and why the loins of kings had been
unloosed before him, and why the gates of brass had been opened, and
the bars of iron burst asunder. It was that he might know that there
was a God in Israel, and none else, and that all idols were as
nothing; that he might also restore the Jews, and rebuild their city
and temple, and fulfil God's purposes upon Babylon. He accordingly
issued his proclamation to the Jews to return, and for the nations to
assist them in rebuilding, "for," said he, "God hath commanded me to
build him an house at Jerusalem." Ezra, chapter i, 2, 3, says: "Thus
saith Cyrus, king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all
the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an
house at Jerusalem, which is in Judea. Who is there among you of all
his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which
is in Judea, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, he is the
God which is in Jerusalem."

What powerful argument, what mighty influence was it which caused
Cyrus to be convinced that it was the God of heaven who dwelt at
Jerusalem, who alone was God, and who had done all these things? He
had not been traditioned in the belief of the true God, nor of the
holy Scriptures. Nay, he had ever been very zealous in the worship of
idols; it was to idols he looked for assistance in the former part of
his life. I reply, it was the power of God, made manifest by prophecy
and its fulfilment; not in a spiritualized sense, not in some obscure,
uncertain, or dark, mysterious way, which was difficult to be
understood; but in positive, literal, plain demonstration, which none
could gainsay or resist. Isaiah says that this was the object the Lord
had in view when he revealed such plainness. And Cyrus manifested that
it had the desired effect.

I would here remark that when we come to treat of that part of
prophecy which yet remains to be fulfilled, we shall bring proof
positive that the heathen nations of the latter days are to be
convinced in the same way that Cyrus was; that is, there are certain
events plainly predicted in the Prophets, yet future, which, when
fulfilled, will convince all the heathen nations of the true God, and
they shall know that he hath spoken and performed it. And all the
great and learned men of Christendom, and all societies, who put any
other than a _literal_ construction on the word of prophecy, shall
stand confounded, and be constrained to acknowledge that all has come
to pass even as it is written.

But to return to our research of prophecy and its fulfilment. The
Prophets had not only predicted the reduction of Babylon by Cyrus, but
they had denounced its fate through all ages, until reduced to entire
desolation, never to be inhabited, not even as a temporary residence
for the wandering Arab: "And the Arabian shall not pitch tent there."
See Isaiah, xiii, 19-22.

Mr. Joseph Wolfe, the celebrated Jewish missionary, while traveling in
Chaldea, inquired of the Arabs whether they pitched their tents among
the ruins of Babylon, to which they replied in the negative, declaring
their fears that, should they do so, Nimrod's ghost would haunt them.
Thus all the predictions of the Prophets concerning that mighty city
have been fulfilled.

Edom also presents a striking fulfilment of plain and pointed
predictions in the Prophets. These predictions were pronounced upon
Edom at a time when its soil was very productive and well cultivated,
and everywhere abounding in flourishing towns and cities. But now its
cities have become heaps of desolate ruins, only inhabited by the
cormorant, bittern, and by wild beasts, serpents, etc., and its soil
has become barren; the Lord has cast upon it the line of confusion,
and the stones of emptiness, and it has been waste from generation to
generation, in express fulfilment of the word of prophecy.

We will now give a passing notice of the vision of Daniel, recorded in
the eighth chapter of his prophecies, concerning the ram and the goat.
The reader would do well to turn and read the whole chapter; but we
will more particularly notice the interpretation, as it was given him
by Gabriel, recorded from the nineteenth to the twenty-fifth verses.
And he said: "I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of
the indignation, for at the time appointed the end shall be. The ram
which thou sawest having two horns, are the kings of Media and Persia:
and the rough goat is the king of Grecia; and the great horn that is
between the eyes is the first king. Now that being broken, whereas
four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation,
but not in his power. And in the latter time of their kingdom, when
the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce countenance,
and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up; and his power shall
be mighty, but not by his own power; and he shall destroy wonderfully,
and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the
holy people; and through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand, and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and
by peace shall destroy many; he shall also stand up against the Prince
of princes; but he shall be broken without hand." In this vision we
have first presented the Medes and Persians, as they were to exist
until they were conquered by Alexander the Great. Now, it is a fact
well known that this empire waxed exceedingly great for some time
after the death of Daniel, pushing its conquests westward, northward,
and southward, so that none could stand before it; until Alexander,
the king of Grecia, came from the west, with a small army of chosen
men, and attacked the Persians upon the banks of the river, and
plunging his horse in, and his army following, they crossed, and
attacked the Persians, who stood to oppose them on the bank with many
times their number; but, notwithstanding their number, and their
advantage of the ground, they were totally routed, and the Grecians
proceeded to overrun and subdue the country, beating the Persians in a
number of pitched battles, until they were entirely subdued. It is
also well known that Alexander, the king of Greece, went forth from
nation to nation, subduing the world before him, until, having
conquered the world, he died at Babylon, at the age of thirty-two
years. And thus, when he had waxed strong, the great horn was broken,
and for it came up four notable ones towards the four winds of heaven.
His kingdom was divided among four of his generals, who never attained
unto his power. Now, in the latter time of their kingdom, when the
transgression of the Jewish nation was come to the full, the Roman
power destroyed the Jewish nation, took Jerusalem, caused the daily
sacrifice to cease, and not only that, bat afterwards destroyed the
mighty and holy people, that is, the Apostles and primitive
Christians, who were slain by the authorities at Rome.

Now, let me inquire, Does the history of these United States give a
plainer account of past events than Daniel's wisdom did of events
which were then future, and some of them reaching down the stream of
time for several hundred years, unfolding events which no human
sagacity could possibly have foreseen? Man, by his own sagacity, may
accomplish many things; he may plough the trackless ocean without wind
or tide in his favor; he may soar aloft amid the clouds without the
aid of wings; he may traverse the land with astonishing velocity
without the aid of beasts; or he may convey his thoughts to his
fellows by the aid of letters. But there is a principle which he can
never attain to; no, not even by the wisdom of ages combined; money
will not purchase it; it comes from God only, and is bestowed upon man
as a free gift. Says the Prophet to the idols, "_Tell us what shall
be, thai we may know that ye are gods_."

We will now proceed to show how exactly the prophecies were fulfilled
_literally_ in the person of Jesus Christ. "Behold," said the Prophet,
"a virgin shall conceive and bear a son." Again, Bethlehem should be
the place of his birth, and Egypt, where he sojourned with his
parents, the place out of which he was to be called. He turned aside
to Nazareth, for it was written, "He shall be called a Nazarene." He
rode into Jerusalem upon a colt, the foal of an ass, because the
Prophet had said, "Behold thy King cometh, meek and lowly, riding upon
a colt," etc. And again, saith the Prophet: "He shall be afflicted and
despised; he shall be a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; he
shall be led as a lamb to the slaughter, and, like a sheep dumb before
his shearers, so he opened not his mouth; in his humiliation his
judgment was taken away; and who shall declare his generation, for his
life is taken from the earth. He was wounded for our transgressions,
and by his stripes we are healed; he was numbered with the
transgressors; he made his grave with the rich." Not a bone of him is
broken; they divide his raiment; cast lots for his vesture; give him
gall and vinegar to drink; betray him for thirty pieces of silver; and
finally, when it was finished, he rested in the tomb until the third
day, and then rose triumphant, without seeing corruption. Now, kind
reader, had you walked up and down with our dear Redeemer during his
whole sojourn in the flesh, and had you taken pains to record the
particular circumstances of his life and death, as they occurred from
time to time, your history would not be a plainer one than the
Prophets gave of him hundreds of years before he was born. There is
one thing we would do well to notice concerning the manner in which
the Apostles interpreted prophecy, and that is this--they simply
quoted it, and recorded its literal fulfilment. By pursuing this
course, they were enabled to bring it home to the hearts of the people
in the Jewish synagogues, with such convincing proof that they were
constrained to believe the supposed impostor whom they had crucified
was the Messiah. But had they once dreamed of rendering a
spiritualizing or uncertain application, like the teachers of the
present day, all would have been uncertainty and doubt, and
demonstration would have vanished from the earth.

Having taken a view of the Old Testament Prophets, concerning prophecy
and its fulfilment, and having shown clearly that nothing but a
literal fulfilment was intended, the objector may inquire whether the
same mode will apply to the predictions contained in the New
Testament. We will therefore bring a few important instances of
prophecy, and its fulfilment, from the New Testament; after which we
shall be prepared to enter the vast field which is still future. One
of the most remarkable prophecies in sacred writ is recorded by Luke,
chap, xxi, 20-24: "And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with
armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them
which are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let them which are in
the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries
enter thereinto; for these be the days of vengeance, that all things
which are written may be fulfilled. But woe unto them that are with
child, and to them that give suck in those days; for there shall be
great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people; and they shall
fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all
nations; and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." This prophecy involves the
fate of Jerusalem and the temple, and the whole Jewish nation, for at
least eighteen hundred years. About the year seventy, the Roman army
compassed Jerusalem. The disciples remembered the warning which had
been given them by their Lord and Master forty years before, and fled
to the mountains. The city of Jerusalem was taken, after a long and
tedious siege, in which the Jews suffered the extreme of famine,
pestilence and the sword; filling houses with the dead, for want of a
place to bury them, while women ate their own children, for want of
all things. In this struggle there perished, in Judea, near one
million and a half of Jews, besides those taken captive. Their country
was laid waste, their city burned, their temple destroyed, and the
miserable remnant dispersed abroad into all the nations of the earth;
in which situation they have continued ever since, being driven from
one nation to another, often falsely accused of the worst of crimes,
for which they have been banished and their goods confiscated. Indeed,
they have been mostly accounted as outlaws among the various nations;
the soles of their feet have found no rest, and they have been a hiss
and a byword; and people have said, "These are the people of the Lord,
and are gone forth out of his land."

During all this time the Gentiles have possessed the land of Canaan,
and trodden under foot the holy city where their forefathers
worshipped the Lord. Now, in this long captivity, the Jews have never
lost sight of the promises respecting their return. Their eyes have
watched and failed with longing for the day, when they might possess
again that blessed inheritance bequeathed to their forefathers; when
they might again rear their city and temple, and re-establish their
priesthood, and worship as in days of old. Indeed they have made
several attempts to return, but were always frustrated in all their
attempts; for it was an unalterable decree, that Jerusalem should be
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles should
be fulfilled. On the subject of this long dispersion, Moses and the
Prophets have written very plainly; indeed, Moses even mentioned the
particulars of their eating their children secretly in the siege and
in the straitness, wherewith their enemies should besiege them in all
their gates. Whoever will read the twenty-eighth of Deuteronomy, will
read the history of what has befallen the Jews, foretold by Moses with
all the clearness that characterizes the history of past events, and
all this thousands of years before its accomplishment.

Our next is found in Acts xxi, 10, 11, where a Prophet named Agabus
took Paul's girdle and bound his own hands and feet, and said: "Thus
saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles." The fulfilment of this prediction is too well known to need
any description. We therefore proceed to notice a prophecy of Paul,
recorded in 2 Tim. iv, 3, 4: "For the time will come, when they will
not endure sound doctrine, but, after their own lusts, shall they heap
to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away
their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." This
prophecy has been fulfilled to the very letter; for it applies to
every religious teacher who has arisen from that day unto the present,
except those commissioned by direct _revelation_ and _inspired_ by the
_Holy Ghost_. But, to convince the reader of its full accomplishment,
we need only point to the numberless priests of the day who preach for
hire, and divine for money, and who receive their authority from their
fellow man; and as to the fables to which they are turned, we need
only to mention the spiritualizings and private interpretations which
salute our ears from almost every religious press and pulpit.

But there is another prophecy of Paul well worth our attention, as
illustrative of the times in which we live; it is found in the first
five verses of the third chapter of 2 Timothy: "This know also that in
the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient
to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof: from such turn away." From the last verse of this quotation
we learn to our _astonishment_ that this _sum_ of awful _wickedness_
applies to _professors_ of _religion_ ONLY; that is, this would be the
character of the (so called) Christian part of the community in the
last days. Do not startle, kind reader; we do not make the application
without proof _positive_ to the point, for, remember, non-professors
have no _form of godliness_, but those ungodly characters spoken of
were to have a _form of godliness_, _denying the power thereof_. But,
if you doubt Paul's testimony on the subject, look around you, examine
for yourselves. "By their fruits ye shall know them." My heart is
pained while I write. Alas, has it come to this; has the Spirit of
Truth removed the veil of obscurity from the last days, only to
present us with the vision of a fallen people; an apostate church,
full of all manner of abominations, and even despising those who are
good; while they themselves have nothing left but the form of
godliness, denying the power of God; that is, setting aside the direct
inspiration and supernatural gifts of the Spirit, which ever
characterize the Church of Christ? Was it for this only that the Holy
Spirit opened to the view of holy men the events of unborn time,
enabling them to gaze upon the opening glories of the latter days? O
ye Prophets and Apostles, ye holy men of old, what have you done if
you stop here; if your prophetic vision only extended down the stream
of time to the present year? Alas! you have filled our minds with
sorrow and despair: the Jews you have left wandering in sorrow and
darkness, far from all their hearts hold most dear on earth; their
land a desolation, their city and temple in ruins, and they, without
the knowledge of the true Messiah. The Gentiles, after partaking of
the root and fatness of the tame olive tree, having fallen, after the
same example of unbelief, are left without fruit, dead, plucked up by
the roots, with naught but a form of godliness; while the powers that
characterized the ancient church have fled from among men. Is this the
consummation of all your labors? Was it for this you searched, toiled,
bled, and died? I pause for a reply; if you have a word of comfort yet
in store, concerning the future, let it quickly speak, lest our souls
should linger in the dark valley of sorrow and despair!




CHAPTER II.

ON THE FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY YET FUTURE.

What is Prophecy but History reversed?


Having made the discovery and produced sufficient proof that the
prophecies, thus far, have been LITERALLY fulfilled--to the very
letter--we hope the reader will never lose sight of the same rule with
regard to those yet future. And, while we stand upon the threshold of
futurity, with the wonders of unborn time about to open upon our view,
presenting before our astonished vision the most mighty and majestic
scenes, the most astonishing revolutions, the most extraordinary
destructions, as well as the most miraculous displays of the power and
majesty of Jehovah, in His great restoration of His long dispersed
covenant people from the four quarters of the earth: I say, as these
scenes are about to open to our view, let us bow before the great I
AM, in the name of Jesus, and pray in faith for His Spirit to enlarge
our hearts and enlighten our minds, that we may understand and believe
all that is written, however miraculous it may be. But, O! kind
reader, whoever you are, if you are not prepared for persecution, if
you are unprepared to have your name cast out as evil, if you cannot
bear to be called a knave, an impostor, or madman, or one that hath a
devil; or if you are bound by the creeds of men to believe just so
much and no more, you had better stop here; for if you were to believe
the things written in the Bible that are yet to come, you will be
under the necessity of believing miracles, signs and wonders,
revelations, and manifestations of the power of God, even beyond
anything that any former generation has witnessed; yes, you will
believe that the waters will be divided and Israel go through dryshod,
as they journey to their own land, as they did in the days of Moses;
for no man ever yet believed the Bible without believing and expecting
such glorious events in the latter days. And I will now venture to say
that a believer in the Bible would be something that very few men have
ever seen in this generation, with all its boasted religion: for there
is a great difference between believing the book to be true when shut,
and believing the things therein written. It is now considered in
Christendom a great disgrace not to believe the Bible when _shut_: but
whosoever tries the experiment will find it a greater disgrace to
believe that the things therein written will surely come to pass.
Indeed, it is our firm belief in the things written in the Bible, and
careful teaching of them, that is one great cause of the persecution
we suffer. For let the prophecies be understood by the people, and let
them roll on in their fulfilment, and this will blow to the four winds
every religious craft in Christendom, and cause the kingdom of Christ
to rise upon their ruins, while the actual _knowledge_ of the _truth_
will cover the earth as the waters do the sea.

Having said so much by way of caution, if there are any of my readers
so bold, and regardless of consequences, as to dare with me to gaze
upon the future, we will commence with Isaiah xi, 11, 12, 15, 16: "And
it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand
again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which
shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and
from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from
the islands of the sea. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations,
and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. And the LORD
shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea; and with his
