entire chapter.) Looking up, they beheld a man descending. He was
clothed in a white robe, and as He reached the earth He said: "Behold,
I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the
world. * * * Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your
hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails
in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of
Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the
sins of the world."--(Verses 10:14.)

27. Having thus declared Himself, Christ proceeded to instruct the
people in the plan of the gospel as He had preached it, and in the
constitution of the Church as He had established it in the east. He
visited the Nephite people on subsequent occasions, taught them many
of the precepts previously given to the Jews; emphasized the doctrine
of baptism and other ordinances essential to salvation; instituted the
sacrament in commemoration of His atoning death; chose and
commissioned twelve apostles, on whom He conferred authority in the
Church; explained the importance of designating the organization by
its proper name--the Church of Christ; and announced the fulfilment of
the law of Moses and the fact that it was thenceforth superseded by
the gospel embodied within the Church as established by Himself. In
plan of organization, in doctrine and precept, and in prescribed
ordinances, the Church of Christ in the west was the counterpart of
the Church in Palestine.

---

28. Thus in the meridian of time the Church of God was founded on both
sides of the earth. In its pristine simplicity and beauty it exhibited
the majesty of a divine institution. It is now our saddening duty to
consider the decline of spiritual power within the Church, and the
eventual apostasy of the Church itself.


NOTES.

1. _Conditions at the Beginning of the Christian Era_. "At the birth
of Christ this amazing federation of the world into one great monarchy
had been finally achieved. Augustus, at Rome, was the sole power to
which all nations looked. * * * No prince, no king, no potentate of
any name could break the calm which such a universal dominion secured.
* * * It was in such a unique era that Jesus Christ was born. The
whole earth lay hushed in profound peace. All lands lay freely open to
the message of mercy and love which He came to announce. Nor was the
social and moral condition of the world at large, at the birth of
Christ, less fitting for His advent than the political. The prize of
universal power struggled for through sixty years of plots and
desolating civil wars, had been won at last by Augustus. Sulla and
Marius, Pompey and Caesar, had led their legions against each other,
alike in Italy and the provinces, and had drenched the earth with
blood. Augustus himself had reached the throne only after thirteen
years of war, which involved regions wide apart. The world was
exhausted by the prolonged agony of such a strife; it sighed for
repose." (Cunningham Geikie, "The Life and Works of Christ," New York,
1894; vol. 1, p. 25.)

"The Roman empire, at the birth of Christ, was less agitated by wars
and turmoils than it had been for many years before. For though I
cannot assent to the opinion of those who, following the account of
Orosius, maintain that the temple of Janus was then shut, and that
wars and discords absolutely ceased throughout the world, yet it is
certain that the period in which our Savior descended upon earth may
be justly styled the 'pacific age,' if we compare it with the
preceding times. And indeed the tranquillity that then reigned was
necessary to enable the ministers of Christ to execute with success
their sublime commission to the human race." (Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical
History," Cent. I, Part I; ch. 1:4).

2. _Paganism at the Beginning of the Christian Era_. "Every nation
then had its respective gods, over which presided one more excellent
than the rest; yet in such a manner that this supreme deity was
himself controlled by the rigid empire of the fates, or what the
philosophers called 'external necessity.' The gods of the east were
different from those of the Gauls, the Germans, and the other northern
nations. The Grecian divinities differed widely from those of the
Egyptians, who deified plants, animals, and a great variety of the
productions both of nature and art. Each people also had their own
particular manner of worshipping and appeasing their respective
deities, entirely different from the sacred rites of other countries.
* * * One thing, indeed, which at first sight appears very remarkable,
is, that this variety of religions and of gods neither produced wars
nor dissensions among the different nations, the Egyptians excepted.
Nor is it perhaps necessary to except even them, since their wars
undertaken for their gods cannot be looked upon with propriety as
wholly of a religious nature. Each nation suffered its neighbors to
follow their own method of worship, to adore their own gods, to enjoy
their own rites and ceremonies, and discovered no sort of displeasure
at their diversity of sentiments in religious matters. There is,
however, little wonderful in this spirit of mutual toleration, when we
consider that they all looked upon the world as one great empire,
divided into various provinces, over every one of which a certain
order of divinities presided; and that therefore none could behold
with contempt the gods of other nations, or force strangers to pay
homage to theirs. The Romans exercised this toleration, in the amplest
manner. For, though they would not allow any changes to be made in the
religions that were publicly professed in the empire, nor any new form
of worship to be openly introduced, yet they granted to their citizens
a full liberty of observing in private the sacred rites of other
nations, and of honoring foreign deities (whose worship contained
nothing inconsistent with the interests and laws of the republic) with
feasts, temples, consecrated groves and such like testimonies of
homage and respect." (Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. I, Part I; ch.
1:7-8.)

3. _Rapid Growth of the Church_. Eusebius, who wrote in the early part
of the fourth century, speaking of the first decade after the Savior's
ascension, says:

"Thus, then, under a celestial influence, and co-operation, the
doctrine of the Savior, like the rays of the sun, quickly irradiated
the whole world. Presently, in accordance with divine prophecy, the
sound of His inspired evangelists and apostles had gone throughout all
the earth, and their words to the ends of the world. Throughout every
city and village, like a replenished barn floor, churches were rapidly
abounding and filled with members from every people. Those who, in
consequence of the delusions that had descended to them from their
ancestors, had been fettered by the ancient disease of idolatrous
superstition, were now liberated by the power of Christ, through the
teachings and miracles of His messengers." (Eusebius, "Ecclesiastical
History," Book I, ch. 3.)

4. _Divine Instrumentality in the Apostolic Ministry_. "When we
consider the rapid progress of Christianity among the Gentile nations,
and the poor and feeble instruments by which this great and amazing
event was immediately effected, we naturally have recourse to an
omnipotent and invisible hand, as its true and proper cause. For,
unless we suppose here a divine interposition, how was it possible
that men, destitute of all human aid, without credit or riches,
learning, or eloquence, could, in so short a time, persuade a
considerable part of mankind to abandon the religion of their
ancestors? How was it possible, that an handful of apostles, who, as
fishermen and publicans, must have been contemned by their own nation,
and as Jews must have been odious to all others, could engage the
learned and mighty, as well as the simple and those of low degree, to
forsake their favorite prejudices, and to embrace a new religion which
was an enemy to their corrupt passions? And, indeed, there were
undoubted marks of a celestial power perpetually attending their
ministry. Their very language, an incredible energy, an amazing power
of sending light into the understanding and conviction into the
heart." (Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History," Cent. I, Part 1, ch. 4:8.)

5. _Nephites and Lamanites_. The progenitors of the Nephite nation
"were led from Jerusalem 600 B. C., by Lehi, a Jewish prophet of the
tribe of Manasseh. His immediate family, at the time of their
departure from Jerusalem, comprised his wife Sariah, and their sons
Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi; at a later stage of the history,
daughters are mentioned, but whether any of these were born before the
family exodus we are not told. Beside his own family, the colony of
Lehi included Zoram and Ishmael, the latter an Israelite of the tribe
of Ephraim. Ishmael, with his family, joined Lehi in the wilderness;
and his descendants were numbered with the nation of whom we are
speaking. The company journeyed somewhat east of south, keeping near
the borders of the Red Sea; then changing their course to the
eastward, crossed the peninsula of Arabia; and there, on the shores of
the Arabian Sea, built and provisioned a vessel in which they
committed themselves to Divine care upon the waters. Their voyage
carried them eastward across the Indian Ocean, then over the south
Pacific Ocean to the western coast of South America, whereon they
landed (590 B. C.) * * * The people established themselves on what to
them was the land of promise; many children were born, and in the
course of a few generations a numerous posterity held possession of
the land. After the death of Lehi, a division occurred, some of the
people accepting as their leader Nephi, who had been duly appointed to
the prophetic office; while the rest proclaimed Laman, the eldest of
Lehi's sons, as their chief. Henceforth the divided people were known
as Nephites and Lamanites respectively. At times they observed toward
each other fairly friendly relations; but generally they were opposed,
the Lamanites manifesting implacable hatred and hostility toward their
Nephite kindred. The Nephites advanced in the arts of civilization,
built large cities, and established prosperous commonwealths; yet they
often fell into transgression; and the Lord chastened them by making
their foes victorious. They spread northward, occupying the northern
part of South America; then, crossing the Isthmus, they extended their
domain over the southern, central, and eastern portions of what is now
the United States of America. The Lamanites, while increasing in
numbers, fell under the curse of darkness; they became dark in skin
and benighted in spirit, forgot the God of their fathers, lived a wild
nomadic life, and degenerated into the fallen state in which the
American Indians,--their lineal descendants,--were found by those who
re-discovered the western continent in later times." (The Author,
"Articles of Faith," Lect. 14:7, 8.)




CHAPTER II.

**The Apostasy Predicted**.


1. In proceeding with our present inquiry we accept as demonstrated
facts the establishment of the Church of Christ under the Savior's
personal administration and the rapid growth of the Church in the
early period of the apostolic ministry.

2. A question of the utmost importance is: Has the Church of Christ,
thus authoritatively established, maintained an organized existence
upon the earth from the apostolic age to the present? Other questions
are suggested by the first. If the Church has continued as an earthly
organization, where lies the proof or evidence of legitimate
succession in priestly authority, and which among the multitude of
contending sects or churches of the present day is the actual
possessor of the holy priesthood originally committed to the Church by
the Christ, its founder?

3. Again, have the spiritual gifts and graces by which the early
Church was characterized and distinguished been manifest on earth
through the centuries that have passed since the meridian of time; and
if so, in which of the numerous churches of these modern times do we
find such signs following the professed believers?--(See Mark 16:17.)

4. We affirm that with the passing of the so-called apostolic age the
Church gradually drifted into a condition of apostasy, whereby
succession in the priesthood was broken; and that the Church, as an
earthly organization operating under divine direction and having
authority to officiate in spiritual ordinances, ceased to exist.

5. If therefore the Church of Christ is to be found upon the earth
to-day it must have been re-established by divine authority; and the
holy priesthood must have been restored to the world from which it was
lost by the apostasy of the Primitive Church.--(See Note 1, end of
chapter.)

6. We affirm that the great apostasy was foretold by the Savior
Himself while He lived as a Man among men, and by His inspired
prophets both before and after the period of His earthly probation.
And further, we affirm that a rational interpretation of history
demonstrates the fact of this great and general apostasy.

7. Before we take up in detail the specific predictions referred to,
and the evidence of their dread fulfilment, we may profitably devote
brief attention to certain general considerations.

8. Respecting the foreknowledge of God, let it not be said that divine
omniscience is of itself a determining cause whereby events are
inevitably brought to pass. A mortal father who knows the weaknesses
and frailties of his son may by reason of that knowledge sorrowfully
predict the calamities and sufferings awaiting his wayward boy. He may
foresee in that son's future a forfeiture of blessings that could have
been won, loss of position, self-respect, reputation and honor; even
the dark shadows of a felon's cell and the sight of a drunkard's grave
may appear in the saddening visions of that fond father's soul; yet,
convinced by experience of the impossibility of bringing about that
son's reform, he foresees the dread developments of the future, and he
finds but sorrow and anguish in his knowledge. Can it be said that the
father's foreknowledge is a cause of the son's sinful life? The son,
perchance, has reached his maturity; he is the master of his own
destiny; a free agent unto himself. The father is powerless to control
by force or to direct by arbitrary command; and while he would gladly
make any effort or sacrifice to save his son from the fate impending,
he fears for what seems to be an awful certainty. But surely that
thoughtful, prayerful, loving parent does not contribute to the son's
waywardness because of his knowledge. To reason otherwise would be to
say that a neglectful father, who takes not the trouble to study the
nature and character of his son, who shuts his eyes to sinful
tendencies, and rests in careless indifference as to the probable
future, will by his very heartlessness be benefiting his child,
because his lack of forethought cannot operate as a contributory cause
to dereliction.

9. Our Heavenly Father has a full knowledge of the nature and
dispositions of each of His children, a knowledge gained by long
observation and experience in the past eternity of our primeval
childhood; a knowledge compared with which that gained by earthly
parents through mortal experience with their children is
infinitesimally small. By reason of that surpassing knowledge, God
reads the future of child and children, of men individually and of men
collectively as communities and nations; He knows what each will do
under given conditions, and sees the end from the beginning. His
foreknowledge is based on intelligence and reason; He foresees the
future as a state which naturally and surely will be; not as one which
must be because He has arbitrarily willed that it shall be.

10. But, it may be argued that in the illustrative instance given
above--that of the earthly parent and the wayward son,--the father
had not the power to change the sad course of sin whereby his son is
hastening to ignominy and destruction; while the omnipotent Father can
save if He will. In reply this is to be said: The Father of souls has
endowed His children with the divine birthright of free agency; He
does not and will not control them by arbitrary force; He impels no
man toward sin; He compels none to righteousness. Unto man has been
given freedom to act for himself; and, associated with this
independence, is the fact of strict responsibility and the assurance
of individual accountability. In the judgment with which we shall be
judged, all the conditions and circumstances of our lives shall be
considered. The inborn tendencies due to heredity, the effect of
environment whether conducive to good or evil, the wholesome teachings
of youth, or the absence of good instruction--these and all other
contributory elements must be taken into account in the rendering of a
just verdict as to the soul's guilt or innocence. Nevertheless, the
divine wisdom makes plain what will be the result with given
conditions operating on known natures and dispositions of men; while
every individual is free to choose good or evil within the limits of
the many conditions existing and operative..--(See Note 2, end of
chapter.)

11. Another matter worthy of thought in the present connection is
this: Is the fact of the great apostasy,--the virtual overthrow and
destruction of the Church established by Jesus Christ,--to be regarded
as an instance of failure in the Lord's plans? Is it a case of defeat
in which Satan was victor over Christ? Consider the following. What
mortal has yet measured the standard by which Omniscience gages
success or failure? Who dares affirm that what man hails as triumph or
deplores as defeat will be so accounted when tested by the principles
of eternal reckoning?

12. The history of the world abounds with instances of the temporary
triumph of evil, of justice seemingly miscarried, of divine plans for
the time being frustrated, of God's purposes opposed and their
consummation delayed.

13. We read of the Lord's covenant with Israel? Unto Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob He declared that their descendants should be a people chosen
for His special service among the nations. Through that lineage the
Savior of mankind was to be born; in the posterity of Abraham all
nations of the earth were to be blessed. Blessings beyond the heart of
man to conceive, beyond the mind of man to comprehend, were promised
on condition of loyal allegiance to Him who proclaimed Himself their
God and their King. Moreover the Lord predicted calamity and
suffering, and individual affliction and national disgrace, if Israel
departed from the service of Jehovah and yielded to the enticements of
their heathen neighbors who knew not God. Think you that the Lord was
ignorant of the course His people would choose? Did He fail to foresee
that Israel would follow the evil way, forfeiting the blessings and
reaping the harvest of sorrow? Jehovah's plans failed not, though the
realization of the blessings so abundantly promised has been long
delayed. Equally forceful with the prediction of calamity in case of
sin, was the promise of eventual restoration to favor. The dispersion
of Israel already accomplished, was to be followed by the gathering of
Israel now in progress.--(See the Author's "Articles of Faith,"
lectures 17 and 18.)

14. What would have been the world's verdict as to the success or
failure of the mission of the Christ, had a vote been taken at the
time of the crucifixion? Seemingly His enemies had triumphed; He who
proclaimed Himself the Messiah, the Son of God, the resurrection and
the life, over whom death could not prevail, had suffered the fate of
malefactors, and His body was in the tomb. But the verdict of the
centuries, which is the verdict of the eternities to come, acclaims
that "failure" as the greatest triumph of the ages, the victory of
victories.

15. Even so with the Church. For a season the powers of evil
triumphed, and the spirit of apostasy ruled. But beyond the darkness
of the spiritual night the glorious dawn of the restoration was seen
in prophetic vision, and both the night with its horrors, and the
awakening day with its splendor, were foreseen and foretold.

16. In our study of the predictions of the apostasy as embodied in
scripture and of their realization as attested by later history, we
shall recognize two distinct phases or stages of the progressive
falling away as follows:

    (1) Apostasy _from_ the Church; and
    (2) The apostasy _of_ the Church.

17. In the first stage we have to deal with the forsaking of the truth
and severance from the Church by individuals, at times few, at other
times many. Such conditions can scarcely be considered otherwise than
as natural and inevitable. History fails to present any example of
great undertakings upon which multitudes enter with enthusiasm, and
from which many do not desert. Unless such cases of individual
abandonment are so numerous as to show the operation of some vital
cause of disaffection, we would not need the authority of divine
prediction and inspired prophecy to explain the occurrence. We find,
however, that apostasy from the Primitive Church was widespread and
general, and that the causes leading to such a condition were of vital
significance.

18. In the second of the two stages already specified we are
confronted with conditions of far greater import than those attending
individual secession from the Church; for here we find the Church
sinking to the degraded level of a human institution, with plan of
organization and mode of operation foreign to the constitution of the
original, without priesthood or authority to officiate in spiritual
ordinances, and devoid of the gifts and graces with which the Savior
endowed His Church at the time of its establishment. In short, we find
the Church itself apostate, boasting of temporal power, making its own
laws, teaching its own dogmas, preserving only a form of godliness,
while denying the power thereof.--(See II Tim. 3:1-6.)

**Specific Predictions of the Apostasy**.

19. The Lord foresaw the great and general departure from the
principles of righteousness, and from the beginning knew that men
would set up their own forms of worship, wrongfully claiming divine
authority for the same. Through the mouths of His chosen prophets He
has repeatedly predicted the inevitable event.--(See note 3, end of
chapter.)

20. Among the prophecies antedating the birth of Christ the following
may be noted. Isaiah beheld in vision the condition of the earth in
the era of spiritual darkness, a period in which all classes would be
involved in a general condition of unrighteousness, a time when the
world of mankind would be in a helpless and practically hopeless
condition. He pictures the earth mourning and languishing in
desolation and assigns the reason for the sad condition as follows:
"The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they
have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the
everlasting covenant."--(Isaiah 24:5; read verses 1 to 6 inclusive.)

21. It may be thought that this prophecy has reference to a violation
of the law of Moses under which ancient Israel lived. Let it be
remembered, however, that the Mosaic law is nowhere called an
everlasting covenant. The covenant between the Lord and Abraham
antedated the giving of the law by four hundred and thirty years, and,
as pointed out by Paul,--(Galatians 3:17; read the entire chapter.) In
his epistle to the Galatians, whom he designates as foolish because of
their confusing the law of Moses and the gospel of Christ, the law
could not nullify the earlier covenant the fulfillment of which could
come only through Christ. The "law," by which the inspired apostle
plainly means the Mosaic statutes, was but a preparation for the
"faith," by which latter expression the gospel as revealed by Christ
is clearly intended. "But before faith came," says Paul, "we were kept
under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be
revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is
come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female: for ye are all one in Jesus Christ. And if ye be Christ's then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise."--(Verses
23-29.)

22. It is evident from the tenor of the entire chapter, that while the
gospel was preached unto Abraham, and covenant made with him relating
to the coming of the Messiah through his posterity, the gospel did not
abide with Israel, and this because of transgression;--(Verse 19.) but
in lieu thereof the Mosaic law was instituted as a disciplinary
measure, temporary in character, destined to be superseded by the
gospel of Christ, and assuredly not an everlasting covenant. On the
other hand, the blood of Christ, through the shedding of which the
atoning sacrifice was wrought, is distinctively called "the blood of
the everlasting covenant,"--(Hebrews 13:20.)

23. It is evident then that Isaiah's fateful prophecy relating to the
breaking of the everlasting covenant could have no reference to a
departure from the Mosaic requirements, but must refer to a then
future condition of apostasy following the establishment of the
everlasting covenant. Moreover, part of the great prediction,
referring to the burnings and widespread calamities,--(See Isaiah
24:6.) yet awaits its complete fulfillment.

24. Another prediction applicable to the period when there should be
no Church of Christ to be found, and when, in consequence there should
be lamentation and suffering, is that of Amos. "Behold, the days come,
saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of
the Lord: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north
even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, and shall not find it."--(Amos 8:11, 12.)

25. Christ instructed His followers in terms at once direct and
conclusive, as to the apostasy then impending. In reply to certain
inquiries concerning the signs by which His second advent would be
heralded, He said: "Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall
come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many."--(Matt.
24:4, 5.) Then He told of approaching wars and political disturbances,
and added: "And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one
another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall
rise and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the
love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end,
the same shall be saved."--(Verses 10-13. See note 4, end of chapter.)

26. Further specifying the conditions incident to the growing
apostasy, Christ declared to His disciples: "Then shall they deliver
you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of
all nations for my name's sake."--(Verse 9.) And again: "Then if any
man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.
For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall
shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that if it were possible, they
shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told you before.
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go
not forth; behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it
not."--(Verses 23-26.)

27. After the departure of Christ from earth His apostles continued to
warn the people of the darkness to come. In that memorable address to
the elders of Ephesus, when, as he told them, they were looking upon
his face for the last time, Paul reminded his hearers of the
instructions he had previously given them, and then charged them with
this solemn warning: "For I know this, that after my departing shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of
your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them."--(Acts 20:29, 30; read verses 17 to 31
incl.)

28. Not only would outsiders ingratiate themselves with the saints for
purposes of selfish gain,--wolves entering in, and not sparing the
flock,--but schisms and divisions were imminent; and these dissensions
were to come through some then present,--men who would aspire to
leadership, and who would set up their own doctrines, thus drawing
disciples away from the Church and unto themselves.

29. The same apostle warns Timothy of the approaching apostasy, and
refers to some of the erroneous teachings that would be impressed upon
misguided people,--teachings which he calls "doctrines of devils." He
admonishes Timothy to put the brethren in remembrance of these things,
as is becoming in a good minister of Christ, "nourished up in the
words of faith and of good doctrine." Note the inspired prediction:
"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their
conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth."--(I Tim.
4:1-3. See Note 5, end of chapter.)

30. In a second epistle to his beloved Timothy, while laboring under
the premonition that his martyrdom was near at hand, Paul urges zeal
and energy in the preaching of the gospel; for the shadows of the
apostasy were gathering about the Church. His admonition is pathetic
in its earnestness: "I charge thee therefore, before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing
and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. For the
time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables."--(II Tim. 4:1-4.)

31. In addressing the Thessalonian saints, Paul warns them against the
error strongly advocated by some that the day of Christ's second
advent was then near at hand. It appears that deception was being
practiced, and that even forgery was suspected, for the apostle
instructs the people that they be not deceived "by word nor by letter
as from us." The admonition is forceful: "Now we beseech you,
brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto Him, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled,
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the
day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for
that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshiped;
so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that
he is God."--(II Thess. 1:2-14.) We shall see how painfully literal
has been the fulfilment of this prophecy in the blasphemous
assumptions of the apostate church, centuries later.

32. The Apostle Peter prophesied in language so plain that none may
fail to comprehend, concerning the heresies that would be preached as
doctrine in the period of the apostasy; and he reminds the people that
there were false teachers in olden times, even as there would be in
times then future: "But there were false prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall
follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of. And through covetousness shall they with feigned
words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not."--(II Peter 2:1-3.
Read the entire chapter, noting the description of conditions existing
in the world today.)

33. Jude, the brother of James, in his general epistle to the saints,
reminds them of earlier warnings: "But, beloved, remember ye the words
which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; How
that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who
should walk after their own ungodly lusts."--(Jude 17, 18.)

34. John, who is called the Revelator, saw in vision the state of the
world in the days then future. Describing the spirit of
unrighteousness as a hideous beast, and its author, Satan, as the
dragon, he says: "And they worshiped the dragon which gave power unto
the beast: and they worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the
beast? who is able to make war with him? * * * And he opened his mouth
in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle,
and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to make war
with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over
all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the
earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of
life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. If any man
have an ear, let him hear."--(Rev. 13:4,6-9.)

35. Note another prophecy based on the vision of John the Revelator.
