spiritual life more than what we know nourishes ours, and if his heart
and will twined more tenaciously round the fragments of revelation
which he possessed, and drew from them more support and strength than
we do from the complete Gospel which we have.

Brethren, what makes us Christians is not the theology we have in our
heads, but the faith and love we have in our hearts. We must, indeed,
have a clear statement of truth in orderly propositions--that is, a
system of dogmas--to have anything to trust to at all. There can be no
saving faith in an unseen Person, except through the medium of thoughts
concerning Him, which thoughts put into words are a creed. The
antithesis which is often eagerly urged upon us--not doctrines, but
Christ--is a very incomplete and misleading one. 'Christ' is a mere
name, empty of all significance till it is filled with definite
statements of who and what Christ is. But whilst I, for my part,
believe that we must have doctrines to make Christ a reality and an
object of faith to grasp at all, I would urge all the more earnestly,
because I thus believe, that, when we have these doctrines, it is not
the creed that saves, but the faith. We are united to Christ, not by
the doctrine of His nature and work, needful as that is, but by
trusting in Him as that which the doctrine declares Him to
be--Redeemer, Friend, Sacrifice, Divine Lover of our souls. Let us
always remember that it is not the amount of religious knowledge which
I have got, but the amount which I use, that determines my religious
position and character. Most of us have in our creeds principles that
have no influence upon our moral and active life; and, if so, it
matters not one whit how pure, how accurate, how comprehensive, how
consistent, how scriptural my conceptions of the Gospel may be. If they
are not powers in my soul, they only increase my responsibility and my
liability to condemnation. The dry light of the understanding is of no
use to anybody. You must turn your creed into a faith before it has
power to bless and save.

There are hosts of so-called Christians who get no more good out of the
most solemn articles of their orthodox belief than if they were
heathens. What in the use of your saying that you believe in God the
Father Almighty, when there is no child's love and happy confidence in
your heart? What the better are you for believing in Jesus Christ, His
divine nature, His death and glory, when you have no reliance on Him,
nor any least flutter of trembling love towards Him? Is your belief in
the Holy Ghost of the smallest consequence, if you do not yield to His
hallowing power? What does it matter that you believe in the
forgiveness of sins, so long as you do not care a rush whether yours
are pardoned or no? And is it anything to you or to God that you
believe in the life everlasting, if all your work, and hopes, and
longings are confined to 'this bank and shoal of time'? Are you any
more a Christian because of all that intellectual assent to these
solemn verities? Is not your life like some secularised monastic
chamber, with holy texts carved on the walls, and saintly images
looking down from glowing windows on revellers and hucksters who defile
its floor? Your faith, not your creed, determines your religion. Many a
'true believer' is a real 'infidel.'

Thank God that the soul may be wedded to Christ, even while a very
partial conception of Christ is in the understanding. The more complete
and adequate the creed, indeed, the mightier and more fruitful in
blessing will the faith naturally be; and every portion of the full orb
of the Sun of Righteousness which is eclipsed by the shadow of our
intellectual misconceptions, will diminish the light and warmth which
falls upon our souls. It is no part of our duty to pronounce what is
the minimum of a creed which faith needs for its object. For myself, I
confess that I do not understand how the spiritual life can be
sustained in its freshness and fervour, in its fulness and reality,
without a belief in the divinity and saving work of Jesus Christ. But
with that belief for the centre which faith grasps, the rest may vary
indefinitely. All who stand around that centre, some nearer, some
further off, some mazed in errors which others have cast behind them,
some of them seeing and understanding more, and some less of Him and of
His work--are His. He loves them, and will save them all. Knowledge
varies. The faith which unites to God remains the same.

2. We may gather from this incident another consideration, namely, that
_Faith has its noblest office in detaching from the present_.

All his life long, from the day of his captivity, Joseph was an
Egyptian in outward seeming. He filled his place at Pharaoh's court,
but his dying words open a window into his soul, and betray how little
he had felt that he belonged to the order of things in the midst of
which he had been content to live. This man, too, surrounded by an
ancient civilisation, and dwelling among granite temples and solid
pyramids and firm-based sphinxes, the very emblems of eternity,
confessed that here he had no continuing city, but sought one to come.
As truly as his ancestors who dwelt in tabernacles, like Abraham
journeying with his camels and herds, and pitching his tent outside the
walls of Hebron, like Isaac in the grassy plains of the South country,
like Jacob keeping himself apart from the families of the land, their
descendant, an heir with them of the same promise, showed that he too
regarded himself as a 'stranger and a sojourner.' Dying, he said,
'Carry my bones up from hence. Therefore we may be sure that, living,
the hope of the inheritance must have burned in his heart as a hidden
light, and made him an alien everywhere but on its blessed soil.

And faith will always produce just such effects. In exact proportion to
its strength, that living trust in God will direct our thoughts and
desires to the 'King in His beauty, and the land that is very far off.'
In proportion as our thoughts and desires are thus directed, they will
be averted from what is round about us; and the more longingly our eyes
are fixed on the furthest horizon, the less shall we see the flowers at
our feet. To behold God pales the otherwise dazzling lustre of created
brightness. They whose souls are fed with heavenly manna, and who have
learned that it is their necessary food, will scent no dainties in the
fleshpots of Egypt, for all their rank garlic and leeks. It is simply a
question as to which of two classes of ideas occupies the thoughts, and
which of two sets of affections engages the heart. If vulgar brawling
and rude merrymakers fill the inn, there will be no room for the
pilgrim thoughts which bear the Christ in their bosom, and have angels
for their guard; and if these holy wayfarers enter, their serene
presence will drive forth the noisy crowd, and turn the place into a
temple. Nothing but Christian faith gives to the furthest future the
solidity and definiteness which it must have, if it is to be a
breakwater for us against the fluctuating sea of present cares and
thoughts.

If the unseen is ever to rule in men's lives, it must be through their
thoughts. It must become intelligible, clear, real. It must be brought
out of the flickering moonlight of fancy and surmises, into the
sunlight of certitude and knowledge. Dreams, and hopes, and
peradventures are too unsubstantial stuff to be a bulwark against the
very real, undeniable present. And such certitude is given through
faith which grasps the promises of God, and twines the soul round the
risen Saviour so closely that it sits with Him in heavenly places. Such
certitude is given by faith alone.

If the unseen is ever to rule in men's lives, it must become not only
an object for certain knowledge, but also for ardent wishes. The vague
sense of possible evils lurking in its mysteries must be taken out of
the soul, and there must come somehow an assurance that all it wraps in
its folds is joy and peace. It must cease to be doubtful, and must seem
infinitely desirable. Does anything but Christian faith engage the
heart to love, and all the longing wishes to set towards, the things
that are unseen and eternal? Where besides, then, can there be found a
counterpoise weighty enough to heave up the souls that are laden with
the material, and cleaving to the dust? Nowhere. The only possible
deliverance from the tyrannous pressure of the trifles amidst which we
live is in having the thoughts familiarised with Christ in heaven,
which will dwarf all that is on earth, and in having the affections
fixed on Him, which will emancipate them from the pains and sorrows
that ever wait upon love of the mutable and finite creatures.

Let us remember that such deliverance from the present is the condition
of all noble, joyous, pure life. It needs Christianity to effect it
indeed, but it does not need Christianity to see how desirable it is,
and how closely connected with whatever is lovely and of good report is
this detachment from the near and the visible. A man that is living for
remote objects is, in so far, a better man than one who is living for
the present. He will become thereby the subject of a mental and moral
discipline that will do him good. And, on the other hand, a life which
has no far-off light for its guiding star, has none of the unity, of
the self-restraint, of the tension, of the conscious power which makes
our days noble and strong. Whether he accomplish them or fail, whether
they be high or low, the man who lets future objects rule present
action is in advance of others. 'To scorn delights and live laborious
days,' which is the prerogative of the man with a future, is always
best. He is rather a beast than a man, who floats lazily on the warm,
sunny wavelets as they lift him in their roll, and does not raise his
head high enough above them to see and steer for the solid shore where
they break. But only he has found the full, controlling, blessing,
quickening power that lies in the thought of the future, and in life
directed by it, to whom that future is all summed in the name of his
Saviour. Whatever makes a man live in the past and in the future raises
him; but high above all others stand those to whom the past is an
apocalypse of God, with Calvary for its centre, and all the future is
fellowship with Christ, and joy in the heavens. Having these hopes, it
will be our own faults if we are not pure and gentle, calm in changes
and sorrows, armed against frowning dangers, and proof against smiling
temptations. They are our armour--'Put on the breastplate of faith ...
and for an helmet the hope of salvation.'

A very sharp test for us all lies in these thoughts. This change of the
centre of interest from earth to heaven is the uniform effect of faith.
What, then, of us? On Sundays we profess to seek for a city; but what
about the week, from Monday morning to Saturday night? What difference
does our faith make in the current of our lives? How far are they
unlike--I do not mean externally and in occupations, but in
principle--the lives of men who 'have no hope'? Are you living for
other objects than theirs? Are you nurturing other hopes in your
hearts, as a man may guard a little spark of fire with both his hands,
to light him amid the darkness and the howling storm? Do you care to
detach yourself from the world? or are you really 'men of this world,
which have their portion in this life,' even while Christians by
profession? A question which I have no right to ask, and no power to
answer but for myself; a question which it concerns your souls to ask
and to answer very definitely for yourselves. There is no need to
preach an exaggerated and impossible abstinence from work and enjoyment
in the world where God has put us, or to set up a standard 'too high
for mortal life beneath the sky.' Whatever call there may have
sometimes been to protest against a false asceticism, and withdrawing
from active life for the sake of one's personal salvation, times are
changed now. What we want to-day is: 'Come ye out and be ye separate,
and touch not the unclean thing.' In my conscience I believe that
multitudes are having the very heart of the Christian life eaten out by
absorption in earthly pursuits and loves, and by the effacing of all
distinction in outward life, in occupation, in recreation, in tastes
and habits, between people who call themselves Christians, and people
who do not care at all whether there is another world or not. There can
be but little strength in our faith if it does not compel us to
separation. If it has any power to do anything at all, it will
certainly do that. If we are naturalised as citizens there, we cannot
help being aliens here. 'Abraham,' says the New Testament, 'dwelt in
tabernacles, _for_ he looked for a city.' Just so! The tent life will
always be the natural one for those who feel that their mother-country
is beyond the stars. We should be like the wandering Swiss, who hear in
a strange land the rude, old melody that used to echo among the Alpine
pastures. The sweet, sad tones kindle home-sickness that will not let
them rest. No matter where they are, or what they are doing, no matter
what honour they have carved out for themselves with their swords, they
throw off the livery of the alien king which they have worn, and
turning their backs upon pomp and courts, seek the free air of the
mountains, and find home better than a place by a foreign throne. Let
us esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt, and go forth to Him without the camp, for here have we no
continuing city.

3. Again, we have here an instance that _Faith makes men energetic in
the duties of the present_.

The remarks which I have been making must be completed by that
consideration, or they become hurtful and one-sided. You know that
common sarcasm, that Christianity degrades this present life by making
it merely the portal to a better, and teaches men to think of it as
only evil, to be scrambled through anyhow. I confess that I wish the
sneer were a less striking contrast to what Christian people really
think. But it is almost as gross a caricature of the teaching of
Christianity as it is of the practice of Christians.

Take this story of Joseph as giving us a truer view of the effect on
present action of faith in, and longing for, God's future. He was, as I
said, a true Hebrew all his days. But that did not make him run away
from Pharaoh's service. He lived by hope, and that made him the better
worker in the passing moment, and kept him tugging away all his life at
the oar, administering the affairs of a kingdom.

Of course it is so. The one thing which saves this life from being
contemptible is the thought of another. The more profoundly we feel the
reality of the great eternity whither we are being drawn, the greater
do all things here become. They are made less in their power to absorb
or trouble, but they are made infinitely greater in importance as
preparations for what is beyond. When they are first they are small,
when they are second they are great. When the mist lifts, and shows the
snowy summits of the 'mountains of God,' the nearer lower ranges, which
we thought the highest, dwindle indeed, but gain in sublimity and
meaning by the loftier peaks to which they lead up. Unless men and
women live for eternity, they _are_ 'merely players,' and all their
busy days 'like a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
_signifying nothing_.' How absurd, how monotonous, how trivial it all
is, all this fret and fume, all these dying joys and only less fleeting
pains, all this mill-horse round of work which we pace, unless we are,
mill-horse-like, driving a shaft that goes _through the wall_, and
grinds something that falls into 'bags that wax not old' on the other
side. The true Christian faith teaches us that this world is the
workshop where God makes men, and the next, the palace where He shows
them. All here is apprenticeship and training. It is of no more value
than the attitudes into which gymnasts throw themselves, but as a
discipline most precious. The end makes the means important; and if we
believe that God is preparing us for immortal life with Him by all our
work, then we shall do it with a will: otherwise we may well be languid
as we go on for thirty or forty years, some of us, doing the same
trivial things, and getting nothing out of them but food, occupation of
time, and a mechanical aptitude for doing what is not worth doing.

It is the horizon that gives dignity to the foreground. A picture
without sky has no glory. This present, unless we see gleaming beyond
it the eternal calm of the heavens, above the tossing tree-tops with
withering leaves, and the smoky chimneys, is a poor thing for our eyes
to gaze at, or our hearts to love, or our hands to toil on. But when we
see that all paths lead to heaven, and that our eternity is affected by
our acts in time, then it is blessed to gaze, it is possible to love,
the earthly shadows of the uncreated beauty, it is worth while to work.

Remember, too, that faith will energise us for any sort of work, seeing
that it raises all to one level and brings all under one sanction, and
shows all as cooperating to one end. Look at that muster-roll of heroes
of faith in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and mark the variety of grades
of human life represented there--statesmen, soldiers, prophets,
shepherds, widow women, martyrs--all fitted for their tasks and
delivered from the snare that was in their calling, by that faith which
raised them above the world, and therefore fitted them to come down on
the world with stronger strokes of duty. This is the secret of doing
with our might whatsoever our hand finds to do-to trust Christ, to live
_with_ Him, and _by_ the hope of the inheritance.

Then, brethren, let us see that our clearer revelation bears fruit in a
faith in the great divine promises as calm and firm as this dying
patriarch had. Then the same power will work not only the same
detachment and energy in life, but the same calmness and solemn light
of hope in death. It is very beautiful to notice how Joseph dying
almost overleaps the thought of death as a very small matter. His
brethren who stood by his bedside might well fear what might be the
consequences to their people when the powerful protector, the prime
minister of the kingdom, was gone. But the dying man has firm hold of
God's promises, and he knows that these will be fulfilled, whether he
live or no. 'I die,' says he, 'but God shall surely visit you. _He_ is
not going to die; and though I stand no more before Pharaoh, you will
be safe.'

Thus we may contemplate our own going away, or the departure of the
dearest from our homes, and of the most powerful for good in human
affairs, and in the faith of God's true promises may feel that no one
is indispensable to our well-being or to the world's good. God's
chariot is self-moving. One after another, who lays his hand upon the
ropes, and hauls for a little space, drops out of the ranks. But it
will go on, and in His majesty He will ride prosperously.

And for himself, too, the dying man felt that death was a very small
matter. 'Whether I live or die I shall have a share in the promise.
Living, perhaps my feet would stand upon its soil; dying, my bones will
rest there.' And we, who know a resurrection, have in it that which
makes Joseph's fond fancy a reality, and reduces the importance of that
last enemy to nothing. Some will be alive and remain till the coming of
the Lord, some will be laid in the grave till His voice calls them
forth, and carries their bones up from hence to the land of the
inheritance. But whether we be of generations that fell on sleep
looking for the promise of His coming, or whether of the generation
that go forth to meet Him when He comes, it matters not. All who have
lived by faith will then be gathered at last. The brightest hopes of
the present will be forgotten. Then, when we too shall stand in the
latter day, wearing the likeness of His glory, and extricated wholly
from the bondage of corruption and the dust of death, we, perfected in
body, soul, and spirit, shall enter the calm home, where we shall
change the solitude of the desert and the transitoriness of the tent
and the dangers of the journey, for the society and the stability and
the security of the city which hath foundations, whose builder and
maker is God.




A COFFIN IN EGYPT


    'They embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.'
    --GENESIS l. 26.

So closes the book of Genesis. All its recorded dealings of God with
Israel, and all the promises and the glories of the patriarchal line,
end with 'a coffin in Egypt'. Such an ending is the more striking, when
we remember that a space of three hundred years intervenes between the
last events in Genesis and the first in Exodus, or almost as long a
time as parts the Old Testament from the New. And, during all that
period, Israel was left with a mummy and a hope. The elaborately
embalmed body of Joseph lay in its gilded and pictured case, somewhere
in Goshen, and was, no doubt, in the care of the Israelites, as is
plain from the fact that they carried it with them at the exodus. For
three centuries, that silent 'coffin in Egypt' preached its impressive
messages. What did it say? It spoke, no doubt, to ears often deaf, but
still some faint whispers of its speechless testimony would sound in
some hearts, and help to keep vivid some hopes.

First, it was a silent reminder of mortality. Egyptian consciousness
was much occupied with death. The land was peopled with tombs. But the
corpse of Joseph was perhaps not laid in one of these, but remained
housed somewhere in sight, as it were, of all Israel. Many a passer-by
would pause for a moment, and think; Here is the end of dignity second
only to Pharaoh's, to this has come that strong brain, that true heart,
Israel's pride and protection is shut up in that wooden case.

  'The glories of our birth and state
     Are shadows, not substantial things;
   There is no armour against fate,
     Death lays his icy hand on kings.'

Yes, but let us remember that while that silent sarcophagus enforced
the old, old lesson to the successive generations that looked on it and
little heeded its stern, sad teaching of mortality, it had other
brighter truths to tell. For the shrivelled, colourless lips that lay
in it, covered with many a fold of linen, had left as their last
utterance, 'I die, but God will surely visit you,' No man is necessary.
Israel can survive the loss of the strongest and wisest. God lives,
though a hundred Josephs die. It is pure gain to lose human helpers, if
thereby we become more fully conscious of our need of a divine arm and
heart, and more truly feel that we have these for our all-sufficient
stay. Blessed is the fleeting of all that can pass, if its withdrawal
lets the calm light of the Eternal, which cannot pass, stream in
uninterrupted on us! When the leaves fall, we see more clearly the rock
which their short-lived greenness in its pride veiled. When the
many-hued and ever-shifting clouds are swept out of the sky by the
wind, the sun that lent them all their colour shines the more brightly.
The message of every death-bed and grave is meant to be, 'This and that
man dies, but God lives.' The last result of our contemplation of
mortality, as affecting our dearest and most needful ones, and as sure
to include ourselves in its far-reaching, close-woven net, ought to be
to drive us to God's breast, that there we may find a Friend who does
not pass, and may dwell in 'the land of the living,' on whose soil the
foot of all-conquering Death dare never tread.

Nor are these thoughts all the message of that 'coffin in Egypt.' In
the first verses of the next book, that of Exodus, there is a
remarkable juxtaposition of ideas, when we read that 'Joseph died and
all his brethren and all that generation.' But was that the end of
Israel? By no means, for the narrative goes on immediately to
say--linking the two things together by a simple 'and'--that 'the
children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and
multiplied and waxed exceeding mighty.'

So life springs side by side with death. There are cradles as well as
graves.

  'The individual withers,
   And the race is more and more.'

Leaves drop and new leaves come. The April days are not darkened, and
the tender green of the fresh leaf-buds is all the more vigorous and
luxuriant, because it is fed from the decaying leaves that litter the
roots of the long-lived oak. Thus through the ages the pathetic
alternation goes on. Penelope's web is ever being woven and run down
and woven again. Joseph dies; Israel grows. Let us not take half-views,
nor either fix our thoughts on the universal law of dissolution and
decay, nor on the other side of the process--the universal emergence of
life from death, reconstruction from dissolution. In our individual
histories and on the wider field of the world's history, the same large
law is at work, which is expressed in the simplest terms by these old
words, 'Joseph died, and all his brethren and all that generation'--and
'the children of Israel were fruitful and increased abundantly.' So the
wholesome lesson of mortality is stripped of much of its sadness, and
retains all its pathos, solemnity, and power to purify the heart.

Again, that 'coffin in Egypt' was a herald of Hope. The reason for
Joseph's dying injunction that his body should be preserved after the
Egyptian fashion, and laid where it could be lifted and carried away,
when the long-expected deliverance was effected, was the dying
patriarch's firm confidence that, though he died, he had still somehow
a share in God's faithful promise. We do not know the precise shape
which his thought of that share took. It may have been merely the
natural sentiment which desires that the unconscious frame shall
moulder quietly beside the mouldering forms which once held our dear
ones. This naturalised Egyptian did his work manfully in the land of
his adoption, and flung himself eagerly into its interests, but his
heart turned to the cave at Machpelah, and, though he lived in Egypt,
he could not bear to think of lying there for ever when dead,
especially of being left there alone. There may have been some trace in
his wish of the peculiar Egyptian belief that the preservation of the
body contributed in some way to the continuance of personal life, and
that a certain shadowy self hovered about the spot where the mummy was
laid. Our knowledge of the large place filled by a doctrine of a future
life in Egyptian thought makes it most probable that Joseph had at
least some forecast of that hope of immortality, which seems to us to
be inseparable from the consciousness of present communion with God.

But, in any case, Israel had charge of that coffin because the dead man
that lay in it had, on the very edge of the gulf of death, believed
that he had still a portion in Israel's hope, and that, when he had
taken the plunge into the great darkness, he had not sunk below the
reach of God's power to give him personal fulfilment of His yet
unfulfilled promise. His dying command was the expression of his
unshaken faith that, though he was dead, God would visit him with His
salvation, and give him to see the prosperity of His chosen, that he
might rejoice in the gladness of the nation, and glory with His
inheritance. He had lived, trusting in God's bare promise, and, as he
lived, he died. The Epistle to the Hebrews lays hold of the true motive
power in the incident, when it points to Joseph's dying 'commandment
concerning his bones' as a noble instance of Faith.

Thus, through slow creeping centuries, this silent preacher said--'Hope
on, though the vision tarry, wait for it, for it will surely come. God
is faithful, and will perform His word.' There was much to make hope
faint. To bring Israel out of Canaan seemed a strange way of investing
it with the possession of Canaan. As the tardy years trickled away,
drop by drop, and the promise seemed no nearer fulfilment, some film of
doubt must have crept over Hope's bright eyes. When new dynasties
reigned, and Israel slowly sank into the state of bondage, it must have
been still harder to believe that the shortest road to the inheritance
was round by Goshen. But through all the darkening course of Israel in
these sad centuries, there stood the 'coffin,' the token of a
triumphant faith which had leapt, as a trifle, over the barrier of
death, and grasped as real the good which lay beyond that frowning
wall. We have a better Herald of hope than a mummy-case and a pyramid
built round it. We have an empty grave and an occupied Throne, by which
to nourish our confidence in Immortality and our estimate of the
insignificance of death. Our Joseph does not say--'I die, but God will
surely visit you,' but He gives us the wonderful assurance of
identification with Himself, and consequent participation in His
glory--'Because I live, ye shall live also.' Therefore our hope should
be as much brighter and more confirmed than this ancient one was as
that on which it is based is better and more joyous. But, alas, there
is no invariable proportion between food supplied and strength derived.
An orchid can fling out gorgeous blooms, though it grows on a piece of
dry wood, but plants set in rich soil often show poor flowers. Our hope
will be worthy of its foundation, only on condition of our habitually
reflecting on the firmness of that foundation, and cultivating
familiarity with the things hoped for.

There are many ways in which the apostle's great saying that 'we are
saved by hope' approves itself as true. Whatever leads us to grasp the
future rather than the present, even if it is but an earthly future,
and to live by hope rather than by fruition, even if it is but a
short-reaching hope, lifts us in the scale of being, ennobles,
dignifies, and in some respects purifies us. Even men whose
expectations have not wing-power enough to cross the dreadful ravine of
Death, are elevated in the degree in which they work towards a distant
goal. Short-sighted hopes are better than blind absorption in the
present. Whatever puts the centre of gravity of our lives in the future
is a gain, and most of all is that hope blessed, which bids us look
forward to an eternal sitting with Jesus at the right hand of God.

If such hope has any solidity in it, it will certainly detach us from
the order of things in which we dwell. The world is always tempting us
to 'forget the imperial palace' whither we go. The Israelites must have
been swayed by many inducements to settle down for good and all in the
low levels of fertile Goshen, and to think themselves better off there
than if going out on a perilous enterprise to win no richer pastures
than they already possessed. In fact, when the deliverance came, it was
not particularly welcome, oven though oppression was embittering the
peoples' lives. But, when hope had died down in them, and desire had
become languid, and ignoble contentment with their flocks and herds had
dulled their spirits, Joseph's silent coffin must have pealed in their
ears--'This is not your rest; arise and claim your inheritance.' In
like manner, the pressure of the apparently solid realities of to-day,
the growth of the 'scientific' temper of mind which confines knowledge
to physical facts, the drift of tendency among religious people to
regard Christianity mainly in its aspect of dealing with social
questions and bringing present good, powerfully reinforce our natural
sluggishness of Hope, and have brought it about that the average
Christian of this day has fewer of his thoughts directed to the future
life than his predecessors had, or than it is good for him to have.

Among the many truths which almost need to be rediscovered by their
professed believers, that of the rest that remains for the people of
God is one. For the test of believing a truth is its influence on
conduct, and no one can affirm that the conduct of the average
Christian of our times bears marks of being deeply influenced by that
Future, or by the hope of winning it. Does he live as if he felt that
he was an alien among the material things surrounding him? Does it look
as if his true affinities were beyond the grave and above the stars? If
we did thus feel, not at rare intervals, when 'in seasons of calm
weather, our souls have sight of that immortal sea,' which lies glassy
before the throne, and on whose banks the minstrels stand singing the
song of Moses and of the Lamb, but habitually and with a vivid
realisation, which makes the things hoped for more solid than what we
touch and handle, our lives would be far other than they are. We should
not work less, but more, earnestly at our present duties, whatever
these may be, for they would be seen in new importance as bearing on
our place in that world of consequences. The more our goal and prize
are seen gleaming through the dust of the race-ground, the more
strenuous our effort here. Nothing ennobles the trifles of our lives in
time like the streaming in on these of the light of eternity. That
vision ever present with us will not sadden. The fact of mortality is
grim enough, if forced upon us unaccompanied by the other fact that
Death opens the gate of our Home. But when the else depressing thought
that 'here we have no continuing city' is but the obverse and result of
the fact that 'we seek one to come,' it is freed from its sadness, and
becomes powerful for good and even for joy. We need, even more than
Israel in its bondage did, to realise that we are strangers and
pilgrims. It concerns the depth of our religion and the reality of our
profiting by the discipline, as well as of our securing the enjoyment
of the blessings, of the fleeting and else trivial present, that we
shall keep very clear in view the great future which dignifies and
interprets this enigmatical earthly life.

Further, that 'coffin in Egypt' was a preacher of patience. As we have
seen, three centuries at least, probably a somewhat longer period,
passed between the time when Joseph's corpse was laid in it, and the
night when it was lifted out of it by the departing Israelites. No
doubt, hope deferred had made many a heart sick, and the weary
question, 'Where is the promise of His coming?' had in some cases
changed into bitter disbelief that the promise would ever be fulfilled.
But, for all these years, the dumb monitor stood there proclaiming, 'If
the vision tarry, wait for it.'

Surely we need the same lesson. It is hard for us to acquiesce in the
slow march of the divine purposes. Life is short, and desire would fain
see the great harvests reaped before death seals our eyes. Sometimes
the very prospect of the great things that shall one day be
accomplished in the world, and we not there to see, weighs heavily on
us. Reformers, philanthropists, idealists of all sorts are
constitutionally impatient, and in their generous haste to see their
ideals realised, forget that 'raw haste' is 'half-sister to delay' and
are indignant with man for his sluggishness and with God for His
majestic slowness. Not less do we fret and fume and think the days drag
with intolerable slowness, before some eagerly expected good rises like
a star on our individual lives. But there is deep truth in Paul's
apparent paradox, that 'if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it.' The more sure the confidence, the more quiet the
patient waiting. It is uncertainty which makes earthly hope short of
breath, and impatient of delay.

But since a Christian man's hope is consolidated into certainty, and
when it is set on God, cannot only say, I trust that it will be so and
so, but, I know that it shall, it may well be content to be patient for
the fulfilment, 'as the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of
the earth, and hath long patience for it.' 'One day is with the Lord as
a thousand years' in respect of the magnitude of the changes which may
be wrought by the instantaneous operation of His hand when the
appointed hour shall strike, and therefore it should not strain our
patience nor stagger our faith that 'a thousand years' should be 'as
one day,' in respect of the visible approximation achieved in them,
towards the establishment of His purpose. The world was prepared for
man through countless millenniums. Man was prepared for the advent of
Christ through long centuries. Nineteen hundred years have effected
comparatively little in incorporating the issues of Christ's work in
the consciousness and characters of mankind. Much of the slowness of
that progress of Christianity is due to the faithlessness and sloth of
professing Christians. But it still remains true that God lifts His
foot slowly, and plants it firmly, in His march through the world. So,
both in regard to the progress of truth, and the diffusion of the
highest, and of the secondary, blessings of Christianity through the
nations, and in respect to the reception of individual good gifts, we
shall do wisely to leave God to settle the 'when' since we are sure
that He has bound Himself to accomplish the fact.

Finally, that 'coffin in Egypt' was a pledge of possession. It lay long
among the Israelites to uphold fainting faith, and at last was carried
up before their host, and reverently guarded during forty years'
wanderings, till it was deposited in the cave at Machpelah, beside the
tombs of the fathers of the nation. Thus it became to the nation, and
remains for us, a symbol of the truth that no hope based upon God's
bare word is ever finally disappointed. From all other anticipations
grounded on anything less solid, the element of uncertainty is
inseparable, and Fear is ever the sister of Hope. With keen insight
Spenser makes these two march side by side, in his wonderful procession
of the attendants of earthly Love. There is always a lurking sadness in
Hope's smiles, and a nameless dread in her eyes. And all expectations
busied with or based upon the contingencies of this poor life, whether
they are fulfilled or disappointed, prove less sweet in fruition than
in prospect, and often turn to ashes in the eating, instead of the
sweet bread which we had thought them to be. One basis alone is sure,
and that is the foundation on which Joseph rested and risked
everything--the plain promise of God. He who builds on that rock will
never be put to shame, and when floods sweep away every refuge built on
sand, he will not need to 'make haste' to find, amid darkness and
storm, some less precarious shelter, but will look down serenely on the
wildest torrent, and know it to be impotent to wash away his fortress
home.

There is no nobler example of victorious faith which prolonged
confident expectation beyond the insignificant accident of death than
Joseph's dying 'commandment concerning his bones.' His confidence,
indeed, grasped a far lower blessing than ours should reach out to
clasp. It was evoked by less clear and full promises and pledges than
we have. The magnitude and loftiness of the Christian hope of
Immortality, and the certitude of the fact on which it reposes, the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, should result in a corresponding increase
in the firmness and clearness of our hope, and in its power in our
lives. The average Christian of to-day may well be sent to school to
Joseph on his death-bed. Is our faith as strong as--I will not ask if
it is stronger than--that of this man who, in the morning twilight of
revelation, and with a hope of an eternal possession of an earthly
inheritance, which, one might have thought, would be shattered by
death, was able to fling his anchor clean across the gulf when he gave
injunction, 'Carry my bones up hence'? We have a better inheritance,
and fuller, clearer promises and facts on which to trust. Shame to us
if we have a feebler faith.







EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE

ALEXANDER MACLAREN, D. D., Litt. D.

EXODUS, LEVITICUS AND NUMBERS




CONTENTS


THE BOOK OF EXODUS

FOUR SHAPING CENTURIES (Exodus i. 1-14)

DEATH AND GROWTH (Exodus i. 6, 7)

THE ARK AMONG THE FLAGS (Exodus ii. 1-10)

THE BUSH THAT BURNED, AND DID NOT BURN OUT (Exodus iii. 2)

THE CALL OF MOSES (Exodus iii. 10-20)

A LAST MERCIFUL WARNING (Exodus xi. 1-10)

THE PASSOVER: AN EXPIATION AND A FEAST, A MEMORIAL AND A PROPHECY
(Exodus xii. 1-14)

THOUGHT, DEED, WORD (Exodus xiii. 9)

A PATH IN THE SEA (Exodus xiv. 19-31)

'MY STRENGTH AND SONG' (Exodus xv. 2)

THE SHEPHERD AND THE FOLD (Exodus xv. 13)

THE ULTIMATE HOPE (Exodus xv. 17)

MARAH (Exodus xv. 23-25)

THE BREAD OF GOD (Exodus xvi. 4-12)

JEHOVAH NISSI (Exodus xvii. 15)

GERSHOM AND ELIEZER (Exodus xviii. 3, 4)

THE IDEAL STATESMAN (Exodus xviii. 21)

THE DECALOGUE:--I. MAN AND GOD (Exodus xx. 1-11)

THE DECALOGUE:--II. MAN AND MAN (Exodus xx. 12-21)

THE FEAST OF INGATHERING IN THE END OF THE YEAR (Exodus xxiii. 16)

'THE LOVE OF THINE ESPOUSALS' (Exodus xxiv. 1-12)

THE BREAD OF THE PRESENCE (Exodus xxv. 30)

THE GOLDEN LAMPSTAND (Exodus xxv. 31)

THE NAMES ON AARON'S BREASTPLATE (Exodus xxviii. 12,29)

THREE INSCRIPTIONS WITH ONE MEANING (Exodus xxviii. 36; Zech. xiv. 20;
Rev. xxii. 4)

THE ALTAR OF INCENSE (Exodus xxx. 1)

RANSOM FOR SOULS--I. (Exodus xxx. 12)

RANSOM FOR SOULS--II. (Exodus xxx. 15)

THE GOLDEN CALF (Exodus xxxii. 1-8, 30-35)

THE SWIFT DECAY OF LOVE (Exodus xxxii. 15-26)

THE MEDIATOR'S THREEFOLD PRAYER (Exodus xxxiii. 12-23)

GOD PROCLAIMING HIS OWN NAME (Exodus xxxiv. 6)

SIN AND FORGIVENESS (Exodus xxxiv. 7)

BLESSED AND TRAGIC UNCONSCIOUSNESS (Exodus xxxiv. 29; Judges xvi. 20)

AN OLD SUBSCRIPTION LIST (Exodus xxxv. 21)

THE COPIES OF THINGS IN THE HEAVENS (Exodus xl. 1-16)




THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS


THE BURNT OFFERING A PICTURE AND A PROPHECY (Lev. i. 1-9)

STRANGE FIRE (Lev. x. 1-11)

THE FIRST STAGE IN THE LEPER'S CLEANSING (Lev. xiv 1-7)

THE DAY OF ATONEMENT (Lev. xvi. 1-19)

'THE SCAPEGOAT' (Lev. xvi. 22)

