already made, as to the gigantic and incomprehensible self-confidence
that speaks here. 'Followeth _Me_'; then Jesus Christ calmly proposes
Himself as the aim and goal for every soul of man; sets up His own
doings as an all-sufficient rule for us all, with all our varieties of
temper, character, culture, and work, and quietly assumes to have a
right of precedence before, and of absolute command over, the whole
world. They are all to keep _behind_ Him, He thinks, be they saints or
sages, kings or beggars; and the liker they are to Himself, He thinks,
the nearer they will be to perfectness and life. He puts Himself at
the head of the mystic march of the generations, and, like the
mysterious Angel that Joshua saw in the plain by Jericho, makes the
lofty claim: 'Nay, but as _Captain_ of the Lord's host am I come up.'
Do we admit His claim because we know His Name? Do we yield Him full
trust because we have learned that He is the Light of men since He is
the Word of God? Do we follow Him with loyal obedience, longing love,
and lowly imitation, since He has been and is to us the Saviour of our
souls?

In the measure in which we do, the great promises of this wonderful
saying will be verified and understood by us--'He that followeth Me
shall not walk in darkness.' That saying has, as one may say, a lower
and a higher fulfilment. In the lower, it refers to practical life and
its perplexities. Nobody who has not tried it would believe how many
difficulties are cleared out of a man's road by the simple act of
trying to follow Christ. No doubt there will still remain obscurities
enough as to what we ought to do, to call for the best exercise of
patient wisdom; but an enormous proportion of them vanish like mist
when the sun breaks through, when once we honestly set ourselves to
find out whither the pillared Light is guiding. It is a reluctant
will, and intrusive likings and dislikings, that obscure the way for
us, much oftener than real obscurity in the way itself. It is seldom
impossible to discern the divine will, when we only wish to know it
that we may do it. And if ever it is impossible for us, surely that
impossibility is like the cloud resting on the Tabernacle--a sign that
for the present His will is that we should be still, and wait, and
watch.

But there is a higher meaning in the words than even this promise of
practical direction. In the profound symbolism of Scripture,
especially of this Gospel, 'darkness' is the name for the whole
condition of the soul averted from God. So our Lord here is declaring
that to follow Him is the true deliverance from that midnight of the
soul. There are a darkness of ignorance, a darkness of impurity, a
darkness of sorrow; and in that threefold gloom, thickening to a
darkness of death, are they enwrapt who follow not the Light. That is
the grim, tragical side of this saying, too sad, too awful for our
lips to speak much of, and best left in the solemn impressiveness of
that one word. But the hopeful, blessed side of it is, that the
feeblest beginnings of trust in Jesus Christ, and the first tottering
steps that try to tread in His, bring us into the light. It does not
need that we have reached our goal, it is enough that our faces are
turned to it, and our hearts desire to attain it, then we may be sure
that the dominion of the darkness over us is broken. To follow, though
it be afar off, and with unequal steps, fills our path with increasing
brightness, and even though evil and ignorance and sorrow may thrust
their blackness in upon our day, they are melting in the growing
glory, and already we may give thanks 'unto the Father who hath made
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, who
hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us
into the kingdom of His dear Son.'

But we have not merely the promise that we shall be led by the light
and brought into the light. A yet deeper and grander gift is offered
here: 'He shall have the light of life.' I suppose that means, not, as
it is often carelessly taken to mean, a light which illuminates the
life, but, like the similar phrases of this Gospel, 'bread of life,'
'water of life,'--light which is life. 'In Him was life, and the life
was the light of men.' These two are one in their source, which is
Jesus, the Word of God. Of Him we have to say, 'With Thee is the
fountain of life, in Thy light shall we see light.' They are one in
their deepest nature; the life is the light, and the light the life.
And this one gift is bestowed upon every soul that follows Christ. Not
only will our outward lives be illumined or guided from without, but
our inward being will be filled with the brightness. 'Ye were
sometimes darkness, now are ye light in the Lord.'

That pillar of fire remained apart and without. But this true and
better Guide of our souls enters in and dwells in us, in all the
fulness of His triple gift of life, and light, and love. Within us He
will chiefly prove Himself the Guide of our spirits, and will not
merely cast His beams on the path of our feet, but will fill and flood
us with His own brightness. All light of knowledge, of goodness, of
gladness will be ours, if Christ be ours; and ours He surely will be
if we follow Him. Let us take heed, lest turning away from Him we
follow the will-o'-the-wisps of our own fancies, or the dancing
lights, born of putrescence, that flicker above the swamps, for they
will lead us into doleful lands where evil things haunt, and into
outer darkness. Let us take heed how we use that light of God; for
Christ, like His symbol of old, has a double aspect according to the
eye which looks. 'It came between the camp of the Egyptians and the
camp of Israel, and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave
light by night to these.' He is either a Stone of stumbling or a sure
Foundation, a savour of life or of death, and which He is depends on
ourselves. Trusted, loved, followed, He is light. Neglected, turned
from, He is darkness. Though He be the Light of the world, it is only
the man who follows Him to whom He can give the light of life.
Therefore, man's awful prerogative of perverting the best into the
worst forced Him, who came to be the light of men, to that sad and
solemn utterance: 'For judgment I am come into this world, that they
which see not might see, and that they which see might be made blind.'




THREE ASPECTS OF FAITH

'Many believed on Him. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on
Him....'--JOHN viii. 30,31.

The Revised Version accurately represents the original by varying the
expression in these two clauses, retaining 'believed on Him' in the
former, and substituting the simple 'believed Him' in the latter. The
variation in two contiguous clauses can scarcely be accidental in so
careful a writer as the Apostle John. And the reason and meaning of it
are obvious enough on the face of the narrative. His purpose is to
distinguish between more and less perfect acceptance of Jesus Christ.
The more perfect is the former, 'they believed on Him'; the less
perfect is the latter, the simple acceptance of His word on His claim
of Messiahship, which is stigmatised as shallow, and proved to be
transient by the context.

They were 'Jews' which believed, and they continued to be so whilst
they were believing. Now, the word 'Jew' in this Gospel always
connotes antagonism to Jesus Christ; and as for these persons, how
slight and unreliable their adhesion to the Lord is, comes out in the
course of the next few verses; and by the end of the chapter they are
taking up stones to stone Him. So John would show us that there is a
kind of acceptance which may be real, and may be the basis of
something much better hereafter, but which, if it does not grow, rots
and disappears; and he would draw a broad line of distinction between
that and the other mental act, far deeper, more wholesome, more
lasting and vital, which he designates as 'believing _on_ Him.' I take
these words, then, for consideration, not so much to deal with other
thoughts suggested by them, as because they afford me a starting-point
for the consideration of the various phases of the act of believing,
its blessings and its nature, and its relation to its objects, which
are expressed in the New Testament by the various grammatical
connections and constructions of this word.

Now, the facts with which I wish to deal may be very briefly stated.
There are three ways in which the New Testament represents the act of
believing, and its relation to its Object, Christ. These three are,
first, the simple one which appears in the text as 'believed Him.'
Then there is a second, which appears in two forms, slightly
different, but which, for our purpose, may be treated as substantially
the same--'believing on Him.' And then there is a third, which,
literally and accurately translated is, 'believing unto' or 'into
Him.' That phrase is John's favourite one, and rather unfortunately,
though perhaps necessarily, it has been generally rendered by our
translators by the less forcible 'believing in,' which gives the idea
of repose in, but does not give the idea of motion towards. These
three, then, I think, do set forth, if we will ponder them, very large
lessons as to the essence of this act of believing, as to the Object
upon which it fastens, and as to the blessings which flow from it,
which it will be worth our while to consider now. I may cast the whole
into the shape of three exhortations: believe Him, believe on Him,
believe unto Him.

I. First, then, believe Christ.

We accept a man's words when we trust the man. Even if belief, or
faith, is represented in the New Testament, as it very rarely is, as
having for its object the words of revelation, behind that acceptance
of the words lies confidence in the person speaking. And the beginning
of all true Christian faith has in it, not merely the intellectual
acceptance of certain propositions as true, but a confidence in the
veracity of Him by whom they are made known to us--even Jesus Christ
our Lord.

I do not need to insist upon that at any length here--it would take me
away from my present purpose; but what I do wish to emphasise is, that
from the very starting-point, the smallest germ of the most
rudimentary and imperfect faith which knits a soul to Jesus Christ has
Him for its Object, and is thus distinguished from the mere acceptance
of truths which, on other grounds than the authority of the speaker,
may legitimately commend themselves to a man.

Then believe Him. Now, that breaks up into two thoughts, which are all
that I intend to deduce from it now, although many more might be
suggested. The one is this, that the least and the lowest that Jesus
Christ asks from us is the entire and unhesitating acceptance of His
utterances as final, conclusive, and absolutely true. Whatever more
Jesus Christ may be, He is, by His life and words, the Communicator of
divine and certain truth. He is a Teacher, though He is a great deal
more. And whatever more Christian faith may be--and it is a great deal
more--it requires, at least, the frank and full recognition of the
authority of every word that comes from His lips. A Christianity
without a creed is a dream. Bones without flesh are very dry, no
doubt; but what about flesh without bones? An inert, shapeless mass.
You will never have a vigorous and true Christian life if it is to be
moulded according to the fantastic dream of these latter days, which
tells us that we may take Jesus as the Guide of our conduct and need
not mind about what He says to us. 'Believe Me' is His requirement.
The words of His mouth, and the revelations which He has made in the
sweetness of His life, and in all the graciousness of His dealings,
are the very unveiling to man of absolute and final and certain truth.

But then, on the other hand, let us remember that, while all this is
most clear and distinct in the teaching of Scripture, it carries us
but a very short way. We find, in the instance from which we take our
starting-point in this sermon, the broad distinction drawn, and
practically illustrated in the conduct of the persons concerned,
between the simple acceptance of what Christ says, and a true faith
that clings to Him for evermore. And the same kind of disparagement of
the lower process of merely accepting His word is found more than once
in connection with the same phrases. We find, for instance, the two
which are connected in our texts used in a previous conversation
between our Lord and His antagonists. When He says to them, 'This is
the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent,' they
reply, dragging down His claim to a lower level, 'What sign showest
Thou, that we may see, and believe Thee?' He demanded belief _on_
Himself; they answer, 'We are ready to _believe you_, on condition
that we see something that may make the rendering of our belief a
logical necessity for us.'

Let us lay to heart the rudimentary and incomplete character of a
faith which simply accepts the teaching of Jesus Christ, and does no
more. The notion that orthodoxy is Christianity, that a man who does
not contradict the teaching of the New Testament is thereby a
Christian, is a very old and very perilous and very widespread one.
There are many of us who have no better claim to be called Christians
than this, that we never denied anything that Jesus Christ said,
though we are not sufficiently interested in it, I was going to say,
even to deny it. This rudimentary faith, which contents itself with
the acceptance of the truth revealed, hardens into mere formalism, or
liquefies into mere careless indifference as to the very truth that it
professes to believe. There is nothing more impotent than creeds which
lie dormant in our brains, and have no influence upon our lives. I
wonder how many readers of this sermon, who fancy themselves good
Christians, do with their creed as the Japanese used to do with their
Emperor--keep him in a palace behind bamboo screens, and never let him
do anything, whilst all the reality of power was possessed by another
man, who did not profess to be a king at all. Do you think you are
Christians because you would sign thirty-nine or three hundred and
ninety articles of Christianity, if they were offered to you, while
there is not one of them that influences either your thinking or your
conduct? Do not let us have these 'sluggish kings,' with a mayor of
the place to do the real government, but set on the throne of your
hearts the principles of your religion, and see to it that all your
convictions be translated into practice, and all your practice be
informed by your convictions.

This belief in a set of dogmas, on the authority of Jesus Christ,
about which dogmas we do not care a rush, and which make no difference
upon our lives, is the faith about which James has so many hard things
to say; and he ventures upon a parallel that I should not like to
venture on unless I were made bold by his example: 'Thou believest, O
vain man! thou doest well: the devils also believe, and'--better than
you, in that their belief does something for them, they 'believe--and
_tremble_!' But what shall we say about a man who professes himself a
disciple, and neither trembles, nor thrills, nor hopes, nor dreads,
nor desires, nor does any single thing because of his creed? Believe
Jesus, but do not stop there.

II. Believe on Christ.

Now, as I have remarked already, and as many of you know, there is a
slightly different, twofold form of this phrase in Scripture. I need
not trouble you with the minute distinction between the one and the
other. Both forms coincide in the important point on which I wish to
touch. That representation of believing on Christ carries us away at
once from the mere act of acceptance of His word on His authority to
the far more manifestly voluntary, moral, and personal act of reliance
upon Him. The metaphor is expanded in various ways in Scripture, and
instead of offering any thoughts of my own about it, I would simply
ask attention to three of the forms in which it is set forth in the
Old and in the New Testaments.

The first of them, and the one which we may regard as governing the
others, is that found in the words of Isaiah, 'Behold, I lay in Zion a
stone, a sure Foundation'; and, as the Apostle Peter comments, 'He
that believeth on Him shall not be confounded.' There the thoughts
presented are the superposition of the building upon its Foundation,
the rest of the soul, and the rearing of the life on the basis of
Jesus Christ.

How much that metaphor says to us about Him as the Foundation, in all
the aspects in which we can apply that term! He is the Basis of our
hope, the Guarantee of our security, the Foundation-stone of our
beliefs, the very Ground on which our whole life reposes, the Source
of our tranquillity, the Pledge of our peace. All that I think, feel,
desire, wish, and do, ought to be rested upon that dear Lord, and
builded on Him by simple faith. By patient persistence of effort
rearing up the fabric of my life firmly upon Him, and grafting every
stone of it--if I might so use the metaphor--into the bedding-stone,
which is Christ, I shall be strong, peaceful, and pure.

The storm comes, the waters rise, the winds howl, the hail and the
rain 'sweep away the refuge of lies,' and the dwellers in these frail
and foundationless houses are hurrying in wild confusion from one peak
to another, before the steadily rising tide. But he that builds on
that Foundation 'shall not make haste,' as Isaiah has it; shall not
need to hurry to shift his quarters before the flood overtake him;
shall look out serene upon all the hurtling fury of the wild storm,
and the rise of the sullen waters. So, reliance on Christ, and the
honest making of Him the Basis, not of our hopes only, but of our
thinkings and of our doings, and of our whole being, is the secret of
security, and the pledge of peace.

Then there is another form of the same phrase, 'believing on,' in
which is suggested not so much the figure of building upon a
foundation, as of some feeble man resting upon a strong stay, or
clinging to an outstretched and mighty arm. The same metaphor is
implied in the word 'reliance.' We lean upon Christ when, forsaking
all other props, and realising His sufficiency and sweetness, we rest
the whole weight of our weariness and all the impotence of our
weakness upon His strong and unwearied arm, and so are saved. All
other stays are like that one to which the prophet compares the King
of Egypt--the papyrus reed in the Nile stream, on which, if a man
leans, it will break into splinters which will go into his flesh, and
make a poisoned wound. But if we lean on Christ, we lean on a brazen
wall and an iron pillar, and anything is possible sooner than that
that stay shall give.

There is still another form of the metaphor, in which neither building
upon a foundation, nor leaning upon a support which is thought of as
below what rests upon it, are suggested, but rather the hanging upon
something firm and secure which is above what hangs from it. The same
picture is suggested by our word 'dependence.' 'As a nail fastened in
a sure place,' said one of the prophets, 'on Him shall hang all the
glory of His Father's house.'

  'Hangs my helpless soul on Thee.'

The rope lowered over the cliffs supports the adventurous bird-nester
in safety above the murmuring sea. They who clasp Christ's hand
outstretched from above, may swing over the deepest, most vacuous
abyss, and fear no fall.

So, brother, build on Christ, rely on Him, depend on Him, and it shall
not be in vain. But if you will not build on the sure Foundation, do
not wonder if the rotten one gives way. If you will not lean on the
strong Stay, complain not when the weak one crumbles to dust beneath
your weight. And if you choose to swing over the profound depth at the
end of a piece of pack-thread, instead of holding on by an adamantine
chain wrapped round God's throne, you must be prepared for its
breaking and your being smashed to pieces below.

III. The last exhortation that comes out of this comparative study of
these phrases is--Believe into Christ.

That is a very pregnant and remarkable expression, and it can
scarcely, as you see, be rendered into our language without a certain
harshness; but still it is worth while to face the harshness for the
sake of getting the double signification that is involved in it. For
when we speak of believing unto or into Him, we suggest two things,
both of which, apparently, were in the minds of the writers of the New
Testament. One is motion towards, and the other is repose in, that
dear Lord.

So, then, true Christian faith is the flight of the soul towards
Christ. Therein is one of the special blessednesses of the Christian
life, that it has for its object and aim absolutely infinite and
unattainable completeness and glory, so that unwearied freshness,
inexhaustible buoyancy, endless progress, are the dower of every
spirit that truly trusts in Christ. All other aims and objects are
limited, transient, and will be left behind. Every other landmark will
sink beneath the horizon, where so many of our landmarks have sunk
already, and where they will all disappear when the last moment comes.
But we may have, and if we are Christian people we shall have, bright
before us, sufficiently certain of being reached to make our efforts
hopeful and confident, sufficiently certain of never being reached to
make our efforts blessed with endless aspirations, the great light and
love of that dear Lord, to yearn after whom is better than to possess
all besides, and following hard after whom, even in the very motion
there is rest, and in the search there is finding. Religion is the
flight of the soul, the aspiration of the whole man after the
unattainable Attainable--'that I may know Him, and be found in Him.'

Oh, how such thoughts ought to shame us who call ourselves Christians!
Growth, progress, getting nearer to Christ, yearning ever with a great
desire after Him!--do not the words seem irony when applied to most of
us? Think of the average type of sluggish contentment with present
attainments that marks Christian people--tortoises in their crawling
rather than eagles in their flight. And let us take our portion of
shame, and remember that the faith which believes Him, and that which
believes on Him, both need to be crowned and perfected by that which
believes towards Him, of which the motto is, 'Forgetting the things
that are behind, I reach forward to the things that are before.'

But there is another side to this last phase of faith. That true
believing towards or unto Christ is the rest of the soul in Him. By
faith that deep and most real union of the believing soul with Jesus
Christ is effected which may be fitly described as our entrance into
and abode in Him. The believer is as if incorporated into Him in whom
he believes. Indeed, the Apostle ventures to use a more startling
expression than _incorporation_ when he says that 'he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit.' If by faith we press towards, by faith we
shall be in, Christ. Faith is at once motion and rest, search and
finding, desire and fruition. The felicity of this last form of the
phrase is its expression of both these ideas, which are united in fact
as in word. A rare construction of the verb _to believe_, with the
simple preposition _in_, coincides with this part of the meaning of
_believing unto_ or _into_, and need not be separately considered.

With this understanding of its meaning, we see how natural is John's
preference for this construction. For surely, if he has anything to
tell us, it is that the true Christian life is a life enclosed, as it
were, in Jesus Christ. Nor need I remind you how Paul, though he
starts from a different point of view, yet coincides with John in this
teaching. For, to him, to be 'in Christ' is the sum of all
blessedness, righteousness, peace, and power. As in an atmosphere, we
may dwell in Him. He may be the strong Habitation to which we may
continually resort. One of the Old Testament words for trusting means
taking refuge, and such a thought is naturally suggested by this New
Testament form of expression. 'I flee unto Thee to hide me.' In that
Fortress we dwell secure.

To be in Jesus, wedded to Him by the conjunction of will and desire,
wedded to Him in the oneness of a believing spirit and in the
obedience of a life, to be thus in Christ is the crown and climax of
faith, and the condition of all perfection. To be in Christ is life;
to be out of Him is death. In Him we have redemption; in Him we have
wisdom, truth, peace, righteousness, hope, confidence. To be in Him is
to be in heaven. We enter by faith. Faith is not the acceptance merely
of His Word, but is the reliance of the soul on Him, the flight of the
soul towards Him, the dwelling of the soul in Him. 'Come, My people,
into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee ... until the
indignation be overpast.'




'NEVER IN BONDAGE'

'We... were never in bondage to any man: how gayest Thou, Ye shall be
made free!'--JOHN viii. 33.

'Never in bondage to any man'? Then what about Egypt, Babylon, Persia,
Syria? Was there not a Roman garrison looking down from the castle
into the very Temple courts where this boastful falsehood was uttered?
It required some hardihood to say, 'Never in bondage to any man,' in
the face of such a history, and such a present. But was it not just an
instance of the strange power which we all have and exercise, of
ignoring disagreeable facts, and by ingenious manipulation taking the
wrinkles out of the photograph? The Jews were perhaps not
misunderstanding Jesus Christ quite so much as these words may
suggest. If He had been promising, as they chose to assume, political
and external liberty, I fancy they would have risen to the bait a
little more eagerly than they did to His words.

But be that as it may, this strange answer of theirs suggests that
power of ignoring what we do not want to see, not only in the way in
which I have suggested, but also in another. For if they had any
inkling of what Jesus meant by slavery and freedom, they, by such
words as these, put away from themselves the thought that they were,
in any deep and inward sense, bondsmen, and that a message of liberty
had any application to them. Ah, dear friends! there was a great deal
of human nature in these men, who thus put up a screen between them
and the penetrating words of our Lord. Were they not doing just what
many of us--all of us to some extent--do: ignoring the facts of their
own necessities, of their own spiritual condition, denying the plain
lessons of experience? Like them, are not we too often refusing to
look in the face the fact that we all, apart from Him, are really in
bondage? Because we do not realise the slavery, are we not indifferent
to the offer of freedom? 'We were never in bondage'; consequently we
add, 'How sayest Thou, Ye shall be made free?' So then, my text brings
us to think of three things: our bondage, our ignorance of our
bondage, our consequent indifference to Christ's offer of liberty. Let
me say a word or two about each of these.

First as to--

I. Our bondage.

Christ follows the vain boast in the text, with the calm, grave,
profound explanation of what He meant: 'Whoso committeth sin is the
slave of sin.' That is true in two ways. By the act of sinning a man
shows that he is the slave of an alien power that has captured him;
and in the act of sinning, he rivets the chains and increases the
tyranny. He is a slave, or he would not obey sin. He is more a slave
because he has again obeyed it. Now, do not let us run away with the
idea that when Jesus speaks of sin and its bondage, He is thinking
only, or mainly, of gross outrages and contradictions of the plain law
of morality and decency, that He is thinking only of external acts
which all men brand as being wrong, or of those which law qualifies as
crimes. We have to go far deeper than that, and into a far more inward
region of life than that, before we come to apprehend the inwardness
and the depth of the Christian conception of what sin is. We have to
bring our whole life close up against God, and then to judge its deeds
thereby. Therefore, though I know I am speaking to a mass of
respectable, law-abiding people, very few of you having any knowledge
of the grosser and uglier forms of transgression, and I dare say none
of you having any experience of what it is to sin against human law,
though I do not charge you--God forbid!--with _vices_, and still less
with _crimes_, I bring to each man's conscience a far more searching
word than either of these two, when I say, 'We all have _sinned_ and
come short of the glory of God.' This declaration of the universality
and reality of the bondage of sin is only the turning into plain words
of a fact which is of universal experience, though it may be of a very
much less universal consciousness. We may not be aware of the fact,
because, as I have to show you, we do not direct our attention to it.
But there it is; and the truth is that every man, however noble his
aspirations sometimes, however pure and high his convictions, and
however honest in the main may be his attempts to do what is right,
when he deals honestly with himself, becomes more or less conscious of
just that experience which a great expert in soul analysis and
self-examination made: 'I find a law'--an influence working upon my
heart with the inevitableness and certainty of law--'that when I would
do good, evil is present with me.'

We all know that, whether we regard it as we ought or no. We all say
Amen to that, when it is forced upon our attention. There _is_
something in us that thwarts aspiration towards good, and inclines to
evil.

  'What will but felt the fleshly screen?'

And it is not only a screen. It not only prevents us from rising as
high as we would, but it sinks us so low as to do deeds that something
within us recoils from and brands as evil. Jesus teaches us that he
who commits sin is the slave of sin; that is to say, that an alien
power has captured and is coercing the wrongdoer. That teaching does
not destroy responsibility, but it kindles hope. A foreign foe, who
has invaded the land, may be driven out of the land, and all his
prisoners set free, if a stronger than he comes against him.
Christianity is called gloomy and stern, because it preaches the
corruption of man's heart. Is it not a gospel to draw a distinction
between the evil that a man does, and the self that a man may be? Is
it not better, more hopeful, more of a true evangel, to say to a man,
'Sin dwelleth in you,' than to say, 'What is called sin is only the
necessary action of human nature'? To believe that their present
condition is not slavery makes men hopeless of ever gaining freedom,
and the true gospel of the emancipation of humanity rests on the
Christian doctrine of the bondage of sin.

Let me remind you that freedom consists not in the absence of external
constraints, but in the animal in us being governed by the will, for
when the flesh is free the man is a slave. And it means that the will
should be governed by the conscience; and it means that the conscience
should be governed by God. These are the stages. Men are built in
three stories, so to speak. Down at the bottom, and to be kept there,
are inclinations, passions, lust, desires, all which are but blind
aimings after their appropriate satisfaction, without any question as
to whether the satisfaction is right or wrong; and above that a
dominant will which is meant to control, and above that a conscience.
That is the public men are more and more abasing themselves to the
degradation of ministering to the supposed wishes instead of cutting
dead against the grain of the wishes, if necessary, in order to meet
the true wants, of the people. Wherever some one strong man stands up
to oppose the wild current of popular desires, he may make up his mind
that the charge of being 'a bad citizen, unpatriotic, a lover of the
enemies of the people,' will be flung at him. You Christian men and
women have to face the same calumnies as your Master had. The rotten
eggs flung at the objects of popular execration--if I might use a
somewhat violent figure--turn to roses in their flight. The praises of
good men and the scoffs of loose-living and godless ones are equally
valuable certificates of character. The Church which does not earn the
same sort of opprobrium which attended its Master has probably failed
of its duty. It is good to be called 'gloomy' and 'sour-visaged' by
those whose only notion of pleasure is effervescent immorality; and it
is good to be called intolerant by the crowd that desires us to be
tolerant of vice. So, my friends, I want you to understand that you,
too, have to tread in the Master's steps. The 'imitation of Jesus'
does not consist merely in the sanctities and secrecies of communion,
and the blessings of a meek and quiet heart, but includes standing
where He stood, in avowed and active opposition to widespread evils,
and, if need be, in the protesting opposition to popular error. And if
you are called nicknames, never mind! Remember what the Master said,
'They shall bring you before kings and magistrates'--the tribunal of
the many-headed is a more formidable judgment-bench than that of any
king--'and it shall turn to a testimony for you.'

II. Now, secondly, this name is the witness to what I venture to call,
for want of a better term, the originality of Jesus Christ.

It bears witness to the dim feeling which onlookers had that in Him
was a new phenomenon, not to be accounted for by birth and descent, by
training and education, or by the whole of what people nowadays call
environment. He did not come out of these circumstances. This is not a
regulation pattern type of Jew. He is 'a Samaritan.' That is to say,
He is unlike the people among whom He dwells; and betrays that other
influences than those which shaped them have gone to the making of
Him.

That is one of the most marked, outstanding, and important features in
the teaching and in the character of Jesus Christ, that it is
absolutely independent of, and incapable of being accounted for by,
anything that He derived from the circumstances in which He lived. He
was a Jew, and yet He was not a Jew. He was not a Samaritan, and yet
He was a Samaritan. He was not a Greek, and yet He was one. He was not
a Roman, nor an Englishman, nor a Hindoo, nor an Asiatic, nor an
African; and yet He had all the characteristics of these races within
Himself, and held them all in the ample sweep of His perfect Manhood.

If we turn to His teaching we find that, whilst no doubt to some
extent it is influenced in its forms by the necessities of its
adaptation to the first listeners, there is a certain element in it
far beyond anything that came from Rabbis, or even from prophets and
psalmists. Modern Christian scholarship has busied itself very much in
these days with studying Jewish literature, so far as it is available,
in order to ascertain how far it formed the teaching, or mind, of
Jesus the Carpenter of Nazareth. There is a likeness, but the likeness
only serves to make the unlikeness more conspicuous. And I, for my
part, venture to assert that, whilst the form of our Lord's teaching
may largely be traced to the influences under which He was brought up,
and whilst the substance of some parts of it may have been anticipated
by earlier Rabbis of His nation, the crowd that listened to Him on the
mountain top had laid their fingers upon the more important fact when
they 'wondered at His teaching,' and found the characteristic
difference between it, and that of the men to whom they had listened,
in the note of authority with which He spoke. Jesus never argues, He
asserts; He claims; and in lieu of all arguments He gives you His own
'Verily! verily! I say unto you.'

Thus not only in its form, but in its substance, in its lofty
morality, in its spiritual religion, in its revelation of the Father
and the Fatherhood for all men, Christ's teaching as teaching stands
absolutely alone.

If we turn to His character, the one thing that strikes us is that
about it there is nothing of the limitations of time or race which
stamp all other men. He is not good after the fashion of His age, or
of any other age; He is simply embodied and perfect Goodness. This
Tree has shot up high above the fences that enclose the grove in which
it grows, and its leaf lasts for ever.

Run over, in your mind, other great names of heroes, saints, thinkers,
poets; they all bear the stamp of their age and circumstances, and the
type of goodness or the manner of thought which belonged to these.
Jesus Christ alone stands before men absolutely free from any of the
limitations which are essential in the case of every human excellence
and teacher. And so He comes to us with a strange freshness, with a
strange closeness; and nineteen centuries have not made Him fit less
accurately to our needs than He did to those of the generation amidst
which He condescended to live. Thickening mists of oblivion wrap all
other great names as they recede into the past; and about the loftiest
of them we have to say, 'This man, having served his generation, fell
on sleep, and saw corruption.' But Jesus Christ lasts, because there
is nothing local or temporary about His teaching or His character.

Now this peculiar originality, as I venture to call it, of Christ's
character is a very strong argument for the truthful accuracy of the
picture drawn of Him in these four Gospels. Where did these four men
get their Christ? Was it from imagination? Was it from myth? Was it
from the accidental confluence of a multitude of traditions? There is
an old story about a painter who, in despair of producing a certain
effect of storm upon the sea, at last flung his wet sponge at the
canvas, and to his astonishment found that it had done the very thing
he wanted. But wet sponges cannot draw likenesses; and to allege that
these four men drew such a picture, in such compass, without anybody
sitting for it, seems to me about the most desperate hypothesis that
ever was invented. If there were no Christ, or if the Christ that was,
was not like what the Gospels paint Him as being, then the authors of
these little booklets are consummate geniuses, and their works stand
at the very top of the imaginative literature of the world. It is more
difficult to account for the Gospels, if they are not histories, than
it is to account for the Christ whom they tell us of if they are.

And then, further, there is only one key to the mystery of this
originality. Christ is perfect man, high above limitations, and owing
nothing to environment, because He is the Son of God. I would as soon
believe that grass roots, which for years, in some meadow, had brought
forth, season after season, nothing but humble green blades, shot up
suddenly into a palm tree, as I would believe that simple natural
descent brought all at once into the middle of the dull succession of
commonplace and sinful men this radiant and unique Figure. Account for
Christ, all you unbelievers! The question of to-day, round which all
the battle is being fought, is the person of Jesus Christ. If He be
what the Gospels tell us that He is, there is nothing left for the
unbeliever worth a struggle. 'What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is
He?' The Jews said, 'Thou art a Samaritan!' We say, 'Thou art the
Christ; the Son of the living God!'

III. Lastly, the name bears witness to Christ's universality.

I presume that, in addition to what seemed His hostility to what was
taken to be true Judaism, another set of facts underlay the name--viz.
those which indicated His kindly relations with the people whom it was
every good Jew's pleasant duty to hate with all his heart. The story
of the Samaritan woman in John's Gospel, the parable of the good
Samaritan, the incident of the grateful leper, who was a Samaritan,
the refusal to allow the eager Apostles to bring down fire from heaven
to consume inhospitable churls in a Samaritan village, were but
outstanding specimens of what must have been a characteristic of His
whole career not unknown to His enemies. So they argued, 'If you love
our enemies you must hate us; and you must be one of them,' thereby
distorting, but yet presenting, what is the great glory of Christ's
Gospel, and of Christ Himself, that He belongs to the world; and that
His salvation, the sweep of His love, and the power of His Cross, are
meant for all mankind.

That universality largely arises from the absence of the limitations
of which I have already spoken sufficiently. Because He belongs to no
one period as regards His character, He is available for all periods
as regards His efficacy. Because His teaching is not dyed in the hues
of any school or of any age or of any cast of thought, it suits for
all mankind. This water comes clear from the eternal rock, and has no
taint of any soil through which it has flowed. Therefore the thirsty
lips of a world may be glued to it, and drink and be satisfied. His
one sacrifice avails for the whole world.

But let me remind you that universality means also individuality, and
that Jesus Christ is the Christ for all men because He is each man's
Christ. The tree of life stands in the middle of the garden that all
may have equal access to it. Is this universal Christ yours; thine?
That is the question. Make Him so by putting out your hand and
claiming your share in Him, by casting your soul upon Him, by trusting
your all to Him, by listening to His word, by obeying His commands, by
drinking in the fulness of His blessing. You can do so if you will. If
you do not, the universal Christ is nothing to you. Make Him thine,
and be sure that the sweep of His love and the efficacy of His
sacrifice embrace and include thee. He is the universal Christ;
therefore He is the only Christ; 'neither is there salvation in any
other.' Through Him all men, each man, thou, must be saved. Without
Him all men, every man, thou, can not be saved. Take Him for yours,
and you will find that each who possesses Him, possesses Him
altogether, and none hinders the other in his full enjoyment of 'the
bread of God which came down from heaven.'




ONE METAPHOR AND TWO MEANINGS

'I must work the works of Him that sent Me, while it is day: the night
cometh when no man can work.'--JOHN ix. 4.

'The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.'--ROMANS
xiii. 12.

The contrast between these two sayings will strike you at once. Using
the same metaphors, they apply them in exactly opposite directions. In
the one, life is the day, and the state beyond death the night; in the
other, life is the night, and the state beyond death the day.
Remarkable as the contrast is, it comes to be still more so if we
remember the respective speakers. For each of them says what we should
rather have expected the other to say. It would have been natural for
Paul to have given utterance to the stimulus to diligence caused by
the consciousness that the time of work was brief; and it would have
been as natural for Jesus, who, as we believe, came from God, from the
place of the eternal supernal glory, to have said that life here was
night as compared with the illumination that He had known. But it is
the divine Master who gives utterance to the common human
consciousness of a brief life ending in inactivity, and it is the
servant who takes the higher point of view.

So strange did the words of my first text seem as coming from our
Lord's lips, that the sense of incongruity seems to have been the
occasion of the remarkable variation of reading which the Revised
Version has adopted when it says '_We_ must work the works of Him that
sent Me.' But that thought seems to me to be perfectly irrelevant to
our Lord's purpose in this context, where He is vindicating His own
action, and not laying down the duty of His servants. He is giving
here one of these glimpses, that we so rarely get, into His own inmost
heart. And so we have to take the sharp contrast between the Master's
thought and the servant's thought, and to combine them, if we would
think rightly about the present and the future, and do rightly in the
present.

I. Let me ask you to look at the Master's thought about the present
and the future.
