We have to carry both the metaphors together with us here. 'I have
blotted out'--that is, as erasing from a book. 'I have blotted out as a
cloud'--that is, the thinning away of the mist. The blurred and stained
page can be cancelled. Chemicals will take the ink out. 'The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin'; and it, passed over all that foul
record, makes it pure and clean. 'What I have written, I have written,'
said Pilate in his obstinacy. 'What I have written, I have written,'
wails many a man in the sense of the irrevocableness of his past.
Brother! be not afraid. Christ can take away all that stained record,
and give you back the page ready to receive holier words.

The cloud is thinned away. What thins the cloud? As I have said, the
light which the cloud obscures, shining on the upper surface of it,
dissipates it layer by layer till it gets down at last to the
lowermost, and then rends a gap in it, and sends the shaft of the
sunbeam through on to the green earth. And that is only a highly
imaginative way of saying that it is the love against which we
transgress that thins away the cloud of transgression, and at last, as
the placid moon, by simply shining silently on, will sweep the whole
sky clear of its clouds, dissipates them all, and leaves the calm blue.
God forgives. The ledger account--if I may use so grossly commercial a
figure--is settled in full; the indictment is endorsed, 'acquitted.' He
remembers the sins only to breathe into the child's heart the assurance
of pardon, and no obstacle rises by reason of forgiven transgression
between the sinning man and the reconciled God.

Now, all this preaching of Isaiah's is enlarged and confirmed, and to
some extent the _rationale_ of it is set before us in the great Gospel
truth of forgiveness through the blood of Jesus Christ. Unless we know
that truth, we may well stand amazed and questioning as to whether a
righteous God, administering a rigorous universe, can ever pardon sin.
And unless we know that by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, granted to our
spirits, our whole nature may be remade and moulded, we might well be
tempted to say, Ah! the Ethiopian cannot change his skin nor the
leopard his spots. But Jesus Christ can change more than skin, even the
heart and spirit, the inmost depths of the nature.

Now, brother, my text speaks of this great blotting out as a past fact.
It is so in the divine mind with regard to each of us, because Christ's
great work has made reconciliation and atonement for all the sins of
all the world. And on the fact that it is past is based the
exhortation, 'Return unto Me, for I have redeemed thee.' God does not
say, 'Come back and I will forgive'; He does not say, 'Return and I
will blot out'; but He says, 'Return, for I _have_ blotted out.' Though
accomplished, the forgiveness has to be appropriated by individual
faith. The sins of the world have been borne, and borne away, by the
Lamb of God, but your sins are not borne away unless your hand is laid
on this head.

If it is, then you do not need to say, 'What I have written is written,
and it cannot be blotted out.' But as in the old days a monk would take
some manuscript upon which filthy stories about heathen gods and
foolish fables were written, and erase these to write the legends of
saints, or perhaps the words of the Gospels themselves; so on our
hearts, which have been scribbled all over with obscenities and
follies, He will write His new best name of Love, and we may be
epistles of Christ, written with the Spirit of the living God.




HIDDEN AND REVEALED

'Verily thou art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of Israel, the
Saviour.... I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth;
I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye Me in vain: I the Lord speak
righteousness, I declare things that are right.'--ISAIAH xlv, 15,19.


The former of these verses expresses the thoughts of the prophet in
contemplating the close of a great work of God's power which issues in
the heathen's coming to Israel and acknowledging God. He adores the
depth of the divine counsels which, by devious ways and after long
ages, have led to this bright result. And as he thinks of all the
long-stretching preparations, all the apparently hostile forces which
have been truly subsidiary, all the generations during which these
Egyptian and Ethiopian tribes have been the enemies and oppressors of
that Israel whom they at last acknowledge for the dwelling-place of
God, and enemies of that Jehovah before whom they finally bow down, he
feels that he has no measuring-line to fathom the divine purposes, and
bows his face to the ground in reverent contemplation with that word
upon his lips: 'Verily Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of
Israel, the Saviour.' It is a parallel to the apostolic words, 'O the
depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. How
unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out.'

But such thoughts are but a half truth, and may very easily become in
men's minds a whole error, and therefore they are followed by a
marvellous section in which the Lord Himself speaks, and of which the
whole burden is--the clearness and fulness with which God makes Himself
known to men. True it is that there are depths inaccessible in the
divine nature. True it is that there are mysteries unrevealed in the
method of the divine procedure, and especially in that of the relation
of heathen tribes to His gospel and His love. True it is that there are
mysteries opened in the very word of His grace. But notwithstanding all
this--it is also true that He makes Himself known to us all, that He
declares righteousness, that He calls us to seek Him, and that He wills
to be found and known by us.

The collocation of these two passages may be taken, then, as
representing the two phases of the Divine Manifestation, the obscurity
which must ever be associated with all our finite knowledge of God, and
the clear sunlight in which blazes all that we need to know of Him.

I. After all revelation, God is hidden.

There is revelation of His Name in all His works. His action must be
all self-manifestation. But after all it is obscure and hidden.

1. Nature hides while it reveals.

Nature's revelation is unobtrusive.

God is concealed behind second causes.

God is concealed behind regular modes of working (laws).

Nature's revelation is partial, disclosing only a fragment of the name.

Nature's revelation is ambiguous. Dark shadows of death and pain in the
sensitive world, of ruin and convulsions, of shivered stars, seem to
contradict the faith that all is very good; so that it has been
possible for men to drop their plummet in the deep and say, 'I find no
God,' and for others to fall into Manichaeism or some form or other of
dualism.

2. Providence hides while it reveals.

That is the sphere in which men are most familiar with the idea of
mystery.

There is much of which we do not see the issue. The process is not
completed, and so the end is not visible.

Even when we believe that 'to Him' and 'for good' are 'all things,' we
cannot tell how all will come circling round. We are like men looking
only at one small segment of an ellipse which is very eccentric.

There is much of which we do not see the consistency with the divine
character.

We are confronted with stumbling-blocks in the allotment of earthly
conditions; in the long ages and many tribes which are without
knowledge of God; in the sore sorrows, national and individual.

We can array a formidable host. But it is to be remembered that
revelation actually increases these. It is just because we know so much
of God that we feel them so keenly. I suppose the mysteries of the
divine government trouble others outside the sphere of revelation but
little. The darkness is made visible by the light.

3. Even in 'grace' God is hidden while revealed.

The Infinite and Eternal cannot be grasped by man.

The conception of infinity and eternity is given us by revelation, but
it is not comprehended so that its contents are fully known. The words
are known, but their full meaning is not, and no revelation can make
them, known to finite intelligences.

God dwells in light inaccessible, which is darkness.

Revelation opens abysses down which we cannot look. It raises and
leaves unsettled as many questions as it solves.

The telescope resolves many nebulae, but only to bring more
unresolvable ones into the field of vision.

Now all this is but one side of the truth. There is a tendency in some
minds to underrate what is plain because all is not plain. For some
minds the obscure has a fascination, apart altogether from its nature,
just because it is obscure. It is a noble emulation to press forward
and 'still to be closing up what we know not with what we know.' But
neither in science nor in religion shall we make progress if we do not
take heed of the opposing errors of thinking that all is seen, and of
thinking that what we have is valueless because there are gaps in it.
The constellations are none the less bright nor immortal fires, though
there be waste places in heaven where nothing but opaque blackness is
seen. In these days it is especially needful to insist both on the
incompleteness of all our religious knowledge, and to say that--

II. Notwithstanding all obscurity, God has amply revealed Himself.

Though God hides Himself, still there comes from heaven the voice--'I
have not spoken in secret,' Now these words contain these thoughts--

1. That whatever darkness there may be, there is none due to the manner
of the revelation.

God has not spoken in secret, in a corner. There are no arbitrary
difficulties made or unnecessary darkness left in His revelation. _We_
have no right to say that He has left difficulties to test our faith.
_He_ Himself has never said so. He deals with us in good faith, doing
all that can be done to enlighten, regard being had to still loftier
considerations, to the freedom of the human will, to the laws which He
has Himself imposed on our nature, and the purposes for which we are
here. It is very important to grasp this. We have been told as much as
_can_ be told. Contrast with such a revelation the cave-muttered
oracles of heathenism and their paltering double sense. Be sure that
when God speaks, He speaks clearly and to all, and that in Christianity
there is no esoteric teaching for a few initiated only, while the
multitude are put off with shows.

2. That whatever obscurity there may be, there is none which hides the
divine invitation or Him from those who obey it.

'I have never said ... seek ye Me in vain.' Much is obscure if
speculative completeness is looked for, but the moral relations of God
and man are not obscure.

All which the heart needs is made known. His revelation is clearly His
seeking us, and His revelation is His gracious call to us to seek Him.
He is ever found by those who seek. They have not to press through
obscurities to find Him, but the desire to possess must precede
possession in spiritual matters. He is no hidden God, lurking in
obscurity and only to be found by painful search. They who 'seek' Him
know where to find Him, and seek because they know.

3. That whatever may be obscure, the Revelation of righteousness is
clear.

We have to face speculative difficulties in plenty, but the great fact
remains that in Revelation steady light is focussed on the moral
qualities of the divine Nature and especially on His righteousness.

And the revelation of the divine righteousness reaches its greatest
brightness, as that of all the divine Nature does, in the Person and
work of Jesus. Very significantly the idea of God's righteousness is
fully developed in the immediately subsequent context. There we find
that attribute linked in close and harmonious conjunction with what
shallower thought is apt to regard as being in antagonism to it. He
declares Himself to be 'a just (righteous) God and a Saviour.' So then,
if we would rightly conceive of His righteousness, we must give it a
wider extension than that of retributive justice or cold, inflexible
aloofness from sinners. It impels God to be man's saviour. And with
similar enlarging of popular conceptions there follows: 'In the Lord is
righteousness and strength,' and therefore, 'In the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be justified (declared and made righteous) and shall
glory'--then, the divine Righteousness is communicative.

All these thoughts, germinal in the prophet's words, are set in fullest
light, and certified by the most heart-moving facts, in the Person and
work of Jesus Christ. He 'declares at this time His righteousness, that
He might Himself be righteous and the maker righteous of them that have
faith in Jesus.' Whatever is dark, this is clear, that 'Jehovah our
Righteousness' has come to us in His Son, in whom seeking Him we shall
never seek in vain, but 'be found in Him, not having a righteousness of
our own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through faith
in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.'

If the great purpose of revelation is to make us know that God loves
us, and has given us His Son that in Him we may know Him and possess
His Righteousness, difficulties and obscurities in its form or in its
substance take a very different aspect. What need we more than that
knowledge and possession? Be not robbed of them.

Many things are not written in the book of the divine Revelation,
whether it be that of Nature, of human history, or of our own spirits,
or even of the Gospel, but these are written that we may believe that
Jesus is the Son of God, and believing, may have life in His name.




A RIGHTEOUSNESS NEAR AND A SWIFT SALVATION

'Hearken unto Me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness: I
bring near My righteousness; it shall not be far off, and My salvation
shall not tarry.'--ISAIAH xlvi. 12,13.


God has promised that He will dwell with him that is humble and of a
contrite heart. Jesus has shed the oil of His benediction on the poor
in spirit. It is the men who form the exact antithesis to these
characters who are addressed here. The 'stout-hearted' are those who,
being untouched in conscience and ignorant of their sin, are
self-reliant and almost defiant before God. That temper is branded
here, though, of course, there is a sense in which a stout heart is a
priceless possession, but that sort of stoutness of heart is best
secured by the contrite of heart. Those who are far from righteousness
are those who are not only sinful in act, but do not desire to be
otherwise, having no approximation or drawing towards a nobler life, by
aspiration or effort.

To such men God speaks, as in the tone of a royal proclamation; and
what should we expect to hear pealing from His lips? Words of rebuke,
warning, condemnation? No; His voice is gentle and wooing, and does not
threaten blows, but proffers blessings: 'I will bring near My
righteousness. It shall not be far off,' though the stout-hearted maybe
'far from' it. Here we have a divine proclamation of a divine Love that
will not let us away from its presence; of a divine Work for us that is
finished without us; of an all-sufficient Gift to us.

I. A divine proclamation of a divine Love that will not let us away
from its presence.

There is a great contest between God and man: man seeking to withdraw
from God, and God following in patient, persistent love.

1. In general terms God keeps near us, however far away we go from Him.

Think of our forgetfulness of Him and His continual thought of us.
Think of our alienated hearts and His unchanging love.

We cannot turn away His care, we cannot exhaust His compassion, we
cannot alienate His heart. All men everywhere are objects of these, as
in every corner of the world the sky is overhead, and all lands have
sunshine.

What a picture of divine patience and placability that truth points for
us! It shows the Father coming after His prodigal son, and so surpasses
even the pearl of the parables.

2. The special reference to Christ's work.

That work is the exhibition in manhood and to men of a perfect
righteousness.

It is the implanting in the corrupt world of a new beginning. It is the
clothing us with Christ's righteousness, for which we are forgiven and
in which we are sanctified.

So Christ's work is God's coming to bring near His righteousness, and
now 'it is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart.'

II. A divine proclamation of a divine Work which is finished without us.

The divine righteousness and its consequence are here represented as
being brought near while men are still 'stout-hearted.' We must feel
the emphasis laid on '_I_ will bring near _My_ righteousness,' and the
impression of merciful speed given by 'My salvation shall not tarry.'
The whole suggests such thoughts as these:--

The divine love is not drawn out by anything in us, but pours out on
us, even while we are far off and indifferent to it. His bringing near
of righteousness, and setting His salvation to run very swiftly side by
side with it, originates in Himself. It is the self-impelled and
self-fed flow of a fountain, and we need no pump or machinery to draw
it forth.

The divine work is accomplished without man's co-operation.

'It is finished,' was Christ's dying cry. But what is
finished?--Bringing the righteousness near. What still remains to be
done?--Making it mine. And that is accomplished by faith.

It is mine if by faith I claim it as mine, and knit myself with Him who
is righteousness and salvation for every man that they may be
accessible to and possessed by any man.

A man may be far from righteousness though it is near him and all
around him. Like Gideon's fleece, he may be dry when all is wet, or
like some rock in a field, barren and sullen, while all around the corn
is waving.

III. The proclamation of an all-sufficient Gift.

Righteousness, salvation, glory, are here brought together in
significant sequence. They are but several names for the same divine
gift, looked at from different angles. A diamond flashes varying
prismatic hues from its different facets.

That encyclopaedical gift, which in regard to man considered as sinful
brings pardon and a new nature 'in righteousness and holiness of
truth,' brings deliverance from peril and from every form of evil and
death, to him considered as exposed to consequences of sin both
physical and moral, and a true though limited participation in the
divine glory, even now, with the hope of entering into the blaze of it
hereafter, to him as considered as made in the divine image and having
lost it.

And all this wonderful triple hope, rapturous and impossible as it
seems when we think of man as he is, and of each of ourselves as we
each feel ourselves to be, is for us a sober certainty and a fact
sufficiently accomplished, to give firm ground for our largest
expectations if we hold fast by Jesus who brings that all-sufficient
gift of God within reach of each of us. The divine patience and love
follow us in all our wild wanderings, praying us 'with much entreaty
that we should receive the gift.' Jesus, who is God's righteousness and
love incarnate, beseeches us to take Him, and in Him righteousness,
salvation, and glory.




A RIVER OF PEACE AND WAVES OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

'Oh that thou hadst hearkened to My commandments! then had thy peace
been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the
sea.'--ISAIAH xlviii. 18.


I. The Wonderful Thought of God here.

This is an exclamation of disappointment; of thwarted love. The good
which He purposed has been missed by man's fault, and He regards the
faulty Israel with sorrow and pity as a would-be benefactor balked of a
kind intention might do. O Jerusalem! 'how often would I have gathered
thee.' 'If thou hadst known ... the things that belong unto thy peace!'

II. Man's opposition to God's loving purpose for us.

To have hearkened to His commandments would have enabled Him to let His
kindness have its way.

It is not only our act contrary to God's Law, but the source of that
act in our antagonistic will, which fatally bars out the possibility of
God's intended good from us. It is 'not hearkening' which is the root
of not doing.

That possibility of lifting up our puny wills against the
all-sovereign, Infinite Will is the mystery of mysteries.

The fact that the mysterious possibility becomes an actuality in us is
still more mysterious. If we could solve those two mysteries, we should
be far on the way to solve all the mysteries of man's relation to God,
and God's to man.

A will absolutely submitted to Him is His great ideal of human nature.
And that ideal we all can thwart, and alas, alas! we all do. It is the
deepest mystery; it is the blackest sin; it is the intensest folly.

Sin is negative as well as positive. Not to hearken is as bad as to act
in dead opposition to.

III. The lost good.

The great purpose of the divine Commandment is to show us, for our own
sakes, the path that leads to all blessedness.

Peace and Righteousness, or, in more modern words, all well-being and
all goodness, are the sure results of taking God's expressed Will as
the guide of life.

These two are inseparable. Indeed they are one and the same fact of
human experience, looked at from two points of view.

The force of the metaphor in both clauses is substantially the same. It
suggests in both--Abundance--Continuity--Uninterrupted Succession. But
regarded separately each has its own fair promise. 'As a
river'--flowing softly, not stagnant--that suggests the calm and gentle
flow of a placid and untroubled stream refreshing and fertilising. 'As
waves of the sea,' these suggest greater force than 'river.' The image
speaks of a righteousness massive and having power and a resistless
swing in it. It is the more striking because the waves of the sea are
the ordinary emblem of rebellious power. But here they stand as emblem
of the strength of a submissive, not of a rebellious, will. In that
obedience human nature rises to a higher type of strength than it ever
attains while in opposition to the Source of all strength.

Contrast--'Whose waters cast up mire and dirt.'

IV. The lost good regained.

God has yet a method to accomplish His loving desire. Even those who
have not hearkened may receive through Christ the good which they have
sinned away. In Him is peace; in Him is Righteousness, which comes from
faith. 'Hear, and your soul shall live.'




EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


ALEXANDER MACLAREN, D. D., Litt. D.

ISAIAH AND JEREMIAH

Isaiah, Chaps. XLIX to End. Jeremiah.




CONTENTS.


FEEDING IN THE WAYS (Isaiah xlix. 9)

THE MOUNTAIN ROAD (Isaiah xlix. 11)

THE WRITING ON GOD'S HANDS (Isaiah xlix. 16)

THE SERVANT'S WORDS TO THE WEARY (Isaiah l. 4)

THE SERVANT'S OBEDIENCE (Isaiah l. 5)

THE SERVANT'S VOLUNTARY SUFFERINGS (Isaiah l. 6)

THE SERVANT'S INFLEXIBLE RESOLVE (Isaiah l. 7)

THE SERVANT'S TRIUMPH (Isaiah l. 8, 9)

A CALL TO FAITH (Isaiah l. 10)

DYING FIRES (Isaiah l. 11)

THE AWAKENING OF ZION (Isaiah lii. 1)

A PARADOX OF SELLING AND BUYING (Isaiah lii. 3)

CLEAN CARRIERS (Isaiah lii. 11)

MARCHING ORDERS (Isaiah lii. 11, 12)

THE ARM OF THE LORD (Isaiah liii. 1)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--I. (Isaiah liii. 2,3)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--II. (Isaiah liii. 4-6)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--III. (Isaiah liii. 7-9)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--IV. (Isaiah liii. 10)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--V. (Isaiah liii. 11)

THE SUFFERING SERVANT--VI. (Isaiah liii. 12)

THE PASSING AND THE PERMANENT (Isaiah liv. 10)

THE CALL TO THE THIRSTY (Isaiah lv. 1-13)

THE GREAT PROCLAMATION (Isaiah lv. 1)

GOD'S WAYS AND MAN'S (Isaiah lv. 8, 9)

CAN WE MAKE SURE OF TO-MORROW? (Isaiah lvi. 12)

FLIMSY GARMENTS (Isaiah lix. 6; Rev. iii. 18)

THE SUNLIT CHURCH (Isaiah lx. 1-3)

WALLS AND GATES (Isaiah lx. 18)

THE JOY-BRINGER (Isaiah lxi. 3)

THE HEAVENLY WORKERS AND THE EARTHLY WATCHERS (Isaiah lxii. 1, 6, 7)

MIGHTY TO SAVE (Isaiah lxiii. 1)

THE WINEPRESS AND ITS TREADER (Isaiah lxiii. 2, 3)

THE SYMPATHY OF GOD (Isaiah lxiii. 9)

HOW TO MEET GOD (Isaiah lxiv. 5)

'THE GOD OF THE AMEN' (Isaiah lxv. 16)


THE BOOK OF JEREMIAH

GOD'S LAWSUIT (Jer. ii. 9)

STIFF-NECKED IDOLATERS AND PLIABLE CHRISTIANS (Jer. ii. 11)

FOUNTAIN AND CISTERNS (Jer. ii. 13)

FORSAKING JEHOVAH (Jer. ii. 19)

A COLLOQUY BETWEEN A PENITENT AND GOD (Jer. iii. 21, 22)

A QUESTION FOR THE BEGINNING (Jer. v. 31)

POSSESSING AND POSSESSED (Jer. x. 16, R.V.)

CALMS AND CRISES (Jer. xii. 5, R.V.)

AN IMPOSSIBILITY MADE POSSIBLE (Jer. xiii. 23; 2 Cor. v. 17; Rev. xxi.
5)

TRIUMPHANT PRAYER (Jer. xiv. 7-9)

SIN'S WRITING AND ITS ERASURE (Jer. xvii, 1; 2 Cor. iii. 3; Col. ii. 14)

THE HEATH IN THE DESERT AND THE TREE BY THE RIVER (Jer. xvii. 6, 8)

A SOUL GAZING ON GOD (Jer. xvii. 12)

TWO LISTS OF NAMES (Jer. xvii. 13; Luke x. 20)

YOKES OF WOOD AND OF IRON (Jer. xxviii. 13)

WHAT THE STABLE CREATION TEACHES (Jer. xxxi. 36)

WHAT THE IMMENSE CREATION TEACHES (Jer. xxxi. 37)

A THREEFOLD DISEASE AND A TWOFOLD CURE (Jer. xxxiii. 8)

THE RECHABITES (Jer. xxxv. 16)

JEREMIAH'S ROLL BURNED AND REPRODUCED (Jer. xxxvi. 32)

ZEDEKIAH (Jer. xxxvii. 1)

THE WORLD'S WAGES TO A PROPHET (Jer. xxxvii. 11-21)

THE LAST AGONY (Jer. xxxix. 1-10)

EBEDMELECH THE ETHIOPIAN (Jer. xxxix. 18)

GOD'S PATIENT PLEADINGS (Jer. xliv. 4)

THE SWORD OF THE LORD (Jer. xlvii. 6, 7)

THE KINSMAN-REDEEMER (Jer. 1. 34)

'As SODOM' (Jer. lii. 1-11)




FEEDING IN THE WAYS

'They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high
places.' ISAIAH xlix. 9.


This is part of the prophet's glowing description of the return of the
Captives, under the figure of a flock fed by a strong shepherd. We have
often seen, I suppose, a flock of sheep driven along a road, some of
them hastily trying to snatch a mouthful from the dusty grass by the
wayside. Little can they get there; they have to wait until they reach
some green pasture in which they can be folded. This flock shall 'feed
in the ways'; as they go they will find nourishment. That is not all;
the top of the mountains is not the place where grass grows. _There_
are bare, savage cliffs, from which every particle of soil has been
washed by furious torrents, or the scanty vegetation has been burnt up
by the fierce 'sunbeams like swords.' There the wild deer and the
ravens live, the sheep feed down in the valleys. But '_their_ pasture
shall be in all high places.' The literal rendering is even more
emphatic: 'Their pasture shall be in all _bare heights_,' where a
sudden verdure springs to feed them according to their need. Whilst,
then, this prophecy is originally intended simply to suggest the
abundant supplies that were to be provided for the band of exiles as
they came back from Babylon, there lie in it great and blessed
principles which belong to the Christian pilgrimage, and the flock that
follows Christ.

They who follow Him, says my text, to begin with, shall find in the
dusty paths of common life, and in all the smallnesses and distractions
of daily duty, nourishment for their spirits. Do you remember what
Jesus said? 'My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to
finish His work.' We, too, may have the same meat to eat which the
world knows not of, and He will give that hidden manna to the combatant
as well as 'to him that overcometh.' In the measure in which 'we follow
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth,' in that measure do we find--like the
stores of provisions that Arctic explorers come upon, _cached_ for
them--food in the wilderness, and nourishment for our highest life in
our common work. That is a great promise, and it is a great duty.

It is a promise the fulfilment of which is plainly guaranteed by the
very nature of the case. Religion is meant to direct conduct, and the
smallest affairs of life are to come under its imperial control, and
the only way by which a man can get any good out of his Christianity is
by living it. It is when he sets to work on the principles of the
Gospel that the Gospel proves itself to be a reality in his blessed
experience. It is when he does the smallest duties from the great
motives that these great motives are strengthened by exercise, as every
motive is. If you wish to weaken the influence of any principle upon
you, do not work it out, and it will wither and die. If a man would
grasp the fulness of spiritual sustenance which lies in the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, let him go to work on the basis of the Gospel, and he
'shall feed in the ways,' and common duties will minister strength to
him instead of taking strength from him. We can make the smallest daily
incidents subserve our growth and our spiritual strength, because, if
we thus do them, they will bring to us attestations of the reality of
the faith by which we act on them. For convincing a man that a lifebuoy
is reliable there is nothing like having had experience of its power to
hold his head above the waves when he has been cast into them. _Live_
your Christianity, and it will attest itself. There will come, besides
that, the blessed memory of past times in which we trusted in the Lord
and were lightened, we obeyed God and found His promises true, we
risked all for God and found that we had all more abundantly. It is
only an active Christian life that is a nourished and growing Christian
life.

The food which God gives us is not only to be taken by faith, but it
has to be made ours more abundantly by work. Saint Augustine said in
another connection, 'Believe, and thou hast eaten.' Yes, that is
blessedly true, but it needs to be supplemented by 'they shall feed _in
the ways_,' and their work will bring them nourishment.

But this is a great duty as well as a great promise. How many of us
Christian people have but little experience of getting nearer to God
because of our daily occupations? To by far the larger number of us, in
by far the greater space of time in our lives, our daily work is a
distraction, and tends to obscure the face of God to us and to shut us
out from many of the storehouses of sustenance by which a quiet,
contemplative faith is refreshed. Therefore we need times of special
prayer and remoteness from daily work; and there will be very little
realisation of the nourishing power of common duties unless there is
familiar to us also the entrance into the 'secret place of the Most
High,' where He feeds His children on the bread of life.

We must not neglect either of these two ways by which our souls are
fed, and we must ever remember that the reason why so many Christian
people cannot set to their seal that this promise is true, lies mainly
in this, that the ways on which they go are either not the ways that
the Shepherd has walked in before them, or that they are trodden in
forgetfulness of Him and without looking to His guidance. The work that
is to minister to the Christian life must be work conformed to the
Christian ideal, and if we fling ourselves into our secular business,
as it is called--if you go to your counting-houses and shops, and I go
to my desk and books, and forget the Shepherd--then there is no grass
by the wayside for such sheep. But if we subject our wills to Him, and
if in all that we do we are trying to refer to Him and are working in
dependence on Him, and for Him, then the poorest work, the meanest, the
most entirely secular, will be a source of Christian nourishment and
blessing. We have to settle for ourselves whether we shall be
distracted, torn asunder by pressure of cares and responsibilities and
activities, or whether, far below the agitated surface which is ruffled
by the winds, and borne along by the tidal wave, there will be a great
central depth, still but not stagnant--whether we shall be fed, or
starved in our Christian life, by the pressure of our worldly tasks.
The choice is before us. 'They shall feed in the ways,' if the ways are
Christ's ways, and He is at every step their Shepherd.

Further, my text suggests that for those who follow the Lamb there
shall be greenness and pasture on the bare heights. Strip that part of
our text of its metaphor, and it just comes to the blessed old thought,
which I hope many of us have known to be a true one, that the times of
sorrow are the times when a Christian may have the most of the presence
and strength of God. 'In the days of famine they shall be satisfied,'
and up among the most barren cliffs, where there is not a bite for any
four-footed creature, they shall find springing grass and watered
pastures. Our prophet puts the same thought, under a kindred though
somewhat different metaphor, in another place in this book, where he
says, 'I will open rivers in high places.' That is clean contrary to
nature. The rivers do not run on the mountain-tops, but down in the low
ground. But for us, as the darkness thickens, the pillar may glow the
brighter; as the gloom increases, the glory may grow; the less of
nutriment or refreshment earth affords, the more abundantly does God
spread His stores before us, if we are wise enough to take them. It is
an experience, I suppose, common to all devout men, that their times of
most rapid growth were their times of trouble. In nature winter stops
all vegetable life. In grace the growing time is the winter. They tell
us that up in the Arctic regions the reindeer will scratch away the
snow, and get at the succulent moss that lies beneath it. When that
Shepherd, Who Himself has known sorrows, leads us up into those barren
regions of perpetual cold and snow, He teaches us, too, how to brush it
away, and find what we need buried and kept safe and warm beneath the
white shroud. It is the prerogative of the Christian soul not to be
without trouble, but to turn the trouble into nourishment, and to feed
on the barest heights.

May I turn these latter words of our text a somewhat different way,
attaching to them a meaning which does not belong to them, but by way
of accommodation? If Christian people want to have the bread of God
abundantly, they must climb. It is to those who live on the heights
that provision comes according to their need. If you would have your
Christian life starved, go down into the fertile valleys. Remember
Abraham and Lot, and the choice which each made. The one said: 'I want
cattle and wealth, and I am going down to Sodom. Never mind about the
vices of the inhabitants. There is money to be made there.' Abraham
said: 'I am going to stay up here on the heights, the breezy, barren
heights,' and God stayed beside him. If we go down we starve our souls.
If we desire them to be fat and flourishing, nourished with the hidden
manna, then we must go up. 'Their pasture shall be in all high places.'

Before I finish, let me remind you of the application of the words of
my text, which we owe to the New Testament. The context runs, as you
will remember, 'they shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the
heat nor the sun smite them. For He that hath mercy on them shall lead
them, even by the springs of water shall He guide them.' And you
remember the beautiful variation and deepening of this promise in that
great saying which the Seer in the Apocalypse gives us, when he speaks
of those 'who follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth,' and are led 'by
living fountains of water,' where 'God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes.' So we are entitled to believe that on the loftiest
heights, far above this valley of weeping, there shall be immortal
food, and that on the high places of the mountains of God there shall
