number and variety of reasons against it given by Jesus. The first
of these is that such anxiety does not go deep enough, and forgets
how we come to have lives to be fed and bodies to be clothed. We
have received the greater, life and body, without our anxiety. The
rich fool could keep his goods, but not his 'soul' or 'life.' How
superficial, then, after all, our anxieties are, when God may end
life at any moment! Further, since the greater is given, the less
which it needs will also be given. The thought of God as 'a faithful
creator' is implied. We must trust Him for the 'more'; we may trust
Him for the less.

The second reason bids us look with attention at examples of
unanxious lives abundantly fed. Perhaps Elijah's feathered
providers, or the words of the Psalmist (Ps. cxlvii. 9), were in
Christ's mind. The raven was one of the 'unclean' birds, and of ill
omen,  from Noah's days, and yet had its meat in due season, though
that meat was corpses. Notice the allusions to the preceding parable
in 'sow not, neither reap,' and in 'neither have storehouse nor
barn.' In these particulars the birds are inferior to us, and, so to
speak, the harder to care for. If they who neither work nor store
still get their living, shall not we, who can do both? Our superior
value is in part expressed by the capacity to sow and reap; and
these are more wholesome occupations for a man than worrying.

How lovingly Jesus looked on all creatures, and how clearly He saw
everywhere God's hand at work! As Luther said, 'God spends every
year in feeding sparrows more than the revenues of the King of
France.'

The third reason is the impotence of anxiety (ver. 25). It is
difficult to decide between the two possible renderings here. That
of 'a cubit' to the 'stature' corresponds best with the growth of
the lilies, while 'age' preserves an allusion to the rich fool, and
avoids treating the addition of a foot and a half to an ordinary
man's height as a small thing. But age is not measured by cubits,
and it is best to keep to 'stature.'

At first sight, the argument of verse 23 seems to be now inverted,
and what was 'more' to be now 'least.' But the supposed addition, if
possible, would be of the smallest importance as regards ensuring
food or clothing, and measured by the divine power required to
effect it, is less than the continual providing which God does. That
smaller work of His, no anxiety will enable us to do. How much less
can we effect the complicated and wide-reaching arrangements needed
to feed and clothe ourselves! Anxiety is impotent. It only works on
our own minds, racking them in vain, but has no effect on the
material world, not even on our own bodies, still less on the
universe.

The fourth reason bids us look with attention at examples of
unanxious existence clothed with beauty. Christ here teaches the
highest use of nature, and the noblest way of looking at it. The
scientific botanist considers how the lilies grow, and can tell all
about cells and chlorophyll and the like. The poet is in raptures
with their beauty. Both teach us much, but the religious way of
looking at nature includes and transcends both the others. Nature is
a parable. It is a visible manifestation of God, and His ways there
shadow His ways with us, and are lessons in trust.

The glorious colours of the lily come from no dyer's vats, nor the
marvellous texture of their petals from any loom. They are inferior
to us in that they do not toil or spin, and in their short
blossoming time. Man's 'days are as grass; as a flower of the field
so he flourisheth'; but his date is longer, and therefore he has a
larger claim on God. 'God clothes the grass of the field' is a truth
quite independent of scientific truths or hypotheses about how He
does it. If the colours of flowers depend on the visits of insects,
God established the dependence, and is the real cause of the
resulting loveliness.

The most modern theories of the evolutionist do not in the least
diminish the force of Christ's appeal to creation's witness to a
loving Care in the heavens. But that appeal teaches us that we miss
the best and plainest lesson of nature, unless we see God present
and working in it all, and are thereby heartened to trust quietly in
His care for us, who are better than the ravens because we have to
sow and reap, or than the lilies because we must toil and spin.

Verse 29 adds to the reference to clothing a repeated prohibition as
to the other half of our anxieties, and thus rounds off the whole
with the same double warning as in verse 22. But it gives a striking
metaphor in the new command against 'being of doubtful mind.' The
word so rendered means to be lifted on high, and thence to be tossed
from height to depth, as a ship in a storm. So it paints the
wretchedness of anxiety as ever shuttlecocked about between hopes
and fears, sometimes up on the crest of a vain dream of good,
sometimes down in the trough of an imaginary evil. We are sure to be
thus the sport of our own fancies, unless we have our minds fixed on
God in quiet trust, and therefore stable and restful.

Verse 30 gives yet another reason against not only anxiety, but
against that eager desire after outward things which is the parent
of anxiety. If we 'seek after' them, we shall not be able to avoid
being anxious and of doubtful mind. Such seeking, says Christ, is
pure heathenism. The nations of the world who know not God make
these their chief good, and securing them the aim of their lives. If
we do the like, we drop to their level. What is the difference
between a heathen and a Christian, if the Christian has the same
objects and treasures as the heathen? That is a question which a
good many so-called Christians at present would find it hard to
answer.

But the crowning reason of all is kept for the last. Much of what
precedes might be spoken by a man who had but the coldest belief in
Providence. But the great and blessed faith in our Father, God,
scatters all anxious care. How should we be anxious if we know that
we have a Father in heaven, and that He knows our needs? He
recognises our claims on Him. He made the needs, and will send the
supply. That is a wide truth, stretching far beyond the mere earthly
wants of food and raiment. My wants, so far as God has made me to
feel them, are prophecies of God's gifts. He has made them as doors
by which He will come in and bless me. How, then, can anxious care
fret the heart which feels the Father's presence, and knows that its
emptiness is the occasion for the gift of a divine fullness? Trust
is the only reasonable temper for a child of such a father. Anxious
care is a denial of His love or knowledge or power.

II. Verses 31-34 point out the true direction of effort and
affection, and the true way of using outward good so as to secure
the higher riches. It is useless to tell men not to set their
longings or efforts on worldly things unless you tell them of
something better. Life must have some aim, and the mind must turn to
something as supremely good. The only way to drive out heathenish
seeking after perishable good is to fill the heart with the love and
longing for eternal and spiritual good. The ejected demon comes back
with a troop at his heels unless his house be filled. To seek 'the
kingdom,' to count it our highest good to have our wills and whole
being bowed in submission to the loving will of God, to labour after
entire conformity to it, to postpone all earthly delights to that,
and to count them all but loss if we may win it--this is the true
way to conquer worldly anxieties, and is the only course of life
which will not at last earn the stern judgment, 'Thou fool.'

That direction of all our desires and energies to the attainment of
the kingdom which is the state of being ruled by the will of God, is
to be accompanied with joyous, brave confidence. How should they
fear whose desires and efforts run parallel with the 'Father's good
pleasure'? They are seeking as their chief good what He desires, as
His chief delight, to give them. Then they may be sure that, if He
gives that, He will not withhold less gifts than may be needed. He
will not 'spoil the ship for a ha'p'orth of tar,' nor allow His
children, whom He has made heirs of a kingdom, to starve on their
road to their crown. If they can trust Him to give them the kingdom,
they may surely trust Him for bread and clothes.

Mark, too, the tenderness of that 'little flock.' They might fear
when they contrasted their numbers with the crowds of worldly men;
but, being a flock, they have a shepherd, and that is enough to
quiet anxiety.

Seeking and courage are to be crowned by surrender of outward good
and the use of earthly wealth in such manner as that it will secure
an unfailing treasure in heaven. The manner of obeying this command
varies with circumstances. For some the literal fulfilment is best;
and there are more Christian men to-day whose souls would be
delivered from the snares if they would part with their possessions
than we are willing to believe.

Sometimes the surrender is rather to be effected by the conscientious
consecration and prayerful use of wealth. That is for each man to
settle for himself. But what is not variable is the obligation to set
the kingdom high above all else, and to use all outward wealth, as
Christ's servants, not for luxury and self-gratification, but as in
His sight and for His glory. Let us not be afraid of believing what
Jesus and His Apostles plainly teach, that wealth so spent here is
treasured in heaven, and that a Christian's place in the future life
depends upon this among other conditions--how he used his money here.




STILLNESS IN STORM

    '... Neither be ye of doubtful mind.'--LUKE xii. 29.

I think that these words convey no very definite idea to most
readers. The thing forbidden is not very sharply defined by the
expression which our translators have employed, but the original
term is very picturesque and precise.

The word originally means 'to be elevated, to be raised as a
meteor,' and comes by degrees to mean to be raised in one special
way--namely, as a boat is tossed by a tough sea. So there is a
picture in this prohibition which the fishermen and folk dwelling by
the Sea of Galilee with its sudden squalls would understand: 'Be
not pitched about'; now on the crest, now in the trough of the wave.

The meaning, then, is substantially identical with that of the
previous words, 'Take no thought for your life,' with this
difference, that the figures by which the thing prohibited is
expressed are different, and that the latter saying is wider than
the former.

The former prohibits 'taking thought,' by which our Lord of course
means not reasonable foresight, but anxious foreboding. And the word
which He uses, meaning at bottom as it does, 'to be distracted or
rent asunder,' conveys a striking picture of the wretched state to
which such anxiety brings a man. Nothing tears us to pieces like
foreboding care. Then our text forbids the same anxiety, as well as
other fluctuations of feeling that come from setting our hopes and
hearts on aught which can change; and its figurative representation
of the misery that follows on fastening ourselves to the perishable,
is that of the poor little skiff, at one moment high on the crest of
the billow, at the next down in the trough of the sea.

So both images point to the unrest of worldliness, and while the
unrest of care is uppermost in the one, the other includes more than
simply care, and warns us that all occupation with simply creatural
things, all eager seeking after 'what ye shall eat or what ye shall
drink' or after more refined forms of earthly good, brings with it
the penalty and misery of 'for ever tossing  on the tossing wave.'
Whosoever launches out on to that sea is sure to be buffeted about.
Whoso sets his heart on the uncertainty of anything below the
changeless God will without doubt be driven from hope to fear, from
joy to sorrow, and his soul will be agitated as his idols change,
and his heart will be desolate when his idols perish.

Our Lord, we say, forbids our being thus tossed about. He seems to
believe that it is in our own power to settle whether we shall be or
no. That sounds strange; one can fancy the answer: 'What is the use
of telling a man not to be buffeted about by storm? Why, he cannot
help it. If the sea is running high the little boat cannot lie quiet
as if in smooth water. Do not talk to me about not being moved,
unless you can say to the tumbling sea of life, "Peace, be still!"
and make it

  "quite forget to rave,
   While birds of peace sit brooding on the charmed wave."'

The objection is sound after a fashion. Change there must be, and
fluctuation of feeling. But there is such a thing as 'peace
subsisting at the heart of endless agitation.' You may remember the
attempt that was made some years ago to build a steamer in which
the central saloon was to hang perfectly still while the outer hull
of the ship pitched and rolled with the moving sea. It was a
failure, but the theory was sound and looked practicable. At any
rate, it is a parable of what may be in our lives. If I might
venture, without seeming irreverence, to modernise and so to
illustrate this command of our Lord's, I would say, that He here
bids us do for our life's voyage across a stormy sea, exactly what
the 'Bessemer' ship was an attempt to do in its region--so to poise
and control the oscillations of the central soul that however the
outward life may be buffeted about, there may be moveless rest
within. He knows full well that we must have rough weather, but He
would have us counteract the motion of the sea, and keep our hearts
in stillness. 'In the world ye shall have tribulation,' but in Him
ye may have peace.

He does not wish us to be blind to the facts of life, but to take
_all_ the facts into our vision. A partial view of the so-called
facts certainly will lead to tumultuous alternations of hope and
fear, of joy and sorrow. But if you will take them all into account,
you can be quiet and at rest. For here is a fact as real as the
troubles and changes of life: 'Your Father knoweth that ye have
need of these things.' Ah! the recognition of that will keep our
inmost hearts full of sweet peace, whatever may befall the outward
life. Only take all the facts of your condition, and accept Christ's
word for that greatest and surest of all--the loving Father's
knowledge of your needs, and it will not be hard to obey Christ's
command, and keep yourself still, because fixed on Him.

But now consider the teachings here as to the true source of the
agitation which our Lord forbids. The precept itself affords no
light on that subject, but the context shows us the true origin of
the evil.

The first point to observe is how remarkably our Lord identifies
this anxiety and restlessness which He forbids with what at first
sight seems its exact opposite, namely a calmness and peace which he
also condemns as wholly bad. The whole series of warnings of which
our text is part begins with the story of the rich man whose ground
brought forth plentifully. His fault was not that he was tossed
about with care and a doubtful mind, but the very opposite. His sin
was in saying, 'Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.'

Notice, then, that our Lord begins by pointing out the great madness
and the great sin of being thus at rest, and trusting in earthly
possessions: and then with a 'Therefore, I say unto you,' He turns
to the opposite pole of worldly feeling, and shows us how, although
opposite, it is yet related. The warning, 'Take no thought for your
life' follows as an inference from the picture of the folly of the
man that lays up treasure for himself and is not rich towards God.

That is to say, the two faults are kindred and in some sense the
same. The rich fool stretching himself out to rest on the pile of
his possessions, and the poor fool tossing about on the billows of
unquiet thought, are at bottom under the influence of the same
folly, though their circumstances are opposite, and their moods seem
to be so too.

The one man is just the other turned inside out. When he is rich and
has got plenty of outward goods, he has no anxiety, because he
thinks that they are supreme and all-sufficient. When he is poor and
has not got enough of them, he has no rest, because he thinks that
they are supreme and all-sufficient. Anxious care and satisfied
possession are at bottom the very same thing. The man who says, 'My
mountain stands strong,' because he has got a quantity of money or
the like; and the man who says, 'Oh, dear me, what is going to
become of me?' because he thinks he has not got enough, only need to
exchange circumstances and they will exchange cries.

The same figure is concave or convex according to the side from
which you look at it. From one it swells out into rounded fullness;
from the other it gapes as in empty hungriness. So the rich fool of
the preceding parable and the anxious, troubled man of my text are
the same man looked at from opposite sides or set in opposite
circumstances. The root of both the rest of the one and of the
anxiety of the other is the over-estimate of outward good.

Then, still further, notice how our Lord here brands this forbidden
fluctuation of feeling as being at bottom pure heathenism. Most
significant double reasons for our text follow it, introduced by a
double 'for.' The first reason is, 'For all these things do the
nations of the world seek after'; the second is, 'For your Father
knoweth that ye have need of these things.' The former points the
lesson of the contradiction between such trouble of mind and the
position of disciples. For pure heathens it is all natural; for men
who do not know that they have a Father in heaven, there is nothing
strange or anomalous in care and anxiety, nor in the race after
riches. But for you, it is in diametrical contradiction to all your
professions, in flagrant inconsistency with all your belief, in flat
denial of that mighty truth that you have a Father who cares for
you, and that His love is enough. Every time you yield to such cares
or thoughts you are going down to the level of pure heathenism. That
is a sharp saying. Our Lord's steady hand wields the keen
dissecting-knife here, and lays bare with unsparing cuts the ugly
growth. We give the thing condemned a great many honourable names,
such as 'laying up for a rainy day,' or 'taking care for the future
of my children,' or 'providing things honest in the sight of all
men,' and a host of others, with which we gloss and gild over
unchristian worldly-mindedness.

There are actions and feelings which are rightly described by such
phrases, that are perfectly right, and against them Jesus Christ
never said a word.

But much of what we deceive ourselves by calling reasonable
foresight is rooted distrust of God, and much practical heathenism
creeps into our lives under the guise of 'proper prudence.' The
ordinary maxims of the world christen many things by names of
virtues and yet they remain vices notwithstanding.

I do not know that there is any region in which Christian men have
more to be on their guard, lest they be betrayed into deadening
inconsistencies, than this of the true limits of care for material
wealth, and of provision for the future outward life.

Those of us, especially, who are engaged in business, and who live
in our great commercial cities, have hard work to keep from dropping
down to the heathen level which is adopted on all sides. It is not
easy for such a man to resist the practical belief that money is the
one thing needful, and he the happy man who has made a fortune. The
false estimate of worldly good is in the air about us, and we have
to be on our guard, or else, before we know where we are, we shall
have breathed the stupefying poison and feel its narcotic influence
slackening the pulses and dimming the eye of our spirits. We need
special watchfulness and prayer, or we shall not escape this subtle
danger, which is truly for many of us 'the pestilence that walketh
in darkness.'

So be not tossed about by these secularities, for the root of them
all is heathenish distrust of your Father in heaven.

Then, finally, we have the cure for all agitation. Christ here puts in
our own hands, in that thought, 'Your Father knoweth that ye have need
of these things,' the one weapon with which we can conquer. There is
the true anchorage for tempest-tossed spirits, the land-locked haven
where they can ride, whatever winds blow and waves break outside the bar.

I remarked that our Lord here seemed to give an injunction which the
facts of life would prevent our obeying, and so it would be, had He
not pointed us to that firm truth, which, if we believe it, will
keep us unmoved. There is no more profitless expenditure of breath
than the ordinary moralist's exhortations to, or warnings against,
states of feeling and modes of mind. Our emotions are very partially
under our direct control. Life cannot be calm by willing to be so.
But what we can do is to think of a truth which will sway our moods.
If you can substitute some other thought for the one which breeds
the emotion you condemn, it will fall silent of itself, just as the
spindles will stop if you shut off steam, or the mill-wheel if you
turn the stream in another direction. So Christ gives us a great
thought to cherish, knowing that if we let it have fair play in our
minds, we shall be at rest: 'Your Father knoweth that ye have need
of these things.' Surely that is enough for calmness. Why should, or
how can we be, troubled if we believe that?

'He knows.' What a wonderful confidence in His heart and resources
is silently implied in that word! If He knows that you need, you may
be quite sure that you will not want. 'He knows'; and His fatherly
heart is our guarantee that to know and to supply our need, are one
and the same thing with Him; and His deep treasure of exhaustless
good is our guarantee that our need can never go beyond His
fullness, nor He ever, like us, see a sorrow He cannot comfort, a
want that He cannot meet.

Enough that He knows; 'the rest goes without saying.' The whole
burden of solicitude is shifted off our shoulders, if once we get
into the light of that great truth. A man is made restful in the
midst of all the changes and storms of life, not by trying to work
himself into tranquillity, not by mere dint of coercing his feelings
through sheer force of will, not by ignoring any facts, but simply
by letting this truth stand before his mind. It scatters cares, as
the silent moon has power, by her mild white light, to clear away a
whole skyful of piled blacknesses.

One other word of practical advice, as to how to carry out this
injunction, is suggested by the context, which goes on, 'Seek ye
first the kingdom of God.'

A boat will roll most when, from lack of a strong hand at the helm,
she has got broadside to the run of the sea. There she lies rocking
about just as the blow of the wave may fall, and drifting wherever
the wind may take her. There are two directions in which she will be
comparatively steady; one, when her head is kept as near the wind as
may be, and the other when she runs before it. Either will be
quieter than washing about anyhow. May we make a parable out of
that? If you want to have as little pitching and tossing as possible
on your voyage, keep a good strong hand on the tiller. Do not let
the boat lie in the trough of the sea, but drive her right against
the wind, or as near it as she will sail. That is to say, have a
definite aim to which you steer, and keep a straight course for
that. So Christ says to us here. Be not filled with agitations, but
seek the Kingdom. The definite pursuit of the higher good will
deaden the lower anxieties. The active energies called out in the
daily efforts to bring my whole being under the dominion of the
sovereign will of God, will deliver me from a crowd of tumultuous
desires and forebodings. I shall have neither leisure nor
inclination to be anxious about outward things, when I am engaged
and absorbed in seeking the kingdom. So 'bear up and steer right
onward,' and it will be smooth sailing.

Sometimes, too, we shall have to try the other tack, and run
_before_ the storm, which again will give us the minimum of
commotion. That, being translated, is, 'Let the winds and the waves
sometimes have their way.' Yield to them in the sweetness of
submission and the strength of resignation. Even when all the stormy
winds strive on the surface sea, recognise them as God's messengers
'fulfilling His word.' Submission is not rudderless yielding to the
gale, that tosses us on high and sinks us again, as the waves list.
This frees us from their power, even while they roll mountains high.

Then keep firm trust in your Father's knowledge; strenuously seek
the kingdom. In quietness accept the changeful methods of his
unchanging providence. Thus shall your hearts be kept in peace
amidst the storm of life, with the happy thought, '_So_ He
bringeth them unto their desired haven.'




THE EQUIPMENT OF THE SERVANTS


    'Let your loins be girded about, and your lights
    burning; 36. And ye yourselves like unto men that wait
    for their Lord.'--Luke xii. 35, 36.

These words ought to stir us like the sound of a trumpet. But, by long
familiarity, they drop upon dull ears, and scarcely produce any effect.
The picture that they suggest, as an emblem of the Christian state, is
a striking one. It is midnight, a great house is without its master,
the lord of the palace is absent, but expected back, the servants are
busy in preparation, each man with his robe tucked about his middle,
in order that it may not interfere with his work, his lamp in his hand
that he may see to go about his business and his eye ever turned to
the entrance to catch the first sign of the coming of his master. Is
that like your Christian life? If we are His servants that is what we
ought to be, having three things--girded loins, lighted lamps, waiting
hearts. These are sharp tests, solemn commandments, but great
privileges, for blessedness as well as strength, and calm peace whatever
happens, belong to those who obey these injunctions and have these
things.

I. The girded loins.

Every child knows the long Eastern dress; and that the first sign
that a man is in earnest about any work would be that he should
gather his skirts around him and brace himself together.

The Christian service demands concentration. It needs the fixing of
all a man's powers upon the one thing, the gathering together of all
the strength of one's nature, and binding it with cords until its
softest and loosest particles are knit together, and become strong.
Why! you can take a handful of cotton-down, and if you will squeeze
it tight enough, it will be as hard and as heavy as a bullet and
will go as far, and have as much penetrating power and force of
impact. The reason why some men hit and make no dint is because they
are not gathered together and braced up by a vigorous concentration.

The difference between men that succeed and men that fail in
ordinary pursuits is by no means so much intellectual as moral; and
there is nothing which more certainly commands any kind of success
than giving yourselves with your whole concentrated power to the
task in hand. If we succeed in anything we must focus all our power
on it. Only by so doing, as a burning-glass does the sun's rays,
shall we set anything on fire.

And can a vigorous Christian life be grown upon other conditions
than those which a vigorous life of an ordinary sort demands? Why
should it be easier to be a prosperous Christian than to be a
prosperous tradesman? Why should there not be the very same law in
operation in the realm of the higher riches and possessions that
rules in the realm of the lower? 'Gird up the loins _of your
mind_,' says the Apostle, echoing the Master's word here. The
first condition of true service is that you shall do it with
concentrated power.

There is another requirement, or perhaps rather another side of the
same, expressed in the figure. One reason why a man tucked up his
robe around his waist, when he had anything to do that needed all
his might, was that it might not catch upon the things that
protruded, and so keep him back. Concentration, and  what I may call
detachment, go together. In order that there shall be the one, there
must be the other. They require each other, and are, in effect, but
the two sides of the same thing contemplated in regard to hindrances
without, or contemplated in regard to the relation of the several
parts of a man's nature to each other.

Observe that Luke immediately precedes the text with:--'Sell that ye
have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief
approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also. Let your loins be girded about.' That
is to say, do not let your affections go straggling anywhere and
everywhere, but gather them together, and that you may gather them
together tear away the robe from the briars and thorns which catch
you as you pass, and gird the long flowing skirts close to
yourselves in order that they may not be caught by these hindrances.
There is no Christian life worth living except upon condition of
wrenching oneself away from dependence upon idolatry of, or longing
for, perishable things. The lesson of my text is the same as the
solemn lesson which the beloved Apostle sharpened his gentle lips to
pronounce when he said, 'If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him.' 'Gird up your loins,' detach heart, desire,
effort from perishable things, and lift them above the fleeting
treasures and hollow delusive sparkles of earth's preciousness, and
set them on the realities and eternities at God's right hand. 'For
where the treasure is, there will the heart be also,' and only that
heart can never be stabbed by disappointment, nor bled to death by
losses, whose treasure is as sure as God and eternal as Himself.
'Let your loins be girded about.'

And then there is another thing suggested, which is the consequence
of these two. The girding up of the loins is not only the symbol of
concentration and detachment, but of that for which the
concentration and the detachment are needful--viz. alert readiness
for service. The servant who stands before his lord with his belt
buckled tight indicates thereby that he is ready to run whenever and
wherever he is bid. Our girded loins are not merely in order to give
strength to our frame, but in order that, having strength given to
our frame, we may be ready for all work. That which is needful for
any faithful discharge of any servant's duty is most of all needful
for the discharge of the highest duty and the noblest service to the
Master who has the right to command all our service.

There are three emblems in Scripture to all of which this metaphor
applies. The soldier, before he flings himself into the fight, takes
in another hole in his leather belt in order that there may be
strength given to his spine, and he may feel himself all gathered
together for the deadly struggle, and the Christian soldier has to
do the same thing. 'Stand therefore, having your loins girt about
with truth.'

The traveller, before he starts upon his long road, girds himself,
and gathers his robes round him; and we have to 'run with
perseverance the race set before us'; and shall never do it if our
garments, however delicately embroidered, are flapping about our
feet and getting in our way when we try to run.

The servant has to be _succinct_, girded together for his work,
even as the Master, when He took upon Him the form of a servant,
'took a towel and girded Himself.' His servants have to follow His
example, to put aside the needless vesture and brace themselves with
the symbol of service. So as soldiers, pilgrims, servants, the
condition of doing our work is, girding up the loins.

II. Further, there are to be the burning lamps.

If we follow the analogy of Scripture symbolism, significance
belongs to that emblem, making it quite worthy to stand by the side
of the former one. You remember Christ's first exhortation in the
Sermon on the Mount immediately following the Beatitudes: 'Ye are
the salt of the earth, ye are the light of the world. Men do not
light a candle, and put it under a bushel. _Let your light so
shine before men_, that they may see your good deeds.' If we
apply that key to decipher the hieroglyphics, the burning lamps
which the girded servants are to bear in the darkness are the whole
sum of the visible acts of Christian people, from which there may
flash the radiance of purity and kindness, 'So shines a good deed in
a naughty world.' The lamp which the Christian servant is to bear is
a character illuminated from above (for it is a kindled lamp, and
the light is derived), and streaming out a brilliance into the
encircling murky midnight which speaks of hospitable welcome and of
good cheer in the lighted hall within.

Now, what is the connection between that exhibition of a lustrous
and pure Christian character and the former exhortation? Why this,
if you do not gird your loins your lamp will go out. Without the
concentrated effort and the continually repeated detachment and the
daily renewed 'Lord! here am I, send me,' of the alert and ready
servant, there will be no shining of the life, no beauty of the
character, but dimness will steal over the exhibition of Christian
graces. Just as, often, in the wintry nights, a star becomes
suddenly obscured, and we know not why, but some thin vaporous cloud
has come between us and it, invisible in itself but enough to blur
its brightness, so obscuration will befall the Christian character
unless there be continual concentration and detachment. Do you want
your lights to blaze? You trim them--though it is a strange mixture
of metaphor--you trim them when you gird your loins.

III. Lastly, the waiting hearts.

An attitude of expectancy does not depend upon theories about the
chronology of prophecy. It is Christ's will that, till He comes, we
know 'neither the day nor the hour.' We may, as I suppose most of us
do, believe that we shall die before He comes. Be it so. That need
not affect the attitude of expectance, for it comes to substantially
the same thing whether Christ comes to us or we go to Him. And the
certain uncertainty of the end of our individual connection with
this fleeting world stands in the same relation to our hopes as the
coming of the Master does, and should have an analogous effect on
our lives. Whatever may be our expectation as to the literal coming
of the Lord, that future should be very solid, very real, very near
us in our thoughts, a habitual subject of contemplation, and ever
operative upon our hearts and  conduct.

Ah! if we never, or seldom, and then sorrowfully, look forward to
the future, and contemplate our meeting with our Master, I do not
think there is much chance of our having either our loins girt, or
our lamps burning.

One great motive for concentration, detachment, and alertness of
service, as well as for exhibiting the bright graces of the
Christian character, is to be found in the contemplation of the two
comings of the Lord. We should be ever looking back to the Cross,
forward to the Throne, and upwards to the Christ, the same on them
both. If we have our gathering together with Him ever in view, then
we shall be willing to yield all for Him, to withdraw ourselves from
everything besides for the excellency of His knowledge; and
whatsoever He commands, joyfully and cheerfully to do.

The reason why such an immense and miserable proportion of
professing Christians are all unbraced and loose-girt, and their
lamps giving such smoky and foul-smelling and coarse radiance, is
because they look little back to the Cross, and less forward to the
Great White Throne. But these two solemn and sister sights are far
more real than the vulgar and intrusive illusions of what we call
the present. That is a shadow, they are the realities; that is but a
transitory scenic display, like the flashing of the Aurora Borealis
for a night in the wintry sky, these are the fixed, unsetting stars
that guide our course. Therefore let us turn away from the lying
present, with its smallnesses and its falsities, and look backwards
to Him that died, forward to Him that is coming. And, as we nourish
our faith on the twofold fact, a history and a hope, that Christ has
come, and that Christ shall come, we shall find that all devotion
will be quickened, and all earnestness stirred to zeal, and the dim
light will flame into radiance and glory.

He comes in one of two characters which lie side by side here, as
they do in fact. To the waiting servants He comes as the Master who
shall gird Himself and go forth and serve them; to those who wait
not, He comes as a thief, not only in the suddenness nor the
unwelcomeness of His coming, but as robbing them of what they would
fain keep, and dragging from them much that they ought never to have
had. And it depends upon ourselves whether, we waiting and watching
and serving and witnessing for Him, He shall come to us as our Joy,
or as our Terror and our Judge.




THE SERVANT-LORD


    Verily I say unto you, that He shall gird Himself, and
    make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth,
    and serve them.--LUKE xii. 37.

No one would have dared to say that except Jesus Christ. For surely,
manifold and wonderful as are the glimpses that we get in the New
Testament of the relation of perfect souls in heaven to Him, none of
them pierces deeper, rises higher, and speaks more boundless
blessing, than such words as these. Well might Christ think it
necessary to preface them with the solemn affirmation which always,
upon His lips, points, as it were, an emphatic finger to, or
underlines that which He is about to proclaim. 'Verily I say unto
you,' if we had not His own word for it, we might hesitate to
believe. And while we have His own word for it, and do not hesitate
to believe, it is not for us to fathom or exhaust, but lovingly and
reverently and humbly, because we know it but partially, to try to
plumb the unfathomable depth of such words. 'He shall gird Himself,
and cause them to sit down to meat; and come forth and serve them.'

I. Then we have, first of all, the wonderful revelation of the
Servant-Lord.

For the name of dignity is employed over and over again in the
immediate context, and so makes more wonderful the assumption here
of the promise of service.

And the words are not only remarkable because they couple so closely
together the two antagonistic ideas, as we fancy them, of rule and
service, authority and subordination, but because they dwell with
such singular particularity of detail upon all the stages of the
menial office which the Monarch takes upon Himself. First, the
girding, assuming the servant's attire; then the leading of the
guests, wondering and silent, to the couches where they can recline;
then the coming to them as they thus repose at the table, and the
waiting upon their wants and supplying all their need. It reminds us
of the wonderful scene, in John's Gospel, where we have coupled
together in the same intimate and interdependent fashion the two
thoughts of dignity and of service--'Jesus, knowing that the Father
had given all things into His hand, and that He came from God and
went to God,' made this use of His consciousness and of His
unlimited and universal dominion, that 'He laid aside His garments,
and took a towel, and girded Himself, and washed the disciples'
feet'; thus teaching what our text teaches in still another form,
that the highest authority means the lowliest service, that the
purpose of power is blessing, that the very sign and mark of dignity
is to stoop, and that the crown of the Universe is worn by Him who
is the Servant of all.

But beyond that general idea which applies to the whole of the
divine dealings and especially to the earthly life of Him who came,
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, the text sets forth
special manifestations of Christ's ministering love and power, which
are reserved for heaven, and are a contrast with earth. The Lord who
is the Servant girds Himself. That corresponds with the commandment
that went before, 'Let your loins be girded,' and to some extent
covers the same ground and suggests the same idea. With all
reverence, and following humbly in the thoughts that Christ has
given us by the words, one may venture to say that He gathers all
His powers together in strenuous work for the blessing of His
glorified servants, and that not only does the metaphor express for
us His taking upon Himself the lowly office, but also the employment
of all that He is and has there in the heavens for the blessing of
the blessed ones that sit at His table.

Here upon earth, when He assumed the form of a Servant in His
entrance into humanity, it was accompanied with the emptying Himself
of His glory. In the symbolical incident in John's Gospel, to which
I have already referred, He laid aside His garments before He
wrapped around Him the badge of service. But in that wondrous
service by the glorified Lord there is no need for divesting ere He
serves, but the divine glories that irradiate His humanity, and by
which He, our Brother, is the King of kings and the Lord of the
Universe, are all used by Him for this great, blessed purpose of
gladdening and filling up the needs of the perfected spirits that
wait, expectant of their food, upon Him. His girding Himself for
service expresses not only the lowliness of His majesty and the
beneficence of His power, but His use of all which He has and is for
the blessing of those whom He keeps and blesses.

I need not remind you, I suppose, how in this same wonderful picture
of the Servant-Lord there is taught the perpetual--if we may so say,
the increased--lowliness of the crowned Christ. When He was here on
earth, He was meek and holy; exalted in the heavens, He is, were it
possible, meeker and more lowly still, because He stoops from a
loftier elevation. The same loving, gentle, gracious heart, holding
all its treasures for its brethren, is the heart that now is girded
with the golden girdle of sovereignty, and which once was girt with
the coarse towel of the slave. Christ is for ever the Servant,
because He is for ever the Lord of them that trust in Him. Let us
learn that service is dominion; that 'he that is chiefest among us'
is thereby bound to be 'the servant' and the helper 'of all.'

II. Notice, the servants who are served and serve.

There are two or three very plain ideas, suggested by the great
words of my text, in regard to the condition of those whom the Lord
thus ministers to, and waits upon. I need not expand them, because
they are familiar to us all, but let me just touch them. 'He shall
make them to sit down to meat.' The word, as many of you know,
really implies a more restful attitude--'He shall make them recline
at meat.' What a contrast to the picture of toil and effort, which
has just been drawn, in the command,' Let your loins be girded
about, and your lamps burning, and ye yourselves as men that wait
for their Lord!' Here, there must be the bracing up of every power,
and the careful tending of the light amid the darkness and the gusts
that threaten to blow it out, and every ear is to be listening and
every eye strained, for the coming of the Lord, that there may be no
unpreparedness or delay in flinging open the gates. But then the
tension is taken off and the loins ungirded, for there is no need
for painful effort, and the lamps that burn dimly and require
tending in the mephitic air are laid aside, and 'they need no
candle, for the Lord is the light thereof'; and there is no more
intense listening for the first foot-fall of One who is coming, for
He has come, and expectation is turned into fellowship and fruition.
The strained muscles can relax, and instead of effort and weariness,
there is repose upon the restful couches prepared by Him. Threadbare
and old as the hills as the thought is, it comes to us toilers with
ever new refreshment, like a whiff of fresh air or the gleam of the
far-off daylight at the top of the shaft to the miner, cramped at
his work in the dark. What a witness the preciousness of that
representation of future blessedness as rest to us all bears to the
pressure of toil and the aching, weary hearts which we all
carry! The robes may flow loose then, for there is neither pollution
to be feared from the golden pavement, nor detention from briars or
thorns, nor work that is so hard as to be toil or so unwelcome as to
be pain. There is rest from labour, care, change, and fear of loss,
from travel and travail, from tired limbs and hearts more tired
still, from struggle and sin, from all which makes the unrest of
life.

Further, this great promise assures us of the supply of all wants
that are only permitted to last long enough to make a capacity for
receiving the eternal and all-satisfying food which Christ gives the
restful servants. Though 'they hunger no more,' they shall always
have appetite. Though they 'thirst no more,' they shall ever desire
deeper draughts of the fountain of life. Desire is one thing,
longing is another. Longing is pain, desire is blessedness; and that
we shall want and know ourselves to want, with a want which lives
but for a moment ere the supply pours in upon it and drowns it, is
one of the blessednesses to which we dare to look forward. Here we
live, tortured by wishes, longings, needs, a whole menagerie of
hungry mouths yelping within us for their food. There we wait upon
the Lord, and He gives a portion in due season.

The picture in the text brings with it all festal ideas of light,
society, gladness, and the like, on which I need not dwell. But let
me just remind you of one contrast. The ministry of Christ, when He
was a servant here upon earth, was symbolised by His washing His
disciples' feet, an act which was part of the preparation of the
guests for a feast. The ministry of Christ in heaven consists, not
in washing, for 'he that is washed is clean every whit' there, and
for ever more--but in ministering to His guests that abundant feast
for which the service and the lustration of earth were but the
preparation. The servant Christ serves us here by washing us from
our sins in His own blood, both in the one initial act of
forgiveness and by the continual application of that blood to the
stains contracted in the miry ways of life. The Lord and Servant
serves His servants in the heavens by leading them, cleansed to His
table, and filling up every soul with love and with Himself.

