tells us something of the government which Christ has been exercising 
over the world ever since the beginning of it, and which He is exercising 
over this world now.  It bids us be still, and know that He is God--that 
He will be exalted among the nations, and will be exalted in the earth, 
whether men like it or not; but that they ought to like it and rejoice in 
it, and find comfort in the thought that Christ Jesus is their refuge and 
their strength--a very present help in trouble--as the old Jew who wrote 
this psalm found comfort.

When this psalm was written, or what particular events it speaks of, I 
cannot tell, for I do not think we have any means of finding out.  It may 
have been written in the time of David, or of Solomon, or of Hezekiah.  
It may possibly have been written much later.  It seems to mo probably to 
refer--but I speak with extreme diffidence--to that Assyrian invasion, 
and that preservation of Jerusalem, of which we heard in the magnificent 
first lesson for this morning and this afternoon; when, at the same time 
that the Assyrians were crushing, one by one, every nation in the East, 
there was, as the elder Isaiah and Micah tell us plainly, a great 
volcanic outbreak in the Holy Land.  But all this matters very little to 
us; because events analogous to those of which it speaks have happened 
not once only, but many times, and will happen often again.  And this 
psalm lays down a rule for judging of such startling and terrible events 
whenever they happen, and for saying of them, "God is our refuge and 
strength, a very present help in trouble."  It seems from the beginning 
of the psalm that there had been earthquakes or hurricanes in Judea--more 
probably earthquakes, which were and are now frequent there.  It seems as 
if the land had been shaken, and cliffs thrown into the sea, which had 
rolled back in a mighty wave, such as only too often accompanies an 
earthquake.  But the Psalmist knew that that was God's doing; and 
therefore he would not fear, though the earth was moved, and though the 
hills were earned into the very midst of the sea.  It seems, moreover, 
that Jerusalem itself had, as in Hezekiah's time, not been shaken, or at 
least seriously injured, by the earthquake.  But why?  "God is in the 
midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed."  It seems, also, as if 
the earthquake or hurricane had been actually a benefit to Jerusalem--
which was often then, and has been often since, in want of water--that 
either fresh springs had broken out, or abundant rain had fallen, as 
occurs at times in such convulsions of nature.  But that, too, was God's 
doing on behalf of His chosen city.  "The rivers of the flood" had made 
"glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the most 
highest."

Moreover, there seem to have been great disturbances and wars among the 
nations round.  The heathen had made much ado, and the kingdoms had been 
moved.  But whatever their plans were, it was God who had brought them to 
naught.  God had shewed His voice, and the earth melted away; and (we 
know not how) discomfiture had fallen upon them, and a general peace had 
followed.  "O come hither," says the Psalmist, "and behold the works of 
the Lord, what desolations He has made in the earth."  Not a desolation 
of cruelty and tyranny:  but a desolation of mercy and justice; putting 
down the proud, the aggressive, the ruthless, and helping the meek, the 
simple, the industrious, and the innocent.  It is He, says the Psalmist, 
who has made wars to cease in all the world, who has broken the bow and 
snapped the spear in sunder, and burned the chariots in the fire; and so, 
by the voice of fact, said to these kings and to their armies, if they 
would but understand it, "Be still, and know that I am God"--that I, not 
you, will be exalted among the nations--that I, not you, will be exalted 
in the earth.

Such is the 46th Psalm, one of the noblest utterances of the whole Old 
Testament.  And is it not as true for us now, ay, for all nations and all 
mankind now, as it was when it was uttered?  Is not Jesus Christ the same 
yesterday, to-day, and for ever?  Have His words passed away?  Did He say 
in vain, "All power is given unto me in heaven and earth?"  Did He say in 
vain, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world?"  I trust 
not.  I trust and I hope that you, or at least some here, believe that 
Christ is ruling and guiding the world, the church, and every individual 
soul who trusts in Him toward--


"One far off divine event,
To which the whole creation moves."


I hope you do have that trust, for your own sakes, for the sake of your 
own happiness, your own sound peace of mind; for then, and then only, you 
can afford to be hopeful concerning yourselves, your families, your 
country, and the whole human race.  It must be so.  If you believe that 
He who hung upon the cross for all mankind is your refuge and strength, 
and the refuge and strength of all mankind, then, amid all the changes 
and chances of this mortal life, you can afford to be still calm in 
sudden calamity, patient in long afflictions; for you know that He is 
God, He is the Lord, He is the Redeemer, He is the King.  He knows best.  
He must be right, whosoever else is wrong.  Let Him do what seemeth Him 
good.

Now I cannot but feel (what wiser and better men than I am feel more 
deeply), that this old-fashioned faith in the living Christ is dying out 
among us.  That men do not believe as they used to do in the living Lord 
and in His government, in that perpetual divine providence which the 
Scriptures call "the kingdom of God."  They have lost faith in Christ's 
immediate and personal government of the world and its nations; and, 
therefore, they are tempted more and more, either to try to misgovern the 
world themselves, or to fancy that Christ has entrusted His government, 
as to a substitute and vicar, to an aged priest at Rome.  They have lost 
faith, likewise, in Christ's immediate government of themselves; their 
own fortunes, their own characters, and inmost souls; and, therefore, 
they are tempted either to follow no rule or guidance save their own 
instincts, passions, fancies; or else, in despair at their own inward 
anarchy, to commit the keeping of their souls to directors and 
confessors, instead of to Christ Himself, the Lord of the spirits of all 
flesh.

Yes, the faith which keeps a man ever face to face with God and with 
Christ, in the least as well as in the greatest events of life; which 
says in prosperity and in adversity, in plenty and scarcity, in joy and 
sorrow, in peace and war,--It is the Lord's doing, it is the Lord's 
sending, and therefore we can trust in the Lord--that faith is growing, I 
fear, very rare.  That faith was more common, I think, a generation or 
two back, in old-fashioned church people than in any other.  It could not 
help being so; for the good old Prayer-Book upon which they were brought 
up is more full of that simple and living faith in the Lord, from 
beginning to end, than any other book on earth except the Bible.  It was 
more common, too, and I suppose always will be, among the poor than among 
the rich; for the poor soon find out how little they have to depend upon 
except the Lord and His good providence; while the rich are tempted, and 
always will be, to depend upon their own wealth and their own power, to 
trust in uncertain riches, and say, "Soul, take thine ease, thou hast 
much goods laid up for many years."  It was more common, too, and I 
suppose always will be, among the old than among the young; for the young 
are tempted to trust not in the Lord, but in their own health, strength, 
wit, courage, and to put their hopes, not on God's Providence, but on the 
unknown chapter of accidents in the future, most of which will never come 
to pass; while the old have learned by experience and disappointment the 
vanity of human riches, the helplessness of human endeavour, the 
blindness of human foresight, and are content to go where God leads them, 
and say, "I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and will make 
mention of Thy righteousness only.  Thou, O God, hast taught me from my 
youth up until now:  therefore will I tell of Thy wondrous works.  
Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am grey-headed; until I 
have showed Thy strength unto this generation, and Thy power to all them 
which are yet for to come."

But, for some reason or other, this generation does not seem to care to 
see God's strength; and those that are yet for to come seem likely to 
believe less and less in God's power--believe less and less that they are 
in Christ's kingdom, and that Christ is ruling over them and all the 
world.  They have not faith in the Living Lord.  But they must get back 
that faith, if they wish to keep that wealth and prosperity after which 
every one scrambles so greedily now-a-days; for those who forget God are 
treading, they and their children after them, not, as they fancy, the 
road to riches--they are treading the road to ruin.  So it always was, so 
it always will be.  Yet the majority of mankind will not see it, and the 
preacher must not expect to be believed when he says it.  Nevertheless it 
is true.  Those who forget that they are in Christ's kingdom, Christ does 
not go out of His way to punish them.  They simply punish themselves.  
They earn their own ruin by the very laws of human nature.  They must 
find hope in something and strength in something; and if they will not 
see that God is their hope, they will hope to get rich as fast as 
possible, and make themselves safe so.  If they will not see that God is 
their strength, they will find strength in cunning, in intrigue, in 
flattery of the strong and tyranny over the weak, and in making 
themselves strong so.  They want a present help in trouble; and if they 
will not believe that God is a present help in trouble, they will try to 
help themselves out of their trouble by begging, lying, swindling, 
forging, and all those meannesses which fill our newspapers with shameful 
stories day by day, and which all arise simply out of want of faith in 
God.

Moreover, it is written, "Be still, and know that I am God."  And if men 
will not be still, they will not know that He is God.  And if they do not 
know that the gracious Christ is God, they will not be still; and 
therefore they will grow more and more restless, discontented, envious, 
violent, irreverent, full of passions which injure their own souls, and 
sap the very foundations of order and society and civilised life.  And 
what can come out of all these selfish passions, when they are let loose, 
but that in which selfishness must always end, but that same mistrust and 
anarchy, ending in that same poverty and wretchedness, under which so 
many countries of the world now lie, as it were, weltering in the mire.  
Alas! say rather weltering in their own life-blood--and all because they 
have forgotten the living God?

Oh, my dear friends, take these words solemnly to heart--for yourselves, 
and for your children after you.  If you wish to prosper on the earth, 
let God be in all your thoughts.  Remember that the Lord is on your right 
hand; and then, and then alone, will you not be moved, either to terror 
or to sin, by any of the chances and changes of this mortal life.  "Fret 
not thyself," says the Psalmist, "else shalt thou be moved to do evil."  
And the only way not to fret yourselves is to remember that God is your 
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.  "He that 
believeth," saith the Prophet, "shall not make haste"--not hurry himself 
into folly and disappointment and shame.  Why should you hurry, if you 
remember that you are in the kingdom of Christ and of God?  You cannot 
hurry God's Providence, if you would; you ought not, if you could.  God 
MUST know best; God's Laws MUST work at the right pace, and fulfil His 
Will in the right way and at the right time.  As for what that Will is, 
we can know from the angels' song on Christmas Eve, which told us how 
God's Will was a good will towards men.

For who is our Lord?  Who is our King?  Who is our Governor?  Who is our 
Lawgiver?  Who is our Guide?  Christ, who died for us on Calvary; who 
rose again for us; who ascended into heaven for us; who sits at God's 
right hand for us; who sent down His Holy Spirit at the first 
Whitsuntide; and sends Him down for ever to us; that by His gracious 
inspiration we may both perceive and know what we ought to do, and also 
may have grace and power faithfully to fulfil the same.  With such a King 
over us, how can the world but go right?  With such a King over us, what 
refuge or strength or help in trouble do we need but Him Himself?--His 
Providence, which is Love, and His Laws, which are Life.



SERMON XXIII.  PRIDE AND HUMILITY



Eversley, 1869.  Chester Cathedral, 1870.

1st. Peter v. 5.  "God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the 
humble."

Let me, this evening, say a few words to you on theology, that is, on the 
being and character of God.  You need not be afraid that I shall use long 
or difficult words.  Sound theology is simple enough, and I hope that my 
words about it will be simple enough for the worst scholar here to 
understand.

"God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble."  Now, this 
saying is an old one.  It had been said, in different words, centuries 
before St Peter said it.  The old prophets and psalmists say it again and 
again.  The idea of it runs through the whole of the Old Testament, as 
anyone must know who has read his Bible with common care.  But why should 
it be true?  What reason is there for it?  What is there in the character 
of God which makes it reasonable, probable, likely to be true?  That God 
would give grace to the humble, and reward men for bowing down before His 
Majesty, seems not so difficult to understand.  But why should God resist 
the proud?  How does a man's being proud injure God, who is "I AM THAT I 
AM;" perfectly self-sufficient, having neither parts nor passions, who 
tempteth no man, neither is tempted of any?  "Why should God go out of 
His way, as it were, to care for such a paltry folly as the pride of an 
ignorant, weak, short-sighted creature like man?

Now, let us take care that we do not give a wrong answer to this 
question--an answer which too many have given, in their hearts and minds, 
though not perhaps in words, and so have fallen into abject and cruel 
superstitions, from which may God keep us, and our children after us.  
They have said to themselves, God is proud, and has a right to be proud:  
and therefore He chooses no one to be proud but Himself.  Pride in man 
calls out His pride, and makes Him angry.  They have thought of God as 
some despotic Sultan of the Indies, who is surrounded, not by free men, 
but by slaves; who will have those slaves at his beck and nod.  In one 
word, they have thought of God as a tyrant.  They have thought of God, 
and, may God forgive them, have talked of God as if He were like 
Nebuchadnezzar of old, who, when the three young men refused to obey him, 
was filled with rage and fury, and cast them into a burning fiery 
furnace.  That is some men's God--a God who must be propitiated by 
crouching and flattery, lest he should destroy them--a God who holds all 
men as his slaves, and therefore hates pride in them.  For what has a 
slave to do with pride?

But that is not the God of the Bible, my friends, nor the God of Nature 
either, the God who made the world and man.  For He is not a tyrant, but 
a Father.  He wishes men not to be His slaves, but His children.  And if 
He resists the proud, it is because children have no right to be proud.  
If He resists the proud, it is in fatherly love, because it is bad for 
them to be proud.  Not because the proud are injuring God, but because 
they are injuring themselves, does God resist them, and bring them low, 
and show them what they are, and where they are, that they may repent, 
and be converted, and turned back into the right way.

Remember always that God is your Father.  This question, like all 
questions between God and man, is a question between a father and a 
child; and if you see it in any other light, and judge it by any other 
rule, you see it and judge it wrongly, and learn nothing about it, or 
worse than nothing.  If God were really angry with, really hated, the 
proud man, or any other man, would He need only to resist him? would He 
have to wait till the next life to punish him?  My dear friends, if God 
really hated you or me, do you not suppose that He would simply destroy 
us--get rid of us--abolish us and annihilate us off the face of the 
earth, just as we crush a gnat when it bites us?

That God can do; and more--He does it now and then.  He will endure with 
much long suffering vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction:  but a 
moment sometimes comes when He will endure them no longer, and He 
destroys them with the destruction for which they have fitted themselves.  
In them is fulfilled the parable of the rich man, who said to himself, 
"Soul, thou hast much good laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, 
drink, and be merry.  But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy 
soul shall be required of thee."

But for the most part, thanks to the mercy of our Heavenly Father, we are 
not destroyed by our pride and for our pride.  We are only chastened, as 
a father chastens his child.  And that we are chastised for pride, who 
does not know?  What proverb more common, what proverb more true, than 
that after pride comes a fall?  Do we not know (if we do not, we shall 
know sooner or later) that the surest way to fail in any undertaking is 
to set about it in self-will and self-conceit; that the surest way to do 
a foolish thing, is to fancy that we are going to do a very wise one; 
that the surest way to make ourselves ridiculous in the eyes of our 
fellow-men, is to assume airs, and boast, shew ourselves off, and end by 
shewing off only our own folly?

Why is it so?  Why has God so ordered the world and human nature, that 
pride punishes itself?  Because, I presume, pride is begotten and born of 
a lie, and God hates a lie, because all lies lead to ruin, and this lie 
of pride above all.  It is as it were the root lie of all lies.  The very 
lie by which, as old tales tell, Satan fell from heaven, and when he 
tried to become a god in his own right, found himself, to his surprise 
and disappointment, only a devil.  For pride and self-conceit contradict 
the original constitution of man and the universe, which is this--that of 
God are all things, and in God are all things, and for God are all 
things.  Man depends on God.  Self tells him that he depends on himself.  
Man has nothing but what he receives from God.  Self tells him that what 
he has is his own, and that he has a right to do with it what he likes.  
Man knows nothing but what God teaches him.  Self tells him that he has 
found out everything for himself, and can say what he thinks fit without 
fear of God or man.  Therefore the proud, self-willed, self-conceited man 
must come to harm, like Malvolio in the famous play, merely because he is 
in the blackest night of ignorance.  He has mistaken who he is, what he 
is, where he is.  He is fancying himself, as many mad men do, the centre 
of the universe; while God is the centre of the universe.  He is just as 
certain to come to harm as a man would be on board a ship, who should 
fancy that he himself, and not the ship, was keeping him afloat, and step 
overboard to walk upon the sea.  We all know what would happen to that 
man.  Let us thank God our Father that He not only knows what would 
happen to such men:  but desires to save them from the consequences of 
their own folly, by letting them feel the consequences of their own 
folly.

Oh my friends, let us search our hearts, and pray to our Father in Heaven 
to take out of them, by whatever painful means, the poisonous root of 
pride, self-conceit, self-will.  So only shall we be truly strong--truly 
wise.  So only shall we see what and where we are.

Do we pride ourselves on being something?  Shall we pride ourselves on 
health and strength?  A tile falling off the roof, a little powder and 
lead in the hands of a careless child, can blast us out of this world in 
a moment--whither, who can tell?  What is our cleverness--our strength of 
mind?  A tiny blood vessel bursting on the brain, will make us in one 
moment paralytic, helpless, babblers, and idiots.  What is our knowledge 
of the world?  That of a man, who is forcing his way alone through a 
thick and pathless wood, where he has never been before, to a place which 
he has never seen.  What is our wisdom--What does a wise man say of his?


"So runs my dream; but what am I?
An infant crying in the night;
An infant crying for the light;
And with no language but a cry."


Yes.  Our true knowledge is to know our own ignorance.  Our true strength 
is to know our own weakness.  Our true dignity is to confess that we have 
no dignity, and are nobody, and nothing in ourselves, and to cast 
ourselves down before the Dignity of God, under the shadow of whose 
wings, and in the smile of whose countenance, alone, is any created being 
safe.  Let us cling to our Father in Heaven, as a child, walking in the 
night, clings to his father's hand.  Let us take refuge on the lowest 
step of the throne of Christ our Lord, and humble ourselves under His 
mighty hand; and, instead of exalting ourselves in undue time, leave Him 
to exalt us again in due time, when the chastisement has told on us, and 
