does not feel that it is drawing a heart from closest human embraces
and constituting a barrier between it and the dearest of earth. There
is still need in these days of relaxed Christian sentiment for the
stern austerity of the law, 'He that loveth father or mother more
than Me is not worthy of Me'; and there are many Christian souls who
would be infinitely stronger and more mature, if they did not yield
to the seductions of family affections which are not rooted in Jesus
Christ. But still, though our faith ought to be far more than it
often is, the determining element in our affections and associations,
its noblest work is not to separate but to unite; and whilst it often
must divide, it is meant to draw more closely together hearts that
are already knit by earthly love. Its legitimate effect is to make
all earthly sweetnesses sweeter, all holy bonds more holy and more
binding, to infuse a new constraint and preciousness into all earthly
relationships, to make brothers tenfold more brotherly and sisters
more sisterly. The heart, in which the deepest devotion is yielded to
Jesus Christ, has its capacity for devotion infinitely increased, and
they who, looking into each other's faces, see reflected there
something of the Lord whom they both love, love each other all the
more because they love Him most, and in their love to Him, and His to
them, have found a new measure for all their affection. They who,
looking on their dear ones, can 'trust they live in God,' will there
find them 'worthier to be loved,' and will there find a power of
loving them. Tryphena and Tryphosa were more sisterly than ever when
they clung to their Elder Brother. 'There is no man that hath left
brethren, or sisters, or mother, or father, for My sake, but he shall
receive a hundredfold more in this time, brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and in the world to come eternal life.'

The contrast between the names of these two Roman ladies and the
characterisation of their 'labour in the Lord' may suggest to us the
most formidable foe of Christian earnestness. Their names, as we have
already noticed, point to a state of society in which the parents
ideal for their daughters was dainty luxuriousness and a withdrawal
from the rough and tumble of common life; but these two women,
magnetised by the love of Jesus, had turned their backs on the
parental ideal, and had cast themselves earnestly into a life of
toil. That ideal was never more formidably antagonistic to the vigour
of Christian life than it is to-day. Rome, in Paul's time, was not
more completely honeycombed with worldliness than England is to-day;
and the English churches are not far behind the English 'world' in
their paralysing love of luxury and self-indulgence. In all ages,
earnest Christians have had to take up the same vehement remonstrance
against the tendency of the average Christian to let his religious
life be weakened by the love of the world and the things of the
world. The protests against growing luxury have been a commonplace in
all ages of the Church; but, surely, there has never been a time when
it has reached a more senseless, sinful, and destroying height than
in our day. The rapid growth of wealth, with no capacity of using it
nobly, which modern commerce has brought, has immensely influenced
all our churches for evil. It is so hard for us, aggregated in great
cities, to live our own lives, and the example of our class has such
immense power over us that it is very hard to pursue the path of
'plain living and high thinking' in communities, all classes of which
are more and more yielding to the temptation to ostentation,
so-called comfort, and extravagant expenditure; and that this is a
danger--we are tempted to say _the_ danger--to the purity, loftiness,
and vigour of religious life among us, he must be blind who cannot
see, and he must be strangely ignorant of his own life who cannot
feel that it is the danger for him. I believe that for one professing
Christian whose earnestness is lost by reason of intellectual doubts,
or by some grave sin, there are a hundred from whom it simply oozes
away unnoticed, like wind out of a bladder, so that what was once
round and full becomes limp and flaccid. If Demas begins with loving
the present world, it will not be long before he finds a reason for
departing from Paul.

We may take these two sisters, finally, as pointing for us the true
victory over this formidable enemy. They had turned resolutely away
from the heathen ideal enshrined in their names to a life of real
hard toil, as is distinctly implied by the word used by the Apostle.
What that toil consisted in we do not know, and need not inquire; but
the main point to be noted is that their 'labour' was 'in the Lord.'
That union with Christ makes labour for Him a necessity, and makes it
possible. 'The labour we delight in physics pain'; and if we are in
Him, we shall not only 'live in Him,' but all our work begun,
continued, and ended in Him, will in Him and by Him be accepted.
There is no victorious antagonist of worldly ease and self-indulgence
comparable to the living consciousness of union with Jesus and His
life in us. To dwell in the swamps at the bottom of the mountain is
to live in a region where effort is impossible and malaria weakens
vitality; to climb the heights brings bracing to the limbs and a
purer air into the expanding lungs, and makes work delightsome that
would have been labour down below. If we are 'in the Lord,' He is our
atmosphere, and we can draw from Him full draughts of a noble life in
which we shall not need the stimulus of self-interest or worldly
success to use it to the utmost in acts of service to Him. They who
live in the Lord will labour in the Lord, and they who labour in the
Lord will rest in the Lord.




PERSIS

   'Salute the beloved Persis, who laboured much in
   the Lord.'--ROMANS xvi. 12.


There are a great number of otherwise unknown Christians who pass for
a moment before our view in this chapter. Their characterisations are
like the slight outlines in the background of some great artist's
canvas: a touch of the brush is all that is spared for each, and yet,
if we like to look sympathetically, they live before us. Now, this
good woman, about whom we never hear again, and for whom these few
words are all her epitaph--was apparently, judging by her name, of
Persian descent, and possibly had been brought to Rome as a slave. At
all events, finding herself there, she had somehow or other become
connected with the Church in that city, and had there distinguished
herself by continuous and faithful Christian toil which had won the
affection of the Apostle, though he had never seen her, and knew no
more about her. That is all. She comes into the foreground for a
moment, and then she vanishes. What does she say to us?

First of all, like the others named by Paul, she helps us to
understand, by her living example, that wonderful, new, uniting
process that was carried on by means of Christianity. The simple fact
of a Persian woman getting a loving message from a Jew, the woman
being in Rome and the Jew in Corinth, and the message being written
in Greek, brings before us a whole group of nationalities all fused
together. They had been hammered together, or, if you like it better,
chained together, by Roman power, but they were melted together by
Christ's Gospel. This Eastern woman and this Jewish man, and the many
others whose names and different nationalities pass in a flash before
us in this chapter, were all brought together in Jesus Christ.

If we run our eye over these salutations, what strikes one, even at
the first sight, is the very small number of Jewish names; only one
certain, and another doubtful. Four or five names are Latin, and then
all the rest are Greek, but this woman seemingly came from further
east than any of them. There they all were, forgetting the hostile
nationalities to which they belonged, because they had found One who
had brought them into one great community. We talk about the uniting
influence of Christianity, but when we see the process going on
before us, in a case like this, we begin to understand it better.

But another point may be noticed in regard to this uniting
process--how it brought into action the purest and truest love as a
bond that linked men. There are four or five of the people commended
in this chapter of whom the Apostle has nothing to say but that they
are beloved. This is the only woman to whom he applies that term. And
notice his instinctive delicacy: when he is speaking of men he says,
'_My_ beloved'; when he is greeting Persis he says, '_the_ beloved,'
that there may be no misunderstanding about the 'my'--'the beloved
Persis which laboured much in the Lord'--indicating, by one delicate
touch, the loftiness, the purity, and truly Christian character of
the bond that held them together. And that is no true Church, where
anything but that is the bond--the love that knits us to one another,
because we believe that each is knit to the dear Lord and fountain of
all love.

What more does this good woman say to us? She is an example living
and breathing there before us, of what a woman may be in God's
Church. Paul had never been in Rome; no Apostle, so far as we know,
had had anything to do with the founding of the Church. The most
important Church in the Roman Empire, and the Church which afterwards
became the curse of Christendom, was founded by some anonymous
Christians, with no commission, with no supervision, with no
officials amongst them, but who just had the grace of God in their
hearts, and found themselves in Rome, and could not help speaking
about Jesus Christ. God helped them, and a little Church sprang into
being. And the great abundance of salutations here, and the
honourable titles which the Apostle gives to the Christians of whom
he speaks, and many of whom he signalises as having done great
service, are a kind of certificate on his part to the vigorous life
which, without any apostolic supervision or official direction, had
developed itself there in that Church.

Now, it is to be noticed that this striking form of eulogium which is
attached to our Persis she shares in common with others in the group.
And it is to be further noticed that all those who are, as it were,
decorated with this medal--on whom Paul bestows this honour of saying
that they had 'laboured,' or 'laboured much in the Lord,' are women
that stand alone in the list. There are several other women in it,
but they are all coupled with men--husbands or brothers, or some kind
of relative. But there are three sets of women, I do not say single
women, but three sets of women, standing singly in the list, and it
is about them, and them only, that Paul says they 'laboured,' or
'laboured much.' There is a Mary who stands alone, and she 'bestowed
much labour on' Paul and others. Then there are, in the same verse as
my text, two sisters, Tryphena and Tryphosa, whose names mean 'the
luxurious.' And the Apostle seems to think, as he writes the two
names that spoke of self-indulgence: 'Perhaps these rightly described
these two women once, but they do not now. In the bad old days,
before they were Christians, they may have been rightly named
luxurious-living. But here is their name now, the luxurious is turned
into the self-sacrificing worker, and the two sisters "labour in the
Lord."' Then comes our friend Persis, who also stands alone, and she
shares in the honour that only these other two companies of women
share with her. She 'laboured much in the Lord.' In that little
community, without any direction from Apostles and authorised
teachers, the brethren and sisters had every one found their tasks;
and these solitary women, with nobody to say to them, 'Go and do this
or that,' had found out for themselves, or rather had been taught by
the Spirit of Jesus, what they had to do, and they worked at it with
a will. There are many things that Christian women can do a great
deal better than men, and we are not to forget that this modern talk
about the emancipation of women has its roots here in the New
Testament. We are not to forget either that prerogative means
obligation, and that the elevation of woman means the laying upon her
of solemn duties to perform. I wonder how many of the women members
of our Churches and congregations deserve such a designation as that?
We hear a great deal about 'women's rights' nowadays. I wish some of
my friends would lay a little more to heart than they do, 'women's
duties.'

And now, lastly, the final lesson that I draw from this eulogium of an
otherwise altogether unknown woman is that she is a model of
Christian service.

First, in regard to its measure. She 'laboured much in the Lord.'
Now, both these two words, 'laboured' and 'much,' are extremely
emphatic. The word rightly translated 'laboured' will appear in its
full force if I recall to you a couple of other places in which it is
employed in the New Testament. You remember that touching incident
about our Lord when, being '_wearied_ with His journey, He sat
thus on the well.' 'Wearied' is the same word as is here used. Then,
you remember how the Apostle, after he had been hauling empty nets
all night in the little, wet, dirty fishing-boat, said, perhaps with
a yawn, 'Master, we have _toiled_ all the night and caught
nothing.' He uses the same word as is employed here. Such is the sort
of work that these women had done--work carried to the point of
exhaustion, work up to the very edge of their powers, work unsparing
and continuous, and not done once in some flash of evanescent
enthusiasm, but all through a dreary night, in spite of apparent
failures.

_There_ is the measure of service. Many of us seem to think that
if we say 'I am tired,' that is a reason for not doing anything.
Sometimes it is, no doubt; and no man has a right so to labour as to
impair his capacity for future labour, but subject to that condition
I do not know that the plea of fatigue is a sufficient reason for
idleness. And I am quite sure that the true example for us is the
example of Him who, when He was most wearied, sitting on the well,
was so invigorated and refreshed by the opportunity of winning
another soul that, when His disciples came back to Him, they looked
at His fresh strength with astonishment, and said to themselves, 'Has
any man brought Him anything to eat?' Ay, what He had to eat was work
that He finished for the Father, and some of us know that the truest
refreshment in toil is a change of toil. It is almost as good to
shift the load on to the other shoulder, or to take a stick into the
other hand, as it is to put away the load altogether. Oh, the careful
limits which Christian people nowadays set to their work for Jesus!
They are not afraid of being tired in their pursuit of business or
pleasure, but in regard to Christ's work they will let anything go to
wrack and ruin rather than that they should turn a hair, by
persevering efforts to prevent it. Work to the limit of power if you
live in the light of blessedness.

She 'laboured much in the Lord,' or, as Jesus Christ said about the
other woman who was blamed by the people that did not love enough to
understand the blessedness of self-sacrifice, 'she had done what she
could.' It was an apology for the form of Mary's service, but it was
a stringent demand as to its amount. 'What she could'--not _half_ of
what she could; not what she _conveniently_ could. That is the
measure of acceptable service.

Then, still further, may we not learn from Persis the spring of all
true Christian work? She 'laboured much in the Lord,' because she
_was_ 'in Him,' and in union with Him there came to her power
and desire to do things which, without that close fellowship, she
neither would have desired nor been able to do. It is vain to try to
whip up Christian people to forms of service by appealing to lower
motives. There is only one motive that will last, and bring out from
us all that is in us to do, and that is the appeal to our sense of
union and communion with Jesus Christ, and the exhortation to live in
Him, and then we shall work in Him. If you link the spindles in your
mill, or the looms in your weaving-shed, with the engine, they will
go. It is of no use to try to turn them by hand. You will only spoil
the machinery, and it will be poor work that you will get off them.

So, dear brethren, be 'in the Lord.' That is the secret of service,
and the closer we come to Him, and the more continuously, moment by
moment, we realise our individual dependence upon Him, and our union
with Him, the more will our lives effloresce and blossom into all
manner of excellence and joyful service, and nothing else that
Christian people are whipped up to do, from lower and more vulgar
motives than that, will. It may be of a certain kind of
inferior value, but it is far beneath the highest beauty of Christian
service, nor will its issues reach the loftiest point of usefulness
to which even our poor service may attain.

Persis seems to me to suggest, too, the safeguard of work. Ah, if she
had not 'laboured in the Lord,' and been 'in the Lord' whilst she was
labouring, she would very soon have stopped work. Our Christian work,
however pure its motive when we begin it, has in itself the tendency
to become mechanical, and to be done from lower motives than those
from which it was begun. That is true about a man in my position. It
is true about all of us, in our several ways of trying to serve our
dear Lord and Master. Unless we make a conscience of continually
renewing our communion with Him, and getting our feet once more
firmly upon the rock, we shall certainly in our Christian work,
having begun in the spirit, continue in the flesh, and before we know
where we are, we shall be doing work from habit, because we did it
yesterday at this hour, because people expect it of us, because A, B,
or C does it, or for a hundred other reasons, all of which are but
too familiar to us by experience. They are sure to slip in; they
change the whole character of the work, and they harm the workers.
The only way by which we can keep the garland fresh is by continually
dipping it in the fountain. The only way by which we can keep our
Christian work pure, useful, worthy of the Master, is by seeing to it
that our work itself does not draw us away from our fellowship with
Him. And the more we have to do, the more needful is it that we
should listen to Christ's voice when He says to us, 'Come ye
yourselves apart with Me into a solitary place, and there renew your
communion with Me.'

The last lesson about our work which I draw from Persis is the
unexpected immortality of true Christian service. How Persis would
have opened her eyes if anybody had told her that nearly 1900 years
after she lived, people in a far-away barbarous island would be
sitting thinking about her, as you and I are doing now! How
astonished she would have been if it had been said to her, 'Now,
Persis, wheresoever in the whole world the Gospel is preached, your
name and your work and your epitaph will go with it, and as long
as men know about Jesus Christ, your and their Master, they will know
about you, His humble servant.' Well, we shall not have our names in
that fashion in men's memories, but Jesus will have your name and
mine, if we do His work as this woman did it, in _His_ memory. 'I
will never forget any of their works.' And if we--self-forgetful to
the limit of our power, and as the joyful result of our personal
union with that Saviour who has done everything for us--try to live
for His praise and glory in any fashion, then be sure of this, that
our poor deeds are as immortal as Him for whom they are done, and
that we may take to ourselves the great word which He has spoken,
when He has declared that at the last He will confess His confessors'
names before the angels in heaven. Blessed are the living that 'live
in the Lord'; blessed are the workers that work 'in the Lord,' for
when they come to be the dead that 'die in the Lord' and rest from
their labours, their works shall follow them.




A CRUSHED SNAKE

   'The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
   feet shortly.'--ROMANS xvi. 20.


There are three other Scriptural sayings which may have been floating
in the Apostle's mind when he penned this triumphant assurance. 'Thou
shalt bruise his head'; the great first Evangel--we are to be endowed
with Christ's power; 'The lion and the adder thou shalt trample under
foot'--all the strength that was given to ancient saints is ours;
'Behold! I give you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy'--the charter of the seventy is the
perennial gift to the Church. Echoing all these great words, Paul
promises the Roman Christians that 'the God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly.' Now, when any special characteristic
is thus ascribed to God, as when He is called 'the God of patience'
or 'the God of hope,' in the preceding chapter, the characteristic
selected has some bearing on the prayer or promise following. For
example, this same designation, 'the God of peace,' united with the
other, 'that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that great
Shepherd of the sheep,' is laid as the foundation of the prayer for
the perfecting of the readers of the Epistle to the Hebrews in every
good work. It is, then, because of that great name that the Apostle
is sure, and would have his Roman brethren to be sure, that Satan
shall shortly be bruised under their feet. No doubt there may have
been some reference in Paul's mind to what he had just said about
those who caused divisions in the Church; but, if there is such
reference, it is of secondary importance. Paul is gazing on all the
great things in God which make Him the God of peace, and in them all
he sees ground for the confident hope that His power will be exerted
to crush all the sin that breaks His children's peace.

Now the first thought suggested by these words is the solemn glimpse
given of the struggle that goes on in every Christian soul.

Two antagonists are at hand-grips in every one of us. On the one
hand, the 'God of peace,' on the other, 'Satan.' If you believe in
the personality of the One, do not part with the belief in the
personality of the other. If you believe that a divine power and
Spirit is ready to help and strengthen you, do not think so lightly
of the enemies that are arrayed against you as to falter in the
belief that there _is_ a great personal Power, rooted in evil,
who is warring against each of us. Ah, brethren! we live far too much
on the surface, and we neither go down deep enough to the dark source
of the Evil, nor rise high enough to the radiant Fountain of the
Good. It is a shallow life that strikes that antagonism of God and
Satan out of itself. And though the belief in a personal tempter has
got to be very unfashionable nowadays, I am going to venture to say
that you may measure accurately the vitality and depth of a man's
religion by the emphasis with which he grasps the thought of that
great antagonism. There is a star of light, and there is a star of
darkness; and they revolve, as it were, round one centre.

But whilst, on the one hand, our Christianity is made shallow in
proportion as we ignore this solemn reality, on the other hand, it is
sometimes paralysed and perverted by our misunderstanding of it. For,
notice, 'the God of peace shall bruise Satan _under your feet_.'
Yes, it is God that bruises, but He uses our feet to do it. It is God
from whom the power comes, but the power works through us, and we are
neither merely the field, nor merely the prize, of the conflict
between these two, but we ourselves have to put all our pith into the
task of keeping down the flat, speckled head that has the poison
gland in it. 'The God of peace'--blessed be His Name--'shall bruise
Satan under your feet,' but it will need the tension of your muscles,
and the downward force of your heel, if the wriggling reptile is to
be kept under.

Turn, now, to the other thought that is here, the promise and pledge
of victory in the name, the God of peace. I have already referred to
two similar designations of God in the previous chapter, and if we
take them in union with this one in our text, what a wonderfully
beautiful and strengthening threefold view of that divine nature do
we get! 'The God of patience and consolation' is the first of the
linked three. It heads the list, and blessed is it that it does,
because, after all, sorrow makes up a very large proportion of the
experience of us all, and what most men seem to themselves to need
most is a God that will bear their sorrows with them and help them to
bear, and a God that will comfort them. But, supposing that He has
been made known thus as the source of endurance and the God of all
consolation, He becomes 'the God of hope,' for a dark background
flings up a light foreground, and a comforted sorrow patiently
endured is mighty to produce a radiant hope. The rising of the muddy
waters of the Nile makes the heavy crops of 'corn in Egypt.' So the
name 'the God of hope' fitly follows the name 'the God of patience
and consolation.'

Then we come to the name in my text, built perhaps on the other two,
or at least reminiscent of them, and recalling them, 'the God of
peace,' who, through patience and consolation, through hope, and
through many another gift, breathes the benediction of His own great
tranquillity and unruffled calm over our agitated, distracted, sinful
hearts. In connection with one of those previous designations to
which I have referred, the Apostle has a prayer very different in
form from this, but identical in substance, when he says 'the God of
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing.' Is not that
closely allied to the promise of my text, 'The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly'? Is there any surer way of
'bruising Satan' under a man's feet than filling him 'with joy and
peace in believing'? What can the Devil do to that man? If his soul
is saturated, and his capacities filled, with that pure honey of
divine joy, will he have any taste for the coarse dainties, the leeks
and the garlic, that the Devil offers him? Is there any surer way of
delivering a man from the temptations of his own baser nature, and
the solicitations of this busy intrusive world round about him, than
to make him satisfied with the goodness of the Lord, and conscious in
his daily experience of 'all joy and peace'? Fill the vessel with
wine, and there is no room for baser liquors or for poison. I suppose
that the way by which you and I, dear friends, will most effectually
conquer any temptations, is by falling back on the superior sweetness
of divine joys. When we live upon manna we do not crave onions. So He
'will bruise Satan under your feet' by giving that which will arm
your hearts against all his temptations and all his weapons. Blessed
be God for the way of conquest, which is the possession of a supremer
good!

But then, notice how beautifully too this name, 'the God of peace,'
comes in to suggest that even in the strife there may be
tranquillity. I remember in an old church in Italy a painting of an
Archangel with his foot on the dragon's neck, and his sword thrust
through its scaly armour. It is perhaps the feebleness of the
artist's hand, but I think rather it is the clearness of his insight,
which has led him to represent the victorious angel, in the moment in
which he is slaying the dragon, as with a smile on his face, and not
the least trace of effort in the arm, which is so easily smiting the
fatal blow. Perhaps if the painter could have used his brush better
he would have put more expression into the attitude and the face, but
I think it is better as it is. We, too, may achieve a conquest over
the dragon which, although it requires effort, does not disturb
peace. There is a possibility of bruising that slippery head under my
foot, and yet not having to strain myself in the process. We may have
'peace subsisting at the heart of endless agitation.' Do you remember
how the Apostle, in another place, gives us the same
beautiful--though at first sight contradictory--combination when he
says, 'The peace of God shall garrison your heart'?

  'My soul! there is a country
    Far, far beyond the stars,
  Where stands an armed sentry,
    All skilful in the wars.'

And her name is Peace, as the poet goes on to tell us. Ah, brethren!
if we lived nearer the Lord, we should find it more possible to
'fight the good fight of faith,' and yet to have 'our feet shod with
the preparedness of the gospel of peace.'

'The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet'; and in
bruising He will give you His peace to do it, and His peace in doing
it, and in still greater measure after doing it. For every struggle
of the Christian soul adds something to the subsequent depth of
its tranquillity. And so the name of the God of peace is our pledge of
victory in, and of deepened peace after, our warfare with sin and
temptation.

Lastly, note the swiftness with which Paul expects that this process
shall he accomplished.

I dare say that he was thinking about the coming of the Lord, when
all the fighting and struggle would be over, and that when he said
'God shall bruise him under your feet shortly,' there lay in the back
of his mind the thought, 'the Lord is at hand.' But be that as it
may, there is another way of looking at the words. They are not in
the least like our experience, are they? 'Shortly!'--and here am I, a
Christian man for the last half century perhaps; and have I got much
further on in my course? Have I brought the sin that used to trouble
me much down, and is my character much more noble, Christ-like, than
it was long years ago? Would other people say that it is? Instead of
'shortly' we ought to put 'slowly' for the most of us. But, dear
friend, the ideal is swift conquest, and it is our fault and our
loss, if the reality is sadly different.

There are a great many evils that, unless they are conquered
suddenly, have very small chance of ever being conquered at all. You
never heard of a man being cured of his love of intoxicating drink,
for instance, by a gradual process. The serpent's life is not crushed
out of it by gradual pressure, but by one vigorous stamp of a nervous
heel.

But if my experience as a Christian man does not enable me to set to
my seal that this text is true, the text itself will tell me why. It
is 'the God of peace' that is going to 'bruise Satan.' Do you keep
yourself in touch with Him, dear friend? And do you let His powers
come uninterruptedly and continuously into your spirit and life? It
is sheer folly and self-delusion to wonder that the medicine does not
work as quickly as was promised, if you do not take the medicine. The
slow process by which, at the best, many Christian people 'bruise
Satan under their feet,' during which he hurts their heels more than
they hurt his head, is mainly due to their breaking the closeness and
the continuity of their communion with God in Jesus Christ.

But, after all, it is Heaven's chronology that we have to do with
here. 'Shortly,' and it will be 'shortly,' if we reckon by heavenly
scales of duration. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in
the morning. 'The Lord will help her, and that right early.' 'The
Lord is at hand.' When we get yonder, ah! how all the long years of
fighting will have dwindled down, and we shall say 'the Lord did help
me, and that right early,' and though there may have been more than
threescore years and ten of fighting, that, while we were in the
thick of it, did not seem to come to much, we shall then look back
and say: 'Yes, Lord, it was but for a moment, and it has brought me
to the undying day of Eternal Peace.'




TERTIUS

   'I, Tertius, who write the epistle, salute you in the
   Lord.'--ROMANS xvi. 22 (R.V.).


One sometimes sees in old religious pictures, in some obscure corner,
a tiny kneeling figure, the portrait of the artist. So Tertius here
gets leave to hold the pen for a moment on his own account, and from
Corinth sends his greeting to his unknown brethren in Rome.
Apparently he was a stranger to them, and needed to introduce
himself. He is never heard of before or since. For one brief moment
he is visible, like a star of a low magnitude, shining out for a
moment between two banks of darkness and then swallowed up. Judging
by his name, he was probably a Roman, and possibly had some
connection with Italy, but clearly was a stranger to the Church in
Rome. We do not know whether he was a resident in Corinth, where he
wrote this epistle, or one of Paul's travelling companions. Probably
he was the former, as his name never recurs in any of Paul's letters.
One can understand the impulse which led him for one moment to come
out of obscurity and to take up personal relations with those who had
so long enjoyed his pen. He would fain float across the deep gulf of
alienation a thread of love which looked like gossamer, but has
proved to be stronger than centuries and revolutions.

This humble and modest greeting is an expression of a sentiment which
the world may smile at, but which, being 'in the Lord,' partakes of
immortality. No doubt the world's hate drove more closely together
all the disciples in primitive times; but the yearning of Tertius for
some little corner in the love of his Roman brethren might well
influence us to-day. There ought to be an effort of imagination going
out towards unknown brethren. Christian love is not meant to be kept
within the limits of sight and personal knowledge; it should overleap
the narrow bounds of the communities to which we belong, and
expatiate over the whole wide field. The great Shepherd has
prescribed for us the limits to the very edge of which our Christian
love should consciously go forth, and has rebuked the narrowness to
which we are prone, when He has said, 'Other sheep I have which are
not of this fold.' We are all too prone to let identities of opinion
and of polity, or even the accident of locality, set bounds to our
consciousness of brotherhood; and the example of this little gush of
affection, that reaches out a hand across the ocean and grasps the
hands of unknown partakers in the common life of the one Lord, may
well shame us out of our narrowness, and quicken us into a wide
perception and deepened feeling towards all who in every place call
up Jesus Christ as their Lord--'both their Lord and ours.'

Another lesson which we may learn from Tertius' characterisation of
himself is the dignity of subordinate work towards a great end. His
office as amanuensis was very humble, but it was quite as necessary
as Paul's inspired fervour. It is to him that we owe our possession
of the Epistle; it is to him that Paul owed it that he was able to
record in imperishable words the thoughts that welled up in his mind,
and would have been lost if Tertius had not been at his side. The
power generated in the boilers does its work through machines of
which each little cog-wheel is as indispensable as the great shafts.
Members of the body which seem to be 'more feeble, are necessary.'
Every note in a great concerted piece of music, and every instrument,
down to the triangle and the little drum in the great orchestra, is
necessary. This lesson of the dignity of subordinate work needs to be
laid to heart both by those who think themselves to be capable of
more important service, and by those who have to recognise that the
less honourable tasks are all for which they are fit. To the former
it may preach humility, the latter it may encourage. We are all very
ignorant of what is great and what is small in the matter of our
Christian service, and we have sometimes to look very closely and to
clear away a great many vulgar misconceptions before we can
clearly discriminate between mites and talents. 'We know not which
may prosper, whether this or that'; and in our ignorance of what it
may please God to bring out of any service faithfully rendered to
Him, we had better not be too sure that true service is ever small,
or that the work that attracts attention and is christened by men
'great' is really so in His eyes. It is well to have the noble
ambition to 'desire earnestly the greater gifts,' but it is better to
'follow the more excellent way,' and to seek after the love which
knows nothing of great or small, and without which prophecy and the
knowledge of all mysteries, and all conspicuous and all the shining
qualities profit nothing.

We can discern in Tertius' words a little touch of what we may call
pride in his work. No doubt he knew it to be subordinate, but he also
knew it to be needful; and no doubt he had put all his strength into
doing it well. No man will put his best into any task which he does
not undertake in such a spirit. It is a very plain piece of homely
wisdom that 'what is worth doing at all is worth doing well.' Without
a lavish expenditure of the utmost care and effort, our work will
tend to be slovenly and unpleasing to God, and man, and to ourselves.
We may be sure there were no blots and bits of careless writing in
Tertius' manuscript, and that he would not have claimed the friendly
feelings of his Roman brethren, if he had not felt that he had put
his best into the writing of this epistle. The great word of King
David has a very wide application. 'I will not take that which is
thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings without cost.'

Tertius' salutation may suggest to us the best thing by which to be
remembered. All his life before and after the hours spent at Paul's
side has sunk in oblivion. He wished to be known only as having
written the Epistle. Christian souls ought to desire to live chiefly
in the remembrance of those to whom they have been known as having
done some little bit of work for Jesus Christ. We may well ask
ourselves whether there is anything in our lives by which we should
thus wish to be remembered. All our many activities will sink into
silence; but if the stream of our life, which has borne along down
its course so much mud and sand, has brought some grains of gold in
the form of faithful and loving service to Christ and men--these will
not be lost in the ocean, but treasured by Him. What we do for Jesus
and to spread the knowledge of His name is the immortal part of our
mortal lives, and abides in His memory and in blessed results in our
own characters, when all the rest that made our busy and often stormy
days has passed into oblivion. All that we know of Tertius who wrote
this Epistle is that he wrote it. Well will it be for us if the
summary of our lives be something like that of his!




QUARTUS A BROTHER

   'Quartus a brother.'--ROMANS xvi. 23.


I am afraid very few of us read often, or with much interest, those
long lists of names at the end of Paul's letters. And yet there are
plenty of lessons in them, if anybody will look at them lovingly and
carefully. There does not seem much in these three words; but I am
very much mistaken if they will not prove to be full of beauty and
pathos, and to open out into a wonderful revelation of what
Christianity is and does, as soon as we try to freshen them up into
some kind of human interest.

It is easy for us to make a little picture of this brother Quartus.
He is evidently an entire stranger to the Church in Rome. They had
never heard his name before: none of them knew anything about him.
Further, he is evidently a man of no especial reputation or position
in the Church at Corinth, from which Paul writes. He contrasts
strikingly with the others who send salutations to Rome. 'Timotheus,
my work-fellow'--the companion and helper of the Apostle, whose name
was known everywhere among the Churches, heads the list. Then come
other prominent men of his more immediate circle. Then follows a
loving greeting from Paul's amanuensis, who, naturally, as the pen is
in his own hand, says: '_I_, Tertius, who wrote this epistle,
salute you in the Lord.' Then Paul begins again to dictate, and the
list runs on. Next comes a message from 'Gaius mine host, and of the
whole Church'--an influential man in the community, apparently rich,
and willing, as well as able, to extend to them large and loving
hospitality. Erastus, the chamberlain or treasurer of the city,
follows--a man of consequence in Corinth. And then, among all these
people of mark, comes the modest, quiet Quartus. He has no wealth
like Gaius, nor civic position like Erastus, nor wide reputation like
Timothy. He is only a good, simple, unknown Christian. He feels a
spring of love open in his heart to these brethren far across the
sea, whom he never met. He would like them to know that he thought
lovingly of them, and to be lovingly thought of by them. So he begs a
little corner in Paul's letter, and gets it; and there, in his little
niche, like some statue of a forgotten saint, scarce seen amidst the
glories of a great cathedral, 'Quartus a brother' stands to all time.

The first thing that strikes me in connection with these words is,
how deep and real they show that new bond of Christian love to have
been.

A little incident of this sort is more impressive than any amount of
mere talk about the uniting influence of the Gospel. Here we get a
glimpse of the power in actual operation in a man's heart, and if we
think of all that this simple greeting presupposes and implies, and
of all that had to be overcome before it could have been sent, we may
well see in it the sign of the greatest revolution that was ever
wrought in men's relations to one another, Quartus was an inhabitant
of Corinth, from which city this letter was written. His Roman name
may indicate Roman descent, but of that we cannot be sure. Just as
probably he may have been a Greek by birth, and so have had to
stretch his hand across a deep crevasse of national antipathy, in
order to clasp the hands of his brethren in the great city. There was
little love lost between Rome, the rough imperious conqueror, and
Corinth, prostrate and yet restive under her bonds, and nourishing
remembrances of a freedom which Rome had crushed, and of a culture
that Rome haltingly followed.

And how many other deep gulfs of separation had to be bridged before
that Christian sense of oneness could be felt! It is impossible for
us to throw ourselves completely back to the condition of things
which the Gospel found. The world then was like some great field of
cooled lava on the slopes of a volcano, all broken up by a labyrinth
of clefts and cracks, at the bottom of which one can see the flicker
of sulphurous flames. Great gulfs of national hatred, of fierce
enmities of race, language, and religion; wide separations of social
condition, far profounder than anything of the sort which we know,
split mankind into fragments. On the one side was the freeman, on the
other, the slave; on the one side, the Gentile, on the other, the
Jew; on the one side, the insolence and hard-handedness of Roman
rule, on the other, the impotent, and therefore envenomed, hatred of
conquered peoples.

And all this fabric, full of active repulsions and disintegrating
forces, was bound together into an artificial and unreal unity by the
iron clamp of Rome's power, holding up the bulging walls that were
ready to fall--the unity of the slave-gang manacled together for
easier driving. Into this hideous condition of things the Gospel
comes, and silently flings its clasping tendrils over the wide gaps,
and binds the crumbling structure of human society with a new bond,
real and living. We know well enough that that was so, but we are
helped to apprehend it by seeing, as it were, the very process going
on before our eyes, in this message from 'Quartus a brother.'

It reminds us that the very notion of humanity, and of the
brotherhood of man, is purely Christian. A world-embracing society,
held together by love, was not dreamt of before the Gospel came; and
since the Gospel came it is more than a dream. If you wrench away the
idea from its foundation, as people do who talk about fraternity, and
seek to bring it to pass without Christ, it is a mere piece of
Utopian sentiment--a fine dream. But in Christianity it worked. It
works imperfectly enough, God knows. Still there is some reality in
it, and some power. The Gospel first of all produced the thing and
the practice, and then the theory came afterwards. The Church did not
talk much about the brotherhood of man, or the unity of the race; but
simply ignored all distinctions, and gathered into the fold the slave
and his master, the Roman and his subject, fair-haired Goths and
swarthy Arabians, the worshippers of Odin and of Zeus, the Jew and
the Gentile. That actual unity, utterly irrespective of all
distinctions, which came naturally in the train of the Gospel, was
the first attempt to realise the oneness of the race, and first
taught the world that all men were brethren.

And before this simple word of greeting could have been sent, and the
unknown man in Corinth felt love to a company of unknown men in Rome,
some profound new impulse must have been given to the world;
something altogether unlike any of the forces hitherto in existence.
What was that? What should it be but the story of One who gave
Himself for the whole world, who binds men into a unity because of
His common relation to them all, and through whom the great
proclamation can be made: 'There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is
neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus.' Brother Quartus' message, like some tiny
flower above-ground which tells of a spreading root beneath, is a
modest witness to that mighty revolution, and presupposes the
preaching of a Saviour in whom he and his unseen friends in Rome are
one.

So let us learn not to confine our sympathy and the play of our
Christian affection within the limits of our personal knowledge. We
must go further a-field than that. Like this man, let us sometimes
send our thoughts across mountains and seas. He knew nobody in the
Roman Church, and nobody knew him, but he wished to stretch out his
hand to them, and to feel, as it were, the pressure of their fingers
in his palm. That is a pattern for us.

Let me suggest another thing. Quartus was a Corinthian. The
Corinthian Church was remarkable for its quarrellings and
dissensions. One said, 'I am of Paul, and another, I of Apollos, and
I of Cephas, and I of Christ.' I wonder if our friend Quartus
belonged to any of these parties? There is nothing more likely than
that he had a much warmer glow of Christian love to the brethren over
there in Rome than to those who sat on the same bench with him in the
upper room at Corinth. For you know that sometimes it is true about
people, as well as about scenery, that 'distance lends enchantment to
the view.' A great many of us have much keener sympathies with
'brethren' who are well out of our reach, and whose peculiarities do
not jar against ours, than with those who are nearest. I do not say
Quartus was one of these, but he may very well have been one of the
wranglers in Corinth who found it much easier to love his brother
whom he had not seen than his brother whom he had seen. So take the
hint, if you need it. Do not let your Christian love go wandering
away abroad only, but keep some for home consumption.

Again, how simply, and with what unconscious beauty, the deep reason
for our Christian unity is given in that one word, a 'Brother.' As if
he had said, Never mind telling them anything about what I am, what
place I hold, or what I do. Tell them I am a brother, that will be
enough. It is the only name by which I care to be known; it is the
name which explains my love to them.

