
Water being scarce, the methods of washing the gravel were both crude
and wasteful. And it is interesting to note that the first gold "pans"
were _bateas_, or bowl-shaped Indian baskets.

The church at San Fernando is in a completely ruined condition. It
stands southwest to northeast. The entrance is at the southwest end and
the altar at the northeast. There is also a side entrance at the east,
with a half-circular arch, sloping into a larger arch inside, with a
flat top and rounded upper corners. The thickness of the walls allows
the working out of various styles in these outer and inner arches that
is curious and interesting. They reveal the individuality of the
builder, and as they are all structural and pleasing, they afford a
wonderful example of variety in adapting the arch to its necessary
functions.

[Illustration: SHEEP AT MISSION SAN FERNANDO REY.]

[Illustration: RUINS OF OLD ADOBE WALL AND CHURCH, MISSION SAN FERNANDO
REY.]

[Illustration: MONASTERY AND OLD FOUNTAIN AT MISSION SAN FERNANDO REY.]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF RUINED CHURCH, MISSION SAN FERNANDO REY.]

The graveyard is on the northwest side of the church, and close by is
the old olive orchard, where a number of fine trees are still growing.
There are also two large palms, pictures of which are generally taken
with the Mission in the background, and the mountains beyond. It is an
exquisite subject. The remains of adobe walls still surround
the orchard.

The doorway leading to the graveyard is of a half-circle inside, and
slopes outward, where the arch is square.

There is a buttress of burnt brick to the southeast of the church, which
appears as if it might have been an addition after the earthquake.

At the monastery the chief entrance is a simple but effective arched
doorway, now plastered and whitewashed. The double door frame projects
pilaster-like, with a four-membered cornice above, from which rises an
elliptical arch, with an elliptical cornice about a foot above.

From this monastery one looks out upon a court or plaza which is
literally dotted with ruins, though they are mainly of surrounding
walls. Immediately in the foreground is a fountain, the reservoir of
which is built of brick covered with cement. A double bowl rests on the
center standard.

Further away in the court are the remnants of what may have been another
fountain, the reservoir of which is made of brick, built into a singular
geometrical figure. This is composed of eight semicircles, with V's
connecting them, the apex of each V being on the outside. It appears
like an attempt at creating a conventionalized flower in brick.

Two hundred yards or so away from the monastery is a square structure,
the outside of boulders. Curiosity prompting, you climb up, and on
looking in you find that inside this framework of boulders are two
circular cisterns of brick, fully six feet in diameter across the top,
decreasing in size to the bottom, which is perhaps four feet
in diameter.

In March, 1905, considerable excitement was caused by the actions of the
parish priest of San Fernando, a Frenchman named Le Bellegny, of
venerable appearance and gentle manners. Not being acquainted with the
_status quo_ of the old Mission, he exhumed the bodies of the Franciscan
friars who had been buried in the church and reburied them. He removed
the baptismal font to his church, and unroofed some of the old buildings
and took the tiles and timbers away. As soon as he understood the matter
he ceased his operations, but, unfortunately, not before considerable
damage was done.



CHAPTER XXVII

SAN LUIS, REY DE FRANCIA

The last Mission of the century, the last of Lasuen's administration,
and the last south of Santa Barbara, was that of San Luis Rey. Lasuen
himself explored the region and determined the site. The governor agreed
to it, and on February 27, 1798, ordered a guard to be furnished from
San Diego who should obey Lasuen implicitly and help erect the necessary
buildings for the new Mission. The founding took place on June 13, in
the presence of Captain Grajera and his guard, a few San Juan neophytes,
and many gentiles, Presidente Lasuen performing the ceremonies, aided by
Padres Peyri and Santiago. Fifty-four children were baptized at the same
time, and from the very start the Mission was prosperous. No other
missionary has left such a record as Padre Peyri. He was zealous,
sensible, and energetic. He knew what he wanted and how to secure it.
The Indians worked willingly for him, and by the 1st of July six
thousand adobes were made for the church. By the end of 1800 there were
237 neophytes, 617 larger stock, and 1600 sheep.

The new church was completed in 1801-1802, but Peyri was too energetic
to stop at this. Buildings of all kinds were erected, and neophytes
gathered in so that by 1810 its population was 1519, with the smallest
death rate of any Mission. In 1811 Peyri petitioned the governor to
allow him to build a new and better church of adobes and bricks; but as
consent was not forthcoming, he went out to Pala, and in 1816
established a branch establishment, built a church, and the picturesque
campanile now known all over the world, and soon had a thousand converts
tilling the soil and attending the services of the church.

In 1826 San Luis Rey reached its maximum in population with 2869
neophytes. From now on began its decline, though in material prosperity
it was far ahead of any other Mission. In 1828 it had 28,900 sheep, and
the cattle were also rapidly increasing. The average crop of grain was
12,660 bushels.

San Luis Rey was one of the Missions where a large number of cattle were
slaughtered on account of the secularization decree. It is said that
some 20,000 head were killed at the San Jacinto Rancho alone. The
Indians were much stirred up over the granting of the ranches, which
they claimed were their own lands. Indeed they formed a plot to capture
the governor on one of his southern trips in order to protest to him
against the granting of the Temecula Rancho.

[Illustration: HOUSE OF MEXICAN, MADE FROM RUINED WALL AND HILLS OF
MISSION SAN FERNANDO REY.]

[Illustration: THE RUINED ALTAR, MORTUARY CHAPEL, SAN LUIS REY.]

[Illustration: ILLUMINATED CHOIR MISSALS, ETC., AT MISSION SAN LUIS
REY.]

The final secularization took place in November, 1834, with Captain
Portilla as comisionado and Pio Pico as majordomo and administrator
until 1840. There was trouble in apportioning the lands among the
Indians, for Portilla called for fifteen or twenty men to aid him in
quelling disturbances; and at Pala the majordomo was knocked down and
left for dead by an Indian. The inventory showed property (including the
church, valued at $30,000) worth $203,707, with debts of $93,000. The
six ranches were included as worth $40,437, the three most valuable
being Pala, Santa Margarita, and San Jacinto.

Micheltorena's decree of 1843 restored San Luis Rey to priestly control,
but by that time its spoliation was nearly complete. Padre Zalvidea was
in his dotage, and the four hundred Indians had scarcely anything left
to them. Two years later the majordomo, appointed by Zalvidea to act for
him, turned over the property to his successor, and the inventory shows
the frightful wreckage. Of all the vast herds and flocks, only 279
horses, 20 mules, 61 asses, 196 cattle, 27 yoke oxen, 700 sheep, and a
few valueless implements remained. All the ranches had passed into
private ownership.

May 18, 1846, all that remained of the former king of Missions was sold
by Pio Pico to Cot and Jose Pico for $2437. Fremont dispossessed their
agent and they failed to gain repossession, the courts deciding that
Pico had no right to sell. In 1847 the celebrated Mormon battalion,
which Parkman so vividly describes in his _Oregon Trail_, were
stationed at San Luis Rey for two months, and later on, a re-enlisted
company was sent to take charge of it for a short time. On their
departure Captain Hunter, as sub-Indian agent, took charge and found a
large number of Indians, amenable to discipline and good workers.

The general statistics from the founding in 1798 to 1834 show 5591
baptisms, 1425 marriages, 2859 deaths. In 1832 there were 27,500 cattle,
2226 horses in 1828, 345 mules in the same year, 28,913 sheep in 1828,
and 1300 goats in 1832.

In 1892 Father J.J. O'Keefe, who had done excellent work at Santa
Barbara, was sent to San Luis Rey to repair the church and make it
suitable for a missionary college of the Franciscan Order. May 12, 1893,
the rededication ceremonies of the restored building took place, the
bishop of the diocese, the vicar-general of the Franciscan Order and
other dignitaries being present and aiding in the solemnities. Three old
Indian women were also there who heard the mass said at the original
dedication of the church in 1802. Since that time Father O'Keefe has
raised and expended thousands of dollars in repairing, always keeping in
mind the original plans. He also rebuilt the monastery.

San Luis Rey is now a college for the training of missionaries for the
field, and its work is in charge of Father Peter Wallischeck, who was
for so many years identified with the College of the Franciscans at
Santa Barbara.

Immediately on entering the church one observes doorways to the right
and left--the one on the right bricked up. It is the door that used to
lead to the stairway of the bell-tower. In 1913 the doorway was opened.
The whole tower was found to be filled with adobe earth, why, no one
really knows, though it is supposed it may have been to preserve the
structure from falling in case of an earthquake.

A semicircular arch spans the whole church from side to side, about
thirty feet, on which the original decorations still remain. These are
in rude imitation of marble, as at Santa Barbara, in black and red, with
bluish green lines. The wall colorings below are in imitation of
black marble.

The choir gallery is over the main entrance, and there a great revolving
music-stand is still in use, with several of the large and interesting
illuminated manuscript singing-books of the early days. In Mission days
it was generally the custom to have two chanters, who took care of the
singing and the books. These, with all the other singers, stood around
the revolving music-stand, on which the large manuscript chorals
were placed.

The old Byzantine pulpit still occupies its original position at San
Luis Rey, but the sounding-board is gone--no one knows whither. This is
of a type commonly found in Continental churches, the corbel with its
conical sides harmonizing with the ten panels and base-mouldings of the
box proper. It is fastened to the pilaster which supports the
arch above.

The original paint--a little of it--still remains. It appears to have
been white on the panels, lined in red and blue.

The pulpit was entered from the side altar, through a doorway pierced
through the wall. The steps leading up to it are of red burnt brick.
Evidently it was a home product, and was possibly made by one of Padre
Peyri's Indian carpenters, who was rapidly nearing graduation into the
ranks of the skilled cabinet-makers.

The Mortuary Chapel is perhaps as fine a piece of work as any in the
whole Mission chain. It is beautiful even now in its sad dilapidation.
It was crowned with a domed roof of heavy cement. The entrance was by
the door in the church to the right of the main entrance. The room is
octagonal, with the altar in a recess, over which is a dome of brick,
with a small lantern. At each point of the octagon there is an engaged
column, built of circular-fronted brick which run to a point at the rear
and are thus built into the wall. A three-membered cornice crowns each
column, which supports arches that reach from one column to another.
There are two windows, one to the southeast, the other northwest. The
altar is at the northeast. There are two doorways, with stairways which
lead to a small outlook over the altar and the whole interior. These
were for the watchers of the dead, so that at a glance they might see
that nothing was disturbed.

[Illustration: BELFRY WINDOW, MISSION SAN FERNANDO REY.]

[Illustration: GRAVEYARD, RUINS OF MORTUARY CHAPEL AND TOWER, MISSION
SAN LUIS REY.]

[Illustration: SIDE OF MISSION SAN LUIS REY.]

[Illustration: THE CAMPANILE AT PALA.]

The altar and its recess are most interesting, the rear wall of the
former being decorated in classic design.

This chapel is of the third order of St. Francis, the founder of the
Franciscan Order. In the oval space over the arch which spans the
entrance to the altar are the "arms" of the third order, consisting of
the Cross and the five wounds (the stigmata) of Christ, which were
conferred upon St. Francis as a special sign of divine favor.

Father Wallischeck is now (1913) arranging for the complete restoration
of this beautiful little chapel and appeals for funds to aid in
the work.



CHAPTER XXVIII

SANTA INES

"Beautiful for situation" was the spot selected for the only Mission
founded during the first decade of the nineteenth century,--Santa Ines.

Governor Borica, who called California "the most peaceful and quiet
country on earth," and under whose orders Padre Lasuen had established
the five Missions of 1796-1797, had himself made explorations in the
scenic mountainous regions of the coast, and recommended the location
afterwards determined upon, called by the Indians _Alajulapu_, meaning
_rincon_, or corner.

The native population was reported to number over a thousand, and the
fact that they were frequently engaged in petty hostilities among
themselves rendered it necessary to employ unusual care in initiating
the new enterprise. Presidente Tapis therefore asked the governor for a
larger guard than was generally assigned for protecting the Missions,
and a sergeant and nine men were ordered for that purpose.

The distance from Santa Barbara was about thirty-five miles, over a
rough road, hardly more than a trail, winding in and out among the
foothills, and gradually climbing up into the mountains in the midst of
most charming and romantic scenery. The quaint procession, consisting of
Padre Presidente Tapis and three other priests, Commandant Carrillo, and
the soldiers, and a large number of neophytes from Santa Barbara, slowly
marched over this mountainous road, into the woody recesses where
nestled the future home of the Mission of Santa Ines, and where the
usual ceremonies of foundation took place September 17, 1804. Padres
Calzada, Gutierrez, and Cipres assisted Presidente Tapis, and the two
former remained as the missionaries in charge.

The first result of the founding of this Mission was the immediate
baptism of twenty-seven children, a scene worthy of the canvas of a
genius, could any modern painter conceive of the real picture,--the
group of dusky little ones with somber, wondering eyes, and the
long-gowned priests, with the soldiers on guard and the watchful Indians
in native costume in the background,--all in the temple of
nature's creating.

The first church erected was not elaborate, but it was roofed with
tiles, and was ample in size for all needful purposes. In 1812 an
earthquake caused a partial collapse of this structure. The corner of
the church fell, roofs were ruined, walls cracked, and many buildings
near the Mission were destroyed. This was a serious calamity, but the
padres never seemed daunted by adverse circumstances. They held the
usual services in a granary, temporarily, and in 1817 completed the
building of a new church constructed of brick and adobe, which still
remains. In 1829 the Mission property was said to resemble that at Santa
Barbara. On one side were gardens and orchards, on the other houses and
Indian huts, and in front was a large enclosure, built of brick and used
for bathing and washing purposes.

When Governor Chico came up to assume his office in 1835 he claimed to
have been insulted by a poor reception from Padre Jimeno at Santa Ines.
The padre said he had had no notice of the governor's coming, and
therefore did the best he could. But Presidente Duran took the bold
position of informing the governor, in reply to a query, that the
government had no claim whatever upon the hospitality of unsecularized
Missions. Chico reported the whole matter to the assembly, who sided
with the governor, rebuked the presidente and the padres, and confirmed
an order issued for the immediate secularization of Santa Ines and San
Buenaventura (Duran's own Mission). J.M. Ramirez was appointed
comisionado at Santa Ines. At this time the Mission was prosperous. The
inventory showed property valued at $46,186, besides the church and its
equipment. The general statistics from the foundation, 1804 to 1834,
show 1372 baptisms, 409 marriages, and 1271 deaths. The largest number
of cattle was 7300 in 1831, 800 horses in 1816, and 6000 sheep in 1821.
After secularization horses were taken for the troops, and while, for a
time, the cattle increased, it was not long before decline set in.

In 1843 the management of the Mission was restored to the friars, but
the former conditions of prosperity had passed away never to return. Two
years later the estate was rented for $580 per year, and was finally
sold in 1846 for $1700, although in later times the title was declared
invalid. In the meantime an ecclesiastical college was opened at Santa
Ines in 1844. A grant of land had been obtained from the government, and
an assignment of $500 per year to the seminary on the condition that no
Californian in search of a higher education should ever be excluded from
its doors; but the project met with only a temporary success, and was
abandoned after a brief existence of six years.

In 1844 Presidente Duran reported 264 neophytes at Santa Ines, with
sufficient resources for their support. When Pico's order of 1845 was
issued, the Mission was valued at $20,288. This did not include the
church, the curate's house or rooms, and the rooms needed for the
court-house. This inventory was taken without the co-operation of the
padre, who refused to sign it. He--the padre--remained in charge until
1850, when the Mission was most probably abandoned.

At Santa Ines there were several workers in leather and silver whose
reputation still remains. In various parts of the State are specimens of
the saddles they made and carved and then inlaid in silver that are
worthy a place in any noteworthy collection of artistic work.

Only ten arches remain at Santa Ines of the long line of corridor arches
that once graced this building. In the distance is a pillar of one still
standing alone. Between it and the last of the ten, eight others used to
be, and beyond it there are the clear traces of three or four more.

The church floor is of red tiles. All the window arches are plain
semicircles. Plain, rounded, heavy mouldings about three feet from the
floor, and the same distance from the ceiling, extend around the inside
of the church, making a simple and effective structural ornament.

The original altar is not now used. It is hidden behind the more
pretentious modern one. It is of cement, or plastered adobe, built out,
like a huge statue bracket, from the rear wall. The old tabernacle,
ornate and florid, is still in use, though showing its century of
service. There are also several interesting candlesticks, two of which
are pictured in the chapter on woodwork.

Almost opposite the church entrance is a large reservoir, built of
brick, twenty-one feet long and eight feet wide. It is at the bottom of
a walled-in pit, with a sloping entrance to the reservoir proper, walls
and slope being of burnt brick. This "sunk enclosure" is about sixty
feet long and thirty feet across at the lower end, and about six feet
below the level to the edge of the reservoir. Connected with this by
a cement pipe or tunnel laid underground, over 660 feet long, is another
reservoir over forty feet long, and eight feet wide, and nearly six feet
deep. This was the reservoir which supplied the Indian village with
water. The upper reservoir was for the use of the padres and also for
bathing purposes.

[Illustration: MISSION SANTA INES.]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN RAFAEL ARCANGEL. From an old painting.]

[Illustration: MISSION SAN FRANCISCO SOLANO, AT SONOMA.]

The water supply was brought from the mountains several miles distant,
flumed where necessary, and then conveyed underground in cement pipes
made and laid by the Indians under the direction of the padres. The
water-right is now lost to the Mission, being owned by private parties.
