
It is plain that the mistake or corruption of a word in the postscript
of the Epistle of Polycarp has had much to do with this Ignatian
imposture. In some worn or badly written manuscript, Syria was perhaps
read instead of Smyrna, and the false reading probably led to the
incubation of the whole brood of Ignatian letters. The error, whether of
accident or design, was adopted by Eusebius, [411:1] and from him passed
into general currency. We may thus best account for the strange
multiplication of these Ignatian epistles. It was clear that the
Ignatius spoken of by Polycarp had written more letters than what first
appeared, [411:2] and thus the epistles to the Smyrnaeans, the
Magnesians, the Trallians, and the Philadelphians, in due time emerged
into notice. At a subsequent date the letters to the Philippians, the
Antiochians, the Virgin Mary, and others, were forthcoming.

The variety of forms assumed by this Ignatian fraud is not the least
remarkable circumstance connected with its mysterious history. All the
seven Epistles mentioned by Eusebius exist in a Longer and a Shorter
Recension; whilst the Syriac version exhibits three of them in a reduced
size, and a third edition. It is a curious fact that other spurious
productions display similar transformations. "_A great number_ of
spurious or interpolated works of the early ages of Christianity," says
Dr Cureton, "are found in two Recensions, a Shorter and a Longer, as in
the instance of the Ignatian Epistles. Thus, we find the two Recensions
of the Clementines, the two Recensions of the Acts of St Andrew, .....
the Acts of St Thomas, the Journeying of St John, the Letter of Pilate
to Tiberius." [411:3] It is still more suspicious that some of these
spurious writings present a striking similarity _in point of style_ to
the Ignatian Epistles. [412:1] The standard coin of the realm is seldom
put into the crucible, but articles of pewter or of lead are freely
melted down and recast according to the will of the modeller. We cannot
add a single leaf to a genuine flower, but an artificial rose may be
exhibited in quite another form by a fresh process of manipulation.
Such, too, has been the history of ancient ecclesiastical records. The
genuine works of the fathers have come down to us in a state of
wonderful preservation; and comparatively few attempts have been made,
by interpolation or otherwise, to interfere with their integrity;
[412:2] but spurious productions seem to have been considered legitimate
subjects for the exercise of the art of the fabricator; and hence the
strange discrepancies in their text which have so often puzzled their
editors.





CHAPTER III.

THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES AND THEIR CLAIMS.
THE INTERNAL EVIDENCE.


The history of the Ignatian Epistles may well remind us of the story of
the Sibylline Books. A female in strange attire is said to have appeared
before Tarquin of Rome, offering to sell nine manuscripts which she had
in her possession; but the king, discouraged by the price, declined the
application. The woman withdrew; destroyed the one-third of her literary
treasures; and, returning again into the royal presence, demanded the
same price for what were left. The monarch once more refused to come up
to her terms; and the mysterious visitor retired again, and burnt the
one-half of her remaining store. Her extraordinary conduct excited much
astonishment; and, on consulting with his augurs, Tarquin was informed
that the documents which she had at her disposal were most valuable, and
that he should by all means endeavour to secure such a prize. The king
now willingly paid for the three books, not yet committed to the flames,
the full price originally demanded for all the manuscripts. The Ignatian
Epistles have experienced something like the fate of those Sibylline
oracles. In the sixteenth century, fifteen letters were brought out from
beneath the mantle of a hoary antiquity, and offered to the world as the
productions of the pastor of Antioch. Scholars refused to receive them
on the terms required, and forthwith eight of them were admitted to be
forgeries. In the seventeenth century, the seven remaining letters, in a
somewhat altered form, again came forth from obscurity, and claimed to
be the works of Ignatius. Again, discerning critics refused to
acknowledge their pretensions; but curiosity was roused by this second
apparition, and many expressed an earnest desire to obtain a sight of
the real epistles. Greece, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt were ransacked in
search of them, and at length three letters are found. The discovery
creates general gratulation; it is confessed that four of the Epistles,
so lately asserted to be genuine, are apocryphal; and it is boldly said
that the three now forthcoming are above challenge. [414:1] But Truth
still refuses to be compromised, and sternly disowns these claimants for
her approbation. The internal evidence of these three epistles
abundantly attests that, like the last three books of the Sibyl, they
are only the last shifts of a grave imposture. [414:2]

The candid investigator, who compares the Curetonian version of the
letters with that previously in circulation, must acknowledge that
Ignatius, in his new dress, has lost nothing of his absurdity and
extravagance. The passages of the Epistles, which were formerly felt to
be so objectionable, are yet to be found here in all their unmitigated
folly. Ignatius is still the same anti-evangelical formalist, the same
puerile boaster, the same dreaming mystic, and the same crazy fanatic.
These are weighty charges, and yet they can be substantiated. But we
must enter into details, that we may fairly exhibit the spirit, and
expose the falsehood of these letters.

I. The style of the Epistles is certainly not above suspicion. On the
ground of style alone, it is, unquestionably, somewhat hazardous to
pronounce a decisive judgment upon any document; but, if such an element
is ever to be taken into consideration, it cannot, in this case, be
overlooked. It is well known that, of the seven epistles mentioned by
Eusebius, there was one which scholars of the highest reputation always
regarded with extreme dubiety. In style it appeared to them so different
from the rest of the letters, and so unlike what might have been
expected from an apostolic minister, that some who were prepared to
admit the genuineness of the other documents, did not hesitate to
declare it a forgery. We allude to the Epistle to Polycarp. Even
Archbishop Ussher and Cardinal Bona [415:1] concurred in its
condemnation. It so happens, however, that it is one of the three
letters recently re-edited; and it appears that, of the three, _it has
been the least altered_. If then such a man as Ussher be considered a
safe and sufficient judge of the value of an ancient ecclesiastical
memorial, the Epistle to Polycarp, published by Dr Cureton, must be
pronounced spurious. Their editor urges that the letters to the
Ephesians and Romans, as expurgated in the Syriac version, now closely
resemble the Epistle to Polycarp in style; and if so, may we not fairly
infer that, had they been presented, in their new form, to the learned
Primate of Armagh, consistency would have bound him to denounce them as
also forgeries?

II. The way in which the Word of God is ignored in these Epistles argues
strongly for their spuriousness. Every one acquainted with the early
fathers must have observed their frequent use of the sacred records. A
considerable portion of a chapter is sometimes introduced in a
quotation. [416:1] Hence it has been remarked that were all the copies
of the Bible lost and the writings of these fathers preserved, a large
share of the Holy Volume might thus be recovered. But Ignatius would
contribute nothing to the work of restoration; as, in the whole of the
three letters, not a single verse of Scripture is given at length. They,
no doubt, occasionally use Bible phraseology, as without it an
ecclesiastical document could not well be written; but not one promise
is quoted, and not one testimony from the Word is repeated for the
edification of the faithful. [416:2] An apostolical pastor on his way to
martyrdom would have written very differently. He would have reminded
his brethren of the "lively oracles," and he would have mentioned some
of those precious assurances which now contributed to his own spiritual
refreshment. He would have told them to have "no confidence in the
flesh;" [416:3] to take unto themselves "the sword of the Spirit which
is the Word of God;" [416:4] and to lay aside every weight and the sin
which did so easily beset them, "_looking unto Jesus_." [416:5] But,
instead of adopting such a course, this Ignatius addresses them in the
style of a starched and straitlaced churchman. "Let your treasures,"
says he, "be your good works. Let your baptism be to you as armory."
"_Look to the bishop_ that God also may look upon you. I will be instead
of the souls of those who are subject to the bishop, and the presbyters
and the deacons." [416:6] What intelligent Christian can believe that a
minister, instructed by Paul or Peter, and filling one of the most
important stations in the apostolic Church, was verily such an ignorant
driveller?

III. The chronological blunders in these Epistles betray their forgery.
In the "Acts of the Martyrdom of Ignatius," he and Polycarp are
represented as "fellow-scholars" of the Apostle John, [417:1] and the
pastor of Smyrna is supposed to be, in point of age, at least as
venerable a personage as the pastor of Antioch. The letter to Polycarp
is evidently written under the same impression. Ignatius there says to
him--"I praise God that I have been deemed _worthy of thy countenance_,
which in God I long after." When these words are supposed to have been
penned, Polycarp was only about six and twenty years of age; [417:2] and
the Church of Smyrna, with which he was connected, did not occupy a very
prominent place in the Christian commonwealth. Is it probable that a man
of the mature faith and large experience of Ignatius would have thus
addressed so youthful a minister? It also seems passing strange that the
aged martyr should commit all the widows of the community to his special
guardianship, and should think it necessary to add--"It is becoming to
men and women who marry, that they marry _by the counsel of the
bishop_." Was an individual, who was himself not much advanced beyond
boyhood, the most fitting person to give advice as to these matrimonial
engagements? A similar mistake as to age is made in the case of
Onesimus, who is supposed to be bishop of Ephesus. This minister, who is
understood to be mentioned in the New Testament. [417:3] is said at an
early date to have been pastor of the Church of the metropolis of the
Proconsular Asia; and the Ignatian forger obviously imagined that he was
still alive when his hero passed through Smyrna on his way to the
Western capital. But Onesimus perished in the Domitian persecution,
[418:1] so that Ignatius is made to write to a Christian brother who had
been long in his grave. [418:2] The fabricator proceeds more cautiously
in his letter to the Romans. How marvellous that this old gentleman, who
is willing to pledge his soul for every one who would submit to the
bishop, does not find it convenient to _name_ the bishop of Rome! The
experiment might have been somewhat hazardous. The early history of the
Roman Church was better known than that of any other in the world, and,
had he here made a mistake, the whole cheat might have been at once
detected. Though his erudition was so great that he could tell "the
places of angels," [418:3] he evidently did not dare to commit himself
by giving us a piece of earthly information, and by telling us who was
at the head of the Church of the Great City in the ninth year of the
reign of Trajan. But the same prudence does not prevail throughout the
Epistle. He here obviously speaks of the Church of Rome, not as she
existed a few years after the death of Clement, but of the same Church
as she was known after the death of Victor. In the beginning of the
second century the Church of the Syrian capital would not have
acknowledged the precedence of her Western sister. On the fall of
Jerusalem, the Church of Antioch was herself the first Christian
community in the Empire. She had a higher antiquity, a more
distinguished prestige, and perhaps a more numerous membership than any
other Church in existence. In the Syrian metropolis the disciples had
first been called Christians; there, Barnabas and Paul had been
separated to the work to which the Lord had called them; there, Peter
had preached; and there, prophets had laboured. But a century had
brought about a wonderful change. The Church of Rome had meanwhile
obtained the first place among Christian societies; and, before the
middle of the third century, "the See of Peter" was honoured as the
centre of catholic unity. Towards the close of the second century, many
persons of rank and power joined her communion, [419:1] and her
political influence was soon felt to be so formidable that even the
Roman Emperor began to be jealous of the Roman bishop. [419:2] But the
Ignatian forger did not take into account this ecclesiastical
revolution. Hence he here incautiously speaks in the language of his own
age, and writing "to her _who sitteth at the head_ in the place of the
country of the Romans," he says to her with all due humility--"I am not
commanding you like Peter and Paul" [419:3]--"Ye have taught
others"--"It is easy for you to do whatsoever you please."

IV. Various words in these Epistles have a meaning which they did not
acquire until long after the time of Ignatius. Thus, the term employed
in the days of the Apostles to denote _purity_, or _chastity_, here
signifies _celibacy_. [419:4] Even in the commencement of the third
century those who led a single life were beginning to be considered
Christians of a superior type, as contrasted with those who were
married; and clerical celibacy was becoming very fashionable. [420:1]
The Ignatian fabricator writes under the influence of the popular
sentiment. "The house of the Church" at Antioch, of which Paul of
Samosata kept possession after his deposition about A.D. 269, [420:2]
seems to have been a dwelling appropriated to the use of the
ecclesiastical functionaries, [420:3] and the schemer who wrote the
first draft of these letters evidently believed that the ministers of
Christ should be a brotherhood of bachelors. Hence Ignatius is made thus
to address Polycarp and his clergy--"Labour together one with another;
make the struggle together one with another; run together one with
another; suffer together one with another; _sleep together one with
another; rise together one with another_." Polycarp and others of the
elders of Smyrna were probably married; [420:4] so that some
inconvenience might have attended this arrangement.

The word _bishop_ is another term found in these Epistles, and employed
in a sense which it did not possess at the alleged date of their
publication. Every one knows that, in the New Testament, it does not
signify the chief pastor of a Church; but, about the middle of the
second century, as will subsequently appear, [421:1] it began to have
this acceptation. Clement of Rome, writing a few years before the time
of the martyrdom of Ignatius, uses the words bishop and presbyter
interchangeably. [421:2] Polycarp, in his own Epistle, dictated,
perhaps, forty years after the death of the Syrian pastor, still adheres
to the same phraseology. In the Peshito version of the New Testament,
executed probably in the former half of the second century, [421:3] the
same terminology prevails. [421:4] Ignatius, however, is far in advance
of his generation. When new terms are introduced, or when new meanings
are attached to designations already current, it seldom happens that an
old man changes his style of speaking. He is apt to persevere, in spite
of fashion, in the use of the phraseology to which he has been
accustomed from his childhood. But Ignatius is an exception to all such
experience, for he repeats the new nomenclature with as much flippancy
as if he had never heard any other. [421:5] Surely this minister of
Antioch must be worthy of all the celebrity he has attained, for he can
not only carry on a written correspondence with the dead, but also
anticipate by half a century even the progress of language!

V. The puerilities, vapouring, and mysticism of these letters proclaim
their forgery. We would expect an aged apostolic minister, on his way to
martyrdom, to speak as a man in earnest, to express himself with some
degree of dignity, and to eschew trivial and ridiculous comparisons.
But, when treating of a grave subject, what can be more silly or
indecorous than such language as the following--"Ye are raised on high
by the engine of Jesus Christ, which is the cross, and ye are drawn by
the rope, which is the Holy Ghost, and your pulley is your faith."
[422:1] Well may the Christian reader exclaim, with indignation, as he
peruses these words, Is the Holy Ghost then a mere rope? Is that
glorious Being who worketh in us to will and to do according to His own
good pleasure, a mere piece of tackling pertaining to the ecclesiastical
machinery, to be moved and managed according to the dictation of Bishop
Ignatius? [422:2] But the frivolity of this impostor is equalled by his
gasconade. He thus tantalises the Romans with an account of his
attainments--"I am able to write to you heavenly things, _but I fear
lest I should do you an injury_." .....

"I am able to know heavenly things, and the places of angels, and the
station of powers that are visible and invisible." Where did he gather
all this recondite lore? Certainly not from the Old or New Testament.
May we not safely pronounce this man to be one who seeks to be wise
above what is written, "intruding into those things which he hath not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind?" [422:3] He seems, indeed,
to have himself had some suspicion that such was his character, for he
says, again, to his brethren of the Western metropolis--"I know many
things in God, but I moderate myself that I may not _perish through
boasting_; for now it is becoming to me that I should fear the more
abundantly, and should not look to _those that puff me up_." Let us now
hear a specimen of the mysticism of this dotard. "There was hidden from
the Ruler of this world the virginity of Mary, and the birth of our
Lord, and the three mysteries of the shout, which were done in the
quietness of God by means of the star, and here by the manifestation of
the Son magic began to be dissolved." [423:1] Who can undertake to
expound such jargon? What are we to understand by "the quietness of
God?" Who can tell how "the three mysteries of the shout" were "done by
means of the star?"

VI. The unhallowed and insane anxiety for martyrdom which appears
throughout these letters is another decisive proof of their fabrication.
He who was, in the highest sense, the Faithful Witness betrayed no
fanatic impatience for the horrid tragedy of crucifixion; and, true to
the promptings of his human nature, he prayed, in the very crisis of His
agony--"O my Father, _if it be possible, let this cup pass from me_."
[423:2] The Scriptures represent the most exalted saints as shrinking
instinctively from suffering. In the prophecy announcing the violent
death of Peter, it is intimated that even the intrepid apostle of the
circumcision would feel disposed to recoil from the bloody ordeal. "When
thou shalt be old," said our Lord to him, "thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee _whither thou
wouldest not_." [423:3] Paul mentions with thankfulness how, on a
critical occasion, the Lord stood with him, and "_delivered_" him "out
of the mouth of the lion." [423:4] Long after the apostolic age, the
same spirit continued to be cherished, and hence we are told of Polycarp
that, even when bowed down by the weight of years, he felt it right to
retire out of the way of those who sought his destruction. The
disciples, whom he had so long taught, took the same view of Christian
duty; and accordingly, in the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, which
records his martyrdom, the conduct of those who "present themselves _of
their own accord_ to the trial" is emphatically condemned. [424:1] "We
do not," say the believers of Smyrna, "commend those who offer
themselves to persecution, _seeing the gospel teaches no such thing_."
[424:2] But a man who is supposed to have enjoyed far higher advantages
than Polycarp--a minister who is said to have been contemporary with all
the apostles--a ruler of the Church who is understood to have occupied a
far more prominent and influential position than the pastor of
Smyrna--is exhibited in the legend of his martyrdom as appearing "of his
own free will" [424:3] at the judgment-seat of the Emperor, and as
manifesting the utmost anxiety to be delivered into the mouth of the
lion. In the commencement of the second century the Churches of Rome and
Ephesus doubtless possessed as much spiritual enlightenment as any other
Churches in the world, and it is a libel upon their Christianity to
suppose that they could have listened with any measure of complacency to
the senseless ravings to be found even in the recent edition of the
Ignatian Letters. [424:4] The writer is made to assure the believers in
these great cities that he has an unquenchable desire to be eaten alive,
and he beseeches them to pray that he may enjoy this singular
gratification. "I hope," says he, "_through your prayers_ that I shall
be devoured by the beasts in Rome." [425:1] ... "I beg of you, be not
with me in the love that is not in its season. Leave me, that I may be
for the beasts, that by means of them I may be worthy of God.... With
provoking _provoke ye the beasts_ that they may be a grave for me, and
may leave nothing of my body, that not even when I am fallen asleep may
I be a burden upon any man.... I rejoice in the beasts which are
prepared for me, and _I pray that they may be quickly found for me_, and
I will provoke them that they may quickly devour me." [425:2] Every man
jealous for the honour of primitive Christianity should be slow to
believe that an apostolic preacher addressed such outrageous folly to
apostolic Churches.

When reviewing the external evidence in support of these Epistles, we
have had occasion to shew that they were probably fabricated in the
former part of the third century. The internal evidence corroborates the
same conclusion. Ecclesiastical history attests that during the fifty
years preceding the death of Cyprian, [425:3] the principles here put
forward were fast gaining the ascendency. As early as the days of
Tertullian, ritualism was rapidly supplanting the freedom of evangelical
worship; baptism was beginning to be viewed as an "armour" of marvellous
potency; [425:4] the tradition that the great Church of the West had
been founded by Peter and Paul was now extensively propagated; and there
was an increasing disposition throughout the Empire to recognise the
precedence of "her who sitteth at the head in the place of the country
of the Romans." It is apparent from the writings of Cyprian that in some
quarters the "church system" was already matured. The language ascribed
to Ignatius--"Be careful for unanimity, than _which there is nothing
more_ excellent" [426:1]--then expressed a prevailing sentiment. To
maintain unity was considered a higher duty than to uphold truth, and to
be subject to the bishop was deemed one of the greatest of evangelical
virtues. Celibacy was then confounded with chastity, and mysticism was
extensively occupying the place of scriptural knowledge and intelligent
conviction. And the admiration of martyrdom which presents itself in
such a startling form in these Epistles was one of the characteristics
of the period. Paul taught that a man may give his body to be burned and
yet want the spirit of the gospel; [426:2] but Origen does not scruple
to describe martyrdom as "the cup of salvation," the baptism which
cleanses the sufferer, the act which makes his blood precious in God's
sight to the redemption of others. [426:3] Do not all these
circumstances combined supply abundant proof that these Epistles were
written in the time of this Alexandrian father? [426:4]

It is truly wonderful that men, such as Dr Cureton, have permitted
themselves to be befooled by these Syriac manuscripts. It is still more
extraordinary that writers, such as the pious and amiable Milner,
[426:5] have published, with all gravity, the rhapsodies of Ignatius for
the edification of their readers. It would almost appear as if the name
_Bishop_ has such a magic influence on some honest and enlightened
Episcopalians, that when the interests of their denomination are
supposed to be concerned, they can be induced to close their eyes
against the plainest dictates of common sense and the clearest light of
historical demonstration. In deciding upon matters of fact the spirit of
party should never be permitted to interfere. Truth is the common
property of the catholic Church; and no good and holy cause can require
the support of an apocryphal correspondence.

It is no mean proof of the sagacity of the great Calvin, that, upwards
of three hundred years ago, he passed a sweeping sentence of
condemnation on these Ignatian Epistles. At the time, many were startled
by the boldness of his language, and it was thought that he was somewhat
precipitate in pronouncing such a decisive judgment. But he saw
distinctly, and he therefore spoke fearlessly. There is a far more
intimate connexion than many are disposed to believe between sound
theology and sound criticism, for a right knowledge of the Word of God
strengthens the intellectual vision, and assists in the detection of
error wherever it may reveal itself. Had Pearson enjoyed the same clear
views of gospel truth as the Reformer of Geneva, he would not have
wasted so many precious years in writing a learned vindication of the
nonsense attributed to Ignatius. Calvin knew that an apostolic man must
have been acquainted with apostolic doctrine, and he saw that these
letters must have been the productions of an age when the pure light of
Christianity was greatly obscured. Hence he denounced them so
emphatically: and time has verified his deliverance. His language
respecting them has been often quoted, but we feel we cannot more
appropriately close our observations on this subject than by another
repetition of it. "There is nothing more abominable than that trash
which is in circulation under the name of Ignatius." [428:1]





CHAPTER IV.

THE GNOSTICS, THE MONTANISTS, AND THE MANICHAEANS.


When Christianity made its appearance in the world, it produced a
profound sensation. It spread on all sides with great rapidity; it was
at once felt to be a religion for the common people; and some
individuals of highly cultivated minds soon acknowledged its authority.
For a time its progress was impeded by the persecutions of Nero and
Domitian; but, about the beginning of the second century, it started
upon a new career of prosperous advancement, and quickly acquired such a
position that the most distinguished scholars and philosophers could no
longer overlook its pretensions. In the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian, a
considerable number of men of learning were already in its ranks; but it
would appear that, on the whole, it derived very equivocal aid from the
presence of these new adherents. Not a few of the literati who joined
its standard attempted to corrupt it; and one hundred and twenty years
after the death of the Apostle John, the champions of orthodoxy had to
contend against no less than thirty-two heresies. [429:1]

Of those who now adulterated the gospel, the Gnostics were by far the
most subtle, the most active, and the most formidable. The leaders of
the party were all men of education; and as they were to be found
chiefly in the large cities, the Church in these centres of influence
was in no small degree embarrassed and endangered by their speculations.
Some of the peculiarities of Gnosticism have been already noticed;
[430:1] but as the second century was the period when it made most
progress and awakened most anxiety, we must here advert more distinctly
to its outlines. The three great antagonists of the gospel were the
Grecian philosophy, the heathen mythology, and a degenerate Judaism; and
Gnosticism may be described as an attempt to effect a compromise between
Christianity and these rivals. As might have been expected, the attempt
met with much encouragement; for many, who hesitated to accept the new
religion unconditionally, were constrained to acknowledge that it
exhibited many indications of truth and divinity; and they were,
therefore, prepared to look on it with favour when presented to them in
an altered shape and furnished with certain favourite appendages. The
Gnostics called themselves believers; and their most celebrated teachers
would willingly have remained in the bosom of the Church; but it soon
appeared that their principles were subversive of the New Testament
revelation; and they were accordingly excluded from ecclesiastical
fellowship.

Gnosticism assumed a variety of forms, and almost every one of its
teachers had his own distinctive creed; but, as a system, it was always
known by certain remarkable features. It uniformly ignored the doctrine
that God made all things out of nothing; [430:2] and, taking for granted
the eternity of matter, it tried to account, on philosophical
principles, for the moral and spiritual phenomena of the world which we
inhabit. The _Gnosis_, [430:3] or knowledge, which it supplied, and from
which it derived its designation, was a strange congeries of wild
speculations. The Scriptures describe the Most High as humbling Himself
to behold the things that are on earth, [431:1] as exercising a constant
providence over all His creatures, as decking the lilies of the valley,
and as numbering the very hairs of our heads; but Gnosticism exhibited
the Supreme God as separated by an immeasurable interval from matter,
and as having no direct communication with anything thus contaminated.
The theory by means of which many of its adherents endeavoured to solve
the problem of the origin of evil, [431:2] and to trace the connexion
between the finite and the infinite, was not without ingenuity. They
maintained that a series of Aeons, or divine beings, emanated from the
Primal Essence; but, as sound issuing from a given point gradually
becomes fainter until it is finally lost in silence, each generation of
Aeons, as it receded from the great Fountain of Spiritual Existence,
lost somewhat of the vigour of divinity; and at length an Aeon was
produced without power sufficient to maintain its place in the Pleroma,
or habitation of the Godhead. This scheme of a series of Aeons of
gradually decreasing excellence was apparently designed to shew how,
from an Almighty and Perfect Intelligence, a weak and erring being might
be generated. There were Gnostics who carried the principle of
attenuation so far as to teach that the inhabitants of the celestial
world were distributed into no less than three hundred and sixty-five
heavens, [431:3] each somewhat inferior to the other. According to some
of these systems, an Aeon removed by many emanations from the source of
Deity, and, in consequence, possessed of comparatively little strength,
passed over the bounds of the Pleroma, and imparted life to matter.
Another Power, called the _Demiurge_, was now produced, who, out of the
materials already in existence, fashioned the present world. The human
race, ushered, under such circumstances, upon the stage of time, are
ignorant of the true God, and in bondage to corrupt matter. But all men
are not in a state of equal degradation. Some possess a spiritual
nature; some, a physical or animal nature; and some, only a corporeal or
carnal nature. Jesus now appeared, and, at His baptism in the Jordan,
Christ, a powerful Aeon, joined Him, that He might be fitted for
redeeming souls from the ignorance and slavery in which they are
entangled. This Saviour taught the human family the knowledge of the
true God. Jesus was seized and led to crucifixion, and the Aeon Christ
now departed from Him; but, as His body was composed of the finest
ethereal elements, and was, in fact, a phantom, He did not really suffer
on the accursed tree. Many of the Gnostics taught that there are two
spheres of future enjoyment. They held that, whilst the spiritual
natures shall be restored to the Pleroma, the physical or animal natures
shall be admitted to an inferior state of happiness; and that such souls
as are found to be incapable of purification shall be consigned to
perdition or annihilation.

Whilst, according to all the Gnostics, the Demiurge, or maker of this
world, is far inferior to the Supreme Deity, these system-builders were
by no means agreed as to his position and his functions. Some of them
regarded him as an Aeon of inferior intelligence who acted in obedience
to the will of the Great God; others conceived that he was no other than
the God of the Jews, who, in their estimation, was a Being of somewhat
rugged and intractable character; whilst others contended that he was an
Evil Power at open war with the righteous Sovereign of the universe. The
Gnostics also differed in their views respecting matter. Those of them
who were Egyptians, and who had been addicted to the study of the
Platonic philosophy, held matter to be inert until impregnated with
life; but the Syrians, who borrowed much from the Oriental theology,
taught that it was eternally subject to a Lord, or Ruler, who had been
perpetually at variance with the Great God of the Pleroma.

Two of the most distinguished Gnostic teachers who flourished in the
early part of the second century were Saturninus of Antioch and
Basilides of Alexandria. [433:1] Valentine, who appeared somewhat later,
and who is supposed to have first excited attention at Rome about A.D.
140, was still more celebrated. He taught that in the Pleroma there are
fifteen male and fifteen female Aeons, whom he professed to distinguish
by their names; and he even proceeded to point out how they are
distributed into married pairs. Some have supposed that certain deep
philosophical truths were here concealed by him under the veil of
allegory. As he, like others of the same class, conveyed parts of his
Gnosis only into the ears of the initiated, it may be that the
explanation of its symbols was reserved for those who were thus made
acquainted with its secret wisdom. It has been alleged that he
personified the attributes of God, and that the Aeons, whom he names and
joins together, are simply those divine perfections which, when
combined, are fitted to produce the most remarkable results. Thus, he
associated _Profundity_ and _Thought, Intelligence_ and _Truth_,
_Reason_ and _Life_. [433:2] His system seems to have had many
attractions for his age, as his disciples, in considerable numbers, were
soon to be found both in the East and in the West.

When Valentine was at Rome, Marcion, another heresiarch of the same
class, was also in the great metropolis. [433:3] This man is said to
have been born in Pontus, and though some of the fathers have attempted
to fix a stain upon his early reputation, his subsequent character seems
to have been irreproachable. [434:1] There is reason to think that he
was one of the most upright and amiable of the Gnostics. These errorists
were charged by their orthodox antagonists with gross immorality; and
there was often, perhaps, too much ground for the accusation; for some
of them, such as Carpocrates, [434:2] avowed and encouraged the most
shameless licentiousness; but others, such as Marcion, were noted for
their ascetic strictness. All the more respectable Gnostics appear to
have recommended themselves to public confidence by the austerity of
their discipline. They enjoined rigorous fasting, and inculcated
abstinence from wine, flesh-meat, and marriage. The Oriental theology,
as well as the Platonic philosophy, sanctioned such a mode of living;
and, therefore, those by whom it was practised were in a favourable
position for gaining the public ear when they came forward as
theological instructors.

Gnosticism may appear to us a most fantastic system; but, in the second
century, it was dreaded as a very formidable adversary by the Church;
and the extent to which it spread attests that it possessed not a few of
the elements of popularity. Its doctrine of Aeons, or Divine Emanations,
was quite in accordance with theories which had then gained extensive
currency; and its account of the formation of the present world was
countenanced by established modes of thinking. Many who cherished a
hereditary prejudice against Judaism were gratified by the announcement
that the Demiurge was no other than the God of the Israelites; and many
more were flattered by the statement that some souls are essentially
purer and better than others. [435:1] The age was sunk in sensuality;
and, as it was the great boast of the heresiarchs that their _Gnosis_
secured freedom from the dominion of the flesh, multitudes, who secretly
sighed for deliverance, were thus induced to test its efficacy. But
Gnosticism, in whatever form it presented itself, was a miserable
perversion of the gospel. Some of its teachers entirely rejected the Old
Testament; others reduced its history to a myth; whilst all mutilated
and misinterpreted the writings of the apostles and evangelists. Like
the Jewish Cabbalists, who made void the law of God by expositions which
fancy suggested and tradition embalmed, the Gnostics by their
far-fetched and unnatural comments, threw an air of obscurity over the
plainest passages of the New Testament. Some of them, aware that they
could derive no support from the inspired records, actually fabricated
Gospels, and affixed to them the names of apostles or evangelists, in
the hope of thus obtaining credit for the spurious documents. [435:2]
Whilst Gnosticism in this way set aside the authority of the Word of
God, it also lowered the dignity of the Saviour; and even when Christ
was most favourably represented by it, He was but an Aeon removed at the
distance of several intermediate generations from the Supreme Ruler of
the universe. The propagators of this system altogether misconceived the
scope of the gospel dispensation. They substituted salvation by carnal
ordinances for salvation by faith; they represented man in his natural
state rather as an ignoramus than a sinner; and, whilst they absurdly
magnified their own Gnosis, they entirely discarded the doctrine of a
vicarious atonement.

Shortly after the middle of the second century the Church began to be
troubled by a heresy in some respects very different from Gnosticism. At
that time the persecuting spirit displayed by Marcus Aurelius filled the
Christians throughout the Empire with alarm, and those of them who were
given to despondency began to entertain the most gloomy anticipations.
An individual, named Montanus, who laid claim to prophetic endowments,
now appeared in a village on the borders of Phrygia; and though he seems
to have possessed a rather mean capacity, his discipline was so suited
to the taste of many, and the predictions which he uttered so accorded
with prevailing apprehensions, that he soon created a deep impression.
When he first came forward in the character of a Divine Instructor he
had been recently converted to Christianity; and he seems to have
strangely misapprehended the nature of the gospel. When he delivered his
pretended communications from heaven, he is said to have wrought himself
up into a state of frenzied excitement. His countrymen, who had been
accustomed to witness the ecstasies of the priests of Bacchus and
Cybele, saw proofs of a divine impulse in his bodily contortions; and
some of them at once acknowledged his extraordinary mission. By means of
two wealthy female associates, named Priscilla and Maximilla, who also
professed to utter prophecies, Montanus was enabled rapidly to extend
his influence. His fame spread abroad on all sides; and, in a few years,
he had followers in Europe and in Africa, as well as in Asia.

It cannot be said that this heresiarch attempted to overturn the creed
of the Church. He was neither a profound thinker nor a logical reasoner;
and he certainly had not maturely studied the science of theology. But
he possessed an ardent temperament, and he seems to have mistaken the
suggestions of his own fanaticism for the dictates of inspiration. The
doctrine of the personal reign of Christ during the millennium appears
to have formed a prominent topic in his ministrations. [437:1] He
maintained that the discipline of the Church had been left incomplete by
the apostles, and that he was empowered to supply a better code of
regulations. According to some he proclaimed himself the _Paraclete_;
but, if so, he most grievously belied his assumed name, for his system
was far better fitted to induce despondency than to inspire comfort. All
his precepts were conceived in the sour and contracted spirit of mere
ritualism. He insisted upon long fasts; he condemned second marriages;
[437:2] he inveighed against all who endeavoured to save themselves by
flight in times of persecution; and he asserted that such as had once
been guilty of any heinous transgression should never again be admitted
to ecclesiastical fellowship. Whilst he promulgated this stern
discipline, he at the same time delivered the most dismal predictions,
announcing, among other things, the speedy catastrophe of the Roman
Empire. He also gave out that the Phrygian village where he ministered
was to become the New Jerusalem of renovated Christianity.

But the Church was still too strongly impregnated with the free spirit
of the gospel to submit to such a prophet as Montanus. He had, however,
powerful advocates, and even a Roman bishop at one time gave him
countenance. [437:3] Though his discipline commended itself to the
morose and pharisaical, it was rejected by those who rightly understood
the mystery of godliness. Several councils were held to discuss its
merits, and it was emphatically condemned. [438:1] The signal failure of
some of the Montanist predictions had greatly lowered the credit of the
party; Montanus was pronounced a false prophet; and though the sect was
supported by Tertullian, the most vigorous writer of the age, it
gradually ceased to attract notice. [438:2]

About a century after the appearance of Montanus, another individual, in
a more remote part of Asia, acquired great notoriety as a heresiarch.
The doctrine of two First Principles, a good deity and an evil deity,
had been long current in the East. Even in the days of Isaiah we may
trace its existence, for there is a most significant allusion to it in
one of his prophecies, in which Jehovah is represented as saying--"I am
the Lord, and there is _none else_, there is no God beside me.... _I
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil:_ I
the Lord do all these things." [438:3] About the fifth century before
Christ, the Persian theology had been reformed by Zoroaster, and the
subordination of the two Principles to one God, the author of both, had
been acknowledged as an article of the established creed. In the early
part of the third century of the Christian era, there was a struggle
between the adherents of the old and the new faith of Parsism; and the
supporters of the views of Zoroaster had been again successful. But a
considerable party still refused to relinquish the doctrine of the
independence of the two Principles; and some of these probably joined
themselves to Mani, a Persian by birth, who, in the latter half of the
third century, became distinguished as the propagator of a species of
mongrel Christianity. This man, who was born about A.D. 240, possessed
genius of a high order. Though he finished his career when he was only
thirty-seven years of age, he had already risen to eminence among his
countrymen, and attracted the notice of several successive sovereigns.
He is said to have been a skilful physician, an accomplished painter,
and an excellent astronomer, as well as an acute metaphysician. Like
Montanus, he laid claim to a divine commission, and alleged that he was
the Paraclete who was promised to guide into all truth. He maintained
that there are two First Principles of all things, light and darkness:
God, in the kingdom of light, and the devil, in the kingdom of darkness,
have existed from eternity. Mani thus accounted for the phenomena of the
world around us--"Over the kingdom of light," said this heresiarch,
"ruled God the Father, eternal in His sacred race, glorious in His
might, the truth by His very essence.... But the Father himself,
glorious in His majesty; incomprehensible in His greatness, has united
with Himself blessed and glorious Aeons, in number and greatness
surpassing estimation." [439:1] He taught that Christ appeared to
liberate the light from the darkness, and that he himself was now
deputed to reveal the mysteries of the universe, and to assist men in
recovering their freedom. He rejected a great portion of the canon of
Scripture, and substituted certain writings of his own, which his
followers were to receive as of divine authority. His disciples, called
Manichees or Manichaeans, assumed the name of a _Church_, and were
divided into two classes, the _Elect_ and the _Hearers_. The Elect,
who were comparatively few, were the sacred order. They alone were made
acquainted with the mysteries, or more recondite doctrines, of the sect;
they practised extreme abstinence; they subsisted chiefly upon olives;
[439:2] and they lived in celibacy. They were not to kill, or even
wound, an animal; neither were they to pull up a vegetable, or pluck a
flower. The Hearers were permitted to share in the business and
pleasures of the world, but they were taught only the elements of the
system. After death, according to Mani, souls do not pass immediately
into the world of light. They must first undergo a two-fold
purification; one, by _water_ in the moon; another, by _fire_
in the sun.

Mani had provoked the enmity of the Magians; and, at their instigation,
he was consigned, about A.D. 277, by order of the Persian monarch, to a
cruel and ignominious death. But the sect which he had organized did not
die along with him. His system was well fitted to please the Oriental
fancy; its promise of a higher wisdom to those who obtained admission
into the class of the Elect encouraged the credulity of the auditors;
and, to such as had not carefully studied the Christian revelation, its
hypothesis of a Good and of an Evil Deity accounted rather plausibly for
the mingled good and evil of our present existence. The Manichaeans were
exposed to much suffering in the country where they first appeared; and,
as a sect of Persian origin, they were oppressed by the Roman
government; but they were not extinguished by persecution, and, far down
in the middle ages, they still occasionally figure in the drama of
history.

Synods and councils may pass resolutions condemnatory of false doctrine,
but it is somewhat more difficult to counteract the seduction of the
principles from which heresies derive their influence. The Gnostics, the
Montanists, and the Manichaeans, owed much of their strength to
fallacies and superstitions with which the Christian teachers of the age
were not fully prepared to grapple; and hence it was that, whilst the
errorists themselves were denounced by ecclesiastical authority, a large
portion of their peculiar leaven found its way into the Church, and
gradually produced an immense change in its doctrine and discipline. A
notice of the more important of the false sentiments and dangerous
practices which the heretics propagated and the catholics adopted, may
enable us to estimate the amount of the damage which the cause of truth
now sustained.

The Montanists recognised the distinction of _venial_ and _mortal_ sins.
They held that a professed disciple, who was guilty of what they called
mortal sin, should never again be admitted to sealing ordinances.
[441:1] It is apparent from the writings of Hippolytus, the famous
bishop of Portus, that, in the early part of the third century, some of
the most influential of the catholics cordially supported this
principle. Soon afterwards it was openly advocated by a powerful party
in the Church of Borne, and its rejection by Cornelius, then at the head
of that community, led to the schism of Novatian. But the distinction of
venial and mortal sins, upon which it proceeded, was even now generally
acknowledged. This distinction, which lies at the basis of the ancient
penitential discipline, was already beginning to vitiate the whole
catholic theology. Some sins, it is true, are more heinous than others,
but the comparative turpitude of transgressions depends much on the
circumstances in which they are committed. The wages of every sin is
death, [441:2] and it is absurd to attempt to give a stereotyped
character to any one violation of God's law by classing it, in regard to
the extent of its guilt, in a particular category. Christianity regards
sin, in whatever form, as a spiritual poison; and instead of seeking to
solve the curious problem--how much of it may exist in the soul without
the destruction of spiritual life?--it wisely instructs us to guard
against it in our very thoughts, and to abstain from even the
"appearance of evil." [442:1] "When lust," or indwelling depravity of
any description, "has conceived, it bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it
is finished, bringeth forth death." [442:2] Experience has demonstrated
that the admission of the distinction of venial and mortal sins is most
perilous to the best interests of the Christian community; for, whilst
it is without foundation in the inspired statutebook, it must inevitably
lead to the neglect or careless performance of many duties which the
Most High has solemnly enjoined.

The Platonic philosophy taught the necessity of a state of purification
after death; [442:3] and a modification of this doctrine formed part of
at least some of the systems of Gnosticism. [442:4] It is inculcated by
Tertullian, the great champion of Montanism; [442:5] and we have seen
how, according to Mani, departed souls must pass, first to the moon, and
then to the sun, that they may thus undergo a twofold purgation. Here,
again, a tenet originally promulgated by the heretics, became at length
a portion of the creed of the Church. The Manichaeans, as well as the
Gnostics, rejected the doctrine of the atonement, and as faith in the
perfection of the cleansing virtue of the blood of Christ declined, a
belief in Purgatory became popular. [442:6]

The Gnostics, with some exceptions, insisted greatly on the
mortification of the body; and the same species of discipline was
strenuously recommended by the Montanists and the Manichaeans. All these
heretics believed that the largest measure of future happiness was to be
realised by those who practised the most rigid asceticism. Mani admitted
that an individual without any extraordinary amount of self-denial,
might reach the world of Light, for he held out the hope of heaven to
his Hearers; but he taught that its highest distinctions were reserved
for the Elect, who scrupulously refrained from bodily indulgence. The
Church silently adopted the same principle; and the distinction between
_precepts_ and _counsels_, which was soon introduced into its theology,
rests upon this foundation. By precepts are understood those duties
which are obligatory upon all; by counsels, those acts, whether of
charity or abstinence, which are expected from such only as aim at
superior sanctity. [443:1] The Elect of the Manichaeans, as well as many
of the Gnostics, [443:2] declined to enter into wedlock, and the
Montanists were disposed to confer double honour on the single clergy.
[443:3] The Church did not long stand out against the fascinations of
this popular delusion. Her members almost universally caught up the
impression that marriage stands in the way of the cultivation of piety;
and bishops and presbyters, who lived in celibacy, began to be regarded
as more holy than their brethren. This feeling continued to gain
strength; and from it sprung that vast system of monasticism which
spread throughout Christendom, with such amazing rapidity, in the fourth
century.

It thus appears that asceticism and clerical celibacy have been grafted
on Christianity by Paganism. Hundreds of years before the New Testament
was written, Buddhism could boast of multitudes of monks and eremites.
[443:4] The Gnostics, in the early part of the second century,
celebrated the praises of a single life; and the Elect of the
Manichaeans were all celibates. Meanwhile marriage was permitted to the
clergy of the catholic Church. Well might the apostle exhort the
disciples to beware of those ordinances which have "_a shew of wisdom_
in will-worship, and humility, and _neglecting of the body_," [444:1] as
the austerities of the cloister are miserable preparatives for the
enjoyments of a world of purity and love. Christianity exhibited
startling tokens of degeneracy when it attempted to nourish piety upon
the spawn of the heathen superstitions. The gospel is designed for
social and for active beings; as it hallows all the relations of life,
it also teaches us how to use all the good gifts of God; and whilst
celibacy and protracted fasting may only generate misanthropy and
melancholy, faith, walking in the ways of obedience, can purify the
heart, and induce the peace that passeth all understanding.


