room only for a declaration that it abides within man, not that it is
man. But, as a matter of fact, the Vajasaneyins speak of him--in their
sacred text--as man, 'This Agni Vai/s/vanara is man; he who knows this
Agni Vai/s/vanara as man-like, as abiding within man,' &c. (/S/at. Bra.
X, 6, 1, 11). The highest Lord, on the other hand, who is the Self of
everything, may be spoken of as well as man, as abiding within
man.--Those who, in the latter part of the Sutra, read 'man-like'
(puru-shavidham) instead of 'man' (purusham), wish to express the
following meaning: If Vai/s/vanara were assumed to be the gastric fire
only, he might be spoken of as abiding within man indeed, but not as
man-like. But the Vajasaneyins do speak of him as man-like, 'He who
knows him as man-like, as abiding within man.'--The meaning of the term
man-like is to be concluded from the context, whence it will be seen
that, with reference to nature, it means that the highest Lord has the
heaven for his head, &c., and is based on the earth; and with reference
to man, that he forms the head, &c., and is based on the chin (of the
devout worshipper[159]).

27. For the same reasons (the Vai/s/vanara) cannot be the divinity (of
fire), or the element (of fire).

The averment that the fanciful attribution of members contained in the
passage 'His head is Sutejas,' &c. may apply to the elemental fire also
which from the mantras is seen to be connected with the heavenly world,
&c., or else to the divinity whose body is fire, on account of its
power, is refuted by the following remark: For the reasons already
stated Vai/s/vanara is neither the divinity nor the element. For to the
elemental fire which is mere heat and light the heavenly world and so on
cannot properly be ascribed as head and so on, because an effect cannot
be the Self of another effect.--Again, the heavenly world cannot be
ascribed as head, &c. to the divinity of fire, in spite of the power of
the latter; for, on the one hand, it is not a cause (but a mere effect),
and on the other hand its power depends on the highest Lord. Against all
these interpretations there lies moreover the objection founded on the
inapplicability of the term 'Self.'

28. Jaimini (declares that there is) no contradiction even on the
assumption of a direct (worship of the highest Lord as Vai/s/vanara).

Above (Sutra 26) it has been said that Vai/s/vanara is the highest Lord,
to be meditated upon as having the gastric fire either for his outward
manifestation or for his limiting condition; which interpretation was
accepted in deference to the circumstance that he is spoken of as
abiding within--and so on.--The teacher Jaimini however is of opinion
that it is not necessary to have recourse to the assumption of an
outward manifestation or limiting condition, and that there is no
objection to refer the passage about Vai/s/vanara to the direct worship
of the highest Lord.--But, if you reject the interpretation based on the
gastric fire, you place yourself in opposition to the statement that
Vai/s/vanara abides within, and to the reasons founded on the term, &c.
(Su. 26).--To this we reply that we in no way place ourselves in
opposition to the statement that Vai/s/vanara abides within. For the
passage, 'He knows him as man-like, as abiding within man,' does not by
any means refer to the gastric fire, the latter being neither the
general topic of discussion nor having been mentioned by name
before.--What then does it refer to?--It refers to that which forms the
subject of discussion, viz. that similarity to man (of the highest Self)
which is fancifully found in the members of man from the upper part of
the head down to the chin; the text therefore says, 'He knows him as
man-like, as abiding within man,' just as we say of a branch that it
abides within the tree[160].--Or else we may adopt another
interpretation and say that after the highest Self has been represented
as having the likeness to man as a limiting condition, with regard to
nature as well as to man, the passage last quoted ('He knows him as
abiding within man') speaks of the same highest Self as the mere witness
(sakshin; i.e. as the pure Self, non-related to the limiting
conditions).--The consideration of the context having thus shown that
the highest Self has to be resorted to for the interpretation of the
passage, the term 'Vai/s/vanara' must denote the highest Self in some
way or other. The word 'Vi/s/vanara' is to be explained either as 'he
who is all and man (i.e. the individual soul),' or 'he to whom souls
belong' (in so far as he is their maker or ruler), and thus denotes the
highest Self which is the Self of all. And the form 'Vai/s/vanara' has
the same meaning as 'Vi/s/vanara,' the taddhita-suffix, by which the
former word is derived from the latter, not changing the meaning; just
as in the case of rakshasa (derived from rakshas), and vayasa (derived
from vayas).--The word 'Agni' also may denote the highest Self if we
adopt the etymology agni=agra/n/i, i.e. he who leads in front.--As the
Garhapatya-fire finally, and as the abode of the oblation to breath the
highest Self may be represented because it is the Self of all.

But, if it is assumed that Vai/s/vanara denotes the highest Self, how
can Scripture declare that he is measured by a span?--On the explanation
of this difficulty we now enter.

29. On account of the manifestation, so A/s/marathya opines.

The circumstance of the highest Lord who transcends all measure being
spoken of as measured by a span has for its reason 'manifestation.' The
highest Lord manifests himself as measured by a span, i.e. he specially
manifests himself for the benefit of his worshippers in some special
places, such as the heart and the like, where he may be perceived.
Hence, according to the opinion of the teacher A/s/marathya, the
scriptural passage which speaks of him who is measured by a span may
refer to the highest Lord.

30. On account of remembrance; so Badari opines.

Or else the highest Lord may be called 'measured by a span' because he
is remembered by means of the mind which is seated in the heart which is
measured by a span. Similarly, barley-corns which are measured by means
of prasthas are themselves called prasthas. It must be admitted that
barley-grains themselves have a certain size which is merely rendered
manifest through their being connected with a prastha measure; while the
highest Lord himself does not possess a size to be rendered manifest by
his connexion with the heart. Still the remembrance (of the Lord by
means of the mind) may be accepted as offering a certain foundation for
the /S/ruti passage concerning him who is measured by a span.--Or
else[161] the Sutra may be interpreted to mean that the Lord, although
not really measured by a span, is to be remembered (meditated upon) as
being of the measure of a span; whereby the passage is furnished with an
appropriate sense.--Thus the passage about him who is measured by a span
may, according to the opinion of the teacher Badari, be referred to the
highest Lord, on account of remembrance.

31. On the ground of imaginative identification (the highest Lord may be
called prade/s/amatra), Jaimini thinks; for thus (Scripture) declares.

Or else the passage about him who is measured by a span may be
considered to rest on imaginative combination.--Why?--Because the
passage of the Vajasaneyibrahma/n/a which treats of the same topic
identifies heaven, earth, and so on--which are the members of
Vai/s/vanara viewed as the Self of the threefold world--with certain
parts of the human frame, viz. the parts comprised between the upper
part of the head and the chin, and thus declares the imaginative
identity of Vai/s/vanara with something whose measure is a span. There
we read, 'The Gods indeed reached him, knowing him as measured by a span
as it were. Now I will declare them (his members) to you so as to
identify him (the Vai/s/vanara) with that whose measure is a span; thus
he said. Pointing to the upper part of the head he said: This is what
stands above (i.e. the heavenly world) as Vai/s/vanara (i.e. the head of
Vai/s/vanara[162]). Pointing to the eyes he said: This is he with good
light (i.e. the sun) as Vai/s/vanara (i.e. the eye of V.). Pointing to
the nose he said: This is he who moves on manifold paths (i.e. the air)
as Vai/s/vanara (i.e. the breath of V.). Pointing to the space (ether)
within his mouth he said: This is the full one (i.e. the ether) as
Vai/s/vanara. Pointing to the saliva within his mouth he said: This is
wealth as Vai/s/vanara (i.e. the water in the bladder of V.). Pointing
to the chin he said: This is the base as Vai/s/vanara (i.e. the feet of
V.).'--Although in the Vajasaneyi-brahma/n/a the heaven is denoted as
that which has the attribute of standing above and the sun as that which
has the attribute of good light, while in the Chandogya the heaven is
spoken of as having good light and the sun as being multiform; still
this difference does not interfere (with the unity of the vidya)[163],
because both texts equally use the term 'measured by a span,' and
because all /s/akhas intimate the same.--The above explanation of the
term 'measured by a span,' which rests on imaginative identification,
the teacher Jaimini considers the most appropriate one.

32. Moreover they (the Jabalas) speak of him (the highest Lord) in that
(i.e. the interstice between the top of the head and the chin which is
measured by a span).

Moreover the Jabalas speak in their text of the highest Lord as being in
the interstice between the top of the head and the chin. 'The unevolved
infinite Self abides in the avimukta (i.e. the non-released soul). Where
does that avimukta abide? It abides in the Vara/n/a and the Nasi, in the
middle. What is that Vara/n/a, what is that Nasi?' The text thereupon
etymologises the term Vara/n/a as that which wards off (varayati) all
evil done by the senses, and the term Nasi as that which destroys
(na/s/ayati) all evil done by the senses; and then continues, 'And what
is its place?--The place where the eyebrows and the nose join. That is
the joining place of the heavenly world (represented by the upper part
of the head) and of the other (i.e. the earthly world represented by the
chin).' (Jabala Up. I.)--Thus it appears that the scriptural statement
which ascribes to the highest Lord the measure of a span is appropriate.
That the highest Lord is called abhivimana refers to his being the
inward Self of all. As such he is directly measured, i.e. known by all
animate beings. Or else the word may be explained as 'he who is near
everywhere--as the inward Self--and who at the same time is measureless'
(as being infinite). Or else it may denote the highest Lord as him who,
as the cause of the world, measures it out, i.e. creates it. By all this
it is proved that Vai/s/vanara is the highest Lord.

Notes:

[Footnote 136: The clause 'he is to meditate with a calm mind' if taken
as a gu/n/avidhi, i.e. as enjoining some secondary matter, viz. calmness
of mind of the meditating person, cannot at the same time enjoin
meditation; for that would involve a so-called split of the sentence
(vakyabheda).]

[Footnote 137: Jivezpi dehadib/rim/hanaj jyastvanyayad va brahmatety
artha/h/. An. Gi.]

[Footnote 138: The discussion is brought on by the term 'vivakshita' in
the Sutra whose meaning is 'expressed, aimed at,' but more literally
'desired to be expressed.']

[Footnote 139: Because he is vyapin.]

[Footnote 140: Another interpretation of the later part of Sutra.]

[Footnote 141: Cp. Ka/th/a Up, I, 1, 13; 20; I, 2, 14.]

[Footnote 142: Freedom from impurity can result only from the knowledge
that the individual soul is in reality Brahman. The commentators explain
rajas by avidya.]

[Footnote 143: Tadartham iti, jivasya brahmasiddhyartham iti yavat,
/k/aitanya/kh/ayapanna dhi/h/sukhadina pari/n/amata iti, tatra
purushozpi bhakt/ri/tvam ivanubhavati na tattvata iti vaktum
adhyaropayati. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 144: Who, somebody might say, is to be understood here,
because immortality and similar qualities belong to him not somehow
only, but in their true sense.]

[Footnote 145: The /t/ikas say that the contents of this last sentence
are hinted at by the word 'and' in the Sutra.]

[Footnote 146: I.e. at the beginning of the instruction which the sacred
fires give to Upako/s/ala, Ch. Up. IV, 10 ff.]

[Footnote 147: Which words conclude the instruction given by the fires,
and introduce the instruction given by the teacher, of which the passage
'the person that is seen in the eye,' &c. forms a part.]

[Footnote 148: A/s/rayantarapratyayasya/s/rayantare kshepa/h/
pratika/h/, yatha brahma/s/abda/h/ paramatmavishayo namadishu kshipyate.
Bha.]

[Footnote 149: The following sentences give the reason why, although
there is only one Brahman, the word Brahman is repeated.]

[Footnote 150: According to Scripture, Nira@nku/s/a/m/
sarvaniyantritva/m/ /s/rauta/m/ na /k/a tadri/s/e sarvaniyantari bhedo
na /k/anumana/m/ /s/rutibhaditam uttish/th/ati. Ananda Giri. Or else, as
Go. An. remarks, we may explain: as the highest Self is not really
different from the individual soul. So also Bhamati: Na /h/anavastha, na
hi niyantrantara/m/ tena niyamyate ki/m/ tu yo jivo niyanta
lokasiddha/h/ sa paramatmevopadhyava/kkh/edakalpitabheda/h/.]

[Footnote 151: V/ri/ttik/ri/dvyakhyam dushayati, Go. An.; ekade/s/ina/m/
dushayati, Ananda Giri; tad etat paramatenakshepasamadhanabhya/m/
vyakhyaya svamatena vya/k/ash/t/e, puna/h/ /s/abdozpi purvasmad
vi/s/esha/m/ dyotayann asyesh/t/ata/m/ su/k/ayati, Bhamati.--The
statement of the two former commentators must be understood to mean--in
agreement with the Bhamati--that /S/a@nkara is now going to refute the
preceding explanation by the statement of his own view. Thus Go. An.
later on explains 'asmin pakshe' by 'svapakshe.']

[Footnote 152: The question is to what passage the 'rupopanyasat' of the
Sutra refers.--According to the opinion set forth first it refers to Mu.
Up. II, 1, 4 ff.--But, according to the second view, II, 1, 4 to II, 1,
9, cannot refer to the source of all beings, i.e. the highest Self,
because that entire passage describes the creation, the inner Self of
which is not the highest Self but Prajapati, i.e. the Hira/n/yagarbha or
Sutratman of the later Vedanta, who is himself an 'effect,' and who is
called the inner Self, because he is the breath of life (pra/n/a) in
everything.--Hence the Sutra must be connected with another passage, and
that passage is found in II, 1, 10, where it is said that the Person
(i.e. the highest Self) is all this, &c.]

[Footnote 153: About which term see later on.]

[Footnote 154: Sarire laksha/n/aya vai/s/vanara/s/abdopapattim aha
tasyeti. An. Gi.]

[Footnote 155: And as such might be said not to require a basis for its
statements.]

[Footnote 156: Na /k/a garhapatyadih/ri/dayadita brahma/n/a/h/
sambhavini. Bhamati.]

[Footnote 157: Na /k/a pra/n/ahutyadhikara/n/ata z nyatra ja/th/aragner
yujyate. Bhamati.]

[Footnote 158: According to the former explanation the gastric fire is
to be looked on as the outward manifestation (pratika) of the highest
Lord; according to the latter as his limiting condition.]

[Footnote 159: I.e. that he may be fancifully identified with the head
and so on of the devout worshipper.]

[Footnote 160: Whereby we mean not that it is inside the tree, but that
it forms a part of the tree.--The Vai/s/vanara Self is identified with
the different members of the body, and these members abide within, i.e.
form parts of the body.]

[Footnote 161: Parima/n/asya h/ri/da/y/advararopitasya smaryama/n/e
katham aropo vishayavishayitvena bhedad ity a/s/a@nkya vyakhyantaram aha
prade/s/eti. Ananda Giri.]

[Footnote 162: Atra sarvatra vai/s/vanara/s/abdas tada@ngapara/h/. Go.
An.]

[Footnote 163: Which unity entitles us to use the passage from the
/S/at. Bra. for the explanation of the passage from the Ch. Up.]




THIRD PADA.

REVERENCE TO THE HIGHEST SELF!


1. The abode of heaven, earth, and so on (is Brahman), on account of the
term 'own,' i.e. Self.

We read (Mu. Up. II, 2, 5), 'He in whom the heaven, the earth, and the
sky are woven, the mind also with all the vital airs, know him alone as
the Self, and leave off other words! He is the bridge of the
Immortal.'--Here the doubt arises whether the abode which is intimated
by the statement of the heaven and so on being woven in it is the
highest Brahman or something else.

The purvapakshin maintains that the abode is something else, on account
of the expression, 'It is the bridge of the Immortal.' For, he says, it
is known from every-day experience that a bridge presupposes some
further bank to which it leads, while it is impossible to assume
something further beyond the highest Brahman, which in Scripture is
called 'endless, without a further shore' (B/ri/. Up. II, 4, 12). Now if
the abode is supposed to be something different from Brahman, it must be
supposed to be either the pradhana known from Sm/ri/ti, which, as being
the (general) cause, may be called the (general) abode; or the air known
from /S/ruti, of which it is said (B/ri/. Up. III, 7, 2, 'Air is that
thread, O Gautama. By air as by a thread, O Gautama, this world and the
other world and all beings are strung together'), that it supports all
things; or else the embodied soul which, as being the enjoyer, may be
considered as an abode with reference to the objects of its fruition.

Against this view we argue with the sutrakara as follows:--'Of the world
consisting of heaven, earth, and so on, which in the quoted passage is
spoken of as woven (upon something), the highest Brahman must be the
abode.'--Why?--On account of the word 'own,' i.e. on account of the word
'Self.' For we meet with the word 'Self' in the passage, 'Know him alone
as the Self.' This term 'Self' is thoroughly appropriate only if we
understand the highest Self and not anything else.--(To propound another
interpretation of the phrase 'sva/s/abdat' employed in the Sutra.)
Sometimes also Brahman is spoken of in /S/ruti as the general abode by
its own terms (i.e. by terms properly designating Brahman), as, for
instance (Ch. Up. VI. 8, 4), 'All these creatures, my dear, have their
root in the being, their abode in the being, their rest in the
being[164].'--(Or else we have to explain 'sva/s/abdena' as follows), In
the passages preceding and following the passage under discussion
Brahman is glorified with its own names[165]; cp. Mu. Up. II, 1, 10,
'The Person is all this, sacrifice, penance, Brahman, the highest
Immortal,' and II, 2, 11, 'That immortal Brahman is before, is behind,
Brahman is to the right and left.' Here, on account of mention being
made of an abode and that which abides, and on account of the
co-ordination expressed in the passage, 'Brahman is all' (Mu. Up. II, 2,
11), a suspicion might arise that Brahman is of a manifold variegated
nature, just as in the case of a tree consisting of different parts we
distinguish branches, stem, and root. In order to remove this suspicion
the text declares (in the passage under discussion), 'Know him alone as
the Self.' The sense of which is: The Self is not to be known as
manifold, qualified by the universe of effects; you are rather to
dissolve by true knowledge the universe of effects, which is the mere
product of Nescience, and to know that one Self, which is the general
abode, as uniform. Just as when somebody says, 'Bring that on which
Devadatta sits,' the person addressed brings the chair only (the abode
of Devadatta), not Devadatta himself; so the passage, 'Know him alone as
the Self,' teaches that the object to be known is the one uniform Self
which constitutes the general abode. Similarly another scriptural
passage reproves him who believes in the unreal world of effects, 'From
death to death goes he who sees any difference here' (Ka. Up. II, 4,
11). The statement of co-ordination made in the clause 'All is Brahman'
aims at dissolving (the wrong conception of the reality of) the world,
and not in any way at intimating that Brahman is multiform in
nature[166]; for the uniformity (of Brahman's nature) is expressly
stated in other passages such as the following one, 'As a mass of salt
has neither inside nor outside, but is altogether a mass of taste, thus
indeed has that Self neither inside nor outside, but is altogether a
mass of knowledge' (B/ri/. Up. IV, 5, 13).--For all these reasons the
abode of heaven, earth, &c. is the highest Brahman.--Against the
objection that on account of the text speaking of a 'bridge,' and a
bridge requiring a further bank, we have to understand by the abode of
heaven and earth something different from Brahman, we remark that the
word 'bridge' is meant to intimate only that that which is called a
bridge supports, not that it has a further bank. We need not assume by
any means that the bridge meant is like an ordinary bridge made of clay
and wood. For as the word setu (bridge) is derived from the root si,
which means 'to bind,' the idea of holding together, supporting is
rather implied in it than the idea of being connected with something
beyond (a further bank).

According to the opinion of another (commentator) the word 'bridge' does
not glorify the abode of heaven, earth, &c., but rather the knowledge of
the Self which is glorified in the preceding clause, 'Know him alone as
the Self,' and the abandonment of speech advised in the clause, 'leave
off other words;' to them, as being the means of obtaining immortality,
the expression 'the bridge of the immortal' applies[167]. On that
account we have to set aside the assertion that, on account of the word
'bridge,' something different from Brahman is to be understood by the
abode of heaven, earth, and so on.

2. And on account of its being designated as that to which the Released
have to resort.

By the abode of heaven, earth, and so on, we have to understand the
highest Brahman for that reason also that we find it denoted as that to
which the Released have to resort.--The conception that the body and
other things contained in the sphere of the Not-self are our Self,
constitutes Nescience; from it there spring desires with regard to
whatever promotes the well-being of the body and so on, and aversions
with regard to whatever tends to injure it; there further arise fear and
confusion when we observe anything threatening to destroy it. All this
constitutes an endless series of the most manifold evils with which we
all are acquainted. Regarding those on the other hand who have freed
themselves from the stains of Nescience desire aversion and so on, it is
said that they have to resort to that, viz. the abode of heaven, earth,
&c. which forms the topic of discussion. For the text, after having
said, 'The fetter of the heart is broken, all doubts are solved, all his
works perish when He has been beheld who is the higher and the lower'
(Mu. Up. II, 2, 8), later on remarks, 'The wise man freed from name and
form goes to the divine Person who is greater than the great' (Mu. Up.
III, 2, 8). That Brahman is that which is to be resorted to by the
released, is known from other scriptural passages, such as 'When all
desires which once entered his heart are undone then does the mortal
become immortal, then he obtains Brahman' (B/ri/. Up. IV, 4, 7). Of the
pradhana and similar entities, on the other hand, it is not known from
any source that they are to be resorted to by the released. Moreover,
the text (in the passage, 'Know him alone as the Self and leave off
other words') declares that the knowledge of the abode of heaven and
earth, &c. is connected with the leaving off of all speech; a condition
which, according to another scriptural passage, attaches to (the
knowledge of) Brahman; cp. B/ri/. Up. IV, 4, 21, 'Let a wise Brahma/n/a,
after he has discovered him, practise wisdom. Let him not seek after
many words, for that is mere weariness of the tongue.'--For that reason
also the abode of heaven, earth, and so on, is the highest Brahman.

3. Not (i.e. the abode of heaven, earth, &c. cannot be) that which is
inferred, (i.e. the pradhana), on account of the terms not denoting it.

While there has been shown a special reason in favour of Brahman (being
the abode), there is no such special reason in favour of anything else.
Hence he (the sutrakara) says that that which is inferred, i.e. the
pradhana assumed by the Sa@nkhya-sm/ri/ti, is not to be accepted as the
abode of heaven, earth, &c.--Why?--On account of the terms not denoting
it. For the sacred text does not contain any term intimating the
non-intelligent pradhana, on the ground of which we might understand the
latter to be the general cause or abode; while such terms as 'he who
perceives all and knows all' (Mu. Up. I, 1, 9) intimate an intelligent
being opposed to the pradhana in nature.--For the same reason the air
also cannot be accepted as the abode of heaven, earth, and so on.

4. (Nor) also the individual soul (pra/n/abh/ri/t).

Although to the cognitional (individual) Self the qualities of Selfhood
and intelligence do belong, still omniscience and similar qualities do
not belong to it as its knowledge is limited by its adjuncts; thus the
individual soul also cannot be accepted as the abode of heaven, earth,
&c., for the same reason, i.e. on account of the terms not denoting
it.--Moreover, the attribute of forming the abode of heaven, earth, and
so on, cannot properly be given to the individual soul because the
latter is limited by certain adjuncts and therefore non-pervading (not
omnipresent)[168].--The special enunciation (of the individual soul) is
caused by what follows[169].--The individual soul is not to be accepted
as the abode of heaven, earth, &c. for the following reason also.

5. On account of the declaration of difference.

The passage 'Know him alone as the Self' moreover implies a declaration
of difference, viz. of the difference of the object of knowledge and the
knower. Here the individual soul as being that which is desirous of
release is the knower, and consequently Brahman, which is denoted by the
word 'self' and represented as the object of knowledge, is understood to
be the abode of heaven, earth, and so on.--For the following reason also
the individual soul cannot be accepted as the abode of heaven, earth,
&c.

6. On account of the subject-matter.

The highest Self constitutes the subject-matter (of the entire chapter),
as we see from the passage, 'Sir, what is that through which, when it is
known, everything else becomes known?' (Mu. Up. I, 1, 3) in which the
knowledge of everything is declared to be dependent on the knowledge of
one thing. For all this (i.e. the entire world) becomes known if Brahman
the Self of all is known, not if only the individual soul is
known.--Another reason against the individual soul follows.

7. And on account of the two conditions of standing and eating (of which
the former is characteristic of the highest Lord, the latter of the
individual soul).

With reference to that which is the abode of heaven, earth, and so on,
the text says, 'Two birds, inseparable friends,' &c. (Mu. Up. III, 1,
1). This passage describes the two states of mere standing, i.e. mere
presence, and of eating, the clause, 'One of them eats the sweet fruit,'
referring to the eating, i.e. the fruition of the results of works, and
the clause, 'The other one looks on without eating,' describing the
condition of mere inactive presence. The two states described, viz. of
mere presence on the one hand and of enjoyment on the other hand, show
that the Lord and the individual soul are referred to. Now there is room
for this statement which represents the Lord as separate from the
individual soul, only if the passage about the abode of heaven and earth
likewise refers to the Lord; for in that case only there exists a
continuity of topic. On any other supposition the second passage would
contain a statement about something not connected with the general
topic, and would therefore be entirely uncalled for.--But, it may be
objected, on your interpretation also the second passage makes an
uncalled-for statement, viz. in so far as it represents the individual
soul as separate from the Lord.--Not so, we reply. It is nowhere the
purpose of Scripture to make statements regarding the individual soul.
From ordinary experience the individual soul, which in the different
individual bodies is joined to the internal organs and other limiting
adjuncts, is known to every one as agent and enjoyer, and we therefore
must not assume that it is that which Scripture aims at setting forth.
The Lord, on the other hand, about whom ordinary experience tells us
nothing, is to be considered as the special topic of all scriptural
passages, and we therefore cannot assume that any passage should refer
to him merely casually[170].--That the mantra 'two birds,' &c. speaks of
the Lord--and the individual soul we have already shown under I, 2,
11.--And if, according to the interpretation given in the
Pai@ngi-upanishad (and quoted under I, 2, 11), the verse is understood
to refer to the internal organ (sattva) and the individual soul (not to
the individual soul and the Lord), even then there is no contradiction
(between that interpretation and our present averment that the
individual soul is not the abode of heaven and earth).--How so?--Here
(i.e. in the present Sutra and the Sutras immediately preceding) it is
denied that the individual soul which, owing to its imagined connexion
with the internal organ and other limiting adjuncts, has a separate
existence in separate bodies--its division being analogous to the
division of universal space into limited spaces such as the spaces
within jars and the like--is that which is called the abode of heaven
and earth. That same soul, on the other hand, which exists in all
bodies, if considered apart from the limiting adjuncts, is nothing else
but the highest Self. Just as the spaces within jars, if considered
apart from their limiting conditions, are merged in universal space, so
the individual soul also is incontestably that which is denoted as the
abode of heaven and earth, since it (the soul) cannot really be separate
from the highest Self. That it is not the abode of heaven and earth, is
therefore said of the individual soul in so far only as it imagines
itself to be connected with the internal organ and so on. Hence it
follows that the highest Self is the abode of heaven, earth, and so
on.--The same conclusion has already been arrived at under I, 2, 21; for
in the passage concerning the source of all beings (which passage is
discussed under the Sutra quoted) we meet with the clause, 'In which
heaven and earth and the sky are woven.' In the present adhikara/n/a the
subject is resumed for the sake of further elucidation.

8. The bhuman (is Brahman), as the instruction about it is additional to
that about the state of deep sleep (i.e. the vital air which remains
awake even in the state of deep sleep).

We read (Ch. Up. VII, 23; 24), 'That which is much (bhuman) we must
desire to understand.--Sir, I desire to understand it.--Where one sees
nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is what
is much (bhuman). Where one sees something else, hears something else,
understands something else, that is the Little.'--Here the doubt arises
whether that which is much is the vital air (pra/n/a) or the highest
Self.--Whence the doubt?--The word 'bhuman,' taken by itself, means the
state of being much, according to its derivation as taught by Pa/n/ani,
VI, 4, 158. Hence there is felt the want of a specification showing what
constitutes the Self of that muchness. Here there presents itself at
first the approximate passage, 'The vital air is more than hope' (Ch.
Up. VII, 15, 1), from which we may conclude that the vital air is
bhuman.--On the other hand, we meet at the beginning of the chapter,
where the general topic is stated, with the following passage, 'I have
heard from men like you that he who knows the Self overcomes grief. I am
in grief. Do, Sir, help me over this grief of mine;' from which passage
it would appear that the bhuman is the highest Self.--Hence there arises
a doubt as to which of the two alternatives is to be embraced, and which
is to be set aside.

The purvapakshin maintains that the bhuman is the vital air, since there
is found no further series of questions and answers as to what is more.
For while we meet with a series of questions and answers (such as, 'Sir,
is there something which is more than a name?'--'Speech is more than
name.'--'Is there something which is more than speech?'--'Mind is more
than speech'), which extends from name up to vital air, we do not meet
with a similar question and answer as to what might be more than vital
air (such as, 'Is there something which is more than vital air?'--'Such
and such a thing is more than vital air'). The text rather at first
declares at length (in the passage, 'The vital air is more than hope,'
&c.) that the vital air is more than all the members of the series from
name up to hope; it then acknowledges him who knows the vital air to be
an ativadin, i.e. one who makes a statement surpassing the preceding
statements (in the passage, 'Thou art an ativadin. He may say I am an
ativadin; he need not deny it'); and it thereupon (in the passage, 'But
he in reality is an ativadin who declares something beyond by means of
the True'[171]),--not leaving off, but rather continuing to refer to the
quality of an ativadin which is founded on the vital air,--proceeds, by
means of the series beginning with the True, to lead over to the bhuman;
so that we conclude the meaning to be that the vital air is the
bhuman.--But, if the bhuman is interpreted to mean the vital air, how
have we to explain the passage in which the bhuman is characterised.
'Where one sees nothing else?' &c.--As, the purvapakshin replies, in the
state of deep sleep we observe a cessation of all activity, such as
seeing, &c., on the part of the organs merged in the vital air, the
vital air itself may be characterised by a passage such as, 'Where one
sees nothing else.' Similarly, another scriptural passage (Pra. Up. IV,
2; 3) describes at first (in the words, 'He does not hear, he does not
see,' &c.) the state of deep sleep as characterised by the cessation of
the activity of all bodily organs, and then by declaring that in that
state the vital air, with its five modifications, remains awake ('The
fires of the pra/n/as are awake in that town'), shows the vital air to
occupy the principal position in the state of deep sleep.--That passage
also, which speaks of the bliss of the bhuman ('The bhuman is bliss,'
Ch. Up. VII, 23), can be reconciled with our explanation, because Pra.
Up. IV, 6 declares bliss to attach to the state of deep sleep ('Then
that god sees no dreams and at that time that happiness arises in his
body').--Again, the statement, 'The bhuman is immortality' (Ch. Up. VII,
24, 1), may likewise refer to the vital air; for another scriptural
passage says, 'Pra/n/a is immortality' (Kau. Up. III, 2).--But how can
the view according to which the bhuman is the vital air be reconciled
with the fact that in the beginning of the chapter the knowledge of the
Self is represented as the general topic ('He who knows the Self
overcomes grief,' &c.)?--By the Self there referred to, the purvapakshin
replies, nothing else is meant but the vital air. For the passage, 'The
vital air is father, the vital air is mother, the vital air is brother,
the vital air is sister, the vital air is teacher, the vital air is
Brahma/n/a' (Ch. Up. VII, 15, 1), represents the vital air as the Self
of everything. As, moreover, the passage, 'As the spokes of a wheel rest
in the nave, so all this rests in pra/n/a,' declares the pra/n/a to be
the Self of all--by means of a comparison with the spokes and the nave
of a wheel--the pra/n/a may be conceived under the form of bhuman, i.e.
plenitude.--Bhuman, therefore, means the vital air.

To this we make the following reply.--Bhuman can mean the highest Self
only, not the vital air.--Why?--'On account of information being given
about it, subsequent to bliss.' The word 'bliss' (samprasada) means the
state of deep sleep, as may be concluded, firstly, from the etymology of
the word ('In it he, i.e. man, is altogether
pleased--samprasidati')--and, secondly, from the fact of samprasada
being mentioned in the B/ri/hadara/n/yaka together with the state of
dream and the waking state. And as in the state of deep sleep the vital
air remains awake, the word 'samprasada' is employed in the Sutra to
denote the vital air; so that the Sutra means, 'on account of
information being given about the bhuman, subsequently to (the
information given about) the vital air.' If the bhuman were the vital
air itself, it would be a strange proceeding to make statements about
the bhuman in addition to the statements about the vital air. For in the
preceding passages also we do not meet, for instance, with a statement
about name subsequent to the previous statement about name (i.e. the
text does not say 'name is more than name'), but after something has
been said about name, a new statement is made about speech, which is
something different from name (i.e. the text says, 'Speech is more than
name'), and so on up to the statement about vital air, each subsequent
statement referring to something other than the topic of the preceding
one. We therefore conclude that the bhuman also, the statement about
which follows on the statement about the vital air, is something other
than the vital air. But--it may be objected--we meet here neither with a
question, such as, 'Is there something more than vital air?' nor with an
answer, such as, 'That and that is more than vital air.' How, then, can
it be said that the information about the bhuman is given subsequently
to the information about the vital air?--Moreover, we see that the
circumstance of being an ativadin, which is exclusively connected with
the vital air, is referred to in the subsequent passage (viz. 'But in
reality he is an ativadin who makes a statement surpassing (the
preceding statements) by means of the True'). There is thus no
information additional to the information about the vital air.--To this
objection we reply that it is impossible to maintain that the passage
last quoted merely continues the discussion of the quality of being an
ativadin, as connected with the knowledge of the vital air; since the
clause, 'He who makes a statement surpassing, &c. by means of the True,'
states a specification.--But, the objector resumes, this very statement
of a specification may be explained as referring to the vital air. If
you ask how, we refer you to an analogous case. If somebody says, 'This
Agnihotrin speaks the truth,' the meaning is not that the quality of
being an Agnihotrin depends on speaking the truth; that quality rather
depends on the (regular performance of the) agnihotra only, and speaking
the truth is mentioned merely as a special attribute of that special
Agnihotrin. So our passage also ('But in reality he is an ativadin who
makes a statement, &c. by means of the True') does not intimate that the
quality of being an ativadin depends on speaking the truth, but merely
expresses that speaking the truth is a special attribute of him who
knows the vital air; while the quality of being an ativadin must be
considered to depend on the knowledge of the vital air.--This objection
we rebut by the remark that it involves an abandonment of the direct
meaning of the sacred text. For from the text, as it stands, we
understand that the quality of being an ativadin depends on speaking the
truth; the sense being: An ativadin is he who is an ativadin by means of
