Siva and Vishnu are sometimes contrasted and occasionally their
worshippers quarrel.[396] But the general inclination is rather to
make the two figures approximate by bestowing the same attributes on
both. A deity must be able to satisfy emotional devotion: hence the
Tamil Sivaite says of Siva the destroyer, "one should worship in
supreme love him who does kindness to the soul." But then the feature
in the world which most impresses the Hindu is the constant change and
destruction, and this must find a place in the All-god. Hence the
sportive kindly Krishna comes to be declared the destroyer of the
worlds.[397] It is as if in some vast Dravidian temple one wandered
through two corridors differently ornamented and assigned to the
priests of different rites but both leading to the same image. Hence
it is not surprising to find that there is actually a deity--if indeed
the term is suitable, but European vocabularies hardly provide one
which meets the case--called Harihara (or Sankara-Narayana), that is
Siva and Vishnu combined. The Harivamsa contains a hymn addressed to
him: fairly ancient sculptures attest the prevalence of his worship in
the Deccan, especially at Badami, he was once the chief deity of
Camboja and he is still popular in south India. Here besides being
worshipped under his own name he has undergone a singular
transformation and has probably been amalgamated with some aboriginal
deity. Under the designation of Ayenar (said to be a corruption of
Harihara) he is extensively worshipped as a village god and reputed to
be the son of Siva and Vishnu, the latter having kindly assumed the
form of a woman to effect his birth.

Another form of this inclination to combine and unite the various
manifestations of the Divine is the tendency to worship groups of
gods, a practice as old as the Vedas. Thus many temples are dedicated
to a group of five, namely, Siva, Vishnu, Durga, Ganesa and the Sun
and it is stated that every Hindu worships these five deities in his
daily prayers.[398] The Trimurti, or figure of Brahma, Siva and
Vishnu, illustrates the worship of groups. Its importance has
sometimes been over-estimated by Europeans from an idea that it
corresponded to the Christian Trinity, but in reality this triad is
late and has little significance. No stress is laid on the idea of
three in one and the number of persons can be increased. The
Brahma-vaivarta Purana for instance adds Krishna to Brahma, Siva
and Vishnu. The union of three personalities is merely a way of
summing up the chief attributes of the All-God. Thus the Vishnu
Purana[399] extols Vishnu as being "Hiranyagarbha, Hari and
Sankara (_i.e._ Brahma, Vishnu and Siva), the creator, preserver and
destroyer," but in another passage as him who is "Brahma, Isvara and
spirit (Pums), who with the three Gunas (qualities of matter) is the
cause of creation, preservation and destruction...." The origin of the
triad, so far as it has any doctrinal or philosophical meaning, is
probably to be sought in the personification of the three Gunas.[400]


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 334: See especially Dig. Nik. XX. and XXXII.]

[Footnote 335: But the lists may be pieces of folk-lore older than the
suttas in which they are incorporated.]

[Footnote 336: The Dionysus of Megasthenes is a deity who comes from
the west with an army that suffers from the heat of the plains. If we
could be certain that he meant Siva by Dionysus this would be valuable
evidence. But he clearly misunderstood many things in Indian religion.
Greek legends connected Dionysus with India and the East.]

[Footnote 337: Macdonell seems to me correct in saying (_J.R.A.S._
1915, p. 125) that one reason why Indian deities have many arms is
that they may be able to carry the various symbols by which they are
characterized. Another reason is that worship is usually accompanied
by dhyana, that is forming a mental image of the deity as described in
a particular text. _E.g._ the worshipper repeats a mantra which
describes a deity in language which was originally metaphorical as
having many heads and arms and at the same time he ought to make a
mental image of such a figure.]

[Footnote 338: But some forms of Sivaism in southern India come even
nearer to emotional Christianity than does Vishnuism.]

[Footnote 339: I cannot discover that any alleged avatara of Siva has
now or has had formerly any importance, but the Vayu, Linga and Kurma
Purana give lists of such incarnations, as does also the Catechism of
the Shaiva religion translated by Foulkes. But Indian sects have a
strong tendency to ascribe all possible achievements and attributes to
their gods. The mere fact that Vishnu becomes incarnate incites the
ardent Sivaite to say that his god can do the same. A curious instance
of this rivalry is found in the story that Siva manifested himself as
Sarabha-murti in order to curb the ferocity of Vishnu when incarnate
in the Man Lion (see Gopinatha Rao, _Hindu Icon_. p. 45). Siva often
appears in a special form, not necessarily human, for a special
purpose (_e.g._ Virabhadra) and some tantric Buddhas seem to be
imitations of these apparitions. There is a strong element of Sivaism
borrowed from Bengal in the mythology of Tibet and Mongolia, where
such personages as Hevajra, Samvara, and Mahakala have a considerable
importance under the strange title of Buddhas.]

[Footnote 340: The passage from one epithet to the other is very plain
in _R.V._ I. 114.]

[Footnote 341: Book XVI.]

[Footnote 342: In the play Mricchakatika or The Clay Cart (probably
of the sixth century A.D.) a burglar invokes Kartikeya, the son of
Siva, who is said to have taught different styles of house-breaking.]

[Footnote 343: A similarly strange collocation of attributes is found
in Daksha's hymn to Siva. Mahabharata, XII. Sec. 285.]

[Footnote 344: Atharva, V. xi. 2. 24.]

[Footnote 345: It is not certain if the Sisnadevah whom Indra is
asked to destroy in Rig. V. VII. 21. 5 and X. 99. 3 are priapic
demons or worshippers of the phallus.]

[Footnote 346: VII. secs. 202, 203, and XIII. sec. 14.]

[Footnote 347: The inscriptions of Camboja and Champa seem to be the
best proof of the antiquity of Linga worship. A Cambojan inscription
of about 550 A.D. records the dedication of a linga and the worship
must have taken some time to reach Camboja from India. Some lingas
discovered in India are said to be anterior to the Christian era.]

[Footnote 348: See F. Kittel, _Ueber den Ursprung der Linga Kultus_,
and Barth, _Religions of India_, p. 261.]

[Footnote 349: As is also its appearance, as a rule. But there are
exceptions to this. Some Hindus deny that the Linga is a phallic
emblem. It is hardly possible to maintain this thesis in view of such
passages as Mahabh. XIII. 14 and the innumerable figures in which
there are both a linga and a Yoni. But it is true that in its later
forms the worship is purged of all grossness and that in its earlier
forms the symbol adored was often a stupa-like column or a pillar with
figures on it.]

[Footnote 350: Such scenes as the relief from Amaravati figured in
Gruenwedel, _Buddhist art in India_, p. 29, fig. 8, might easily be
supposed to represent the worship of the linga, and some of Asoka's
pillars have been worshipped as lingas in later times.]

[Footnote 351: But not of course the soul which, according to the
general Indian idea, exists before and continues after the life of the
body.]

[Footnote 352: Crooke, _Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern
India_, I. 84; II. 219.]

[Footnote 353: They are however of some importance in Vishnuite
theology. For instance according to the school of Ramanuja it is the
Sakti (Sri) who reveals the true doctrine to mankind. Vishnu is often
said to have three consorts, Sri, Bhu and Lila.]

[Footnote 354: _E.g._ Sat. Brah. I. 2. 5. See also the strange legend
_Ib._ XI. 1. 1 where Vishnu is described as the best of the gods but
is eaten by Indra. He is frequently (_e.g._ in the Sata Brah) stated to
be identical with the sacrifice, and this was probably one of the
reasons for his becoming prominent.]

[Footnote 355: See many modern examples in Crooke, _Popular Religion
and Folk Lore of Northern India_, chap. IV. and _Census of India_,
1901, vol. VI. _Bengal_, pp. 196-8, where are described various
deified heroes who are adored in Bengal, such as Goveiya (a bandit),
Sailesh, Karikh, Larik, Amar Singh, and Gobind Raut (a slayer of
tigers). Compare too the worship of Gopi Nath and Zinda Kaliana in the
Panjab as described in _Census of India_, 1901, vol. XVII. pp. 118-9.]

[Footnote 356: The Bhagavata Purana (I. iii.) and the Bhaktamala (see
_J.R.A.S._ 1909, pp. 621 ff.) give longer lists of 22 and 26, and the
Pancaratra gives 39. See Ahirbudhnya Samhita, V. 50-55.]

[Footnote 357: Book I, cantos 74-76.]

[Footnote 358: A parallel phenomenon is the belief found in Bali, that
Buddha is Siva's brother.]

[Footnote 359: For Brahmanic ideas about Buddha see Vishnu Purana,
III. 18. The Bhagavata Purana, I. 3. 24 seems to make the Buddha
incarnation future. It also counts Kapila and Rishabha, apparently
identical with the founder of the Sankhya and the first Jain saint, as
incarnations. The Padma Purana seems to ascribe not only Buddhism but
the Maya doctrine of Sankara to delusions deliberately inspired by
gods. I have not been able to find the passage in the printed edition
of the Purana but it is quoted in Sanskrit by Aufrecht, _Cat. Cod.
Bib. Bodl._ p. 14, and Muir, _Original Sanskrit Texts_, p. 198.]

[Footnote 360: See Norman in _Trans. Third Int. Congress of
Religions_, II. p. 85. In the _Ind. Ant._ 1918, p. 145 Jayaswal tries
to prove that Kalki is a historical personage and identical with King
Yasodharman of Central India (about A.D. 500) and that the idea of his
being a _future_ saviour is late. This theory offers difficulties, for
firstly there is no proof that the passages of the Mahabharata which
mention Kalki (III. 190, 13101; III. 191, 13111: XII. 340, 12968) are
additions later than Yasodharman and secondly if Kalki was first a
historical figure and then projected into the future we should expect
to hear that he will _come again_, but such language is not quoted. On
the other hand it seems quite likely (1) that there was an old
tradition about a future saviour called Kalki, (2) that Yasodharman
after defeating the Huns assumed the role, (3) and that when it was
found that the golden age had not recommenced he was forgotten (as
many pseudo-Messiahs have been) and Kalki again became a hope for the
future. Vincent Smith (_Hist. of India_, ed. III. p. 320) intimates
that Yasodharman performed considerable exploits but was inordinately
boastful.]

[Footnote 361: Another version of the story which omits the expedition
to Lanka and makes Sita the sister of Rama is found in the Dasaratha
Jataka (641).]

[Footnote 362: But this colonization is attributed by tradition to
Vijaya, not Rama.]

[Footnote 363: See especially book VI. p. 67, in Growse's
_Translation._]

[Footnote 364: See Muir's _Sanskrit Texts_, vol. IV. especially pp.
441-491.]

[Footnote 365: Ekanatha, who lived in the sixteenth century, calls the
Adhyatma R. a modern work. See Bhandarkar, _Vaishn. and Saivism_, page
48. The Yoga-Vasishtha R. purports to be instruction given by
Vasishtha to Rama who wishes to abandon the world. Its date is
uncertain but it is quoted by authors of the fourteenth century. It is
very popular, especially in south India, where an abridgment in Tamil
called Jnana-Vasishtha is much read. Its doctrine appears to be
Vedantist with a good deal of Buddhist philosophy. Salvation is never
to think that pleasures and pains are "mine."]

[Footnote 366: Chand. Up. III. 17.6]

[Footnote 367: The Kaush. Brahm. says that Krishna was an Angirasa
XXX. g. The Anukramani says that the Krishna of Rig Veda, VIII. 74
was an Angirasa. For Ghora Angirasa "the dread descendent of the
Angirases" see Macdonell and Keith, _Vedic Index_, s.v.]

[Footnote 368: _E.g._ Dig. Nik. V. The Pancaratra expressly states
that Yoga is worship of the heart and self-sacrifice, being thus a
counterpart of the external sacrifice (bahyayaga).]

[Footnote 369: Pan. IV. 3. 98, _Vasudevarjunabhyam vun._ See
Bhandarkar, _Vaishnavism and Saivism_, p. 3 and _J.R.A.S._ 1910, p.
168. Sutra 95, just above, appears to point to _bhakti_, faith or
devotion, felt for this Vasudeva.]

[Footnote 370: Especially the Besnagar column. See Rapson, _Ancient
India_, p. 156 and various articles in _J.R.A.S._ 1909-10.]

[Footnote 371: X. i, vi.]

[Footnote 372: III. i. 23, Ularo so Kanho isi ahosi. But this may
refer to the Rishi mentioned in _R.V._ VIII. 74 who has not
necessarily anything to do with the god Krishna.]

[Footnote 373: See Hemacandra Abhidhanacintamani, Ed. Boehtlingk and
Rien, p. 128, and Barnett's translation of the _Antagada Dasao_, pp.
13-15 and 67-82.]

[Footnote 374: Apparently the same as the Vrishnis.]

[Footnote 375: III. XV.]

[Footnote 376: It would seem that the temple of Dvaraka was built
between the composition of the narrative in the Mahabharata and of the
Vishnu Purana, for while the former says the whole town was
destroyed by the sea, the latter excepts the temple and says that
whoever visits it is freed from all his sins. See Wilson, _Vishnu
Purana_, V. p. 155.]

[Footnote 377: A most curious chapter of the Vishnu Purana (IV. 13)
contains a vindication of Krishna's character and a picture of old
tribal life.]

[Footnote 378: Neither can I agree with some scholars that Krishna
is mainly and primarily a deity of vegetation. All Indian ideas about
the Universe and God emphasize the interaction of life and death,
growth and decay, spring and winter. Krishna is undoubtedly
associated with life, growth and generation, but so is Siva the
destroyer, or rather the transmuter. The account in the Mahabhashya
(on Pan. III. 1. 26) of the masque representing the slaughter of
Kamsa by Krishna is surely a slight foundation for the theory that
Krishna was a nature god. It might be easily argued that Christ is a
vegetation spirit, for not only is Easter a spring festival but there
are numerous allusions to sowing and harvest in the Gospels and Paul
illustrates the resurrection by the germination of corn. It is a
mistake to seek for uniformity in the history of religion. There were
in ancient times different types of mind which invented different
kinds of gods, just as now professors invent different theories about
gods.]

[Footnote 379: The Krishna of the Chandogya Upanishad _receives_
instruction but it is not said that he was himself a teacher.]

[Footnote 380: Hopkins, _India Old and New_, p. 105.]

[Footnote 381: Bhandarkar. Allusions to Krishna in Mahabhashya,
_Ind. Ant._ 1874, p. 14. For the pastoral Krishna see Bhandarkar,
_Vaishnavism and Saivism_, chap. IX.]

[Footnote 382: The divinity of Radha is taught specially in the
Brahma-vaivarta Purana and the Narada pancaratra, also called
Jnanamritasara. She is also described in the Gopala-tapaniya
Upanishad of unknown date.]

[Footnote 383: But Kamsa appears in both series of legends, _i.e._, in
the Ghata-Jataka which contains no hint of the pastoral legends but is
a variant of the story of the warlike Krishna.]

[Footnote 384: Vishnu Purana, V. 10, 11 from which the quotations in
the text are taken. Much of it is repeated in the Harivamsa. See for
instance H. 3808.]

[Footnote 385: The Muttra cycle of legends cannot be very late for the
inscription of Glai Lomor in Champa (811 A.D.) speaks of Narayana
holding up Goburdhan and a Cambojan inscription of Prea Eynkosey (970
A.D.) speaks of the banks of the Yamuna where Krishna sported. These
legends must have been prevalent in India some time before they
travelled so far. Some of them are depicted on a pillar found at
Mandor and possibly referable to the fourth century A.D. See _Arch.
Survey Ind._ 1905-1906, p. 135.]

[Footnote 386: Strom, III. 194. See M'Crindle, _Ancient India_, p.
183.]

[Footnote 387: Vincent Smith, _Fine Art in India_, pp. 134-138.]

[Footnote 388: In the Sutta-nipata Mara, the Evil One is called
Kanha, the phonetic equivalent of Krishna in Prakrit. Can it be
that Mara and his daughters have anything to do with Krishna and the
Gopis?]

[Footnote 389: Compare the Greek stories of the infant Hermes who
steals Apollo's cattle and invents the lyre. Compare too, as having a
general resemblance to fantastic Indian legends, the story of young
Hephaestus.]

[Footnote 390: Mgr. Bongard, _Histoire de la Bienheureuse Marguerite
Marie_. Quoted by W. James, _Varieties of Religious Experience_, p.
343.]

[Footnote 391: Vitthal or Vittoba is a local deity of Pandharpur
in the Deccan (perhaps a deified Brahman of the place) now identified
with Krishna.]

[Footnote 392: _Life and Sayings of Ramakrishna_. Trans. F. Max
Mueller, pp. 137-8. The English poet Crashaw makes free use of
religious metaphors drawn from love and even Francis Thompson
represents God as the lover of the Soul, _e.g._ in his poem _Any
Saint._]

[Footnote 393: Though surprising, it can be paralleled in modern times
for Kabir (_c._ 1400) was identified by his later followers with the
supreme spirit.]

[Footnote 394: Mahabhar. Sabhap. XIV. Vishnu Pur. v. xxxiv. The name
also occurs in the Taittiriya Aranyaka (i. 31) a work of moderate if
not great antiquity Nazayanaya vidmahe Vasudevaya dhimahi.]

[Footnote 395: See. Vishnu Pur. VI. V. See also Wilson, _Vishnu
Purana_, I. pp. 2 and 17.]

[Footnote 396: Thus the Saura Purana inveighs against the Madhva sect
(XXXVIII.-XL.) and calls Vishnu the servant of Siva: a Puranic legal
work called the Vriddha-Harita-Samhita is said to contain a polemic
against Siva. Occasionally we hear of collisions between the followers
of Vishnu and Siva or the desecration of temples by hostile fanatics.
But such conflicts take place most often not between widely different
sects but between subdivisions of the same sect, _e.g._, Tengalais and
Vadagalais. It would seem too that at present most Hindus of the
higher castes avoid ostentatious membership of the modern sects, and
though they may practise special devotion to either Vishnu or Siva,
yet they visit the temples of both deities when they go on
pilgrimages. Jogendra Nath Bhattacharya in his _Hindu Castes and
Sects_ says (p. 364) that aristocratic Brahmans usually keep in their
private chapels both a salagram representing Vishnu and emblems
representing Siva and his spouse. Hence different observers vary in
their estimates of the importance of sectarian divisions, some holding
that sect is the essence of modern Hinduism and others that most
educated Hindus do not worship a sectarian deity. The Kurma Purana,
Part I. chap. XXII. contains some curious rules as to what deities
should be worshipped by the various classes of men and spirits.]

[Footnote 397: Bhag.-gita, XL. 23-34.]

[Footnote 398: See Srisa Chandra Vasu, _Daily practice of the Hindus_,
p. 118.]

[Footnote 399: II. 1 and I. 1.]

[Footnote 400: See Maitrayana Up. V. 2. It is highly probable that
the celebrated image at Elephanta is not a Trimurti at all but a
Mahesamurti of Siva. See Gopinatha Rao, _Hindu Iconog._ II. 382.]




CHAPTER XXVI

FEATURES OF HINDUISM: RITUAL, CASTE, SECT, FAITH


1


In the last chapter I traced the growth of the great gods Siva and
Vishnu. The prominence of these figures is one of the marks which
distinguish the later phase of Indian religion from the earlier. But
it is also distinguished by various practices, institutions and
beliefs, which are more or less connected with the new deities. Such
are a new ritual, the elaboration of the caste system, the growth of
sects, and the tendency to make devotion to a particular deity the
essence of religion. In the present chapter I shall say something of
these phenomena.

Hinduism has often and justly been compared to a jungle. As in the
jungle every particle of soil seems to put forth its spirit in
vegetable life and plants grow on plants, creepers and parasites on
their more stalwart brethren, so in India art, commerce, warfare and
crime, every human interest and aspiration seek for a manifestation in
religion, and since men and women of all classes and occupations, all
stages of education and civilization, have contributed to Hinduism,
much of it seems low, foolish and even immoral. The jungle is not a
park or garden. Whatever can grow in it, does grow. The Brahmans are
not gardeners but forest officers. To attempt a history or description
of Indian creeds seems an enterprise as vast, hopeless and pathless as
a general account of European politics. As for many centuries the life
of Europe has expressed itself in politics, so for even longer ages
the life of India, which has more inhabitants than western
Europe,[401] has found expression in religion, speculation and
philosophy, and has left of all this thought a voluminous record,
mighty in bulk if wanting in dates and events. And why should it
chronicle them? The truly religious mind does not care for the history
of religion, just as among us the scientific mind does not dwell on
the history of science.

Yet in spite of their exuberance Hinduism and the jungle have
considerable uniformity. Here and there in a tropical forest some
well-grown tree or brilliant flower attracts attention, but the
general impression left on the traveller by the vegetation as he
passes through it mile after mile is infinite repetition as well as
infinite luxuriance. And so in Hinduism. A monograph on one god or one
teacher is an interesting study. But if we continue the experiment,
different gods and different teachers are found to be much the same.
We can write about Vishnuism and Sivaism as if they were different
religions and this, though incomplete, is not incorrect. But in their
higher phases both show much the same excellences and when degraded
both lead to much the same abuses, except that the worship of Vishnu
does not allow animal sacrifices. This is true even of externals. In
the temples of Madura, Poona and Benares, the deities, the rites, the
doctrines, the race of the worshippers and the architecture are all
different, yet the impression of uniformity is strong. In spite of
divergences the religion is the same in all three places: it smacks of
the soil and nothing like it can be found outside India.

Hinduism is an unusual combination of animism and pantheism, which are
commonly regarded as the extremes of savage and of philosophic belief.
In India both may be found separately but frequently they are combined
in startling juxtaposition. The same person who worships Vishnu as
identical with the universe also worships him in the form of a pebble
or plant.[402] The average Hindu, who cannot live permanently in the
altitudes of pantheistic thought, regards his gods as great natural
forces, akin to the mighty rivers which he also worships, irresistible
and often beneficent but also capricious and destructive. Whereas
Judaism, Christianity and Islam all identify the moral law with the
will and conduct of the deity, in Hinduism this is not completely
admitted in practice, though a library might be filled with the
beautiful things that have been said about man and God. The outward
forms of Indian religion are pagan after the fashion of the ancient
world, a fashion which has in most lands passed away. But whereas in
the fourth century A.D. European paganism, despite the efforts of
anti-Christian eclectics, proved inelastic and incapable of satisfying
new religious cravings, this did not happen in India. The bottles of
Hinduism have always proved capable of holding all the wine poured
into them. When a new sentiment takes possession of men's souls, such
as love, repentance, or the sense of sin, some deity of many shapes
and sympathies straightway adapts himself to the needs of his
worshippers. And yet in so doing the deity, though he enlarges
himself, does not change, and the result is that we often meet with
strange anachronisms, as if Jephthah should listen appreciatively to
the Sermon on the Mount and then sacrifice his daughter to Christ.
Many Hindu temples are served by dancing girls who are admittedly
prostitutes,[403] an institution which takes us back to the cultus of
Corinth and Babylon and is without parallel in any nation on
approximately the same level of civilization. Only British law
prevents widows from being burned with their dead husbands, though
even in the Vedic age the custom had been discontinued as
barbarous.[404] But for the same legislation, human sacrifice would
probably be common. What the gods do and what their worshippers do in
