any surprise or imposition. It is not the same with religion; each one
accepts it at hazard, and believes it upon verbal testimony, without
taking the trouble to examine it. Two causes seem to concur in
sustaining men in the negligence and the thoughtlessness which they
exhibit when the question comes up of examining their religious
opinions. The first one is, the hopelessness of penetrating the
obscurity by which every religion is surrounded; even in its first
principles, it has only a tendency to repel indolent minds, who see in
it but chaos, to penetrate which, they judge impossible. The second is,
that each one is afraid to incommode himself by the severe precepts
which everybody admires in the theory, and which few persons take the
trouble of practicing. Many people preserve their religion like old
family titles which they have never taken the trouble to examine
minutely, but which they place in their archives in case they need them.




CXXXVIII.--FAITH TAKES ROOT BUT IN WEAK, IGNORANT, OR INDOLENT MINDS.

The disciples of Pythagoras had an implicit faith in their Master's
doctrine: "HE HAS SAID IT!" was for them the solution of all problems.
The majority of men act with as little reason. A curate, a priest, an
ignorant monk, will become in the matter of religion the master of one's
thoughts. Faith relieves the weakness of the human mind, for whom
application is commonly a very painful work; it is much easier to rely
upon others than to examine for one's self; examination being slow and
difficult, it is usually unpleasant to ignorant and stupid minds as well
as to very ardent ones; this is, no doubt, why faith finds so many
partisans.

The less enlightenment and reason men possess, the more zeal they
exhibit for their religion. In all the religious factions, women,
aroused by their directors, exhibit very great zeal in opinions of which
it is evident they have not the least idea. In theological quarrels
people rush like a ferocious beast upon all those against whom their
priest wishes to excite them. Profound ignorance, unlimited credulity, a
very weak head, an irritated imagination, these are the materials of
which devotees, zealots, fanatics, and saints are made. How can we make
those people understand reason who allow themselves to be guided without
examining anything? The devotees and common people are, in the hands of
their guides, only automatons which they move at their fancy.




CXXXIX.--TO TEACH THAT THERE EXISTS ONE TRUE RELIGION IS AN ABSURDITY,
AND A CAUSE OF MUCH TROUBLE AMONG THE NATIONS.

Religion is a thing of custom and fashion; we must do as others do. But,
among the many religions in the world, which one ought we to choose?
This examination would be too long and too painful; we must then hold to
the faith of our fathers, to that of our country, or to that of the
prince, who, possessing power, must be the best. Chance alone decides
the religion of a man and of a people. The French would be to-day as
good Mussulmen as they are Christians, if their ancestors had not
repulsed the efforts of the Saracens. If we judge of the intentions of
Providence by the events and the revolutions of this world, we are
compelled to believe that it is quite indifferent about the different
religions which exist on earth. During thousands of years Paganism,
Polytheism, and Idolatry have been the religions of the world; we are
assured today, that during this period the most flourishing nations had
not the least idea of the Deity, an idea which is claimed, however, to
be so important to all men. The Christians pretend that, with the
exception of the Jewish people, that is to say, a handful of unfortunate
beings, the whole human race lived in utter ignorance of its duties
toward God, and had but imperfect ideas of Divine majesty. Christianity,
offshoot of Judaism, which was very humble in its obscure origin, became
powerful and cruel under the Christian emperors, who, driven by a holy
zeal, spread it marvelously in their empire by sword and fire, and
founded it upon the ruins of overthrown Paganism. Mohammed and his
successors, aided by Providence, or by their victorious arms, succeeded
in a short time in expelling the Christian religion from a part of Asia,
Africa, and even of Europe itself; the Gospel was compelled to surrender
to the Koran. In all the factions or sects which during a great number
of centuries have lacerated the Christians, "THE REASON OF THE STRONGEST
WAS ALWAYS THE BEST;" the arms and the will of the princes alone decided
upon the most useful doctrine for the salvation of the nations. Could we
not conclude by this, either that the Deity takes but little interest in
the religion of men, or that He declares Himself always in favor of
opinions which best suit the Authorities of the earth, in order that He
can change His systems as soon as they take a notion to change?

A king of Macassar, tired of the idolatry of his fathers, took a notion
one day to leave it. The monarch's council deliberated for a long time
to know whether they should consult Christian or Mohammedan Doctors. In
the impossibility of finding out which was the better of the two
religions, it was resolved to send at the same time for the missionaries
of both, and to accept the doctrine of those who would have the
advantage of arriving first. They did not doubt that God, who disposes
of events, would thus Himself explain His will. Mohammed's missionaries
having been more diligent, the king with his people submitted to the law
which he had imposed upon himself; the missionaries of Christ were
dismissed by default of their God, who did not permit them to arrive
early enough. God evidently consents that chance should decide the
religion of nations.

Those who govern, always decide the religion of the people. The true
religion is but the religion of the prince; the true God is the God whom
the prince wishes them to worship; the will of the priests who govern
the prince, always becomes the will of God. A jester once said, with
reason, that "the true faith is always the one which has on its side
'the prince and the executioner.'"

Emperors and executioners for a long time sustained the Gods of Rome
against the God of the Christians; the latter having won over to their
side the emperors, their soldiers and their executioners succeeded in
suppressing the worship of the Roman Gods. Mohammed's God succeeded in
expelling the Christian's God from a large part of the countries which
He formerly occupied. In the eastern part of Asia, there is a large
country which is very flourishing, very productive, thickly populated,
and governed by such wise laws, that the most savage conquerors adopted
them with respect. It is China! With the exception of Christianity,
which was banished as dangerous, they followed their own superstitious
ideas; while the mandarins or magistrates, undeceived long ago about the
popular religion, do not trouble themselves in regard to it, except to
watch over it, that the bonzes or priests do not use this religion to
disturb the peace of the State. However, we do not see that Providence
withholds its benefactions from a nation whose chiefs take so little
interest in the worship which is offered to it. The Chinese enjoy, on
the contrary, blessings and a peace worthy of being envied by many
nations which religion divides, ravages, and often destroys. We can not
reasonably expect to deprive a people of its follies; but we can hope to
cure of their follies those who govern the people; these will then
prevent the follies of the people from becoming dangerous. Superstition
is never to be feared except when it has the support of princes and
soldiers; it is only then that it becomes cruel and sanguinary. Every
sovereign who assumes the protection of a sect or of a religious
faction, usually becomes the tyrant of other sects, and makes himself
the must cruel perturbator in his kingdom.




CXL.--RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY TO MORALITY AND TO VIRTUE.

We are constantly told, and a good many sensible persons come to believe
it, that religion is necessary to restrain men; that without it there
would be no check upon the people; that morality and virtue are
intimately connected with it: "The fear of the Lord is," we are told,
"the beginning of wisdom." The terrors of another life are salutary
terrors, and calculated to subdue men's passions. To disabuse us in
regard to the utility of religious notions, it is sufficient to open the
eyes and to consider what are the morals of the most religious people.
We see haughty tyrants, oppressive ministers, perfidious courtiers,
countless extortioners, unscrupulous magistrates, impostors, adulterers,
libertines, prostitutes, thieves, and rogues of all kinds, who have
never doubted the existence of a vindictive God, or the punishments of
hell, or the joys of Paradise.

Although very useless for the majority of men, the ministers of religion
have tried to make death appear terrible to the eyes of their votaries.
If the most devoted Christians could be consistent, they would pass
their whole lives in tears, and would finally die in the most terrible
alarms. What is more frightful than death to those unfortunate ones who
are constantly reminded that "it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of a living God;" that they should "seek salvation with fear and
trembling!" However, we are assured that the Christian's death has great
consolations, of which the unbeliever is deprived. The good Christian,
we are told, dies with the firm hope of enjoying eternal happiness,
which he has tried to deserve. But this firm assurance, is it not a
punishable presumption in the eyes of a severe God? The greatest saints,
are they not to be in doubt whether they are worthy of the love or of
the hatred of God Priests who console us with the hope of the joys of
Paradise, and close your eyes to the torments of hell, have you then had
the advantage of seeing your names and ours inscribed in the book of
life?




CXLI.--RELIGION IS THE WEAKEST RESTRAINT THAT CAN BE OPPOSED TO THE
PASSIONS.

To oppose to the passions and present interests of men the obscure
notions about a metaphysical God whom no one can conceive of; the
incredible punishments of another life; the pleasures of Heaven, of
which we can not form an idea, is it not combating realities with
chimeras? Men have always but confused ideas of their God; they see Him
only in the clouds; they never think of Him when they wish to do wrong.
Whenever ambition, fortune, or pleasure entices them or leads them away,
God, and His menaces, and His promises weigh nothing in the balance. The
things of this life have for men a degree of certainty, which the most
lively faith can never give to the objects of another life.

Every religion, in its origin, was a restraint invented by legislators
who wished to subjugate the minds of the common people. Like nurses who
frighten children in order to put them to sleep, ambitious men use the
name of the gods to inspire fear in savages; terror seems well suited to
compel them to submit quietly to the yoke which is to be imposed upon
them. Are the ghost stories of childhood fit for mature age? Man in his
maturity no longer believes in them, or if he does, he is troubled but
little by it, and he keeps on his road.




CXLII.--HONOR IS A MORE SALUTARY AND A STRONGER CHECK THAN RELIGION.

There is scarcely a man who does not fear more what he sees than what he
does not see; the judgments of men, of which he experiences the effects,
than the judgments of God, of whom he has but floating ideas. The desire
to please the world, the current of custom, the fear of being ridiculed,
and of "WHAT WILL THEY SAY?" have more power than all religious
opinions. A warrior with the fear of dishonor, does he not hazard his
life in battles every day, even at the risk of incurring eternal
damnation?

The most religious persons sometimes show more respect for a servant
than for God. A man that firmly believes that God sees everything, knows
everything, is everywhere, will, when he is alone, commit actions which
he never would do in the presence of the meanest of mortals. Those even
who claim to be the most firmly convinced of the existence of a God, act
every instant as if they did not believe anything about it.




CXLIII.--RELIGION IS CERTAINLY NOT A POWERFUL CHECK UPON THE PASSIONS OF
KINGS, WHO ARE ALMOST ALWAYS CRUEL AND FANTASTIC TYRANTS BY THE EXAMPLE
OF THIS SAME GOD, OF WHOM THEY CLAIM TO BE THE REPRESENTATIVES; THEY USE
RELIGION BUT TO BRUTALIZE THEIR SLAVES SO MUCH THE MORE, TO LULL THEM TO
SLEEP IN THEIR FETTERS, AND TO PREY UPON THEM WITH THE GREATER FACILITY.

"Let us tolerate at least," we are told, "the idea of a God, which alone
can be a restraint upon the passions of kings." But, in good faith, can
we admire the marvelous effects which the fear of this God produces
generally upon the mind of the princes who claim to be His images? What
idea can we form of the original, if we judge it by its duplicates?
Sovereigns, it is true, call, themselves the representatives of God, His
lieutenants upon earth. But does the fear of a more powerful master than
themselves make them attend to the welfare of the peoples that
Providence has confided to their care? The idea of an invisible Judge,
to whom alone they pretend to be accountable for their actions, should
inspire them with terror! But does this terror render them more
equitable, more humane, less avaricious of the blood and the goods of
their subjects, more moderate in their pleasures, more attentive to
their duties? Finally, does this God, by whom we are assured that kings
reign, prevent them from vexing in a thousand ways the peoples of whom
they ought to be the leaders, the protectors, and fathers? Let us open
our eyes, let us turn our regards upon all the earth, and we shall see,
almost everywhere, men governed by tyrants, who make use of religion but
to brutalize their slaves, whom they oppress by the weight of their
vices, or whom they sacrifice without mercy to their fatal
extravagances. Far from being a restraint to the passions of kings,
religion, by its very principles, gives them a loose rein. It transforms
them into Divinities, whose caprices the nations never dare to resist.
At the same time that it unchains princes and breaks for them the ties
of the social pact, it enchains the minds and the hands of their
oppressed subjects. Is it surprising, then, that the gods of the earth
believe that all is permitted to them, and consider their subjects as
vile instruments of their caprices or of their ambition?

Religion, in every country, has made of the Monarch of Nature a cruel,
fantastic, partial tyrant, whose caprice is the rule. The God-monarch is
but too well imitated by His representatives upon the earth. Everywhere
religion seems invented but to lull to sleep the people in fetters, in
order to furnish their masters the facility of devouring them, or to
render them miserable with impunity.




CXLIV.--ORIGIN OF THE MOST ABSURD, THE MOST RIDICULOUS, AND THE MOST
ODIOUS USURPATION, CALLED THE DIVINE RIGHT OF KINGS. WISE COUNSELS TO
KINGS.

In order to guard themselves against the enterprises of a haughty
Pontiff who desired to reign over kings, and in order to protect their
persons from the attacks of the credulous people excited by their
priests, several princes of Europe pretended to have received their
crowns and their rights from God alone, and that they should account to
Him only for their actions. Civil power in its battles against spiritual
power, having at length gained the advantage, and the priests being
compelled to yield, recognized the Divine right of kings and preached it
to the people, reserving to themselves the right to change opinions and
to preach revolution, every time that the divine rights of kings did not
agree with the divine rights of the clergy. It was always at the expense
of the people that peace was restored between the kings and the priests,
but the latter maintained their pretensions notwithstanding all
treaties.

Many tyrants and wicked princes, whose conscience reproaches them for
their negligence or their perversity, far from fearing their God, rather
like to bargain with this invisible Judge, who never refuses anything,
or with His priests, who are accommodating to the masters of the earth
rather than to their subjects. The people, when reduced to despair,
consider the divine rights of their chiefs as an abuse. When men become
exasperated, the divine rights of tyrants are compelled to yield to the
natural rights of their subjects; they have better market with the gods
than with men. Kings are responsible for their actions but to God, the
priests but to themselves; there is reason to believe that both of them
have more faith in the indulgence of Heaven than in that of earth. It is
much easier to escape the judgments of the gods, who can be appeased at
little expense, than the judgments of men whose patience is exhausted.
If you take away from the sovereigns the fear of an invisible power,
what restraint will you oppose to their misconduct? Let them learn how
to govern, how to be just, how to respect the rights of the people, to
recognize the benefactions of the nations from whom they obtain their
grandeur and power; let them learn to fear men, to submit to the laws of
equity, that no one can violate without danger; let these laws restrain
equally the powerful and the weak, the great and the small, the
