Reformation writings, which appeared in the same year (1520), while, on
the other hand, his espousal of the rights of the "poor man"--to be met
with here for the first time--shows that the Monk of Witttenberg,
coming from the narrow limits of the convent, had an intimate and
sympathetic knowledge of the social needs of his time. Thus he proved
by his own example that to take a stand in the center of the Gospel
does not narrow the vision nor harden the heart, but rather produces
courage in the truth and sympathy for all manner of misery.

Luther's contemporaries at once recognized the great importance of the
Treatise, for within the period of seven months it passed through eight
editions; these were followed by six more editions between the years of
1521 and 1525; in 1521 it was translated into Latin, and in this form
passed through three editions up to the year 1525; and all this in
spite of the fact that in those years the so-called three great
Reformation writings of 1520 were casting all else into the shadow.
Melanchthon, in a contemporaneous letter to John Hess, called it
Luther's best book. John Mathesius, the well-known pastor at
Joachimsthal and Luther's biographer, acknowledged that he had learned
the "rudiments of Christianity" from it.

Even to-day this book has its peculiar mission to the Church. The
seeking after self-elected works, the indolence regarding the works
commanded of God, the foolish opinion, that the path of works leads to
God's grace and good-will, are even to-day widely prevalent within the
kingdom of God. To all this Luther's treatise answers: Be diligent in
the works of your earthly calling as commanded of God, but only after
having first strengthened, by the consideration of God's mercy, the
faith within you, which is the only source of all truly good works and
well-pleasing to God.

M. REU.

WARTBURG SEMINARY, DUBUQUE, IOWA.




TREATISE ON GOOD WORKS

1520

DEDICATION

JESUS


To the Illustrious, High-born Prince and Lord, John Duke of Saxony,
Landgrave of Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen, my gracious Lord and
Patron.


Illustrious, High-born Prince, gracious Lord! My humble duty and my
feeble prayer for your Grace always remembered!

For a long time, gracious Prince and Lord, I have wished to show my
humble respect and duty toward your princely Grace, by the exhibition
of some such spiritual wares as are at my disposal; but I have always
considered my powers too feeble to undertake anything worthy of being
offered to your princely Grace.

Since, however, my most gracious Lord Frederick, Duke of Saxony,
Elector and Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire, your Grace's brother, has
not despised, but graciously accepted my slight book, dedicated to his
electoral Grace, and now published--though such was not my intention, I
have taken courage from his gracious example and ventured to think that
the princely spirit, like the princely blood, may be the same in both
of you, especially in gracious kindness and good will. I have hoped
that your princely Grace likewise would not despise this my humble
offering which I have felt more need of publishing than an other of my
sermons or tracts. For the greatest of all questions has been raised,
the question of Good Works; in which is practised immeasurably more
trickery and deception than in anything else, and in which the
simpleminded man is so easily misled that our Lord Christ has commanded
us to watch carefully for the sheep's clothings under which the wolves
hide themselves.

Neither silver, gold, precious stones, nor any rare thing has such
manifold alloys and flaws as have good works, which ought to have a
single simple goodness, and without it are mere color, show and deceit.

And although I know and daily hear many people, who think slightingly
of my poverty, and say that I write only little pamphlets and German
sermons for the unlearned laity, this shall not disturb me. Would to
God I had in all my life, with all the ability I have, helped one
layman to be better! I would be satisfied, thank God, and be quite
willing then to let all my little books perish.

Whether the making of many great books is an art and a benefit to the
Church, I leave others to judge. But I believe that if I were minded to
make great books according to their art, I could, with God's help, do
it more readily perhaps than they could prepare a little discourse
after my fashion. If accomplishment were as easy as persecution, Christ
would long since have been cast out of heaven again, and God's throne
itself overturned.  Although we cannot all be writers, we all want to
be critics.

I will most gladly leave to any one else the honor of greater things,
and not be at all ashamed to preach and to write in German for the
unlearned laymen. Although I too have little skill in it, I believe
that if we had hitherto done, and should henceforth do more of it,
Christendom would have reaped no small advantage, and have been more
bene fited by this than by the great, deep books and quaestiones, which
are used only in the schools, among the learned.

Then, too, I have never forced or begged any one to hear me, or to read
my sermons. I have freely ministered in the Church of that which God
has given me and which I owe the Church. Whoever likes it not, may hear
and read what others have to say. And if they are not willing to be my
debtors, it matters little. For me it is enough, and even more than too
much, that some laymen condescend to read what I say. Even though there
were nothing else to urge me, it should be more than sufficient that I
have learned that your princely Grace is pleased with such German books
and is eager to receive instruction in Good Works and the Faith, with
which instruction it was my duty, humbly and with all diligence to
serve you.

Therefore, in dutiful humility I pray that your princely Grace may
accept this offering of mine with a gracious mind, until, if God grant
me time, I prepare a German exposition of the Faith in its entirety.
For at this time I have wished to show how in all good works we should
practice and make use of faith, and let faith be the chief work. If God
permit, I will treat at another time of the Faith itself--how we are
daily to pray or recite it.

I humbly commend myself herewith to your princely Grace, Your Princely
Grace's Humble Chaplain,

DR. MARTIN LUTHER.

From Wittenberg, March 29th, A. D. 1520.




THE TREATISE

I. We ought first to know that there are no good works except those
which God has commanded, even as there is no sin except that which God
has forbidden. Therefore whoever wishes to know and to do good works
needs nothing else than to know God's commandments. Thus Christ says,
Matthew xix, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments." And
when the young man asks Him, Matthew xix, what he shall do that he may
inherit eternal life, Christ sets before him naught else but the Ten
Commandments. Accordingly, we must learn how to distinguish among good
works from the Commandments of God, and not from the appearance, the
magnitude, or the number of the works themselves, nor from the judgment
of men or of human law or custom, as we see has been done and still is
done, because we are blind and despise the divine Commandments.

II. The first and highest, the most precious of all good works is faith
in Christ, as He says, John vi. When the Jews asked Him: "What shall we
do that we may work the works of God?" He answered: "This is the work
of God, that ye believe on Him Whom He hath sent." When we hear or
preach this word, we hasten over it and deem it a very little thing and
easy to do, whereas we ought here to pause a long time and to ponder it
well. For in this work all good works must be done and receive from it
the inflow of their goodness, like a loan. This we must put bluntly,
that men may understand it.

We find many who pray, fast, establish endowments, do this or that,
lead a good life before men, and yet if you should ask them whether
they are sure that what they do pleases God, they say, "No"; they do
not know, or they doubt. And there are some very learned men, who
mislead them, and say that it is not necessary to be sure of this; and
yet, on the other hand, these same men do nothing else but teach good
works. Now all these works are done outside of faith, therefore they
are nothing and altogether dead. For as their conscience stands toward
God and as it believes, so also are the works which grow out of it. Now
they have no faith, no good conscience toward God, therefore the works
lack their head, and all their life and goodness is nothing.  Hence it
comes that when I exalt faith and reject such works done without faith,
they accuse me of forbidding good works, when in truth I am trying hard
to teach real good works of faith.

III. If you ask further, whether they count it also a good work when
they work at their trade, walk, stand, eat, drink, sleep, and do all
kinds of works for the nourishment of the body or for the common
welfare, and whether they believe that God takes pleasure in them
because of such works, you will find that they say, "No"; and they
define good works so narrowly that they are made to consist only of
praying in church, fasting, and almsgiving. Other works they consider
to be in vain, and think that God cares nothing for them. So through
their damnable unbelief they curtail and lessen the service of God, Who
is served by all things whatsoever that are done, spoken or thought in
faith.

So teaches Ecclesiastes ix: "Go thy way with joy, eat and drink, and
know that God accepteth thy works. Let thy garments be always white;
and let thy head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with the wife whom
thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity." "Let thy garments
be always white," that is, let all our works be good, whatever they may
be, without any distinction. And they are white when I am certain and
believe that they please God.  Then shall the head of my soul never
lack the ointment of a joyful conscience.

So Christ says, John viii: "I do always those things that please Him."
And St. John says, I. John iii: "Hereby we know that we are of the
truth, if we can comfort our hearts before Him and have a good
confidence. And if our heart condemns or frets us, God is greater than
our heart, and we have confidence, that whatsoever we ask, we shall
receive of Him, because we keep His Commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in His sight." Again: "Whosoever is born of God, that
is, whoever believes and trusts God, doth not commit sin, and cannot
sin." Again, Psalm xxxiv: "None of them that trust in Him shall do
sin." And in Psalm ii: "Blessed are all they that put their trust in
Him." If this be true, then all that they do must be good, or the evil
that they do must be quickly forgiven. Behold, then, why I exalt faith
so greatly, draw all works into it, and reject all works which do not
flow from it.

IV. Now every one can note and tell for himself when he does what is
good or what is not good; for if he finds his heart confident that it
pleases God, the work is good, even if it were so small a thing as
picking up a straw. If confidence is absent, or if he doubts, the work
is not good, although it should raise all the dead and the man should
give himself to be burned. This is the teaching of St. Paul, Romans
xiv: "Whatsoever is not done of or in faith is sin." Faith, as the
chief work, and no other work, has given us the name of "believers on
Christ." For all other works a heathen, a Jew, a Turk, a sinner, may
also do; but to trust firmly that he pleases God, is possible only for
a Christian who is enlightened and strengthened by grace.

That these words seem strange, and that some call me a heretic because
of them, is due to the fact that men have followed blind reason and
heathen ways, have set faith not above, but beside other virtues, and
have given it a work of its own, apart from all works of the other
virtues; although faith alone makes all other works good, acceptable
and worthy, in that it trusts God and does not doubt that for it all
things that a man does are well done. Indeed, they have not let faith
remain a work, but have made a habitus of it, as they say, although
Scripture gives the name of a good, divine work to no work except to
faith alone.  Therefore it is no wonder that they have become blind and
leaders of the blind. And this faith brings with it at once love,
peace, joy and hope. For God gives His Spirit at once to him who trusts
Him, as St. Paul says to the Galatians: "You received the Spirit not
because of your good works, but when you believed the Word of God."

V. In this faith all works become equal, and one is like the other; all
distinctions between works fall away, whether they be great, small,
short, long, few or many. For the works are acceptable not for their
own sake, but because of the faith which alone is, works and lives in
each and every work without distinction, however numerous and various
they are, just as all the members of the body live, work and have their
name from the head, and without the head no member can live, work and
have a name.

From which it further follows that a Christian who lives in this faith
has no need of a teacher of good works, but whatever he finds to do he
does, and all is well done; as Samuel said to Saul: "The Spirit of the
Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt be turned into another man;
then do thou as occasion serves thee; for God is with thee." So also we
read of St. Anna, Samuel's mother: "When she believed the priest Eli
who promised her God's grace, she went home in joy and peace, and from
that time no more turned hither and thither," that is, whatever
occurred, it was all one to her. St. Paul also says: "Where the Spirit
of Christ is, there all is free." For faith does not permit itself to
be bound to any work, nor does it allow any work to be taken from it,
but, as the First Psalm says, "He bringeth forth his fruit in his
season," that is, as a matter of course.

VI. This we may see in a common human example. When a man and a woman
love and are pleased with each other, and thoroughly believe in their
love, who teaches them how they are to behave, what they are to do,
leave undone, say, not say, think?  Confidence alone teaches them all
this, and more. They make no difference in works: they do the great,
the long, the much, as gladly as the small, the short, the little, and
vice versa; and that too with joyful, peaceful, confident hearts, and
each is a free companion of the other. But where there is a doubt,
search is made for what is best; then a distinction of works is
imagined whereby a man may win favor; and yet he goes about it with a
heavy heart, and great disrelish; he is, as it were, taken captive,
more than half in despair, and often makes a fool of himself.

So a Christian who lives in this confidence toward God, a knows all
things, can do all things, undertakes all things that are to be done,
and does everything cheerfully and freely; not that he may gather many
merits and good works, but because it is a pleasure for him to please
God thereby, and he serves God purely for nothing, content that his
service pleases God. On the other hand, he who is not at one with God,
or doubts, hunts and worries in what way he may do enough and with many
works move God. He runs to St. James of Compostella, to Rome, to
Jerusalem, hither and yon, prays St. Bridget's prayer and the rest,
fasts on this day and on that, makes confession here, and makes
confession there, questions this man and that, and yet finds no peace.
He does all this with great effort, despair and disrelish of heart, so
that the Scriptures rightly call such works in Hebrew Avenama, that is,
labor and travail. And even then they are not good works, and are all
lost. Many have been crazed thereby; their fear has brought them into
all manner of misery. Of these it is written, Wisdom of Solomon v: "We
have wearied ourselves in the wrong way; and have gone through deserts,
where there lay no way; but as for the way of the Lord, we have not
known it, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us."

VII. In these works faith is still slight and weak; let us ask further,
whether they believe that they are well-pleasing to God when they
suffer in body, property, honor, friends, or whatever they have, and
believe that God of His mercy appoints their sufferings and
difficulties for them, whether they be small or great. This is real
strength, to trust in God when to all our senses and reason He appears
to be angry; and to have greater confidence in Him than we feel. Here
He is hidden, as the bride says in the Song of Songs: "Behold he
standeth behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows"; that is, He
stands hidden among the sufferings, which would separate us from Him
like a wall, yea, like a wall of stone, and yet He looks upon me and
does not leave me, for He is standing and is ready graciously to help,
and through the window of dim faith He permits Himself to be seen.  And
Jeremiah says in Lamentations, "He casts off men, but He does it not
willingly."

This faith they do not know at all, and give up, thinking that God has
forsaken them and is become their enemy; they even lay the blame of
their ills on men and devils, and have no confidence at all in God. For
this reason, too, their suffering is always an offence and harmful to
them, and yet they go and do some good works, as they think, and are
not aware of their unbelief. But they who in such suffering trust God
and retain a good, firm confidence in Him, and believe that He is
pleased with them, these see in their sufferings and afflictions
nothing but precious merits and the rarest possessions, the value of
which no one can estimate. For faith and confidence make precious
before God all that which others think most shameful, so that it is
written even of death in Psalm cxvi, "Precious in the sight of the Lord
is the death of His saints." And just as the confidence and faith are
better, higher and stronger at this stage than in the first stage, so
and to the same degree do the sufferings which are borne in this faith
excel all works of faith. Therefore between such works and sufferings
there is an immeasurable difference and the sufferings are infinitely
better.

VIII. Beyond all this is the highest stage of faith, when; God punishes
the conscience not only with temporal sufferings, but with death, hell,
and sin, and refuses grace and mercy, as though it were His will to
condemn and to be angry eternally. This few men experience, but David
cries out in Psalm vi, "O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger." To
believe at such times that God, in His mercy, is pleased with us, is
the highest work that can be done by and in the creature; but of this
the work-righteous and doers of good works know nothing at all. For how
could they here look for good things and grace from God, as long as
they are not certain in their works, and doubt even on the lowest step
of faith.

In this way I have, as I said, always praised faith, and rejected all
works which are done without such faith, in order thereby to lead men
from the false, pretentious, pharisaic, unbelieving good works, with
which all monastic houses, churches, homes, low and higher classes are
overfilled, and lead them to the true, genuine, thoroughly good,
believing works. In this no one opposes me except the unclean beasts,
which do not divide the hoof, as the Law of Moses decrees; who will
suffer no distinction among good works, but go lumbering along: if only
they pray, fast, establish endowments, go to confession, and do enough,
everything shall be good, although in all this they have had no faith
in God's grace and approval. Indeed, they consider the works best of
all, when they have done many, great and long works without any such
confidence, and they look for good only after the works are done; and
so they build their confidence not on divine favor, but on the works
they have done, that is, on sand and water, from which they must at
last take a cruel fall, as Christ says, Matthew vii. This good-will and
favor, on which our confidence rests, was proclaimed by the angels from
heaven, when they sang on Christmas night: "Gloria in excelsis Deo,
Glory to God in the highest, peace to earth, gracious favor to man."

IX. Now this is the work of the First Commandment, which commands:
"Thou shalt have no other gods," which means: "Since I alone am God,
thou shalt place all thy confidence, trust and faith on Me alone, and
on no one else." For that is not to have a god, if you call him God
only with your lips, or worship him with the knees or bodily gestures;
but if you trust Him with the heart, and look to Him for all good,
grace and favor, whether in works or sufferings, in life or death, in
joy or sorrow; as the Lord Christ says to the heathen woman, John iv:
"I say unto thee, they that worship God must worship Him in spirit and
in truth." And this faith, faithfulness, confidence deep in the heart,
is the true fulfilling of the First Commandment; without this there is
no other work that is able to satisfy this Commandment. And as this
Commandment is the very first, highest and best, from which all the
others proceed, in which they exist, and by which they are directed and
measured, so also its work, that is, the faith or confidence in God's
favor at all times, is the very first, highest and best, from which all
others must proceed, exist, remain, be directed and measured. Compared
with this, other works are just as if the other Commandments were
without the First, and there were no God, Therefore St. Augustine well
says that the works of the First Commandment are faith, hope and love.
As I said above, such faith and confidence bring love and hope with
them. Nay, if we see it aright, love is the first, or comes at the same
instant with faith. For I could not trust God, if I did not think that
He wished to be favorable and to love me, which leads me, in turn, to
love Him and to trust Him heartily and to look to Him for all good
things.

X. Now you see for yourself that all those who do not at at all times
trust God and do not in all their works or sufferings, life and death,
trust in His favor, grace and good-will, but seek His favor in other
things or in themselves, do not keep this Commandment, and practise
real idolatry, even if they were to do the works of all the other
Commandments, and in addition had all the prayers, fasting, obedience,
patience, chastity, and innocence of all the saints combined. For the
chief work is not present, without which all the others are nothing but
mere sham, show and pretence, with nothing back of them; against which
Christ warns us, Matthew vii: "Beware of false prophets, which come to
