unexceptionable and excellent matter, and the charge of heresy on
the subject of Christ's character, he pronounces unjust. The Nicene
Creed, which they always repeat at the close of their worship,
accords very nearly with that venerable document, as it has been
handed down to us.1

1 Annual Report of the Board for 1841, p. 114.






CHAPTER XIII.

THE MOUNTAIN NESTORIANS.

1840-1844.


We paused in the history of the Nestorian mission at the return of
Dr. Grant to Oroomiah, after a successful exploration of the
mountains of Koordistan. He remained there till the 7th of May,
1840. During this time, two brothers of the Patriarch visited the
mission, and urged its extension into the mountains. Mar Shimon also
wrote, renewing his request for a visit in the spring. Dr. Grant had
but little prospect of recovering his health on the plain; and the
welfare of his two sons in the United States, children of his first
marriage, and the three children then with him at Oroomiah, seemed
to require that he revisit his native land. Two of these last
mentioned sickened and died in January. Having then only one son to
take with him, four years of age, he decided to return through the
mountains, and revisit the Patriarch on his way. It was a perilous
journey so early in the season, especially with so tender a
companion; but the brave little fellow appears to have endured the
snows and precipices of Koordistan as well as the father. The boy
was everywhere a favorite, both with Koords and Nestorians. One
night the snow was so deep near the summit of a mountain that they
were obliged to sleep under the open sky, with the thermometer below
zero; but the Patriarch's brothers had carpets enough to keep them
warm until three in the morning, when the light of the moon enabled
them to resume their journey. Mar Shimon was then a guest of
Suleiman Bey, in the castle of Julamerk, and with him they spent ten
days. Nurullah Bey had gone to Erzroom to negotiate for the
subjugation of the Independent Nestorians to the Turkish rule,
having already relinquished his own personal independence, and
become a Pasha of the empire. Suleiman Bey was a relative of the
Emir, and had been the leader of the party that murdered Mr.
Schultz. He showed special kindness to Dr. Grant. His mother and
sister, as also the sister and mother of the Patriarch, with womanly
forethought, loaded the Doctor with supplies for the inhospitable
road before them. He found the Emir at Van on his return home, and
discovered what had been the object of his journey to Erzroom. When
Dr. Grant arrived there, with clothes worn and ragged from the
roughness of the journey, he had the happiness of meeting Dr.
Wright, then on his way to Oroomiah. The two brethren called on the
gentlemen of the Persian embassy, then at Erzroom, and one of them,
observing Dr. Grant's erect and commanding person, remarked that a
good soldier was spoiled when that man became a missionary. At
Trebizond he gladly exchanged the saddle for the quiet of the
steamer, which took him to Constantinople, and he arrived at Boston
on the 3d of October.

Having embraced the theory, that the Nestorians are descendants of
the lost Ten Tribes of Israel, Dr. Grant, with characteristic
industry, employed such time as he could command during his
missionary travels and his homeward voyage, in preparing a volume in
support of these views. It was published both in this country and in
England, and attracted considerable attention. The celebrated Dr.
Edward Robinson deemed it deserving of an elaborate discussion in
the "American Biblical Repository," in which he makes a strong
argument against the theory.1

1 See _American Biblical Repository_, 1841, vol. vi. of new series,
pp. 454-482, and vol. vii. pp. 26-68.

In January, 1841, Dr. Grant had the pleasure of witnessing the
departure of the Rev. Messrs. Abel K. Hinsdale and Colby C.
Mitchell, and their wives, for the Mountain Nestorians. They went by
way of Aleppo and Mosul, that being the more practicable route for
females; but the Doctor, thinking to reach the mountains before
them, and prepare for their arrival, went himself by way of
Constantinople, Erzroom, and Van. He was at Constantinople May 14th,
and at Van on the first day of July. The journey from Erzroom to
that place was wearisome and perilous, famine, the plague, and
predatory Koords harassing him nearly all the way.

Van, with fourteen thousand Armenian population, though at that time
difficult of access, was even then regarded as an important place
for a missionary station, and preferable for residence to most
others in the interior. Being five thousand feet above the level of
the sea, it was not subject to oppressive heats. There were fruitful
gardens on the one hand, stretching for miles over the plain, and on
the other, the placid lake, and snow-capped mountains; altogether
forming a very striking landscape. A small Nestorian community had
formed a settlement on the mountains within three or four hours of
Van.

Dr. Grant reached the summer residence of the Patriarch on the 9th
of July, and was cordially received as before; and the same may be
said of his intercourse with the mountaineers. He mentions several
places in Koordistan as having strong claims for a missionary
station, but gives the preference to Asheta in Tiary.

While at Asheta, he received painful tidings of the death of Mr. and
Mrs. Mitchell, and the sickness of Mr. and Mrs. Hinsdale, and
immediately started for Mosul, though at much risk from Koords on
the frontier, and from roving Arabs near the Tigris. He reached
Mosul on the 25th of August, in time to minister successfully to Mr.
Hinsdale, whose life had been seriously endangered by a relapse of
fever.

Messrs. Hinsdale and Mitchell were forty-one days on their voyage to
Smyrna, from whence an Austrian steamer took them to Beirut. Mr. and
Mrs. Beadle accompanied them as far as Aleppo, to commence a new
station. Mr. Mitchell had a slight attack of fever and ague at
Aleppo, which detained him till the 28th of May. That was rather
late in the season, still all might have gone well, had they been
able to press on with the usual speed. The abundant green grass on
the plain, however, caused the muleteers to loiter, and, once on the
road, the company was entirely at their mercy. Still the journey, as
far as Mardin, where they arrived June 19th, was both pleasant and
prosperous. On the plain below the city Mr. Mitchell, in efforts to
keep their tent from being blown down in a storm, became wet and
chilled. This brought on another fit of ague, which was repeated
after three days. On the 25th, with scarcely any apparent disease,
he lost his reason, and from that time drooped, like the withering
of a plant, till he died on the morning of June 27th, 1841. The
Koordish villagers refused the Christian a grave, nor would they aid
in carrying the body a few miles to the Jacobite village Telabel,
The survivors had not strength themselves to carry it, but secured
its conveyance thither as best they could. There they buried the
mortal remains in the village cemetery, and two rude stones mark the
grave.

Eight hours brought them in sight of the Tigris, at Beshabor. The
next day they crossed on rafts supported by inflated goat-skins,
and, on the 30th, rode six and a half hours to a Yezidee village.
Next morning, after riding an hour, Mrs. Mitchell became too ill to
proceed, and she lay four days in a mud hovel, among Arabs so rude
that they could not be kept from the sick room, where they laid
their hands on whatever they fancied. To remain there was out of the
question, so Mr. Hinsdale constructed a litter, and at exorbitant
prices obtained men from a distant village to carry it. She had to
be repeatedly laid upon the ground, while he rode far and near to
find four men willing to perform the degrading service of carrying a
woman. At length the sun became so hot, that they could travel only
by night. Their troubles were somewhat relieved by the services of a
man, whom Mr. Rassam had kindly sent to meet them. On the 7th of
July, they entered Mosul, and were cordially welcomed by Mr. and
Mrs. Rassam. Mrs. Mitchell's disease then assumed a new form, and
from that time till her death, on the 12th, her reason was
dethroned. Mr. Hinsdale was taken violently ill before the death of
Mrs. Mitchell, and Mrs. Hinsdale was unable to render any assistance
to her husband. It was in these trying circumstances, that Dr. Grant
so opportunely arrived.

There was ample evidence in the subsequent experience of the
mission, that these fatal results were not owing to any peculiar
hazard in the journey itself, though they may have resulted from the
lateness of the season. All the way from Aleppo to Mosul, they had
the assistance of Mr. Kotschy, who, in addition to his medical
knowledge, had travelled seven years in Western Asia and Africa. The
route, moreover, had been, and is still, one of the great highways
of nations.

No doubt Divine Providence is always consistent with itself, and
with the Saviour's promise; and so would it always appear to us,
could we see, as God sees, the end from the beginning. To the
devoted missionary, who dies at the outset of his career, all is
satisfactory, however painful the circumstances, as soon as he
passes the dark portal. Then, too, in contemplating the reverses
which were now beginning to thicken upon the mission, we should bear
in mind, that the divine plan for the Mountain Nestorian mission, as
afterwards appeared, was not that it be prosecuted from the western
side of the mountains, but from Oroomiah, the position first taken
by the mission; where, as we shall soon see, Gospel influences were
gathering a peculiar and most needful strength.

As soon as Mr. Hinsdale was able to travel, he accompanied Dr. Grant
on a tour among the Yezidee and Nestorian villages lying near to
Mosul.1

1 For an account of this tour, see _Missionary Herald_, 1842, pp.
310-320.

The Jacobites are a branch of the venerable Church of Antioch, and
were then painfully struggling to repel the inroads of the Papacy.
As soon as they learned the adherence of the American missionaries
to the Bible, and their opposition to Papal innovations, they began
to welcome them as friends. Having been duped by the plausible
pretenses of the Papists, they were at first cautious in their
advances; but a priest from the Syrian Christians in India, named
Joseph Matthew, on his way to be ordained metropolitan by the Syrian
Patriarch at Mardin, did much to dispel their fears, and promote
friendly relations with the missionaries. He was a graduate of the
English college at Cotayam, was evangelical in his views, spoke
English with propriety, and at once gave the right hand of
fellowship to the missionaries, and bespoke for them the confidence
of the people. Early in the following year, he returned from Mardin
as Bishop Athanasius, and consented to remain and preach among the
Jacobites during Dr. Grant's absence in the summer.

Nurullah Bey had now commenced making war on the mountain
Nestorians, with the aid of the Turks; and the Nestorians, split
into hostile parties, were incapable of combined resistance.
Suleiman Bey, being opposed to an alliance with Turkey, had seized
the reins of government in the absence of the Emir; and since the
object of the Osmanlis was to subjugate the Nestorians, as well as
the Koords, the Patriarch naturally, but as it proved unhappily,
sided with Suleiman.1

1 _Dr. Grant and the Mountain Nestorians_, p. 203.

Dr. Grant believed it would now be easier to enter the mountains
from the east, than from the west. Accordingly he set out for
Oroomiah, on the 6th of June, 1842, going the southern route by way
of Ravandooz. Mr. Hinsdale and Bishop Athanasius accompanied him the
first day. When about to return, the bishop offered prayer in the
English language, and thus they parted, not all to meet again.
Athanasius wrote a letter to Dr. Grant from Malabar, but with a date
nearly a year subsequent to Dr. Grant's death, in which he stated,
that his people had welcomed him with great joy, and gladly received
the Word of God.1

1 _Dr. Grant and the Mountain Nestorians_, p. 219.

Dr. Grant crossed the plain of Arbela, where Alexander conquered
Persia, and in ten days arrived at Oroomiah. Being impatient to get
into the mountains, the mission assembled immediately, and delegated
Mr. Stocking to accompany him. Dr. Wright said of him, at this time,
that "his spirits were buoyant, his step elastic, and his energy
untiring." Two Nestorians went with them, and they had letters from
the governor and some Persian nobles to the Persian Khan and the
Emir of the Hakary Koords. At Khosrawa, Mr. Stocking was constrained
by sickness to return; and both the native assistants were so
alarmed by the warlike aspect of things, that they declined going
farther. The now solitary traveller succeeded, at the last moment,
in getting the brave bishop Mar Yusuf to be his companion.

The Emir had now broken his treaty with the Sultan, formed two years
before in the hope of immediate aid to subdue the Nestorians; and
had sworn perpetual allegiance to the Shah, who promised him support
against the Sultan. Dr. Grant found Yahya Khan and the Emir at the
castle of Charreh, on the summit of an isolated rock near the river
of the same name. The tents of more than a dozen chiefs dotted the
green banks of the stream. Nurullah Bey still professed to regard
Dr. Grant as his physician and friend, and in the presence of the
Khan promised to protect him and his associates, and permit them to
erect buildings in Tiary for themselves and their schools.

The Khan, to whose friendly agency with the Emir Dr. Grant was
specially indebted, had a good reputation for integrity. He was a
Persian subject, then governor of Salmas, and also chief of a branch
of the Hakary tribe. He had married a sister of the Emir, and given
him one of his own in return, and another was in the harem of the
Shah. He assured his missionary guest of the Emir's personal
friendship, and interested himself for his future safety.

After sundry adventures among precipitous mountains and savage
Koords, Dr. Grant was once more the guest of Mar Shimon, who kindly
received the New Testament, the Psalms, and other books from the
mission press. The Doctor was himself suffering from the effects of
exposure in a wet dormitory the previous night; but the bracing air
of that elevated region renewed his strength, and he was glad to
resume his journey towards Asheta, which he had proposed as the site
of his first mountain station. On this part of the way he had the
company of Mar Shimon, who had then decided not to join the Koords
and Persians against the Turks, having discovered that the strife
between them was for the supremacy over his own people. Of the two
he preferred the Turks. He was, however, advised by Dr. Grant to
cultivate the friendship of the Emir. Further than this Dr. Grant
would not interfere, being, fully resolved not to meddle with their
political relations. A secret correspondence of the Patriarch with
the Turkish Pasha, when discovered, cost him the favor of the Emir;
and it soon became apparent that the Turks, whatever their
pretensions, were resolved upon nothing short of the complete
subjugation of his people. It was but too evident, also, to his
missionary friend, that the Patriarch was himself more concerned for
their political, than for their religious and moral condition.

Amadia, on the western frontier of the Nestorians, had now
surrendered to the Turks; and the war on that side of the mountains
being ended, Mr. Hinsdale left Mosul on the last day of September,
and in eight days was at Asheta. The prospect from the summit on the
western side of the valley was of singular beauty. The village of
Asheta extended below him for a mile and a half, with numerous plats
of grain and vegetables interspersed, the whole diversified with
shade trees of various kinds. A short distance above the village was
a deep ravine, from which the snow never disappeared. The spot
selected for the mission house, was on the summit of a hill, near
the centre of the village.

Soon after the arrival of Mr. Hinsdale, the papal bishop of Elkosh
and an Italian priest found their way to Asheta. They stated to the
Patriarch, that many boxes of presents were on their way from
Diarbekir, and requested permission to remain till they arrived. The
following Sabbath the Patriarch, with Mar Yusuf and several priests,
held a public discussion with them on the prominent errors of the
Papacy. The result was not favorable to their object, and the next
day their presents were returned, and they had permission to leave
the country. They left during the week, but not till they had taken
much pains, though apparently without success, to shake the
Patriarch's confidence in the American missionaries. Soon after,
early in November, Mr. Hinsdale returned to Mosul.

Up to this time, Mar Yusuf had been fearless and tolerably patient,
but he had now become heartily tired of the mountains, and longed
for his peaceful home on the plain. It was the first time in a life
of fifty years, that he had been ill when far from home. Yet he had
been faithful in imparting religious instruction, and the missionary
regretted his departure. Near the close of November, Dr. Grant
received a letter from Nurullah Bey, requesting his professional
services at Julamerk. His Nestorian friends strongly objected to his
going, as they were apprehensive of treachery, and not without some
reason; but he went, committing his way unto the Lord. He found the
chief sick of fever, from which he recovered, through the blessing
of God on the remedies employed. There was now opportunity to
counteract reports intended to enlist the Emir in measures to
destroy the mission. He became convinced that Dr. Grant was neither
building a castle at Asheta, nor a bazaar to draw away the trade.
Elsewhere, as will appear in the sequel, these reports had a more
serious effect.

Dr. Grant had already heard of the arrival of the Rev. Thomas Laurie
and wife at Mosul; and two days after, returning from Julamerk, he
received the painful intelligence that Mr. Hinsdale was dangerously
sick. He at once hastened to his relief, but he was too late. The
devoted missionary rested from his labors on the 26th of December,
at the age of thirty-five, after a sickness of twenty-four days. His
disease was typhus fever. Mr. Hinsdale was a native of Torrington,
Connecticut, and received his education at Yale College, and the
Auburn Theological Seminary. "On the night of his decease," says Dr.
Grant, "while his deeply afflicted wife and Mr. Laurie were sitting
by him, he was heard to say, amid the wanderings of his disordered
intellect; 'I should love to have the will of my Heavenly Father
done!' It was his 'ruling passion strong in death.' Desiring to have
the will of God done in all the earth, he had toiled to fit himself
for the missionary work, and then, regardless of sacrifices, he had
come to a field rich in promise, but full of hardships. His daily
spirit, as evinced in all his actions, made me feel that he was just
the man for this portion of the Lord's vineyard."

The Papists were, to say the least, not the main cause of Mar
Shimon's alienation from his American friends. In 1840, after Dr.
Grant had passed through the mountains the second time, on his
return to America, the Patriarch was visited by Mr. Ainsworth,
travelling at the expense of the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge and the Royal Geographical Society. The statements of this
gentleman and of his companion, Mr. Rassam, to Mar Shimon, so
resembled those made by the Papists, that the Patriarch suspected
them of being Jesuits in disguise, and they actually left the
mountains without removing that suspicion. Nor was it creditable to
them, that they passed through Oroomiah without even calling on the
American missionaries there.1

1 See _Dr. Grant and the Mountain Nestorians_, pp. 151-154. For Mr.
Ainsworth's account of this visit, see _Travels and Researches in
Asia Minor_, _etc_., vol. i. p. 1, and vol. ii. pp. 243-255. It is
not necessary here to correct the erroneous statements in the
passage referred to.

