
There is some difference of opinion as to whether the prophets are superior
to the angels. The Hanifites hold that the prophets amongst men are
superior to the prophets amongst angels, who in their turn are superior to
the ordinary run of men, to whom again the angels, other than prophets, are
inferior. The Mutazilites say that the angels are superior to the prophets.
The Shia'hs assert that the twelve Imams are superior to prophets.

The way in which Muhammad received inspiration has been shown in a previous
chapter; but Ibn Khaldoun gives such an interesting account of prophetic
inspiration that I give the substance of his remarks here. He speaks
somewhat as follows.[142] If we contemplate the world and the creatures it
contains we shall recognize a perfect order, a regular {152} system, a
sequence of cause and effect, a connexion between different categories of
existence, and a transformation of beings from one category of existence to
another. Then the phenomena of the visible world indicate to us the
existence of an agent whose nature is different from that of the body, who
is in fact a spiritual existence. This agent, which is the soul, must on
the one hand be in contact with the existences of this world and, on the
other, with the existences in the next category of superiority, and one
whose essential qualities are pure perception and clear intelligence. Such
are the angels. It follows, then, that the human soul has a tendency
towards the angelic world. All this is quite in accordance with the idea
that, according to a regular order, all the categories of existences in the
universe are in mutual contact by means of their faculties and on account
of their nature.

The souls of men may be divided into three classes. The first kind of soul
is too feeble by nature to attain to a perception of the spiritual: it has
to content itself with moving in the region of sense and imagination. Thus
it can understand concepts and affirmations. It can raise itself high in
its own category but cannot pass its limit.

The souls of the second class are carried by a reflective movement and a
natural disposition towards a spiritual intelligence. They can enter into a
state of contemplation which results in ecstasy. This is the intuition of
the Saints (Auliya)[143] to whom God has given this divine knowledge.

The souls of the third class are created with the power of disengaging
themselves altogether from their human bodies in order that they may rise
to the angelic state where they become like angels. In a moment of time
such {153} a soul perceives the sublime company (of angels) in the sphere
which contains them. It, there and then, hears the speech of the soul and
the divine voice. Such are the souls of the prophets. God has given to
these souls the power of leaving the human body. Whilst thus separate from
it God gives to them His revelation. The prophets are endowed by God with
such a purity of disposition, such an instinct of uprightness, that they
are naturally inclined to the spiritual world. They are animated by an
ardour quite peculiar to their order. When they return from the angelic
state they deliver to men the revelations they have received. Sometimes the
revelation comes to the prophet as the humming of confused discourse. He
grasps the ideas and, as soon as the humming ceases, he comprehends the
message; sometimes an angel in human form communicates the revelation, and
what he says the prophet learns by heart. The journey to, the return from
the angelic state, and the comprehension of the revelation received there
occupy less time than the twinkling of an eye. So rapidly do the souls of
prophets move. So instantaneously do they receive and understand God's
revelations. This is why inspiration is called Wahi, a word which,
according to Ibn Khaldoun, means to make haste.

The first way of delivering a message is adopted when he who receives it is
only a Nabi (prophet), and not a Rasul (apostle or messenger.) The second
mode is employed towards a Rasul who, on the principle that the greater
contains the less, is also a Nabi. A Hadis records that Muhammad said:
"Revelation came to me sometimes like the ticking of a clock and fatigued
me much. When it stopped I learnt the meaning of what had been delivered to
me. Sometimes an angel in human form spoke to me and, whilst he was
speaking, I learnt what was said." That a prophet should feel oppressed on
such occasions is hinted at in "With measured tone intone the Quran, for we
shall devolve on thee mighty words." (Sura lxxiii. 5.)

{154}

A Nabi, (who must be a wise and a free man, that is, one who is not a slave
of another, and one also who is free from imperfection either of body or
mind), receives Wahi but has not necessarily to deliver to men the orders
of God. A Rasul who must possess the same qualifications as a Nabi, is one
who is commanded to deliver God's message to men, though he does not
necessarily abrogate what preceding Rasuls have delivered. Neither is it
necessary that he should bring a book or even a new law. Some Rasuls do so,
but the distinguishing mark of the Rasul is that he delivers to men
commands direct from God, and is specially commissioned so to do. Thus
every Rasul is a Nabi, whilst every Nabi is not a Rasul.

The question of the sinlessness of the prophets is one to which
considerable attention has been paid by Muslim theologians. The orthodox
belief is that they are free from sin. Some think that their freedom from
sin is because the grace of God being ever in them in the richest fulness
they are kept in the right path. The Ash'arians believe that the power of
sinning is not created in them.[144] The Mutazilites deny this, but admit
the existence of some quality which keeps them from evil. These theories do
not agree with actual facts. Prophets like other men commit faults, but
here comes in the Muslim distinction of sins into gunah-i-kabira "great
sins," and gunah-i-saghira "little sins." The gunah-i-kabira are, murder,
adultery, disobedience to God and to parents, robbing of orphans, to accuse
of adultery, to avoid fighting against infidels, drunkenness, to give or to
take usury, to neglect the Friday prayers and the Ramazan fast, tyranny,
backbiting, untrustworthiness, forgetting the Quran after reading it, to
avoid giving true or to give false witness, lying without sufficient
reason,[145] to swear falsely or to swear by any other than God, flattery
of tyrants, false judgments, giving short weight or measure, {155} magic,
gambling, approval of the ceremonies of infidels, boasting of one's piety,
calling on the names of deceased persons and beating the breast at such
times,[146] dancing, music, neglect when opportunity offers of warning
other persons with regard to the "commands and prohibitions" of God,
disrespect to a Hafiz, to shave the beard, to omit saying the "darud"
(_i.e._ on whom and on whose family be the peace and mercy of God) whenever
the name of Muhammad is mentioned.[147] These are all "great sins" and can
only be forgiven after due repentance: the "little sins" are forgiven if
some good actions are done. "Observe prayer at early morning, at the close
of day, and at the approach of night; for the _good deeds drive away the
evil deeds_." (Sura xi. 116).

Men may commit sin wittingly or unwittingly. It is the universal belief
that a prophet never commits the greater sins in either way; but there is a
difference of opinion with regard to the lesser sins. Some hold that they
can do them unwittingly, though even then it is not in any thing connected
with their office. Others again limit even this frailty to the period
before "wahi" (inspiration) comes upon them. The general opinion, however,
is that they are free from all sin, whether great or small. The frailties
which they show are merely reckoned as faults and slight imperfections not
amounting to sin.

This, to the Muslim mind at once disposes of a difficulty the Quran itself
raises on this point. With the exception of Jesus Christ, the
Anbiya-ulul-'Azm are spoken of as doing what every one except an orthodox
Muslim would call sin. Adam's transgression[148] is referred to in Sura ii.
29-37 and {156} in Sura vii. 10-24. I quote only one verse: "They said, 'O
our Lord! with ourselves have we dealt unjustly; if Thou forgive us not and
have not pity on us, we shall surely be of those that perish.'" The sin of
Noah is not specified in the Quran, yet it is plainly hinted at. "To Thee
verily, O my Lord, do I repair lest I ask that of Thee wherein I have no
knowledge: unless Thou forgive me and be merciful to me I shall be one of
the lost." (Sura xi. 49). There is also a similar request in Sura lxxi. 29.
Abraham is represented as saying to his people: "They whom ye worship, ye
and your fathers of early days, are my foes; but not so the Lord of the
worlds, who hath created me, and guideth me, who giveth me food and drink;
and when I am sick, he healeth me, and who will cause me to die and again
quicken me, and who, I hope, will forgive me my sins in the day of
reckoning." (Sura xxvi. 75-82). Moses is described as having done "a work
of Satan" in killing a man, and as saying: "'O my Lord, I have sinned to my
own hurt; forgive me.' So God forgave him; for He is the forgiving, the
merciful. He said: 'Lord, because thou hast showed me this grace, I will
never again be the helper of the wicked.'" (Sura xxviii. 15, 16).

The following passages refer to Muhammad. "Be thou steadfast and patient;
for true is the promise of God; and seek pardon for thy fault."[149] (Sura
xl. 57). "Ask pardon for thy sin, and for believers, both men and women."
(Sura xlvii. 21). The scandal caused by the Prophet's conduct with the wife
of Zeid, and with the Egyptian slave Mary, necessitated a pretended
revelation of God's will in reference to these events. The circumstances
will be found fully detailed in Sura xxxiii. 36-38 and in Sura lxvi. 1-5.

One of the most important verses is: "Verily, we have won for thee an
undoubted victory, in token that God forgiveth thy earlier and later
fault." (Sura xlviii. 1-2). {157} It is not quite clear what victory is
here referred to. According to the Tafsir-i-Husaini, some commentators say
that it is the taking of Mecca, the past tense being prophetically used for
the future. The following explanations are given of the expression "earlier
and later fault." (1) God has forgiven thy sin committed before and after
the descent of wahi, (2) before and after the taking of Mecca, or (3)
before the descent of this Sura. (4) The commentator Salmi says: "The
earlier sin refers to the sin of Adam committed when Muhammad was in the
loins of his great ancestor and thus connected with him; the later sin
refers to the followers of the Prophet, and in that way is connected with
him, just as the sin of Adam was the predecessor and the cause of their
sin." (5) Imam Abu'l-Lais says: "The words refer to the sin of Adam, and to
those of the followers of the Prophet. Both are connected with Muhammad,
because the former is forgiven by the blessing, and the latter by the
intercession of Muhammad."[150]

From these extracts from the Quran it appears that sin is imputed to
prophets, though Muslims evade the charge by the casuistry I have already
referred to. Be that as it may, it is a striking fact that the one sinless
member of the Anbiya-ulul-'Azm, the one sinless prophet of Islam, is none
other than Jesus Christ. There is no passage in the Quran which hints at
sin, even in the modified form in which Muslims attribute it to other
prophets, being committed by him: no passage which speaks of His seeking
for pardon.

It is the universal belief that prophets work miracles, (mu'jizat). A
miracle is defined to be "Kharq-i-'adat," that is, something contrary to
the usual course of nature.

The object for which a miracle is performed must be a moral one, and
chiefly to attest the truth of the statements made by the prophet. Although
Muhammad makes, in the {158} Quran, no distinct claim to the power of
working miracles,[151] his followers maintain that in this, as in all other
respects he was equal to all and superior to some prophets, and produce
various passages of the Quran in support of their view. Thus, according to
Shaikh Jelal-ud-din Syuti, if to Adam was given the power of naming every
thing, Muhammad also possessed the same power. Enoch was exalted on high,
but Muhammad was taken to the 'Baqab-i-qausain,' the 'two bows' length,'
where Gabriel, "one mighty in power," appeared to him. (Sura liii. 5-9).
Ishmael was ready to be sacrificed, but Muhammad endured the splitting of
his chest;[152] Joseph was to some extent handsome, but Muhammad was the
very perfection of beauty; Moses brought water from the rock, but Muhammad
produced it from his fingers. The sun was stayed on its course by Joshua
and so it was by Muhammad. Solomon had a great kingdom, Muhammad a greater,
for he possessed the keys of the treasuries of the earth. Wisdom was given
to John the Baptist whilst yet a child, so also were wisdom and
understanding granted to Muhammad at an early period of his life. Jesus
could raise the dead, so also could Muhammad. In addition to all these, the
special miracles of the Prophet are the splitting of the moon asunder, the
Mi'raj, the coming of a tree into his presence, and above all the wonderful
miracle of the Quran.[153]

The splitting of the moon in sunder is referred to in, {159} "The hour of
judgment approacheth; and the moon hath been split in sunder." (Sura liv.
1). Imam Zahid says that Abu Jahl and a Jew visited the Prophet, and
demanded a sign from him on pain of death. The Prophet made a sign with his
little finger, and at once the moon separated into two parts: one of which
remained in the sky, the other went off to a long distance. The Jew
believed in Islam forthwith. Abu Jahl ascribed the affair to magic, but on
making enquiry from various travellers ascertained that they, on this very
night, distinctly saw the moon in two parts.[154] Some, however, refer the
passage to the future, as they consider the splitting of the moon to be one
of the signs of the last day.

The Mi'raj, or night ascent, is mentioned in, "Glory be to Him who carried
His servant by night from the sacred temple (of Mecca) to the temple that
is more remote, whose precinct We have blessed, that We might show him of
our signs." (Sura xvii. 1). Muslim writers, who are fond of the marvellous,
narrate at length the wonderful things the Prophet saw and did on this
eventful night;[155] but some maintain that it was only a vision, and quote
the words: "We ordained the vision which we showed thee," in proof of this
assertion.[156] Be that as it may, all orthodox Muslims maintain the
superiority of Muhammad, as a worker of miracles, over all other prophets.

5. THE RESURRECTION AND THE LAST DAY.--These two articles of the faith may
be considered together. The {160} following is a summary of the remarks of
Muhammad Al Berkevi on this point. It is necessary to acknowledge:--

    1. That the torments of the tomb are real and certain and that Munkir
    and Nakir (Ante p. 145) will come and interrogate the dead person
    concerning his God, his Prophet, his faith and his Qibla. The faithful
    will reply: "our God is God; our Prophet is Muhammad; our religion,
    Islam; our Qibla, the Ki-'adataba.

    2. That all the signs of the last day mentioned by the Prophet will
    come to pass; such as, the appearance of Dajjal, or Antichrist; the
    descent of Jesus from heaven; the appearance of Imam Mahdi and of Gog
    and Magog; the rising of the sun from the west, &c.

    3. That all living things will die; that the mountains will fly in the
    air like birds; that the heavens will melt away; that after some time
    has thus passed God most High will set the earth in order and raise the
    dead; that prophets, saints, doctors of the law, and the faithful will
    find near them the robes and the horses of Paradise. They will put on
    the robes, and mount the horses and go into the shade of the throne of
    God. Other men, hungry, thirsty, and naked will go on foot. The
    Faithful will go to the right, the Infidels to the left.

    4. That there will be a balance, in which the good and bad actions of
    men will be weighed. Those whose good deeds outweigh the bad will go to
    Paradise; if the bad predominate, they will go into the fire, unless
    God has mercy on them, or the prophets or saints intercede for them.
    If, however, they were not Muslims there will be no intercession for
    them, nor will they come out from the fire. The Muslims who enter the
    fire will, after having purged their crimes, enter Paradise.

    5. That the bridge Sirat, which is sharper than a sword, is raised
    above the fire; that all men must pass over this. Some will pass over
    with the speed of lightning, some like a horse that runs, some, their
    backs laden with their sins, will go very slowly over; others will fall
    and certainly enter into the fire.

    6. That each prophet has a pool where he, with his people, will quench
    their thirst before entering Paradise; that the pool of Muhammad is the
    largest of all, for it is a month's march from one side thereof to the
    other. Its water is sweeter than honey, whiter than milk.

    7. That Paradise and Hell actually exist; that the chosen remain for
    ever in the former; they neither die, nor grow aged. They experience no
    kind of change. The Houris and the females are exempted {161} from the
    infirmities of their sex. They will no longer bear children. The elect
    will find there the meat and the drink they require, without taking
    upon themselves any trouble. The ground of Paradise is of musk; the
    bricks of its edifices are of gold and of silver.

    The unbelievers and the demons will remain for ever in hell, tormented
    by serpents as thick as the neck of a camel, by scorpions as large as
    mules, by fire and by scalding water. Their bodies will burn, till they
    become reduced to a coal, when God will revive them so that they may
    endure fresh torments. This will last for ever."

The following additional remarks are based on the Sharh-i-'Aqaid-i-Jami.
They fall under four heads.

(1). The sounding of the trumpets. (Nafkhatain-i-Sur). This will not take
place until wickedness spreads over all the earth. The Prophet said: "The
resurrection will not come to pass, till some of the sects among my
followers mix up with the Mushriks (those who associate others with God)
and till others commence to worship monuments." Again, "The last hour will
not be till no one is found who calls on God." Then "There shall be a blast
on the trumpet, and all who are in the heavens and all who are in the earth
shall expire, save those whom God shall vouchsafe to live. There shall be
another blast on it, and lo! arising they shall gaze around them." (Sura
xxxix. 68). Abu Huraira, a Companion, relates that the Prophet speaking of
the trumpet stated as follows: "After the creation of the heavens and the
earth God created the trumpet and gave it to Israfil who, with his mouth
placed to it, is ever looking up and waiting for the order to blow it. He
will blow three times.[157] The first time, the blast of consternation, to
terrify; the second, the blast of examination, to slay; the third, the
blast of resurrection, to quicken the dead." Most persons believe that
everything, save God and His attributes, will perish. The Karamians and
some other sects deny this.

{162}

The resurrection of the body is clearly proved by the Quran. Thus, "They
say, 'Who will bring us back?' Say: 'He who created you at first.'" (Sura
xvii. 53). "'Who shall give life to bones when they are rotten?' Say: 'He
shall give life to them who gave them being at first, for in all creation
is He skilled.'" (Sura xxxvi. 79). "Man saith: 'What! after I am dead,
shall I in the end be brought forth alive?' Doth not man bear in mind that
we made him at first, when he was nought?" (Sura xix. 68). "The infidels
will say, 'shall we indeed be restored as at first? What! When we have
become rotten bones?' 'This then,' say they, 'will be a return to loss.'
Verily, it will be but a single blast, and lo! they are on the surface of
the earth." (Sura lxxix. 10-14). "Is He not powerful enough to quicken the
dead?" (Sura lxxv. 40). This resurrection will be to judgment. "'Never,'
say the unbelievers, 'will the hour come upon us.' Say: 'Yea, by my Lord
who knoweth the unseen, it will surely come upon you, ... to the intent
that God may reward those who have believed, ... but as for those who aim
to invalidate our signs, a chastisement of painful torment awaiteth them.'"
(Sura xxxiv. 3, 4). "A terrible chastisement doth await them _on the Day_
when faces shall turn white, and faces shall turn black. 'What! after your
belief have ye become infidels? Taste, then, the chastisement for that ye
have been unbelievers.' And as to those whose faces shall have become
white, they shall be within the mercy of God." (Sura iii, 102). The Prophet
knew not the time when all this would take place. "They will ask thee of
the 'Hour,' when will be its fixed time? But what knowledge hast thou of
it? Its period is known only to thy Lord; and thou art charged with the
warning of those who fear it." (Sura lxxix. 41-45.) These and similar texts
show the certainty of the resurrection. According to the Ijma' of the
Faithful, he who has any doubts on this article of the faith is an infidel.
The {163} Mutazilites show from reason that a resurrection of the body is
necessary in order that rewards and punishment may be bestowed. The
orthodox agree with the conclusion, but hesitate to base it on reason.[158]
