had mustered together several Bedouin tribes to attack Mohammad, to
fight and kill him; it was a straightforward course allowed by the
usages of the military law. Mohammad had distinctly and expressly
interdicted _perfidy, deceit and assassination_. "Do not," said he,
charging his commanders and soldiers on the point of marching for a
military expedition, "commit perfidy, and do not mutilate, and do not
kill a child."[220] He also laid down the golden maxim, "_Belief is the
restraint to assassination. No believer should commit
assassination_."[221]

5.--_Abu Rafe._

[Sidenote: 53. Abu Rafe.]

Abu Rafe, called also Sallam Ibn Abul Hokeik, was the chief of Bani
Nazeer, who had warred with the Moslems at Medina, and had been banished
to Khyber. He had taken a prominent part in the assembling of most of
the Bedouin tribes at the war of the confederates when they besieged
Medina. Subsequently, he had excited Bani Fezara and other Bedouin
tribes to carry on their depredations among the Moslems. A band of the
latter was dispatched to inflict condign punishment upon him, and he met
with his death at their hands. But the account of his execution are full
of contradictions and discrepancies. But none of these diverse stories
has, that Mohammad commanded the assassination of Abu Rafe, while Ibn
Ishak gives no account of him at all. Ibn Hisham has--"That Abu Rafe had
brought the confederate army against Mohammad, and some of Khazraj had
asked permission to kill him, and Mohammad permitted them."[222] Sir W.
Muir narrates that Mohammad "gave them command to make away with Abul
Huckeick,"[223] whilst the Secretary of Wakidi, whom he follows, simply
says, "He gave command to kill him." "_Making away with a person_"
creates an idea of secret murder tantamount to 'assassination,' but such
is not the wording of the original. _Sending a party to kill_, or _fight
with an enemy_ are synonymous, and permissible by the international or
military law, the Arab mode of fighting mostly consisting of single
combats.

6.--_Oseir-bin Zarim._[224]

[Sidenote: 54. Oseir-bin Zarim.]

Oseir-ibn Zarim, the chief of Bani Nazeer, had maintained a hostile
animosity against the Moslems of Medina, to war with whom he had
enrolled himself in the adverse tribe of Ghatafan. Preparations were
briskly made by this tribe to make a havoc of Medina, and Oseir had been
made the hero of the enterprise. Hereupon Mohammad delegated the mission
of bringing the insurgent to Medina to Abdullah-bin Rawaha and some
others, with a promise of making him Governor of Khyber,[225] and
treating him with marked distinction, if he yielded to the wishes of the
Prophet. Oseir complied, and set out with his followers to Medina. On a
camel were mounted Abdullah-bin, Oneis, and Oseir. Hardly they had
travelled six miles when Oseir repented of his determination to go to
Medina, and stretched forth his hand towards the sword of Abdullah, who
leaped from the camel and cut off his leg, Oseir in the meantime
wounding Abdullah's head with his camel staff.[226]

Now, whether Oseir was assassinated or murdered perfidiously; whether
he meditated treachery, and Abdullah struck him in his
self-defence,--whatever might be the case, certainly there is nothing in
the narrative of Oseir's death to show that Mohammad had sent him "on a
secret errand with a view of getting rid of the Jewish chief" as Sir W.
Muir explains.[227] The story is not imparted by earliest writers like
Ibn Ishak, and the traditions of a later date are incoherent, one-sided,
and imperfect. Notwithstanding these inaccuracies, no account tells us
that mandates were issued for fighting with or killing Oseir, much less
for his assassination.

7.--_The alleged intended Assassination of Abu Sofian._

[Sidenote: 55. The intended assassination of Abu Sofian.]

A Bedouin Arab was sent by Abu Sofian to Medina to assassinate Mohammad.
The emissary was tracked in his evil attempt, and confessed the purpose
with which he had come. This is related by Ibn Sad Katib Wakidi as the
cause of Mohammad's sending Amr Ibn Omeya to assassinate Abu
Sofian.[228] According to Hishamee, Amr was commissioned by the Prophet
to fight with Abu Sofian, and to kill him in immediate revenge for the
murder of Khobeib and his companions captured at Raji.[229] Now, Ibn
Ishak and Wakidi preserve absolute silence on this head. Ibn Hisham
relates nothing about assassination. It is only Ibn Sad Katib Wakidi who
hands down to posterity the orders of Mohammad for the assassination of
Abu Sofian. This tradition is neither strengthened by any sterling
witness, nor is it a genuine one; and for this very reason it was not
accepted by Ibn Ishak or even by Wakidi, so prone to the recital of
apocryphal traditions.

[Sidenote: 56. Irving and Muir quoted: concluding remarks.]

Referring to the above attempted assassination Mr. Washington Irving
says: "During this period of his career Mahomet in more than one
instance narrowly escaped falling by the hand of an assassin. He himself
is charged with the use of insidious means to rid himself of an enemy,
for it is said that he sent Amru Ibn Omeya on a secret errand to Mecca,
to assassinate Abu Sofian, but the plot was discovered, and the assassin
only escaped by rapid flight. The charge, however, is not well
substantiated, and is contrary to his general character and
conduct."[230]

Sir W. Muir writes: "There is just a shadow of possibility that the
tradition may have been fabricated by the anti-Omeyad party to throw
odium on the memory of Abu Sofian, as having been deemed by Mahomet
worthy of death. But this is not to be put against the evidence of
unanimous and apparently independent traditions."[231] But, in fact,
there are no unanimous and apparently independent traditions of the
command of Mohammad to assassinate Abu Sofian; there is only one and but
one, by Ibn Sad, which is wholly unreliable, and that too from the lips
of the would-be assassin himself who before the introduction of Islam
was a professional cutthroat, whose narration, therefore, deserves not
our belief.

Even if it be taken for granted that Mohammad did send some one to
assassinate Abu Sofian, who had already sent some one to assassinate
Mohammad as related by Ibn Sad, it was justified in self-defence. It was
a measure for retaliation, not one of mere revenge, but only a means of
protective retribution, which is lawful under the military law.[232]

[Footnote 205: Selections from the Kur-an by Edward William Lane, with
an Introduction by Stanley Lane Poole. Intro., p. xliv: Truebner & Co.,
London, 1879.]

[Footnote 206: Islam under the Arabs, by R.D. Osborn, p. 60, London,
1876.]

[Footnote 207: Wakidi's Campaigns of Mohammad, pp. 172 & 173: Calcutta
Baptist Mission Press; edited by A. Von Kremer.]

[Footnote 208: Sir W. Muir writes that "Hishami says, that Mahomet,
being vexed by Asma's verses, said _publicly_, 'Who will rid me of this
woman?'" But there is no such word in Ibn Hisham which may be rendered
'_publicly_.']

[Footnote 209: Ibn Hisham, p. 994. Wakidi does not give this sentence.
On the contrary, he says, Salim had taken a vow to kill Abu Afak or die
himself.]

[Footnote 210: Ibn Sad Katib Wakidi, pp. 186, 187.]

[Footnote 211: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. III, pp.
147-148.]

[Footnote 212: In the collections of Bokhari in the Book of Campaigns;
and in the Book of Jihad by Moslim.]

[Footnote 213: Mohammad-bin Sad Katib Wakidi and Mohammad-bin Ishak. The
latter in Ibn Hisham, p. 551.]

[Footnote 214: Vide _Osaba-fi Tamiz Issahaba_; or, Biographical
Dictionary of Persons who knew Mohammad, by Ibn Hajr-al-Askalani. Part
I, No. 1021, p. 434.]

[Footnote 215: Ibn Abbas was only five years old at that time, and was
at Mecca. His evidence is consequently inadmissible.]

[Footnote 216: Yahya-bin Saeed al Ansaree, Ali-bin Abdullah-bin Abbas,
Ibnal Mosayyab, Ata Ibrahim-bin Maisura, Mohammad-bin Sireen, Kasim, and
Abdullah-bin Omar say that Ikrama was a liar. Vide _Mizanul Etedal_ of
Zahabi, _Koukabi Durrari Sharah_, _Saheeh Bokhari_, by Shamsuddin
Kirmani; and _Marafat Anwaa-ilm Hadees_, by Abu Omar-ad-Damishki.]

[Footnote 217: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. III, p. 200.]

[Footnote 218: Elements of International Law, by Henry Wheaton, LL.D.
Sixth edition, by William Beach Lawrence, Boston, 1855; Part IV, Chapter
I, p. 374, quoting Bynkershoek; in p. 416, quoting Bynkershoek and
Wolff.]

[Footnote 219: _Ibid_, Chapter II, p. 470.]

[Footnote 220: The collections of Moslem _Apud_ Boreida, _vide_ Mishkat,
p. 333.]

[Footnote 221: The collections of Abu Daud in the Book of Jihad, Vol.
II, p. 26.]

[Footnote 222: The Life of Mohammad based on Mohammad-ibn Ishak, by
Abdel Malik-ibn Hisham, p. 714.]

[Footnote 223: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, p. 14.]

[Footnote 224: Or Yoseir-bin Razim.]

[Footnote 225: As Khyber was not yet conquered, neither Mohammad could
make such a promise, nor the Jews could have been induced to believe it;
therefore the story is a false one.]

[Footnote 226: The Life of Mohammad, by Abdel Malik-bin Hisham, pp.
980-981.]

[Footnote 227: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 16-17.]

[Footnote 228: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV. p. 20.]

[Footnote 229: The Life of Mohammad, by Abdel Malik-bin Hisham, pp.
992-993. The fighting was, according to Arab custom, in single combats.]

[Footnote 230: Mahomet and his Successors, by Washington Irving, p. 118,
London, 1869.]

[Footnote 231: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 20, foot-note.]

[Footnote 232: Compare "Contributions to Political Science," by Francis
Lieber, LL.D., Vol. II, p. 250.]


_The alleged Cruelties in executing the Prisoners of War and others_.

[Sidenote: 57. Treatment of the prisoners of war.]

Some of the war prisoners had received the condign punishment of
execution for their crimes in conformity with the laws of war. It has
been alleged by some European biographers of Mohammad that their (the
war prisoners') execution was cruel, and that they were accused of no
crime except their scepticism and political antagonism.[233]

The persons executed were as follows:--

     1. Nadhr-bin-Harith.
     2. Okba.
     3. Abul Ozza.
     4. Moavia-bin-Mughira.

[Sidenote: The law of nations regarding the prisoners of war.]

Before reviewing the case of each prisoner, I must note, by way of
introductory remarks, that, under the international or military law, a
prisoner of war is a public enemy armed or attached to the hostile army
for active aid, and who has fallen into the hands of the captor, either
fighting or wounded, on the fields or in the hospitals, by individual
surrender or capitulation. All soldiers, of whatever species of arms;
all men who belong to the rising _en masse_ of the hostile country; all
those who are attached to the army for its efficiency and promote
directly the object of the war, except religious persons, officers of
medical staff, hospital nurses and servants, all disabled men or
officers on the field, or elsewhere, if captured, all enemies who have
thrown away their arms and asked for quarters, are prisoners of war, and
as such exposed to the inconveniences as well as entitled to the
privileges of a prisoner of war. He is subject to no punishment for
being a public enemy, nor is any revenge wreaked upon him by the
international infliction of any suffering or disgrace, by cruel
imprisonment, want of food, by mutilation, death, or any other
barbarity. But a prisoner of war remains answerable for his crimes
committed against the captor's army or people before he was captured,
and for which he has not been punished by his own authorities. All
prisoners of war are liable to the infliction of retaliatory measures.

1.--_Nadhr-bin-Harith_.

[Sidenote: 59. The execution of Nadhr Ibn Harith.]

Nadhr (Nazr), one of the prisoners of war, was executed after the battle
of Badr for his crime of severely tormenting the Moslems at Mecca.
Musab had distinctly reminded him of his torturing the companions of
Mohammad,[234] so there was nothing of a cruel and vindictive spirit of
the Prophet displayed towards his enemies in the execution of Nazr as it
is made out by Sir W. Muir.[235] On the other hand, his execution is
denied by some critics, like Ibn Manda and Abu Naeem, who say, that
Nazr-bin-Haris was present at the battle of Honain, A.H. 8, six years
after that of Badr, and was presented with one hundred camels by
Mohammad. Sir W. Muir himself puts down very quietly Nadhir Ibn al
Harith's name in a foot-note (Vol. IV, page 151) as a recipient of one
hundred camels at Honain. The same Nadhr-bin-Harith is shown among the
earliest Moslem refugees who had fled to Abyssinia. These discrepancies
leave no doubt that the story of Nadhr's execution is not a fact. It is
also related by the narrators, who assert Nazr's execution at Badr, that
his daughter or sister came to Mohammad and addressed him several
verses, the hearing of which produced such a tender emotion in him, that
his eyes shed tears and said, he would not have issued orders for his
execution had he heard these verses before. The following are two of the
verses which Mohammad heard:

     _"Ma kan Zarraka lao mananta va rubba mamannal
       fata va ho-al mughizul mohnihoo."_
     Thou wouldst no harm have seen to set him free,
     Anger how high for pardon has no plea.

But Zobier-bin-Bakar says, he heard some learned men who objected to
these verses on the ground that they were all concocted; and I think
that the whole story of Nazr's execution is a spurious one.

2.--_Okba-bin-Mueit_.

[Sidenote: 60. The execution of Okba.]

Another prisoner, named Okba, was executed after the battle of Badr for
a crime similar to that of Nazr. It is related that while he was going
to be executed, he asked who would take care of his little girl.
Mohammad replied, "Hell-fire!" This is altogether an apocryphal story,
and owes its origin to the relation of Okba to the tribe of Banunnar, or
the "children of fire." Wackidi does not give his authorities for the
story, and Ibn Is-hak gives only one immediately before him, which is
cut short of another intervening link of authorities up to the scene of
occurrence. Abu Daood narrates it from Masrook, who gave it on the
authority of Abdullah-bin-Mas-ood, who does not say he was present at
the scene or he heard it directly or indirectly from Mohammad. Besides
the circumstances under which Masrook gave out this story are very
suspicious, and show that calumny was at work. Masrook was proposed by
Zohak to be entrusted with the administration of a certain district.
Ommara, the son of Okba, objected to this, as Masrook was one of the
murderers of Osman, the third Khalif. Masrook in reply said to Ommara,
on the authority of Ibn Masood, that "when thy father was being
executed, he had asked the Prophet, who will take care of his little
girl." The Prophet replied, "Hell-fire." Therefore, I am satisfied for
thee with what the Prophet had chosen for thy father.[236]

There is a discrepancy in the mode of Okba's execution as well as about
the person who executed him. Ibn Is-hak says, that it was Asim who
killed him, and Ibn Hisham, that it was Ali. Ibrahim is of opinion, that
Okba was executed at Taimee,[237] and Mohammad-bin-Khobeib Hashimi,[238]
that he was crucified, from which others differ and say that he was
beheaded. I have no belief in Okba's execution at all.

[Sidenote: 61. Free liberty granted to Ozza, a prisoner of war.]

Abul Ozza, one of the prisoners of Badr, and who was one of the
persecutors of the Moslems at Mecca, had besought Mohammad to release
him by way of compassion for his five daughters. Mohammad granted him
his life and his liberty.[239] This directly points to the universal
generosity of the Prophet, and from this it will appear that the story
of Okba's execution runs contrary to his general character and conduct.
On these grounds the execution of Okba might be rejected as a fiction.

3.--_Abul Ozza._

[Sidenote: 62. Abul Ozza proved a traitor and was executed.]

Abul Ozza, one of the prisoners of Badr, was allowed his freedom without
any ransom, on the condition that he would never again bear up arms in
any war against the Prophet; but he proved a traitor. He exhorted the
Arabs to make war on Mohammad, and joined himself the invading army of
Mecca. He was doomed to misfortune, he was caught at Hamra, and duly
executed.[240] This was in full accordance with the laws and usages of
war (_vide ante_, para. 58).

4.--_Moavia Ibn Mughira._

[Sidenote: The execution of Moavia Ibn Mughira.]

Moavia Ibn Mughira, also a prisoner of war, was granted three days'
truce, on the condition that if he were found in Medina after the
appointed time, he was to be executed. The period had passed, and he was
still lurking at Medina. At length he was found out and killed by Zeid
and Ammar on their return from Hamra-al-Assad, after five or six days.
It is apparent that Moavia violated his truce, and his lurking in Medina
might be either as a spy[241] or scout secretly seeking information.

[Sidenote: 64. Justification of Mughira's execution.]

Sir W. Muir, who calls him Othman Ibn Mughira, makes out a favourable
case in his behalf. He writes: He "incautiously lingered at Medina till
the last day of his term of grace, when he set out for Mecca."[242] But
Ibn Hisham distinctly writes that he "stayed at Medina after the three
days had passed and was found lurking there." Even according to Wackidi
he was caught on the fourth day. But this is far from truth, for,
according to his own account, Mohammad was absent after the battle of
Ohad for five days at Hamra-al-Assad; then how he (Ibn Mughira) could
have endeavoured to avoid the returning Moslem force from
Hamra-al-Assad, and lose his way, as Sir W. Muir gives it out, only on
the fourth day?

One of the enemies, who had invaded Medina and attacked Mohammad, was,
after being captured, allowed three days' truce on explicit conditions
that he was to be killed there if found after three days, and was also
provided with a camel and provisions for the way, was discovered lurking
thereabout on the fifth or sixth day, in consequence of which he lost
his life. This is called by Sir W. Muir as being "perished by a too
great confidence in the generosity of his enemy,"[243]--_i.e._,
Mohammad.

[Footnote 233: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 307.]

[Footnote 234: Wackidi Campaigns of Mohammad, p. 101, Calcutta, 1855.]

[Footnote 235: "It was at Otheil that the cruel and vindictive spirit of
Mahomet towards his enemies first began to display itself."--Muir's Life
of Mohamet, Vol. III, p. 115. After this, the author narrates the
execution of Nazr. Ibn Is-hak. _Vide_ Ibn Hisham, p. 458; Wackidi, p.
108; Abu Daood, Vol. II, p. 10. This story is not given by Ibn Hisham
and Ibn Sad.]

[Footnote 236: Abu Daood as before.]

[Footnote 237: Zorkanee, Vol. II, p. 541.]

[Footnote 238: Sirat Halabi, Vol. II, p. 371.]

[Footnote 239: Wackidi, 105. Insan-ul Oyoon or Sirat Halabi, Vol. II, p.
464.]

[Footnote 240: Wackidi, p. 105; Hishami, p. 591; Insan-ul-Oyoon or Sirat
Halabi, Vol. II, p. 464.]

[Footnote 241: Ibn Hisham, p. 591; Wackidi, pp. 324 and 325.]

[Footnote 242: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. III, p. 185.]

[Footnote 243: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, 185.]


_The intended Execution of the Prisoners of Badr._

[Sidenote: 63. The wrong version of Sir W. Muir.]

Sir W. Muir writes: "It would even seem to have been contemplated at the
close of the battle to kill all the prisoners. Mahomet is represented by
tradition as himself directing this course." In a foot-note he says,
"Thus Mahomet said: 'Tell not Said of his brother's death'" (Mabad, a
prisoner, see above, page 110 note); "but kill ye every man his
prisoner."--(Wackidi, 100.) Again: "Take not any man his brother
prisoner, but rather kill him" (page 101). "I would not, however, lay
too much stress on these traditions. I am inclined rather to view them
as called into existence by the passages quoted below from the
Coran."[244] The contemplated execution of the prisoners is not borne
out by the traditions which Sir W. Muir himself looks upon as fabricated
ones. The true translation of the passages in Wackidi referred to above
is as follows:--

_First passage._--"Tell not Said of his brother's killing (_i.e._, being
killed), so he will kill every prisoner in your hands."--(Wackidi, page
100.) This obviously means, that do not let Saeed know that his brother
Wahid, who was made prisoner and killed by Omar or Abu Barda, was
killed. If you do so, he will, being enraged, kill every prisoner now in
your hands. It is very strange that Sir W. Muir translates the sentence
to mean "kill ye every man his prisoner!"

_Second passage._--"No body must take his brother's prisoner, so that he
may be killed," meaning none of you should seize other person's
prisoner. If you do so, perhaps, the other person may kill the prisoner
in the contest. Sir W. Muir has quite misunderstood the sentence.

[Sidenote: 66. Mohammad never blamed in the Koran for relieving
prisoners.]

There are some fictitious traditions on the subject that Mohammad was
reprimanded in the Koran (Sura, viii, 68, 69) for releasing the
prisoners of Badr, meaning that he ought to have executed them. The
verse is translated thus:--

"It is not for a Prophet to take prisoners until (_hatta_) he hath
slaughtered in the land. Ye wish to have the goods of this world, but
God wishes for the next, for God is Mighty, Wise! Were it not for a book
from God that had gone before, there would have touched you, for which
ye took, a mighty punishment."

The verse 68, if it is rightly translated, will mean that prisoners
should not be executed. The word '_hatta_' means '_until_,' and is also
used as a causative word. I prefer the latter, and translate--

"It is not for any Prophet that prisoners may be brought to him _in
order_ that he may make slaughter in the land," which means, that it is
not proper for a Prophet to take prisoners of war in order to slaughter
them. This meaning is in consonance with the other passage in the Koran
(xlvii, 4), which restricts the treatment of the prisoners of war to
either free dismissal or ransom.
