furthermore, that in the decrees regarding the universality of
Original Sin it was not intended to include the Blessed Virgin or to
weaken the binding force of the decrees issued by Sixtus IV. regarding
her Immaculate Conception.

The way was now cleared for the question of Justification.[1] This was
the doctrine on which Luther first found himself in disagreement with
the Church, and which he put forward in his sermons as the foundation
of his new gospel. The importance of the subject both in itself and in
the circumstances of the time cannot be exaggerated, nor can it be
contended that the Fathers at Trent failed to realise their
responsibilities or to give it the attention it deserved. Had they
done nothing else except to give to the world such a complete and
luminous exposition of the Catholic teaching on Justification their
meeting would not have been held in vain. In the 6th public session
(13th January 1547), at which there were present besides the legates,
ten archbishops, forty-two bishops, two procurators, five generals of
religious orders, two abbots and forty-three theologians, it was
defined that, though by the sin of Adam man had lost original justice
and had suffered much, he still retained free-will, that God had been
pleased to promise redemption through the merits of Jesus Christ, and
that baptism or the desire for baptism is necessary for salvation. The
decrees dealt also with the method of preparing for Justification,
with its nature, causes, and conditions, with the kind of faith
required in opposition to the confidence spoken of by the Reformers,
with the necessity and possibility of observing the commandments, with
the certainty of Justification, perseverance, loss of Grace by mortal
sin, and with merit. The 7th public session (3rd March) was given to
decrees regarding the Sacraments in general and Baptism and
Confirmation in particular.

Meanwhile the long-expected civil war had begun in Germany, and Europe
awaited with anxiety the result of a struggle upon which such
momentous interests might depend. Charles, supported by most of the
Catholic and not a few of the Protestant princes, overthrew the forces
of the Elector of Saxony and of Philip of Hesse (1547) and by his
victory found himself for the first time master in his own
territories. Coupled with rejoicing at the success of the imperial
arms there was also the fear in many minds that the Emperor might use
his power to overawe the Council, and force it to agree to
compromises, which, however useful for the promotion of unity in
Germany, might be subversive of the doctrine and discipline of the
Church and dangerous to the prerogatives of the Holy See. The
selection of Trent as the place of assembly for the council was never
very satisfactory to the Pope, but now in the changed circumstances of
the Empire it was looked upon as positively dangerous. An epidemic
that made its appearance in the city afforded an excellent pretext for
securing a change of venue, and at the 8th public session (11th March
1547) a majority of the members present voted in favour of retiring to
Bologna. The legates accompanied by most of the bishops departed
immediately, while the bishops who supported the Emperor remained at
Trent. For a time the situation was critical in the extreme, but under
the influence of the Holy Ghost moderate counsels prevailed with both
parties, and after a couple of practically abortive sessions at
Bologna the council was prorogued in September 1549. A few months
later, November 1549, Paul III. passed to his reward.

In the conclave that followed the cardinals were divided into three
parties, namely, the Imperial, the French, and the followers of the
Farnese family. By an agreement between the two latter Cardinal del
Monte was elected against the express prohibition of Charles V., and
took as his title Julius III.[2] (1550-5). He was a man of good
education, of sufficiently liberal views, and with a rather large
experience acquired as a prominent official in Rome and as one of the
legates at the Council of Trent. While acting in the latter capacity
he had come into sharp conflict with the Emperor, but as Pope he found
himself forced by the conduct of the Farnese family to cultivate
friendly relations with his former opponent. The alliance concluded
with the Emperor turned out disastrously enough owing to the French
victories in Italy during the campaign of 1552, and in consequence of
this Julius III. ceased to take an active part in the struggle between
these two countries. During the earlier years of his reign the Pope
took earnest measures to push forward the work of reform, patronised
the Jesuits, established the /Collegium Germanicum/ at Rome for the
use of ecclesiastical students from Germany, and succeeded in
restoring England to communion with the Holy See, but as time passed,
discouraged by the failure of his cherished projects, he adopted a
policy of /laissez-faire/, and like many of his predecessors laid
himself open to damaging though to a great extent unfounded charges of
nepotism.

Julius III. was anxious to continue the work of reform that had been
begun in Trent. In 1550 he issued a Bull convoking the council to meet
once more in Trent on the 1st May 1551. When the papal legates
attended at the time fixed for the opening of the council they found
it necessary owing to the small numbers present to adjourn it at first
till the 1st September, and later till the 11th October. On account of
the unfriendly relations existing between France and the Empire
regarding the Duchy of Parma, and to the alliance of the Pope and the
Emperor, the King of France would not permit the French bishops to
attend. The majority of the bishops present were from Italy, Germany,
and Spain. In the 13th public session (11th Oct. 1551), at which there
were present in addition to the legates, ten archbishops and fifty-
four bishops, decrees were passed regarding the Real Presence of
Christ in the Eucharist, Transubstantiation, the institution,
excellence and worship of the Eucharist, its reservation and the
conditions necessary for its worthy reception. In the 14th public
session (25th Nov. 1551) the council dealt with the sacraments of
Penance and Extreme Unction. In the meantime the Emperor was
negotiating with the Lutherans with the object of inducing them to
send representatives to Trent. Some of their procurators had arrived
already, amongst them being the well-known theologian and historian
John Sleidanus of Strassburg, but their demands, including the
withdrawal of the decrees contravening the articles of the Augsburg
Confession and the submission of the Pope to the authority of a
General Council, were of such an extravagant character that they could
not be entertained. While the subject was under consideration news
arrived that Maurice of Saxony had gone over to the side of the
Lutherans, that there was no army in the field to hold him in check,
that the passes of the Tyrol were occupied by his troops, and that an
advance upon Trent was not impossible. Many of the bishops took their
departure immediately, and in April 1552 against the wishes of a few
Spanish bishops the council was suspended for two years. As a matter
of fact close on ten years were to elapse before the work that had
been interrupted could be resumed.

On the death of Julius III. (1555) Marcellus II. succeeded, but his
reign was cut short by death (22 days). In the conclave that followed
Cardinal Pietro Caraffa, the first general and in a certain sense the
founder of the Theatines, received the required majority of votes
notwithstanding the express veto of the Emperor. He was proclaimed
Pope under the title of Paul IV.[3] (1555-9). During his life as an
ecclesiastic the new Pope had been remarkable for his rigid views, his
ascetic life, and his adherence to Scholastic as opposed to Humanist
views. As nuncio in Spain he had acquired a complete distrust of the
Spanish rulers, nor was this bad impression likely to be removed by
the treatment he received from the Austro-Spanish party when appointed
Archbishop of Naples. The conclusion of the religious peace of
Augsburg (1555) and the proclamation of Ferdinand I. were not
calculated to win the sympathy of Paul IV. for the House of Habsburg.
Hence, he put himself in communication with the Italian opponents of
Philip II. of Spain, and concluded an alliance with France. The French
army despatched to Naples under the leadership of the Duke of Guise
was out-manoeuvred completely by the Spanish Viceroy, the Duke of Alva,
who followed up his success by invading the Papal States and
compelling the Pope to sue for peace (1556). The unfriendly relations
existing between Paul IV. and Philip II. of Spain, the husband of
Queen Mary I., rendered difficult the work of effecting a complete
reconciliation between England and the Holy See. Owing to the
disturbed condition of Europe and the attitude of the Emperor and the
King of Spain, it would have been impossible for the Pope even had he
been anxious to do so to re-convoke the council. He would not so much
as consider the idea of selecting Trent or any German city as a fit
place for such an assembly, while the Austro-Spanish rulers were
equally strong against Rome or any other place in Italy. But of his
own initiative Paul IV. took strong measures to reform the Roman
Curia, established a special commission in Rome to assist him in this
work, stamped out by vigorous action heretical opinions that began to
manifest themselves in Italy, and presided frequently himself at
meetings of the Inquisition. He even went so far as to arrest Cardinal
Morone on a suspicion of heresy, and to summon Cardinal Pole to appear
before the tribunal of the Inquisition. By the Romans he had been
beloved at first on account of his economic administration whereby the
taxes were reduced considerably, but the disastrous results of the war
against Philip II. in Naples effaced the memory of the benefits he had
conferred, and he died detested by the people. After his death the
city was at the mercy of the mob, who plundered and robbed wholesale
for close on a fortnight before order could be restored.

In the conclave that followed the two great parties among the
cardinals were the French and the Austro-Spanish, neither of which,
however, was strong enough to procure the election of its nominee.
After a struggle lasting three months Cardinal Giovanni Angelo de'
Medici, who was more or less neutral, was elected by acclamation. He
was proclaimed under the title of Pius IV. (1559-65). The new Pope had
nothing of the stern morose temperament of his predecessor. He was of
a mild disposition, something of a scholar himself, inclined to act as
a patron towards literature and art, and anxious to forward the
interests of religion by kindness rather than by severity. He was
determined to proceed with the work of the council at all costs, and
as a first step in that direction he devoted all his energies to the
establishment of friendly relations with the Emperor Ferdinand I. and
with Spain. In all his schemes for reform he was supported loyally by
his nephew, Charles Borromeo, whom he created cardinal, and to whom he
entrusted the work of preparing the measures that should be submitted
to the future council.

When all arrangements had been made the Bull of re-convocation,
summoning the bishops to meet at Trent at Easter 1561, was published
in November 1560. Though not expressly stated in the document, yet it
was implied clearly enough that the assembly was not to be a new
council but only the continuation of the Council of Trent. This was
not satisfactory to France, which demanded a revision of some of the
decrees passed at Trent, and which objected strongly to the selection
of Trent as the meeting-place. The Emperor Ferdinand I. and Philip II.
expressed their anxiety to further the project of the Pope. Delegates
were sent from Rome to interview the Lutheran princes and theologians,
but only to meet everywhere with sharp rebuffs. In an assembly held at
Naumburg in 1561 the Lutherans refused to attend the council, unless
they were admitted on their own terms, while many of the Catholic
princes and bishops showed no enthusiasm to respond to the papal
convocation. When the legates arrived to open the council they found
so few bishops in attendance that nothing could be done except to
prepare the subjects that should be submitted for discussion.

It was only on the 15th January 1562 the first (17th) public session
could be held. There were present in addition to the legates, three
patriarchs, eleven archbishops, forty bishops, four generals of
religious orders, and four abbots. From the very beginning the legates
found themselves in a very difficult position owing to the spirit of
hostility against the Holy See manifested by some of the bishops and
representatives of the civil powers. At this session very little was
accomplished except to announce the formal opening of the council, to
fix the date for the next public session, and to prepare safe conducts
for the delegates of the Protestant princes. Similarly in the 18th
public session (25th February) no decrees of any importance could be
passed. Despite the earnest efforts of the presidents it was found
impossible to make any progress. Grave differences of opinion
manifested themselves both within and without the council. The
question whether bishops are bound to reside in their dioceses by
divine or ecclesiastical law gave rise to prolonged and angry debates.
Spain demanded that it should be stated definitely that the council
was only a prolongation of the council held previously at Trent, while
France insisted that it should be regarded as a distinct and
independent assembly. The Emperor put forward a far-reaching scheme of
reform parts of which it was entirely impossible for the legates to
accept.[4] At length after many adjournments the 21st public session
was held (16th July 1562), in which decrees regarding the Blessed
Eucharist were passed. It was defined that there was no divine law
obliging the laity to receive Holy Communion under both kinds, that
the Church has power to make arrangements about Communion so long as
it does not change the substance of the sacrament, that Christ is
really present whole and entire both under the appearance of bread and
under the appearance of wine, that infants, who have not come to the
use of reason, are not bound to receive Holy Communion because they
have been regenerated already by baptism. At this session there were
present six cardinals, three patriarchs, nineteen archbishops, and one
hundred and forty-eight bishops.

In the 22nd public session (17th Sept. 1562) decrees were published
concerning the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. It was laid down that in
place of the sacrifices and the priesthood of the Old Law Christ set
up a new sacrifice, namely the Mass, the clean oblation foretold by
the prophet Malachy (Mal. I., 11) and a new priesthood, to whom the
celebration of the Mass was committed, that the sacrifice of the Mass
is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross having the same high priest
and the same victim, that the Mass may be offered up for the dead as
well as for the living, that it may be offered up in honour of the
Saints, that though the faithful should be advised to receive Holy
Communion whenever they assist at Mass, yet private Masses at which
nobody is present for Communion are not unlawful, and that, though it
was not deemed prudent to allow the sacrifice to be offered up in the
vulgar tongue, it was the earnest wish of the council that priests
should explain the ceremonies of the Mass to the people especially on
Sundays and holidays. The question of allowing the laity to receive
the chalice was discussed at length, and it was decided finally to
submit it to the decision of the Pope. Pius IV. did, indeed, make a
concession on this point in favour of several districts in Austria;
but as the Catholics did not desire such a concession and the
Lutherans refused to accept it as insufficient the indult remained
practically a dead-letter, and later on was withdrawn.

The next session was fixed for November 1562 but on account of very
grave difficulties that arose a much more prolonged adjournment was
rendered necessary. During this interval the old controversies broke
out with greater violence and bitterness, and more than once it
appeared as if the council would break up in disorder; but the
perseverance, tact, and energy of the new legates, Cardinals Morone
and Navagero, strengthened by the prudent concessions made by the
Pope, averted the threatened rupture, and made it possible for the
Fathers to accomplish the work for which they had been convoked.
Cardinal Guise[5] (de Lorraine) accompanied by a number of French
bishops and theologians arrived at Trent in November 1562. His arrival
strengthened the hands of those Spanish bishops who were insisting on
having it defined that the obligation of episcopal residence was /de
jure divino/. The question had been adjourned previously at the
request of the legates, but with the advent of the discussion on the
sacrament of Orders further adjournment was impossible. Several of the
bishops maintained that the obligation must be /jure divino/, because
the episcopate itself was /de jure divino/. From this they concluded
that the bishops had their jurisdiction immediately from Christ, not
mediately through the Pope as some of the papal theologians
maintained. Consequently they asserted that the subordination of the
bishops to the Pope was not, therefore of divine origin, thereby
raising at once the whole question of the relations of a general
council to a Pope and the binding force of the decrees regarding the
superiority of a council passed at Constance and Basle.

At the same time danger threatened the council from another quarter.
The Emperor, Ferdinand I. had put forward a very comprehensive scheme
of reform. Some portions of this were considered by the legates to be
prejudicial to the rights of the Holy See, and were therefore rejected
by them after consultation with the Pope. Ferdinand annoyed by their
action asserted that there was no liberty at the council, that it was
being controlled entirely from Rome, and that the assembly at Trent
had become merely a machine for confirming what had been decreed
already on the other side of the Alps. At his request several of his
supporters left Trent and joined him at Innsbruck, where a kind of
opposition assembly was begun. Cardinal Morone, realising fully the
seriousness of the situation, betook himself to Innsbruck (April 1563)
for a personal interview with the Emperor. The meeting had the result
of clearing away many of the misunderstandings that had arisen, and of
bringing about a compromise. At the same time the Pope wrote a letter
pointing out that it was only reasonable that the Head of the Church,
not being present at the council, should be consulted by his legates
in all important matters that might arise.

Meanwhile the council was still engaged in discussing the authority of
the bishops. On the ground that the Fathers should define at one and
the same time both the rights of the bishops and the rights of the
Holy See Cardinal Guise, who represented the Gallican school of
thought, brought forward certain proposals highly derogatory to the
prerogatives of the Pope. In face of this counter-move the legates
were firm but conciliatory. They pointed out that the whole question
of the jurisdiction of the Holy See had been decided already by the
Council of Florence and that the decrees of Florence could not be
watered down at Trent. On this question the Italian bishops found
themselves supported by the vast majority of the Spanish, Austro-
German and Portuguese representatives; but in deference to the request
of the Pope, who wished that nothing should be defined unless with the
unanimous consent of the Fathers, and to the feelings of the French,
whose secession from the council was anticipated, it was agreed to
issue no decree on the subject. As the supreme authority of the Pope
had been recognised implicitly by the council[6] no definition was
required.

As a result of the negotiations inside and outside the council it was
possible to hold the 23rd public session on the 15th July 1563. In
this it was defined that the priesthood of the New Law was instituted
by Christ, that there were seven orders in the Church about two of
which, the priesthood (/de sacerdotibus/) and the diaconate (/de
diaconis/) express mention is made in the Scriptures, that the bishops
who have succeeded to the place of the Apostles pertain especially to
the hierarchy and are superior to priests, that neither the consent of
the people nor of the civil power is necessary for the valid reception
of orders, and that bishops who are appointed by the authority of the
Roman Pontiff are true bishops.[7] The question whether the duty of
episcopal residence is /de jure divino/, about which such a protracted
and heated controversy had been waged, was settled amicably by
deciding that the bishops as pastors are bound by divine command to
know their flocks, and that they cannot do this unless they reside in
their dioceses. At this session there were present four cardinals,
three patriarchs, twenty-five archbishops and one hundred and ninety-
three bishops.

Many of the bishops were anxious to return to their dioceses, and
nearly all of them hoped for a speedy conclusion of the council. The
Pope, the Emperor, and the King of France were in agreement, though
for different reasons, in endeavouring to dissolve the assembly as
soon as possible. The sacrament of Matrimony was next proposed for
discussion. The French party wished that marriages contracted without
the consent of the parents as well as clandestine marriages should be
declared invalid, but the council refused to make the validity of
marriage dependent upon parental consent. In deference to the wishes
of Venice, which stood in close relation to the Greeks, it was agreed
to define merely that the Church does not err when she states in
accordance with the apostolic and evangelic teaching that the bond of
marriage is not broken by adultery. In the 24th public session (11th
Nov. 1563) the decrees on Matrimony were proclaimed.

The greatest anxiety was displayed on all sides to bring the work to a
conclusion. The action of the papal legates in proposing that the
interference of Catholic rulers in ecclesiastical affairs should be
considered and if necessary reformed did not tend to delay the
dissolution. The princes were most anxious to reform the Pope and
clergy, but they were determined not to allow any weakening of their
own so-called prerogatives. In accordance with the general desire the
addresses were cut short, and so rapid was the progress made that the
last public session was held on the 3rd and 4th December 1563. The
decrees on Purgatory, on the honour to be paid to relics and images of
Saints and on Indulgences were passed. It was agreed, furthermore,
that in regard to fast days and holidays the usage of the Roman Church
should be followed, and that the Holy See should undertake the
preparation of a new edition of the missal and breviary. The decrees
that had been passed under Paul III. and Julius III. were read and
approved. The legates were requested to obtain the approval of the
Holy Father for the decisions of the council, and Cardinal Guise in
the name of the bishops returned thanks to the Pope, the Emperor, the
ambassadors of the Catholic nations, and to the legates. Finally the
Fathers subscribed their names to the acts of the council. There were
then present six cardinals, three patriarchs, twenty-five archbishops,
one hundred and sixty-seven bishops, and nineteen procurators.

The Council of Trent met in peculiarly difficult circumstances, and it
carried on its work in face of great opposition and disappointments.
More than once it was interrupted for a long period, and more than
once, too, it was feared by many that it would result in promoting
schism rather than unity. But under the Providence of God the dangers
were averted, the counsels of despair were rejected, the arms of its
enemies were weakened, and the hearts of the faithful children of the
Church throughout the world filled with joy and gratitude. It found
itself face to face with a strong and daily increasing party, who
rejected the authority that had been accepted hitherto without
difficulty, and who called in question many of the most cherished
doctrines and practices of the Catholic world. Without allowing
themselves to be involved in purely domestic disputes among Catholic
theologians or to be guided by the advice of those who sought to
secure peace by means of dishonourable compromises, the Fathers of
Trent set themselves calmly but resolutely to sift the chaff from the
wheat, to examine the theories of Luther in the light of the teaching
of the Scriptures and the tradition of the Church as contained in the
writings of the Fathers, and to give to the world a clear-cut
exposition of the dogmas that had been attacked by the heretics. Never
had a council in the Church met under more alarming conditions; never
had a council been confronted with more serious obstacles, and never
did a council confer a greater service on the Christian world than did
the 19th ecumenical council held at Trent (1545-63).

It was of essential importance that the council should determine the
matters of faith that had been raised, but it was almost equally
important that it should formulate a satisfactory scheme of reform.
Reform of the Church in its Head and members was on the lips of many
whose orthodoxy could not be suspected long before Luther had made
this cry peculiarly his own, the better thereby to weaken the loyalty
of the faithful to the Holy See. As in matters of doctrine so also in
matters of discipline the Council of Trent showed a thorough
appreciation of the needs of the Church, and if in some things it
failed to go as far as one might be inclined to desire the fault is
not to be attributed to the Popes or the bishops, but rather to the
secular rulers, whose jealousies and recriminations were one of the
greatest impediments to the progress of the council, and who, while
calling out loudly for the reform of others, offered a stubborn
resistance to any change that might lessen their own power over the
Church, or prevent the realisation of that absolute royalty, towards
which both the Catholic and Protestant rulers of the sixteenth century
were already turning as the ultimate goal of their ambitions.

The council struck at the root of many of the abuses that afflicted
the Christian world by suppressing plurality of benefices, provisions,
and expectancies, as well as by insisting that, except in case of
presentation by a university, nobody could be appointed to a benefice
unless he had shown that he possessed the knowledge necessary for the
proper discharge of his duty. It determined the method of electing
bishops, commanded them to reside in their dioceses unless exempted
for a time on account of very special reasons, to preach to their
people, to hold regular visitations of their parishes, to celebrate
diocesan synods yearly, to attend provincial synods at least once in
three years, and to safeguard conscientiously the ecclesiastical
property committed to their charge.

It put an end to abuses in connexion with the use of ecclesiastical
censures, indulgences, and dispensations, and ordained that all causes
of complaint should be brought before the episcopal court before being
carried to a higher tribunal. It made useful regulations concerning
those who should be admitted into diocesan chapters, defined the
relations between the bishop and his canons, and arranged for the
administration of the dioceses by the appointment of vicars-capitular
to act during the interregnum. It ordered the secular clergy to be
mindful always of the spiritual dignity to which they had been called,
not to indulge in any business unworthy of their sacred office,
condemned concubinage in the strongest terms, and commanded priests to
look after the religious education of the young, to preach to their
flocks on Sundays and holidays, and to attend zealously to the
spiritual wants of the souls committed to their charge.

The council recognised, furthermore, that the best method of securing
a high standard of priestly life was the careful training of
ecclesiastical students. Hence it ordained that in the individual
dioceses seminaries should be established, where those who were
desirous of entering the clerical state should live apart from the
world, and where they should receive the education and discipline
necessary for the successful discharge of their future obligations. It
put an end to many abuses of monastic life, suppressed questing for
alms, drew up rules for the reception of novices, gave the bishop
power to deal with irregularities committed outside the monasteries,
and subjected all priests both regular and secular to episcopal
authority by insisting on the necessity of Approbation for all who
wished to act as confessors. Finally, in order to apply a remedy
against the many scandals and crimes that resulted from secret
marriages, the Council of Trent laid it down that those marriages only
should be regarded as valid which should be contracted in the presence
of the parish priest of one of the contracting parties and two
witnesses.

On the conclusion of the Council of Trent Cardinal Morone hastened to
Rome with the decrees to seek the approval of the Pope. Some of the
Roman officials, who felt themselves aggrieved by the reforms, advised
the Pope to withhold his approval of certain decrees, but Pius IV.
rejected this advice. On the 26th January 1564 he issued the Bull of
confirmation, and set himself to work immediately to put the reforms
into execution. To assist him in this design he appointed a
commission, one of the ablest members of which was his own nephew,
Charles Borromeo, and he despatched representatives to the princes and
bishops to ensure their acceptance of the decrees. As an example to
others he established the Roman Seminary for the education of priests
