hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men! Thou
shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou
shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. Ps.
31:14, 15, 18, 19, 20.

21. Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let the angel of the Lord
chase them. Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the
Lord persecute them. Ps. 35:5, 6.

22. Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down like the
grass, and wither as the green herb.--The wicked plotteth against the just,
and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him: for he
seeth that his day is coming. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and
have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as
be of upright conversation. Their sword shall enter into their own heart,
and their bows shall be broken.--The wicked watcheth the righteous, and
seeketh to slay him. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn
him when he is judged.--I have seen the wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree. Yet he passed away, and, lo, he
was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. Ps. 37:1, 2, 12,
13, 14, 15, 32, 33, 35, 36.

23. But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth
not his mouth. Then I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth
are no reproofs.--For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually
before me. Ps. 38:13, 14, 17.

24. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my
sorrow was stirred.--I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst
it.--For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were. Ps. 39:2, 9, 12.

25. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
never suffer the righteous to be moved. But thou, O God, shalt bring them
down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live
out half their days; but I will trust in thee. Ps. 55:22, 23.

26. Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me; for my soul trusteth
in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until
these calamities be overpast. I will cry unto God most high; unto God that
performeth all things for me. He shall send from heaven, and save me from
the reproach of him that would swallow me up. God shall send forth his
mercy and his truth. My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them
that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and
arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Be thou exalted, O God, above the
heavens; let thy glory be above all the earth. They have prepared a net
for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they have digged a pit before me,
into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. My heart is fixed, O
God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. Awake up, my glory;
awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early. I will praise thee, O
Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among the nations. For thy
mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds. Be thou
exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the earth.
Ps. 57:1-11.

27. Preserve my life from fear of the enemy; who whet their tongue like a
sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words; that
they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him,
and fear not.--But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall
they be wounded. So shall they make their own tongue to fall upon
themselves: all that see them shall flee away. Ps. 64:1, 3, 4, 7, 8.

28. Mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my soul take
counsel together, saying, God hath forsaken him; persecute and take him;
for there is none to deliver him.--I will go in the strength of the Lord
God: I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. O God,
thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous works. Now also when I am old and gray-headed, O God, forsake me
not; until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power
to every one that is to come.--Thou, which hast shewed me great and sore
troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the
depths of the earth. Thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on
every side. Ps. 71:10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21.

29. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help.
My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth. He will not
suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber.
Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord
is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall
not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee
from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy
going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore.
Ps. 121:1-8.

30. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent
man; which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they gathered
together for war. They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent:
adders' poison is under their lips. Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the
wicked; preserve me from the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow
my goings. The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread
a net by the way side; they have set nets for me. I said unto the Lord,
Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O Lord. O God, the
Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in the day
of battle. Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his
wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. As for the head of those that
compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them. Let
burning coals fall upon them; let them be cast into the fire; into deep
pits, that they rise not up again. Let not an evil speaker be established
in the earth: evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. I know
that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of
the poor. Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name: the
upright shall dwell in thy presence. Ps. 140:1-13.

31. I cried unto the Lord with my voice; with my voice unto the Lord did I
make my supplication. I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed
before him my trouble. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou
knewest my path. In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a
snare for me. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man
that would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul. I cried
unto thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land
of the living. Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me
from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I. Bring my soul out of
prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall compass me about:
for thou shalt deal bountifully with me. Ps. 142:1-7.




Chapter XVIII.


Showing How The Sorrows And Pains Of Christ Should Teach Us To Subdue The
                           Lusts Of The Flesh.


    _My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death._--MATT. 26:38.


The third branch of the cross of Christ consists in the unspeakable sorrow
and sufferings which began at his very birth. For as his most holy human
soul was filled with the light of divine knowledge and wisdom, by virtue
of the personal union of his two natures, he saw all that he should
experience in the future, as if it were already present; and thus his soul
was, from the beginning, filled with the deepest sorrow, and suffered
inward pain. He foresaw his future inconceivable and inexpressible agony
of soul, and his unspeakable bodily pains. For the more delicate, pure,
and innocent, the human nature in Christ was, the greater were the pain
and anguish that affected him. Of this those sorrows and spiritual
torments, that are wont to work upon the inmost soul, are a sufficient
proof. For inasmuch as the constitution of the soul, by reason of its
immortality, exceeds that of the body in worth and delicacy; so also her
pains exceed those of the body in depth and acuteness. For this reason the
Lord never rejoiced upon his own account, and with reference only to
himself; but it was when he saw that his Heavenly Father was known and
worshipped, and his divine works manifested unto the world. Hence "he
rejoiced in spirit" at the return of the seventy disciples. Luke 10:21.

2. Since all those things, which he was to suffer, from his own people and
countrymen, were known to him, he could not but be highly afflicted and in
constant sorrow; and this was also still more the case, the more nearly he
approached the time appointed for his passion. This he himself testifies,
saying, "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straitened
till it be accomplished!" Luke 12:50. And the time of this baptism being
come, he says, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death" (Matt.
26:38): intimating thereby the excessive and unutterable grief and anguish
of spirit, that forced from him that sweat, which "was as it were great
drops of blood." Luke 22:44. And what pains he suffered besides, in his
tender and sensible body, no tongue can sufficiently declare. _First_,
because sin is an infinite and inexpressible evil. For, its full
punishment and atonement could not but cause torment so exquisite, that to
a mere man it had been altogether insupportable.

3. The _second_ reason of this exquisite grief was, because he bore the
sins of the world: not merely those sins which from the beginning of the
world had been committed, but those also which men should become guilty of
through all ages, down to the very end of the world. And, therefore, such
as are the number and malignity of _all_ sins, of _all_ men, through _all_
generations; such also were the pain and sorrow endured by the Lord. For
which cause he prayed in Gethsemane, "O my Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me." Matt. 26:39.

4. _Thirdly_, the sufferings of Christ were heightened by that perfect
love which he bore to his heavenly Father. The greater our love is, the
greater is also the grief occasioned by what interferes with it: as on the
contrary, the less it is, the less are we troubled by that which thwarts
it. Since, therefore, Christ loved his heavenly Father with most exalted
and consummate love, his affliction must needs have been the more
grievous, on account of the heinousness of sin, with which fallen men so
shamefully insulted so beloved a Father. Hence the sins of the whole
world, with the pains he endured for them, did not so much affect him, as
the sorrow he felt on account of the indignity offered to a God, who, in
his very nature, is love itself. And it was upon account of this love of
the Father (which deserved all the returns of love the creature was able
to make), that Christ sustained most exquisite pains, and a most
ignominious death; in order that by a satisfaction proportionable to the
offence, he might regain for wretched mortals that love and favor of God
which they had forfeited by their offences.

5. In the _fourth_ place, the suffering of Christ was endured on account
of his perfect love to mankind. For as he died for all, and bore the sins
of all, so also was he exceedingly desirous to see the object of his death
accomplished, which is the salvation of all men. Hence the unbelief and
impenitence of men, which hindered this love from taking effect upon
sinners, caused him most grievous and bitter torments: but especially was
he pained that they threw away their souls when he desired to save them.
Not to mention the cruel hatred and envy, wrath and blasphemy, by which
some were hurried on, even to trample on that blood which was designed to
redeem them. He himself says, "Reproach hath broken my heart" (Ps. 69:20);
lamenting not so much his own, as the condition of them who reproached him
in so heinous a manner.

6. _Fifthly_: another circumstance which pierced the very heart of our
Lord, was his being forsaken of God, notwithstanding he was the Son of God
himself. For though it is true that God could not forsake him, who himself
was God, and did not cease to be God even when he hung on the cross, when
he expired, and when he was buried; yet does he complain of being forsaken
by him. Ps. 22:1; Matt. 27:46. But this lamentable complaint the Lord
poured out, in order to show that God withdrew from him, as a man, the
support of his comfort, hiding himself for a while in this dark hour. He
manifests also, by this exclamation, the extreme misery in which he then
was.

7. The _sixth_ aggravation of the anguish of Christ, was on account of his
Person, for he was very God. Whence it is plain, that all the reproaches
and blasphemies uttered against him were an infinite evil, as being
directed against the entire Person of Christ, who was true God and man;
and so he endured, both as God and man, the revilings of his enemies in
his whole Person. All this left a most exquisite impression of sorrow upon
his soul.

8. And, in the _seventh_ place, who is able sufficiently to explain what
pains the Lord suffered in his most innocent, most holy, most tender, and
delicate _body_? Or who can doubt that a body most innocent, most
delicate, most noble, most pure, conceived by the Holy Ghost, personally
united with the divine nature, filled with the Spirit of God, and with all
the fulness of the Godhead; I say, who can doubt that such a body should
not feel most grievous and bitter pains, when smitten, scourged, wounded,
pierced, crucified, and put to death? No words are sufficiently expressive
to set forth the pain and acuteness thereof. What is all our affliction,
if compared with this suffering of the Lord? We, as sinners, have justly
deserved eternal death and damnation; and yet even the smallest cross is
too heavy a burden for tender Christians, who do what they can to shake it
off, though it is designed as wholesome medicine, to procure the health of
the soul. Surely, he who is a sincere lover of Christ, can wish no other
condition, of life, but such as comes up nearest to the original of the
blessed life of Christ. 1 Peter 2:21. This conformity of our lives to the
life of Christ we ought to account our greatest gain and dignity in this
world. Let the true lover of Christ rejoice in this, that he has been
thought worthy to suffer with Christ, his Head and Saviour.

9. Since, then, affliction is to be the companion of a Christian in his
way to heaven, or, to use the apostle's phrase, since he must, "through
much tribulation, enter into the kingdom of God" (Acts 14:22); what cause
can we assign why we should not willingly walk in the same path? For we
know that the Son of God himself travelled this way before us, and by his
holy example sanctified it, not having "entered into his glory but by
sufferings." Luke 24:26. And since, notwithstanding all the insults of the
enemy, he entered into glory at last; we may also assure ourselves, that
our affliction, which is but for a moment, shall be followed in the end by
an everlasting weight of glory and happiness. 2 Cor. 4:17.

10. In fine, as the Lord did not spare himself, but devoted himself
entirely to the service of others, undergoing all from no other impulse
than fervent love and charity; so this love, of our Redeemer should awaken
love in our souls, and never should we grow faint and weary under any
affliction whatever.




Chapter XIX.


 Showing How We Should Behold In The Crucified Christ, As In The Book Of
  Life, Both Our Sins, And Also The Displeasure, The Love, Justice, And
                              Wisdom Of God.


    _And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
    written within and on the back side._--REV. 5:1.


Christ crucified is set before our eyes as a Book of Life, whence we may
learn the sacred wisdom of God, which is in him eminently displayed. For
the whole Scripture, the Law and all the prophets, are completely
fulfilled in him by his most perfect obedience, wherein he was faithful
even unto death, and suffered the most cruel torments for the sins of the
world. And this perfect internal and external obedience and suffering, is
that Book of Life written within and without. Rev. 5:1.

2. In the first place, the Crucified Jesus presents us with a deplorable
sight of our sins, both as to their number and heinousness. By the
lamentable complaint into which he burst forth, he manifested that inward
anguish of soul, which he suffered for the hidden and secret sins of our
hearts. In his wounded and mangled body, bleeding on the cross, he leads
us to behold and read, as in a book, the malignity of those sins which we
have committed by all our members, in having yielded them up to the
government of lust.

3. Besides this, the devout soul may behold in Christ Crucified, the
justice of God in judging sinners. There was no other means by which to
remove both our sin and the punishment attending it, than this high
atonement made by the Lord himself. And hence we may learn that God is so
far from letting any sin go unpunished, that he will rather deliver up his
most beloved Son unto death than connive at the transgression of a sinner.
Rom. 4:25.

4. Hence the soul may, further, contemplate the infinite love and
condescending mercy of the Heavenly Father, most wonderfully displayed in
our Crucified Saviour. Rather than that we should forever perish in our
wretched state, and be subject to eternal death and damnation, he would
have his own Son make satisfaction for us; which we ourselves, yea, and
all the other creatures besides, had never been able to perform.

5. The contemplation of Christ Crucified will, in the next place, lead us
to a sight of the most gracious will, providence and fatherly care of God,
as it respects the recovery of lost mankind. No opposition was so great,
no difficulty so stubborn and obstinate, which he did not conquer by his
beloved Son, the author of our salvation. That we might inherit
everlasting joy, he left nothing untried, nor did he spare even his own
Son.

6. In the same Book of Life (the _Crucified Jesus_), appears also the
infinite wisdom of God, namely, in finding out a means of salvation, such
as could never have entered into the thoughts of any creature whatever,
and which, at the same time, revealed both the justice and the mercy of
God. For the work of our salvation was so wisely ordered, that by
manifesting the infinite mercy of God, his justice was not at all
infringed; as, on the other hand, Christ by his death has so atoned for
sin, that in satisfying the claims of strict justice, his infinite mercy
is rendered more bright and conspicuous. And as by eating of the forbidden
tree, the first Adam (Gen. 3:1), brought us under the curse; so God in his
marvellous wisdom has, by the tree of the cross, taken away the curse, and
restored his blessing. 1 Peter 2:24. Yea, by the unsearchable counsel of
the divine wisdom, it is so brought about, that through the death of
Christ, all things detained under the power of death are restored to life,
death itself being destroyed at last. 1 Cor. 15:26. By his pains and
torments is purchased for us eternal pleasure in heaven; by his griefs and
sorrows are gained joys celestial without end. And by this wonderful work
of God, though foolish in the eye of the world, he hath confounded the
wisdom of the wise; and by the foolishness of God (1 Cor. 1:25), he has
manifested a wisdom altogether unfathomable to men.

7. In Christ Crucified farther appears the brightest and fairest pattern
of patience and meekness that was ever seen. So far was he from revenging
the injuries done him, that he made intercession to his Father for his
revilers, yea, even laid down his life for the sins of those who put him
to death.

8. The believer discovers, moreover, in Christ the most astonishing
humility, wherein he was so eminent, that he readily underwent the most
ignominious death of the cross. Thus are the death and passion of Christ
become to a faithful soul, redemption from hell, an avenue into paradise,
a complete reconciliation with God, a victory over the devil, that great
enemy of souls; a full satisfaction for sins, and in one word, an entire
recovery of that original righteousness which had been lost.

9. By all this, it sufficiently appears to a Christian soul, that Christ
Crucified is indeed a Book of Life, teaching nothing but the eternal and
infallible truths of God. Let us then silently sit down at the feet of our
Crucified Lord, who, as the great Teacher of souls, and Book of Life, will
not neglect to instil into an humble heart, the lesson of a living faith,
and of a holy life consequent on it; provided we desire to be not dead,
but living members of his body, and to be so controlled and influenced
both by his life and his death, as to produce abundant living fruits.




Chapter XX.


   Of The Power And Necessity Of Prayer, In These Holy Contemplations.


    _I will seek him whom my soul loveth._--SONG OF SOL. 3:2.


Since the living knowledge of God and of Christ crucified, is not to be
attained, unless we keep our eye constantly fixed upon the innocent and
holy life of Jesus Christ our Lord; and since we cannot arrive at this
elevation of mind, but by devout, humble, believing and earnest prayer; it
is, therefore, highly necessary to make some further inquiry into the
nature of prayer. It consists not so much in an utterance of words, as in
a meditation or intercourse of the believing heart with God, and in a
lifting up of the soul, and of all her faculties and powers, to our
Heavenly Father. Ps. 19:14; 25:1. As it is impossible to find God without
prayer, so prayer is a means for seeking and finding him. Matt. 7:7, 8.

2. And as it falls under a threefold denomination, it being either _oral_,
_internal_, or _supernatural_ (according to St. Paul: "I will pray with
the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also;" 1 Cor. 14:15);
so we shall now consider each of these in order.

3. _Oral prayer_ is an humble address to God, and an external exercise,
which conducts the soul to the internal duty of prayer, and leads man into
the interior recesses of his own heart; especially if the words uttered be
digested in faith, and if, by attentive application, they be well pondered
and considered. This often proves a means of elevating the spirit and soul
so near unto God, as to enjoy with faith a truly filial intercourse with
Him, our heavenly Father.

4. _Internal_ prayer is offered up without intermission, in faith, spirit,
and mind, according to the words of our Saviour: "The true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth" (John 4: 23); also those
of David: "Let the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O
Lord." Ps. 19:14. And again: "I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit
made diligent search." Ps. 77:6. Hereby, says St. Paul (speaking of the
Spirit of adoption), we cry, Abba, Father. Rom. 8:15. By this internal
prayer, we are led on gradually to that which is _supernatural_; which,
according to Tauler, "consists in a true union with God by faith; when our
created spirit dissolves, as it were, and sinks away in the uncreated
Spirit of God. It is then that all is transacted in a moment, which in
words or deeds has been done by all the saints from the beginning of the
world." For this reason this supernatural prayer is unspeakably more
excellent than that which is chiefly external; for therein the soul is by
true faith so replenished with the divine love, that it can think of
nothing else but of God only. Or if another thought should enter
inadvertently into the heart, it proves but an occasion of trouble and
sorrow; and the soul cannot be at ease till the intruding thought has
again vanished. A soul that has once arrived at this happy state gives but
little or no employment to the tongue: it is silent before the Lord: it
panteth and thirsteth after God (Ps. 42:1, 2): it longeth, yea, even
fainteth for him (Ps. 63:1; 84:2). It loves him only; it rests in him
alone, not at all minding the world, nor worldly affairs. Whence it is
still more and more filled with an experimental knowledge of God, and with
such love and joy as no tongue is able to utter. Whatever the soul then
perceives, is beyond all possibility of being expressed in words. If one
should ask a soul under these contemplations: _What dost thou perceive?_
the answer would be: A good that is above all good. _What seest thou?_ A
perfection of beauty, transcending all other beauty. _What feelest thou?_
A joy surpassing all joys. _What dost thou taste?_ The inexpressible
delight of love. Nay, such a one would tell you that all the words that
possibly could be framed, were but a shadow, and came infinitely short of
the inward delight which was experienced. This is the voice of the eternal
Word; this His speech to a loving soul; according to that saying of the
Lord: "He that loveth me--I will manifest myself unto him." John 14:21.
Whatever is felt here, whatever is seen here, is above nature. Here voices
are heard, and words perceived that are termed words of the understanding
and the mind.

5. This is the school in which the soul learns to know God aright, and, as
it were, to taste him. Ps. 34:8. Whilst she knows him, she loves him: and
whilst she loves him, she longs for the full enjoyment of him. This is the
true sign of love, to desire wholly to possess the beloved object, to be
intimately united with, and altogether transformed into it.

6. This the soul now and then perceives in a glance, which lasts but for a
moment, and then vanishes again; but it puts the soul upon fervent
desires, to recover, if possible, that beam of heavenly joy which darted
upon her, and to regain this divine taste, which so lovingly moved her.
And she desires all this, in order to be more intimately united to her
beloved. From this affectionate desire spring up both internal and oral
prayer; the soul being fully convinced that these heavenly pleasures and
visitations are to be attained only by prayer. And in all this, the
wonderful wisdom of God appears, by which everything is managed in the
most perfect order.

7. Thus none is permitted to attain unto mental prayer, but he who begins
with that which is oral; and none can have an access to the _supernatural_
prayer, or to a union with the highest and most delightful Good, but by
_mental_ prayer. But this highest can only be known by an experimental
perception, not expressible by words.

8. And this is the cause why God so strictly, so frequently, and so
earnestly enjoins prayer (Ps. 50:14); because it is a sacred pledge and
bond, by which God draws us up to himself; and by elevating us into his
immediate presence, detains us there a while, and unites us with himself,
who is the source of all that is good. And thus we are always reminded of
him; without this gracious order, we would think less frequently on him,
and would not share in the gifts of his mercy.

9. If, therefore, thou desirest that thy prayer be acceptable to God, see
that thou perform it not with a divided, but with a whole and entire
heart. But this is not to be attained, except by frequent exercise and
continual and unwearied application. Without this, thou canst not reap the
fruits of prayer. On the contrary, as often as thou givest attendance to
any external work, take care that thou set not thy heart wholly upon it.
If thou eatest and drinkest, or attendest to any other outward affair
incident to this life, see that thou bestow not thyself, that is, thy
whole heart, upon it. For thy heart is to rest entirely in God alone, and
closely to adhere to him by internal prayer. The more thou offerest up
thyself to God by this prayer, the more will the divine light display
itself in thy mind. And again, the more the knowledge of God is enlarged,
the more delightful will be thy sense and perception of the highest good;
the more ardent also and affectionate will be thy love to the Lord; and in
fine, the more capable wilt thou be of enjoying him. The soul thus
disposed will in a supernatural manner taste of a happiness so high and
transcendent as infinitely to exceed all the language and expressions of
men.

10. Of this threefold prayer, Jesus Christ himself has furnished us with a
bright and perfect pattern, whence we may learn the nature and method of
it, if we but attentively consider his manner of praying. We find that he
often continued whole days and nights in prayer to God. Luke 6:12. He
prayed with a fervency that made him triumph in prayer, and rejoice in
spirit. Luke 10:21. He has, therefore, both by example and words, taught
us the method of praying; and leaving us a pattern to follow, has
commanded us to watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation. Matt.
6:9. He also most frequently recommends to us the duty of prayer (Matt.
26:41); thereby testifying that nothing was more pleasing, nothing more
acceptable to him than our prayer; he having enjoined it for no other
reason than to show us how entirely he loved us, and how desirous he was
that by prayer we should partake of the highest and most precious good.

11. Lest, however, we should allege that so noble an effect as that which
results from a due performance of prayer was not attainable by us, the
Lord did not think it enough to say: "Ask," but he has encouraged us also
with a promise annexed: "And ye shall receive, that your joy may be full."
John 16:24. He moreover excites us to pray by his own example, for amid
his sufferings he prayed for us, as the Evangelist records: "For being in
an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood falling down to the ground." Luke 22:44.

12. Set, therefore, this mirror of prayer before thine eyes, and study to
persevere therein. Whenever thou feelest thyself faint and weak in prayer,
then seriously advert to thy Lord Jesus Christ, who prayed not for
himself, or upon his own account, but for thee and upon thy account, and
thus sanctified thy prayer and blessed it, and added life and efficacy to
it. Him, therefore, behold, who, though he was true God, and consequently
in actual possession of all things, yet as man, obtained for thee of his
Heavenly Father, all things by prayer. And hence as his whole life was a
continual and uninterrupted prayer, and a perpetual longing to do the will
of God: so he finished it with praying upon the cross. Luke 23:46.

13. If then thy Lord and Saviour prayed so fervently upon thy account, and
was heard; surely he will not suffer thy prayers to be poured forth in
vain. Did he procure all things for thee by prayer? And thinkest thou that
thou canst obtain the least blessing without it? Thou knowest that without
divine grace, light, and knowledge, and, in fine, without faith, not one
can be saved; but it is no less plain that these and all other graces can
be obtained by prayer alone. It is the Lord whom thou must entreat by
fervent prayer, so as to obtain from him faith, love, hope, humility,
patience, the Holy Spirit, together with the whole train of Christian
virtues, which he is both able and willing to give, as well as to
strengthen in thy soul. It is He alone that createth them in the heart.
But as he that hath them not, cannot give them, so the Lord, whose gift
they are, will not give them without being asked.

14. If then thou art truly desirous of pouring out thy soul before the
Lord in fervency of spirit, there is not a more ready and effectual means
of doing this than with the eyes of thy mind to behold the mirror of the
most meek and humble life of Christ: to keep thy eyes attentively fixed
upon the poverty, the reproach and contempt, the griefs and sorrows, and
the most ignominious death of thy blessed Redeemer. Into this Book of
Prayer, if thou diligently look, thy heart and mind will become inflamed
with most affectionate and ardent desires. And though the devil and the
flesh will not cease to assault thee with temptations on all hands, yet,
by means of prayer, they shall be subdued at last.

15. Nor is the duty of prayer only stirred up and revived by the
contemplation of Christ crucified, but the heart is also cleansed thereby.
Without this purification of the heart by faith (Acts 15:9), our prayers
will prove altogether ineffectual in the sight of God: whereas, after a
sincere application to the Lord by prayer, the Spirit of God is wont to
visit the heart with his gracious presence, as he descended upon the
apostles, even then, when they were with one accord praying at Pentecost.
Acts 2:1.

16. With reference to the temptations that are wont to attend the duty of
prayer, thou must behave thyself under them as the Lord himself did. In
the midst of the agony which he suffered on the mount of Olives, "he
prayed the more earnestly." Luke 22:44. Thus thy prayer shall prove at
last the victory over all thy enemies. By prayer the Lord manifests
himself unto his people. By prayer we learn to practise true humility; for
by prayer the highest is united to the lowest; the most High God to the
most humble heart. And this humility is the very channel through which
abundance of divine grace is infused into the soul. The more this grace
humbles man, the more grace itself gets rooted in the soul. And again, the
more a soul is enriched with grace, the more she improves in humility.

17. The most considerable temptation and obstruction in prayer seems to be
when God withdraws the grace of a fervent and lively devotion. And yet it
is in this case that we ought the more to stir ourselves up to prayer and
supplication. It is true, a prayer poured forth in a spirit of power and
fervency must needs be acceptable to God; yet that which climbs up to the
throne of grace in affliction, temptation, spiritual dryness, and
brokenness of soul, is still more pleasing in his sight. For as the heart
of a father is sooner softened into paternal tenderness, by the trembling
words of a sick and languishing child, than by the strong voice of one in
perfect health; so is the secret affliction, and feeble effort of a soul
affected with a sense of her weakness in faith, of her poverty in spirit,
and of her want of spiritual life and comfort, far more acceptable to our
infinitely good God than the more vigorous petition of a soul elevated by
a sense of faith and divine consolation. Only hold out patiently in these
spiritual straits, and be assured that the Lord, in his own time, will
certainly "restore unto thee the joy of his salvation." Ps. 51:12.




Chapter XXI.


              Of The Power Of The Noble Virtue Of Humility.


    _Be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth
    grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty
    hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time._--1 PET. 5:5, 6.


Without true humility all prayer is in vain. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the
Book from which this noble virtue is best learned; as he is, indeed, a
perfect mirror to us of all the virtues and graces. Look on his life, and
thou wilt find it made up of nothing but love and humility. Look on his
doctrine, and thou wilt discern it to be absolute wisdom and truth; a
doctrine consisting not in words, but in a living power; and in very deed
itself.

2. Now, in order that we might perfectly learn how to practise this virtue
of humility, he taught it not only by words, but also by deeds and by his
holy example, forasmuch as he humbled himself unto death, even the death
of the cross. Phil. 2:8. Behold, then, O Christian, how this gracious
virtue has its foundation, and its highest and most excellent ground, not
in any angel, not in any apostle or eminent saint, but in Jesus Christ
himself. And therefore he saith: "Learn of me" (Matt. 11:29), which is as
if he had said: "Look ye upon me how I abase myself under all, who yet am
above all. Behold, as much higher as my majesty is, so much lower is my
humility: and so much dearer should this virtue be to you, as I your Lord
and your God have described and delineated it in my whole life." Observe,
he saith, "Learn of me." But what? Not to do mighty wonders, not to work
signs and miracles, or show any great work of creation, but to be _meek_
and _lowly_. "And if I did not teach you this with mine own example,"
saith the meek Lamb of God, "ye would not believe that this virtue is so
high and so noble."

3. The humble Jesus chose to exemplify this as his concluding work: after
his last supper, he took a towel and girded himself, and then "washed his
disciples' feet;" that so he might by such example implant this virtue in
all that should be ever called by his name, and might most sensibly
imprint it on the heart of every one to whom this Gospel should come.
Wherefore he also saith: "Know ye what I have done to you?" John 13:4, 5,
12. "Do ye indeed consider what it is that I have done? Will ye remember
this that I have now done to you? Will ye be ready to serve one another in
the same manner? And will ye humble yourselves one to the other, and
submit gladly even to the meanest offices of charity? O learn of me, by
what you have at this time seen me do: for I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done to you. Whosoever then shall forget my
humility, the same shall forget a principal part both of my doctrine and
my example, and shall never find rest unto his soul. Therefore let this my
example be a rule for your whole lives, and let my life evermore be set
before your eyes as a representation of humility."

4. And now let us show that without humility all prayer to God is utterly
vain. Humility is a bright light in the heart, in which there is at once
discovered to us our own nothingness, and the high majesty and overflowing
goodness of God. Hence the more any man knows himself, the more he must
needs come to the knowledge of his own nothingness. For when a man sees
his own emptiness, and learns that he is destitute in himself of
everything that is good, he begins to pray the more earnestly for the
grace and mercy of God. He pants after, and betakes himself to God, as to
the origin and fountain of all good things; desiring to know him aright,
to praise him, and to honor him as he should. This desire being thus
begotten in him, he pours out his heart by himself, and says, "When shall
I come and appear before God?" In this humility he looks at God's majesty
and greatness, as also at his superabundant love and grace. And hereupon
the streams of grace flow down into such a faithful, humble soul, by
prayer. And divine grace being thus communicated to the thirsty soul,
there is hereby begotten in it a spirit of prayer, which ceases not to
ascend in holy aspirations, and to bring down the blessings of peace and
righteousness. Through such grace of God there is a descent of the Holy
Spirit into the soul, whose influences thereby grow continually stronger
and stronger: and the "love of God" is by this means "shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost" (Rom. 5:5), which is given to us through the
prayer of humility. For when the believing soul, conscious of her own
vileness, reflects upon the humiliation of the Son of God, and beholds him
humbling himself so as not only to put off the form of _God_, that he
might appear in that of _man_, but even to suffer the greatest of evils in
this vile form, for the vilest of his creatures; by this reflection and
consideration, he is not only made humble, but hence, also, in this his
humility, there springs up a most noble flame of love to God, which burns
more and more day by day. And in this divine flame of love, the soul,
being attracted by faith to God, is hence made to love all men in God, and
in Christ; as calling to mind the exceeding great love of the Godhead
towards mankind; and particularly how her Heavenly Father has in Christ
loved her, and called her to the participation of his goodness. When thus
the soul is drawn to God, and included in his love, the consequence is
this, that as to all those who are beloved by God, the soul also cannot
but love in like manner as God loveth them.

5. Hence it follows, that if any good befall our neighbor, charity will
rejoice; but if any evil happen to him, it will sorrow. And the humble and
the charitable person, behaving himself courteously and lovingly towards
his neighbor on all occasions, does not rashly judge him, if he behold his
misery; much less does he behave himself haughtily and superciliously
towards him, or treat him with contempt. 1 Cor. 13:4. For the soul that is
truly humble, can never so put off the sense of her own misery and
vileness, as to despise another, or to esteem herself better than any; for
she remembers the mire out of which she herself has been delivered. And
while she stands, she knows well enough that she does not stand by her own
strength, but solely by the help of divine grace.

6. Humble charity judges itself in the first place, examines itself before
all, and influences us to condemn ourselves rather than others: and a
neighbor's calamity will cause the soul to descend into herself, and
deplore herself before God. In another's fall, the lowly and loving soul
reads her own defaults, her own sins and transgressions, her own calamity
and misery.

7. Moreover, by humility a man is confirmed in the knowledge of God, and
established in hope. Having a consciousness of his own ignorance,
blindness, and folly, in divine matters, he gives thanks to God for the
revelation of his word, and imprints it more diligently on his heart. But
considering also, that as he has no knowledge of God and divine things in
himself, so likewise all his own abilities are nothing before God: he is
hence established in a godly hope, placing his confidence in nothing but
God only.

8. Another fruit of humility is, that it renders a man acceptable to
others, even in the very outward course of his life. For it avoids
contentions and quarrels, and composes the whole man to gentleness and
benignity. Yea, a man is conformed by means of it even to Christ himself,
who says in one of the Psalms: "But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was
as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth. Thus I was as a man that heareth
not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs." Ps. 38:13, 14. Such a faithful
and humble man as this is a living member of Christ, in whom Christ
liveth.

9. Besides, humility brings with it true inward peace of the mind; so that
he who is the possessor of it can by no miseries and calamities whatever
be unduly distressed or disquieted, but may with St. Paul say: "Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ?" Romans 8:35. And he is mindful
always of that saying: "My grace is sufficient for thee." 2 Cor. 12:9.

10. True humility also begets silence. He who is endued therewith, as he
is sensible of his own ignorance and foolishness, will beware of speaking
a great deal, or of being over-forward to teach others.

11. In short, it is impossible to enumerate how many spiritual benefits
and fruits, how many heavenly treasures of virtues and graces, are
comprehended in, and flow from, this most noble virtue; so that it may
deservedly be regarded as a spiritual treasury. It is, therefore, not
without reason, that the Son of God, our light, life, salvation, and
treasure, would have us to learn it even of _himself_. O that this holy
wish of our Lord might be fulfilled by all Christians; and that they would
with all diligence learn from Him this most excellent virtue!

12. If it be asked, What is the means for acquiring this virtue, and by
what way may one arrive at so great a treasure, which abounds so richly in
the gifts of celestial grace? I answer, that there are two: first, ardent
and devout prayer; and secondly, constant meditation on Christ crucified.
Let us look earnestly to the passion and death of Christ, and let us
meditate on it, as on a holy Book of life, till this root of the Christian
virtues, with all which accompany it, grow up day by day in our hearts, as
in a fruitful and well-cultivated soul.




Chapter XXII.


All The Works Of A True Christian Must Be Done In Humility, Or They Will,
              Otherwise, Become An Abomination And Idolatry.


    _That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the
    sight of God._--LUKE 16:15.


All works that are a well-pleasing and acceptable sacrifice to God, can
proceed from true faith alone; this will not fail to beget Christian
humility in the heart. The effect of this will be meekly to acknowledge
that with regard to any good that may be found in us, it is wholly and
solely to be ascribed to the grace of God: "Not I, but the grace of God
which was with me." 1 Cor. 15:10. He who does not do this, commits two
sins: the first is, apostasy from God, by turning himself from God towards
himself, that is, from the Supreme Being, towards that which is in itself
nothing. The second is sacrilege, by taking to himself that honor which is
due to none but God; to whom, and not to man, everything that may be
called good belongs. He, therefore, that doeth not all things in humility,
steals from God the glory due to him. For when God says: "I will not give
my glory to another, neither my praise to graven images" (Isaiah 42:8); he
shows that all glory and praise are due to him alone.

2. If, therefore, any man applaud himself, either for knowing or doing
anything, verily that man takes to himself the glory which is due to God
only, and is thereby an idolater of himself. For this reason, ambition is
abominable idolatry: and self-love, and self-esteem, are no less than
having another God before him whose name is Jehovah. For this very reason
also, the devil seeks to be honored and worshipped in the world.

3. Such a vainglorious devil, covetous of honor and worship from the
world, every proud and arrogant person, by thinking highly of himself,
cherishes in his heart. If thou be wise, see that thou break down and
destroy this idol, which is set up in thy heart. Many persons are so holy
that they will not even look upon any outward images, lest they should
happen to be defiled by them; not observing, at the same time, that great
idol which they carry about with them in their hearts, and by which they
are to such a degree defiled as to become an abomination before God. For
all that is most highly esteemed by men (through self-love and ambition)
is an abomination before God. Whence all who seek only their own honor, or
power, or ascribe aught to themselves as their own, are idolaters. Thus
the whole world lieth in idolatry; and every house has its living idols.

4. That idolatry which defiles thee, proceeds from within, even from the
heart. To whatsoever thy heart inclines, in whatsoever it acquiesces and
rests, and unto whatsoever it cleaves by love and inclination, whether it
be good fortune, wealth, honor, power, or long life; that very thing
immediately becomes an idol, and has seduced thee into the sin of
idolatry. Idolatry is not any outward pollution; but that which is
internal, spiritual, and springing up within. It is so that God considers
it; He judges all things according to the heart; and it is so only that he
looks, trying the hearts and reins (Ps. 7:9), and judging of all things
according to the faith or unbelief there found by him. Whence Christ has
also plainly told thee, "Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be
also" (Matt. 6:21); that is, thy God, thy rest, thy peace, thy trust will
be there; and there will be thy paradise, yea, there will heaven and all
things be to thee. Observe closely what that object is on which thy heart
loves to dwell, for it is surely thy God, whatever its nature may be. If
thy heart cleave fast to God only, then is _He_ thy God, and blessed art
thou: according as it is written: "Happy are the people whose God is the
Lord." Ps. 144:15. And again, "Delight thyself also in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desire of thy heart." Ps. 37: 4. But if thy mind
cleave to the world, then the world is thy God. And so of the rest.

5. It hence appears that there are really in the world no other idols but
such as the heart of man makes for him. The devil himself is called "the
god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4), because the ungodly follow him, do his
deeds, love darkness, and take pleasure in the works of the devil. And
thus men make a god even of Satan.

6. Idols of wood are easily avoided, but take heed of the idols of gold.
See that thou be not ensnared by these. It is no hard matter to keep from
dead idols; but take heed that thou worship not living ones, and
especially thyself. As soon as thou ascribest honor, skill, or power to
thyself, thou settest up thyself in the place of God. This idolatry is
properly struck at by God, when he says that he "will not give his glory
to another." Isa. 42:8. For whatsoever is, or is called by the name of
honor and glory, is due to none but him, who is the Most High, and the
most Holy One, and the sovereign and everlasting Good. Whosoever,
therefore, thou art, that wouldest not make an idol of thyself, nor
pollute thy works with the foulest of abominations before God, learn
hence, not to ascribe to thyself honor, or glory, or praise; knowing that
it is true humility to shun honor, and to account one's self unworthy of
all glory. When thou shalt do this, and shalt have mortified all ambition
and self-esteem, then thou shalt be known to be dead to the world indeed.
From this springs up the new man, in whom is found the most noble life of
Christ; which life, he himself has described as being meekness and
lowliness of heart. Matt. 11:29. He, on the contrary, is still carnal, and
lives after the flesh, according to the old birth, who would be honored
and greatly esteemed: because it is the nature of the carnal man to
endeavor to be, or to be accounted above all others. But if any man seek
to be accounted nothing of, he has a heart truly spiritual and Christian.
But alas! where shall we now find the true Christians, that is, such as
are willing to be slighted, and to be reputed as nothing? For, as hath
been said before, it is the property of the true followers of Christ, to
deny themselves, to hate themselves, to despise themselves, and to
renounce all that is theirs, for his sake. Matt. 10:38; Luke 9:23. Such
are indeed genuine Christians.

7. If any one should here ask of me, What then is a Christian to do, if it
please God so to honor him as to give him grace and glory before the world
(Ps. 84:11), as in the case of Daniel: and, since God has appointed
certain distinctions among men, several orders, states, and offices; and
has for that end variously distributed his gifts among them, What is the
duty of a Christian, if he be advanced to some post of dignity? I answer,
If this be thy lot, then render all the honor which is conferred upon thee
to God again; and ascribe nothing to thyself which is the right of
another, or take that to be thine which is God's only.

8. As soon, therefore, as any honor is given thee, see that, being mindful
of thy low estate, thou transfer it all to God, and keep nothing thereof
to thyself. If thou neglectest to do this, and shouldest be induced to
attribute anything to thyself, it is certain that thou must thereby lose
divine grace, while, with a sacrilegious impiety, thou invadest that which
of right belongs to God. So if thou excel others in spiritual or natural
gifts, in wisdom or skill, wealth or dignity, be watchful not to take this
honor to thyself; yea, let it be thy joy and delight to offer all up to
God again, from a most deep and intimate devotion of thy heart. This thou
wilt not fail to do, and to give that glory to Him which is due, when thou
shalt glory in nothing but in Him only, according to the words of the
Prophet: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; neither let the mighty
man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let
him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me,
that I am the Lord which exercise loving-kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth; for in these things I delight, saith the
Lord." Jer. 9:23, 24.




Chapter XXIII.


 A Man Who Does Not Perceive His Own Emptiness, And Does Not Give All The
    Honor To God, Commits The Greatest Of Sins, And Falls Like Satan.


    _Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity._--PS.
    39:5.


To the end that man may acknowledge his own vanity, he is compared by the
Psalmist (Ps. 39; 144:4), to a shadow; and again in another place (Ps.
90:5), to a dream. Now what is a shadow? It is a lifeless resemblance of
that thing on which it depends; and has in itself neither substance nor
life, but is nothing. In like manner, man of himself has neither
substance, life, strength, nor indeed any ability whatsoever; but depends
on God, even as a shadow on the body, or as light on the sun.

2. Whosoever, therefore, so forgets himself as not to depend on God, who
alone is all in all, "thinking himself to be something when he is nothing,
he deceiveth himself." Gal. 6:3. He falls from the true eternal and
Sovereign Being into his own nothingness; from the unchangeable Good into
vanity; from truth itself into a lie.

3. This is not only the greatest of sins, but of punishments also. For the
more man turns from God to himself, the more he approaches extreme misery
and calamity. And man by this means, even by turning himself away from
God, towards his own faculties and powers, in truth punishes thereby the
very sin which he commits. He is then accounted to turn himself away from
God, and to forsake "the rock of his salvation" (Deut. 32:15), whenever he
ascribes to himself any degree of power or strength, art or skill, wisdom,
or honor, or merit, so as to be willing to be thought somebody, and to be
much accounted of; when, in very deed, all these in no wise belong to man,
or to any creature, but to God only. Every creature is but a mere shadow,
and of itself merely nothing; even so as the life, substance, faculty,
wisdom, powers, and strength which it seems to have, are not properly its
own, but are God's only.

4. Wherefore, as soon as a man ascribes all or any of these to himself, he
becomes guilty of apostasy from God. Nor indeed was the devil's apostasy
aught else, but the not abiding within the bounds, duties, and properties
of a creature, which has all its life, substance, and ability in God, and
ought to hold the same from him, as the shadow does with respect to the
body and the motion thereof. For any one, therefore, to ascribe those
things to himself which are God's; or to challenge to himself honor,
glory, wisdom, or esteem (forasmuch as none of these suit a creature, but
are all to be transferred to God alone, to whom they really appertain), is
properly to fall like Satan. Hence God permitted him to fall, not
sustaining him any longer with his grace, which was by him disowned. The
same thing must befall all men who, through pride and ambition, presume to
arrogate to themselves any of those things which are God's. They are not
upheld by the grace of God, who arrogantly turn themselves away from God,
affecting to be as God. God alone being All in all, and moreover being the
only Good, or the _one Good_, and the _all-Good_ essentially; it would be
most unreasonable for any creature to claim to itself aught of that which
is good. Hence our blessed Lord saith, "There is none good but one, that
is God" (Matt. 19:17); meaning, that he is the essential Good, and he
alone is all that is good. This property of God, our Saviour was not
willing to take unto himself in his state of humiliation, forasmuch as he
was then held to be no more than a mere man; that thus, by his most bright
example, he might instruct us that man ought not to ascribe to himself the
things which are God's.

5. When man does otherwise, he commits the greatest of all sins, and,
aiming at divinity, stains himself thereby with a most nefarious
sacrilege, being turned from God to himself. And as many as are in this
condition, seek help, counsel, and comfort, not from God only, as they
ought, but from creatures, and sometimes even from the devil himself. But
what greater madness, or what worse blindness is there, than to expect
good from evil, life from death, blessedness from the damned, help from
the helpless, blessedness from the accursed, and light from darkness?
Whereas, on the other hand, it is the highest wisdom to look for good from
the source of all good, to seek life from the fountain of life, to expect
blessedness from the spring of salvation, and to go for help to him who
can do all things, and "with whom nothing is impossible." Luke 1:37.




Chapter XXIV.


  Of The Noble Virtue Of Love, And Of Its Power, Soundness, And Purity.


    _He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love._--1 JOHN
    4:8.


Love, says St. Paul, is the greatest of all virtues, and without it all
gifts are unprofitable (1 Cor. 13:13); therefore he admonishes us, saying,
"Let all your things be done with charity." 1 Cor. 16:14. Accordingly we
