will and the affection is purified and cleansed from all fleshly,
kindly, and worldly love, and is inflamed with burning love of the
Holy Ghost."

But to this blessed condition none may attain perfectly here on
earth. The writer goes on to speak of the mystical consolations and
visitations granted to the loving soul in this life, distinguishing
the feelings and sensations that are mere delusions, from those that
truly proceed from the fire of love in the affection and the light
of knowing in the reason, and are a very anticipation of that
ineffable "onehead" in heaven.

The three remaining treatises--the Epistle of Prayer, the Epistle of
Discretion in Stirrings of the Soul, and the Treatise of Discerning
of Spirits[19]--are associated in the manuscripts with four other
works: the Divine Cloud of Unknowing, the Epistle of Privy Counsel,
a paraphrase of the Mystical Theology of Dionysius entitled Dionise
Hid Divinity, and the similar translation or paraphrase of the
Benjamin Minor of Richard of St. Victor already considered.[20]
These seven treatises are all apparently by the same hand. The
Divine Cloud of Unknowing has been credited to Walter Hilton, as
likewise to William Exmew, or to Maurice Chauncy, Carthusians of the
sixteenth century, whereas the manuscripts are at least a hundred
years earlier than their time; but it seems safer to attribute the
whole series to an unknown writer of the second part of the
fourteenth century, who "marks a middle point between Rolle and
Hilton."[21] The spiritual beauty of the three here reprinted--and,
more particularly, of the Epistle of Prayer, with its glowing
exposition of the doctrine of Pure Love--speaks for itself. They
show us mysticism brought down, if I may say so, from the clouds for
the practical guidance of the beginner along this difficult way.
And, in the Epistle of Discretion, we find even a rare touch of
humour; where the counsellor "conceives suspiciously" of his
correspondent's spiritual stirrings, lest "they should be conceived
on the ape's manner." Like St. Catherine of Siena, though in a less
degree, he has the gift of vision and the faculty of intuition
combined with a homely common sense, and can illustrate his "simple
meaning" with a smile.

I have borrowed a phrase from St. Catherine, "The Cell of
Self-Knowledge," la cella del cognoscimento di noi, as the title of
this little volume. Knowledge of self and purity of heart, the
mystics teach, are the indispensable conditions for the highest
mystical elevation. Knowledge of self, for Richard of St. Victor, is
the high mountain apart upon which Christ is transfigured; for
Catherine of Siena, it is the stable in which the pilgrim through
time to eternity must be born again. "Wouldest thou behold Christ
transfigured?" asks Richard; "ascend this mountain; learn to know
thyself."[22] "Thou dost see," writes Catherine, speaking in the
person of the eternal Father, "this sweet and loving Word born in a
stable, while Mary was journeying; to show to you, who are
travellers, that you must ever be born again in the stable of
knowledge of yourselves, where you will find Him born by grace
within your souls."[23] The soul is a mirror that reflects the
invisible things of God, and it is by purity of heart alone that
this mirror is made clear. "Therefore," writes Richard of St.
Victor, "let whoso thirsts to see his God, wipe his mirror, purify
his spirit. After he hath thus cleared his mirror and long
diligently gazed into it, a certain clarity of divine light begins
to shine through upon him, and a certain immense ray of unwonted
vision to appear before his eyes. This light irradiated the eyes of
him who said: Lord, lift Thou up the light of Thy countenance upon
us; Thou hast put gladness in my heart. From the vision of this
light which it sees with wonder in itself, the mind is wondrously
inflamed and inspired to behold the light which is above
itself."[24]

Pepwell's volume has been made the basis of the present edition of
these seven treatises; but, in each case, the text has been
completely revised. The text of the Benjamin, the Epistle of Prayer,
the Epistle of Discretion, and the Treatise of Discerning of
Spirits, has been collated with that given by the Harleian MSS. 674
and 2373; and, in most cases, the readings of the manuscripts have
been adopted in preference to those of the printed version. The
Katherin has been collated with Caxton's Lyf; the Margery Kempe with
Wynkyn de Worde's precious little volume in the University Library
of Cambridge; and the Song of Angels with the text published by
Professor Horstman from the Camb. MS Dd. v. 55. As the object of
this book is not to offer a Middle English text to students, but a
small contribution to mystical literature, the orthography has been
completely modernised, while I have attempted to retain enough of
the original language to preserve the flavour of mediaeval devotion.

EDMUND G. GARDNER.




I.

HERE FOLLOWETH A VERY DEVOUT TREATISE, NAMED BENJAMIN, OF THE MIGHTS
AND VIRTUES OF MAN'S SOUL, AND OF THE WAY TO TRUE CONTEMPLATION,
COMPILED BY A NOBLE AND FAMOUS DOCTOR, A MAN OF GREAT HOLINESS AND
DEVOTION, NAMED RICHARD OF SAINT VICTOR

A TREATISE NAMED BENJAMIN

THE PROLOGUE


A GREAT clerk that men call [25] Richard of Saint Victor, in a book
that he maketh of the study of wisdom, witnesseth and saith that two
mights are in a man's soul, given of the Father of Heaven of whom
all good cometh. The one is reason, the other is affection; through
reason we know, and through affection we feel or love.

Of reason springeth right counsel and ghostly wits; and of affection
springeth holy desires and ordained[26] feelings. And right as
Rachel and Leah were both wives unto Jacob, right so man's soul
through light of knowing in the reason, and sweetness of love in the
affection, is spoused unto God. By Jacob is understanden God, by
Rachel is understanden reason, by Leah is understanden affection.
Each of these wives, Rachel and Leah, took to them a maiden; Rachel
took Bilhah, and Leah took Zilpah. Bilhah was a great jangler, and
Zilpah was ever drunken and thirsty. By Bilhah is understanden
imagination, the which is servant unto reason, as Bilhah was to
Rachel; by Zilpah is understanden sensuality, the which is servant
unto affection, as Zilpah was to Leah. And so much are these maidens
needful to their ladies, that without them all this world might
serve them of nought. For why, without imagination reason may not
know, and without sensuality affection may not feel. And yet
imagination cryeth so inconveniently[27] in the ears of our heart
that, for ought that reason her lady may do, yet she may not still
her. And therefore it is that oft times when we should pray, so many
divers fantasies of idle and evil thoughts cry in our hearts, that
on no wise we may by our own mights drive them away. And thus it is
well proved that Bilhah is a foul jangler. And also the sensuality
is evermore so thirsty, that all that affection her lady may
feel,[28] may not yet slake her thirst. The drink that she desireth
is the lust of fleshly, kindly, and worldly delights,[29] of the
which the more that she drinketh the more she thirsteth; for why,
for to fill the appetite of the sensuality, all this world may not
suffice; and therefore it is that oft times when we pray or think on
God and ghostly things, we would fain feel sweetness of love in our
affection,[30] and yet we may not, for are we so busy to feed the
concupiscence of our sensuality; for evermore it is greedily asking,
and we have a fleshly compassion thereof. And thus it is well proved
that Zilpah is evermore drunken and thirsty. And right as Leah
conceived of Jacob and brought forth seven children, and Rachel
conceived of Jacob and brought forth two children, and Bilhah
conceived of Jacob and brought forth two children, and Zilpah
conceived of Jacob and brought forth two children; right so the
affection conceiveth through the grace of God, and bringeth forth
seven virtues; and also the sensuality conceiveth through the grace
of God, and bringeth forth two virtues; and also the reason
conceiveth through the grace of God, and bringeth forth two virtues;
and also the imagination conceiveth through the grace of God, and
bringeth forth two virtues, or two beholdings. And the names of
their children and of their virtues shall be known by this figure
that followeth:

Husband: Jacob temporally, God spiritually. Wives to Jacob: Leah,
that is to say, Affection; Rachel, that is to say, Reason. Maid to
Leah is Zilpah, that is to understand, Sensuality; and Bilhah maiden
to Rachel, that is to understand, Imagination.

The sons of Jacob and Leah are these seven that followeth: Reuben
signifieth dread of pain; Simeon, sorrow of sins; Levi, hope of
forgiveness; Judah, love of righteousness; Issachar, joy in inward
sweetness; Zebulun, hatred of sin; Dinah, ordained shame.

The sons of Jacob and Zilpah, servant of Leah, are these: Gad,
abstinence; Asher, patience.

The sons of Jacob and of Rachel are these: Joseph, discretion;
Benjamin, contemplation.

The sons of Jacob and Bilhah, servant to Rachel, are these: Dan,
sight of pain to come; and Naphtali, sight of joy to come.

In this figure it is shewed apertly of Jacob and of his wives, and
their maidens, and all their children. Here it is to shew on what
manner they were gotten, and in what order:--

First, it is to say of the children of Leah; for why, it is read
that she first conceived. The children of Leah are nought else to
understand but ordained affections or feelings in a man's soul; for
why, if they were unordained, then were they not the sons of Jacob.
Also the seven children of Leah are seven virtues, for virtue is
nought else but an ordained and a measured feeling in a man's soul.
For then is man's feeling in soul ordained when it is of that thing
that it should be; then it is measured when it is so much as it
should be. These feelings in a man's soul may be now ordained and
measured, and now unordained and unmeasured; but when they are
ordained and measured, then are they accounted among the sons of
Jacob.[31]




CAPITULUM I

HOW THE VIRTUE OF DREAD RISETH IN THE AFFECTION


THE first child that Leah conceived of Jacob was Reuben, that is,
dread; and therefore it is written in the psalm: "The beginning of
wisdom is the dread of our Lord God."[32] This is the first felt
virtue in a man's affection, without the which none other may be
had. And, therefore, whoso desireth to have such a son, him behoveth
busily and oft also behold the evil that he hath done. And he shall,
on the one party, think on the greatness of his trespass, and, on
another party, the power of the Doomsman.[33] Of such a
consideration springeth dread, that is to say Reuben, that through
right is cleped "the son of sight."[34] For utterly is he blind that
seeth not the pains that are to come, and dreadeth not to sin. And
well is Reuben cleped the son of sight; for when he was born, his
mother cried and said: "God hath seen my meekness."[35] And man's
soul, in such a consideration of his old sins and of the power of
the Doomsman, beginneth then truly to see God by feeling of dread,
and also to be seen of God by rewarding of pity.




CAPITULUM II

HOW SORROW RISETH IN THE AFFECTION


WHILE Reuben waxeth, Simeon is born; for after dread it needeth
greatly that sorrow come soon. For ever the more that a man dreadeth
the pain that he hath deserved, the bitterlier he sorroweth the sins
that he hath done. Leah in the birth of Simeon cried and said: "Our
Lord hath heard me be had in despite."[36] And therefore is Simeon
cleped "hearing";[37] for when a man bitterly sorroweth and
despiseth his old sins, then beginneth he to be heard of God, and
also for to hear the blessed sentence of God's own mouth: "Blessed
be they that sorrow, for they shall be comforted."[38] For in what
hour the sinner sorroweth and turneth from his sin, he shall be
safe.[39] Thus witnesseth holy Scripture. And also by Reuben he is
meeked,[40] and by Simeon he is contrite and hath compunction of
tears; but, as witnesseth David in the psalm: "Heart contrite and
meeked God shall not despise";[41] and without doubt such sorrow
bringeth in true comfort of heart.




CAPITULUM III

HOW HOPE RISETH IN THE AFFECTION


BUT, I pray thee, what comfort may be to them that truly dread and
bitterly sorrow for their old sins, ought but a true hope of
forgiveness? the which is the third son of Jacob, that is Levi, the
which is cleped in the story "a doing to."[42] For when the other
two children, dread and sorrow, are given of God to a man's soul,
without doubt he this third, that is hope, shall not be delayed, but
he shall be lone to;[43] as the story witnesseth of Levi, that, when
his two brethren, Reuben and Simeon, were given to their mother
Leah, he, this Levi, was done to. Take heed of this word, that he
was "done to" and not given. And therefore it is said that a man
shall not presume of hope of forgiveness before the time that his
heart be peeked in dread and contrite in sorrow; without these two,
hope is presumption, and where these two are, hope is done to; and
thus after sorrow cometh soon comfort, as David telleth in the psalm
that "after the muchness of my sorrow in my heart," he saith to our
Lord, "Thy comforts have gladded my soul."[44] And therefore it is
that the Holy Ghost is called Paracletus, that is, comforter, for
oft times he vouchethsafe to comfort a sorrowful soul.




CAPITULUM IV

HOW LOVE RISETH IN THE AFFECTION


FROM now forth beginneth a manner of homeliness for to grow between
God and a man's soul; and also on a manner a kindling of love, in so
much that oft times he feeleth him not only be visited of God and
comforted in His coming, but oft times also he feeleth him filled
with an unspeakable joy. This homeliness and this kindling of love
first felt Leah, when, after that Levi was born, she cried with a
great voice and said: "Now shall my husband be coupled to me."[45]
The true spouse of our soul is God, and then are we truly coupled
unto Him, when we draw near Him by hope and soothfast love. And
right as after hope cometh love, so after Levi was Judah born, the
fourth son of Leah. Leah in his birth cried and said: "Now shall I
shrive to our Lord."[46] And therefore in the story is Judah cleped
"Shrift."[47] Also man's soul in this degree of love offereth it
clearly to God, and saith thus: "Now shall I shrive to our Lord."
For before this feeling of love in a man's soul, all that he doth is
done more for dread than for love; but in this state a man's soul
feeleth God so sweet, so merciful, so good, so courteous, so true,
and so kind, so faithful, so lovely and so homely, that he leaveth
nothing in him--might, wit, conning,[48] or will--that he offereth
not it clearly, freely, and homely unto Him. This shrift is not only
of sin, but of the goodness of God. Great token of love it is when a
man telleth to God that He is good. Of this shrift speaketh David
full oft times in the psalter, when he saith: "Make it known to God,
for He is good."[49]

Lo, now have we said of four sons of Leah. And after this she left
bearing of children till another time; and so man's soul weeneth
that it sufficeth to it when it feeleth that it loveth the true
goods.[50] And so it is enough to salvation, but not to perfection.
For it falleth to a perfect soul both to be inflamed with the fire
of love in the affection, and also to be illumined with the light of
knowing in the reason.




CAPITULUM V

HOW THE DOUBLE SIGHT OF PAIN AND JOY RISETH IN THE IMAGINATION


THEN when Judah waxeth, that is to say, when love and desire of
unseen true goods is rising and waxing in a man's affection; then
coveteth Rachel for to bear some children; that is to say, then
coveteth reason to know these things that affection feeleth; for as
it falleth to the affection for to love, so it falleth to the reason
for to know. Of affection springeth ordained and measured feelings;
and of reason springeth right knowings[51] and clear understandings.
And ever the more that Judah waxeth, that is to say love, so much
the more desireth Rachel bearing of children, that is to say, reason
studieth after knowing. But who is he that woteth not how hard it
is, and nearhand impossible to a fleshly soul the which is yet rude
in ghostly studies, for to rise in knowing of unseeable[52] things,
and for to set the eye of contemplation in ghostly things? For why,
a soul that is yet rude and fleshly, knoweth nought but bodily
things, and nothing cometh yet to the mind but only seeable[53]
things. And, nevertheless, yet it looketh inward as it may; and that
that it may not see yet clearly by ghostly knowing, it thinketh by
imagination.

And this is the cause why Rachel had first children of her maiden
than of herself. And so it is that, though all a man's soul may not
yet get the light of ghostly knowing in the reason, yet it thinketh
it sweet to hold the mind on God and ghostly things in the
imagination. As by Rachel we understand reason, so by her maiden
Bilhah we understand imagination. And, therefore, reason sheweth
that it is more profitable for to think on ghostly things, in what
manner so it be; yea, if it be in kindling of our desire with some
fair imagination; than it is for to think on vanities and deceivable
things of this world. And, therefore, of Bilhah were born these two:
Dan and Naphtali. Dan is to say sight of pains to come; and
Naphtali, sight of joys to come. These two children are full needful
and full speedful unto a working soul; the one for to put down evil
suggestions of sins; and the other for to raise up our wills in
working of good and in kindling of our desires. For as it falleth to
Dan to put down evil suggestions of sin by sight of pains to come,
so it falleth to the other brother Naphtali to raise up our wills in
working of good, and in kindling of holy desires by sight of joys to
come. And therefore holy men, when they are stirred to any unlawful
thing, by inrising of any foul thought, as oft they set before their
mind the pains that are to come; and so they slaken their temptation
in the beginning, ere it rise to any foul delight in their soul. And
as oft as their devotion and their liking in God and ghostly things
cease and wax cold (as oft times it befalleth in this life, for
corruption of the flesh and many other skills),[54] so oft they set
before their mind the joy that is to come. And so they kindle their
will with holy desires, and destroy their temptation in the
beginning, ere it come to any weariness or heaviness of sloth. And
for that[55] with Dan we damn unlawful thoughts, therefore he is
well cleped in the story "Doom."[56] And also his father Jacob said
of him thus: "Dan shall deem his folk."[57] And also it is said in
the story that, when Bilhah brought forth Dan, Rachel said thus:
"Our Lord hath deemed me";[58] that is to say: "Our Lord hath evened
me unto my sister Leah." And thus saith reason, when the imagination
hath gotten the sight of pains to come, that our Lord hath evened
her with her sister affection; and she saith thus, for she hath the
sight of pains to come in her imagination, of the which she had
dread and sorrow in her feeling. And then after came Naphtali, that
is to say, the sight of joys to come. And in his birth spake Rachel
and said: "I am made like to my sister Leah";[59] and therefore is
Naphtali cleped in the story "Likeness."[60] And thus saith reason
that she is made like to her sister affection. For there as she had
gotten hope and love of joy to come in her feeling, she hath now
gotten sight of joy to come in her imagination. Jacob said of
Naphtali that he was "a hart sent out, giving speeches of
fairhead."[61] So it is that, when we imagine of the joys of heaven,
we say that it is fair in heaven. For[62] wonderfully kindleth
Naphtali our souls with holy desires, as oft as we imagine of the
worthiness and the fairhead of the joys of heaven.




CAPITULUM VI

HOW THE VIRTUES OF ABSTINENCE AND PATIENCE RISE IN THE SENSUALITY


WHEN Leah saw that Rachel her sister made great joy of these two
bastards born of Bilhah her maiden, she called forth her maiden
Zilpah, to put to her husband Jacob; that she might make joy with
her sister, having other two bastards gotten of her maiden Zilpah.
And thus it is seemly in man's soul for to be, that from the time
that reason hath refrained the great jangling of imagination, and
hath put her to be underlout[63] to God, and maketh her to bear some
fruit in helping of her knowing, that right so the affection refrain
the lust and the thirst of the sensuality, and make her to be
underlout to God, and so to bear some fruit in helping of her
feeling. But what fruit may she bear, ought but that she learn to
live temperately in easy things, and patiently in uneasy things?
These are they, the children of Zilpah, Gad and Asher: Gad is
abstinence, and Asher is patience. Gad is the sooner born child, and
Asher the latter; for first it needeth that we be attempered in
ourself with discreet abstinence, and after that we bear outward
disease[64] in strength of patience. These are the children that
Zilpah brought forth in sorrow; for in abstinence and patience the
sensuality is punished in the flesh; but that that is sorrow to the
sensuality turneth to much comfort and bliss to the affection. And
therefore it is that, when Gad was born, Leah cried and said:
"Happily"[65]; and therefore Gad is cleped in the story "Happiness,"
or "Seeliness."[66] And so it is well said that abstinence in the
sensuality is happiness[67] in the affection. For why, ever the less
that the sensuality is delighted in her lust, the more sweetness
feeleth the affection in her love. Also after when Asher was born,
Leah said: "This shall be for my bliss";[68] and therefore was Asher
called in the story "Blessed."[69] And so it is well said that
patience in the sensuality is bliss in the affection. For why, ever
the more disease that the sensuality suffereth, the more blessed is
the soul in the affection. And thus by abstinence and patience we
shall not only understand a temperance in meat and drink, and
suffering of outward tribulation, but also [in] all manner of
fleshly, kindly,[70] and worldly delights, and all manner of
disease, bodily and ghostly, within or without, reasonable or
unreasonable, that by any of our five wits torment or delight the
