We are brethren because we are sons of one Father. So that favourite
name, by which the early Christians knew each other, rested upon and
proclaimed the deep truth that they knew themselves to be all
partakers of a common life derived from one Parent. When they said
they were brethren, they implied, 'We have been born again by the
word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.' The great Christian
truth of regeneration, the communication of a divine life from God
the Father, through Christ the Son, by the Holy Spirit, is the
foundation of Christian brotherhood. So the name is no mere piece of
effusive sentiment, but expresses a profound fact. 'To as many as
received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God,' and
therein to become the brethren of all His sons. That is the true
ground of our unity, and of our obligation to love all who are
begotten of Him. You cannot safely put them on any other footing. All
else--identity of opinion, similarity of practice and ceremonial,
local or national ties, and the like--all else is insufficient. It
may be necessary for Christian communities to require in addition a
general identity of opinion, and even some uniformity in government
and form of worship; but if ever they come to fancy that such
subordinate conditions of visible oneness are the grounds of their
spiritual unity, and to enforce these as such, they are slipping off
the real foundation, and are perilling their character as Churches of
Christ. The true ground of the unity of all Christians is here: 'Have
we not all one Father?' We possess a kindred life derived from Him.
We are a family of brethren because we are sons.

Another remark is, how strangely and unwittingly this good man has
got himself an immortality by that passing thought of his. One loving
message has won for him the prize for which men have joyfully given
life itself,--an eternal place in history. Wheresoever the Gospel is
preached there also shall this be told as a memorial of him. How much
surprised he would have been if, as he leaned forward to Tertius
hurrying to end his task and said, 'Send my love too,' anybody had
told him that that one act of his would last as long as the world,
and his name be known for ever! And how much ashamed some of the
other people in the New Testament would have been if they had known
that their passing faults--the quarrel of Euodia and Syntyche for
instance--were to be gibbeted for ever in the same fashion! How
careful they would have been, and we would be, of our behaviour if we
knew that it was to be pounced down upon and made immortal in that
style! Suppose you were to be told--Your thoughts and acts to-morrow
at twelve o'clock will be recorded for all the world to read--you
would be pretty careful how you behaved. When a speaker sees the
reporters in front of him, he weighs his words.

Well, Quartus' little message is written down here, and the world
knows it. All our words and works are getting put down too, in
another Book up there, and it is going to be read out one day. It
does seem wonderful that you and I should live as we do, knowing that
all the while that God is recording it all. If we are not ashamed to
do things, and let Him note them on His tablets that they may be for
the time to come, for ever and ever, it is strange that we should be
more careful to attitudinise and pose ourselves before one another
than before Him. Let us then keep ever in mind 'those pure eyes and
perfect witness of the all-judging' God. The eternal record of this
little message is only a symbol of the eternal life and eternal
record of all our transient and trivial thoughts and deeds before
Him. Let us live so that each act, if recorded, would shine with some
modest ray of true light like brother Quartus' greeting, and let us
seek that, like him,--all else about us being forgotten, position,
talents, wealth, buried in the dust,--we may be remembered, if we are
remembered at all, by such a biography as is condensed into these
three words. Who would not wish to be embalmed, so to speak, in such
a record? Who would not wish to have such an epitaph as this? A sweet
fate to live for ever in the world's memory by three words which tell
his name, his Christianity, and his brotherly love! So far as we are
remembered at all, may the like be our life's history and our
epitaph!




EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE

ALEXANDER MACLAREN, D.D., Litt.D.

CORINTHIANS
(_To II Corinthians, Chap. V_)



CONTENTS

CALLING ON THE NAME (1 COR. i. 2)

PERISHING OR BEING SAVED (1 COR. i. 18)

THE APOSTLE'S THEME (1 COR. ii. 2)

GOD'S FELLOW-WORKERS (1 COR. iii. 9)

THE TESTING FIRE (1 COR. iii. 12, 13)

TEMPLES OF GOD (1 COR. iii. 16)

DEATH, THE FRIEND (1 COR. iii. 21, 22)

SERVANTS AND LORDS (1 COR. iii. 21-23)

THE THREE TRIBUNALS (1 COR. iv. 3, 4)

THE FESTAL LIFE (1 COR. v. 8)

FORMS _VERSUS_ CHARACTER
   (1 COR. vii. 19, GAL. v. 6, GAL. vi. 15, R.V.)

SLAVES AND FREE (1 COR. vii. 22)

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE (1 COR. vii. 24)

'LOVE BUILDETH UP' (1 COR. viii. 1-13)

THE SIN OF SILENCE (1 COR. ix. 16, 17)

A SERVANT OF MEN (1 COR. ix. 19-23)

HOW THE VICTOR RUNS (1 COR. ix. 24)

'CONCERNING THE CROWN' (1 COR. ix. 25)

THE LIMITS OF LIBERTY (1 COR. x. 23-33)

'IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME' (1 COR. xi. 24)

THE UNIVERSAL GIFT (1 COR. xii. 7)

WHAT LASTS (1 COR. xiii. 8, 13)

THE POWER OF THE RESURRECTION (1 COR. xv. 3, 4)

REMAINING AND FALLING ASLEEP (1 COR. xv. 6)

PAUL'S ESTIMATE OF HIMSELF (1 COR. xv. 10)

THE UNITY OF APOSTOLIC TEACHING (1 COR. xv. 11)

THE CERTAINTY AND JOY OF THE RESURRECTION (1 COR. xv. 20)

THE DEATH OF DEATH (1 COR. xv. 20, 21; 50-58)

STRONG AND LOVING (1 COR. xvi. 13, 14)

ANATHEMA AND GRACE (1 COR. xvi. 21-24)

GOD'S YEA; MAN'S AMEN (2 COR. i. 20, R.V.)

ANOINTED AND STABLISHED (2 COR. i. 21)

SEAL AND EARNEST (2 COR. i. 22)

THE TRIUMPHAL PROCESSION (2 COR. ii. 14, R.V.)

TRANSFORMATION BY BEHOLDING (2 COR. iii. 18)

LOOKING AT THE UNSEEN (2 COR. iv. 18)

TENT AND BUILDING (2 COR. v. 1)

THE PATIENT WORKMAN (2 COR. v. 5)

THE OLD HOUSE AND THE NEW (2 COR. v. 8)

PLEASING CHRIST (2 COR. v. 9)

THE LOVE THAT CONSTRAINS (2 COR. v. 14)

THE ENTREATIES OF GOD (2 COR. v. 20)




I. CORINTHIANS


CALLING ON THE NAME

   'All that in every place call upon the name of Jesus
   Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.'--1 COR. i. 2.


There are some difficulties, with which I need not trouble you, about
both the translation and the connection of these words. One thing is
quite clear, that in them the Apostle associates the church at
Corinth with the whole mass of Christian believers in the world. The
question may arise whether he does so in the sense that he addresses
his letter both to the church at Corinth and to the whole of the
churches, and so makes it a catholic epistle. That is extremely
unlikely, considering how all but entirely this letter is taken up
with dealing with the especial conditions of the Corinthian church.
Rather I should suppose that he is simply intending to remind 'the
Church of God at Corinth ... sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
saints,' that they are in real, living union with the whole body of
believers. Just as the water in a little land-locked bay, connected
with the sea by some narrow strait like that at Corinth, is yet part
of the whole ocean that rolls round the world, so that little
community of Christians had its living bond of union with all the
brethren in every place that called upon the name of Jesus Christ.

Whichever view on that detail of interpretation be taken, this
phrase, as a designation of Christians, is worth considering. It is
one of many expressions found in the New Testament as names for them,
some of which have now dropped out of general use, while some are
still retained. It is singular that the name of 'Christian,' which
has all but superseded all others, was originally invented as a jeer
by sarcastic wits at Antioch, and never appears in the New Testament,
as a name by which believers called themselves. Important lessons are
taught by these names, such as disciples, believers, brethren,
saints, those of the way, and so on, each of which embodies some
characteristic of a follower of Jesus. So this appellation in the
text, 'those who call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,' may
yield not unimportant lessons if it be carefully weighed, and to some
of these I would ask your attention now.

I. First, it gives us a glimpse into the worship of the primitive
Church.

To 'call on the name of the Lord' is an expression that comes
straight out of the Old Testament. It means there distinctly
adoration and invocation, and it means precisely these things when it
is referred to Jesus Christ.

We find in the Acts of the Apostles that the very first sermon that
was preached at Pentecost by Peter all turns upon this phrase. He
quotes the Old Testament saying, 'Whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be saved,' and then goes on to prove that 'the Lord,'
the 'calling on whose Name' is salvation, is Jesus Christ; and winds
up with 'Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that
God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and
Christ.'

Again we find that Ananias of Damascus, when Jesus Christ appeared to
him and told him to go to Paul and lay his hands upon him, shrank
from the perilous task because Paul had been sent to 'bind them that
call upon the name of the Lord,' and to persecute them. We find the
same phrase recurring in other connections, so that, on the whole, we
may take the expression as a recognised designation of Christians.

This was their characteristic, that they prayed to Jesus Christ. The
very first word, so far as we know, that Paul ever heard from a
Christian was, 'Lord Jesus! receive my spirit.' He heard that cry of
calm faith which, when he heard it, would sound to him as horrible
blasphemy from Stephen's dying lips. How little he dreamed that he
himself was soon to cry to the same Jesus, 'Lord, what wilt thou have
me to do?' and was in after-days to beseech Him thrice for
deliverance, and to be answered by sufficient grace. How little he
dreamed that, when his own martyrdom was near, he too would look to
Jesus as Lord and righteous Judge, from whose hands all who loved His
appearing should receive their crown! Nor only Paul directs desires
and adoration to Jesus as Lord; the last words of Scripture are a cry
to Him as Lord to come quickly, and an invocation of His 'grace' on
all believing souls.

Prayer to Christ from the very beginning of the Christian Church was,
then, the characteristic of believers, and He to whom they prayed,
thus, from the beginning, was recognised by them as being a Divine
Person, God manifest in the flesh.

The object of their worship, then, was known by the people among whom
they lived. Singing hymns to Christus as a god is nearly all that the
Roman proconsul in his well-known letter could find to tell his
master of their worship. They were the worshippers--not merely the
disciples--of one Christ. That was their peculiar distinction. Among
the worshippers of the false gods they stood erect; before Him, and
Him only, they bowed. In Corinth there was the polluted worship of
Aphrodite and of Zeus. These men called not on the name of these
lustful and stained deities, but on the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. And everybody knew whom they worshipped, and understood whose
men they were. Is that true about us? Do we Christian men so
habitually cultivate the remembrance of Jesus Christ, and are we so
continually in the habit of invoking His aid, and of contemplating
His blessed perfections and sufficiency, that every one who knew us
would recognise us as meant by those who call on the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ?

If this be the proper designation of Christian people, alas! alas!
for so many of the professing Christians of this day, whom neither
bystanders nor themselves would think of as included in such a name!

Further, the connection here shows that the divine worship of Christ
was universal among the churches. There was no 'place' where it was
not practised, no community calling itself a church to whom He was
not the Lord to be invoked and adored. This witness to the early and
universal recognition in the Christian communities of the divinity of
our Lord is borne by an undisputedly genuine epistle of Paul's. It is
one of the four which the most thorough-going destructive criticism
accepts as genuine. It was written before the Gospels, and is a voice
from the earlier period of Paul's apostleship. Hence the importance
of its attestation to this fact that all Christians everywhere, both
Jewish, who had been trained in strict monotheism, and Gentile, who
had burned incense at many a foul shrine, were perfectly joined
together in this, that in all their need they called on the name of
Jesus Christ as Lord and brought to Him, as divine, adoration not to
be rendered to any creatures. From the day of Pentecost onwards, a
Christian was not merely a disciple, a follower, or an admirer, but a
worshipper of Christ, the Lord.

II. We may see here an unfolding of the all-sufficiency of Jesus
Christ.

Note that solemn accumulation, in the language of my text, of all the
designations by which He is called, sometimes separately and
sometimes unitedly, the name of 'our Lord Jesus Christ.' We never
find that full title given to Him in Scripture except when the
writer's mind is labouring to express the manifoldness and
completeness of our Lord's relations to men, and the largeness and
sufficiency of the blessings which He brings. In this context I find
in the first nine or ten verses of this chapter, so full is the
Apostle of the thoughts of the greatness and wonderfulness of his
dear Lord on whose name he calls, that six or seven times he employs
this solemn, full designation.

Now, if we look at the various elements of this great name we shall
get various aspects of the way in which calling on Christ is the
strength of our souls.

'Call on the name of--the Lord.' That is the Old Testament Jehovah.
There is no mistaking nor denying, if we candidly consider the
evidence of the New Testament writings, that, when we read of Jesus
Christ as 'Lord,' in the vast majority of cases, the title is not a
mere designation of human authority, but is an attribution to Him of
divine nature and dignity. We have, then, to ascribe to Him, and to
call on Him as possessing, all which that great and incommunicable
Name certified and sealed to the Jewish Church as their possession
in their God. The Jehovah of the Old Testament is our Lord of the
New. He whose being is eternal, underived, self-sufficing,
self-determining, knowing no variation, no diminution, no age, He
who is because He is and that He is, dwells in His fulness in our
Saviour. To worship Him is not to divert worship from the one God,
nor is it to have other gods besides Him. Christianity is as much
monotheistic as Judaism was, and the law of its worship is the old
law--Him only shalt thou serve. It is the divine will that all men
should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father.

But what is it to call on the name of Jesus? That name implies all
the sweetness of His manhood. He is our Brother. The name 'Jesus' is
one that many a Jewish boy bore in our Lord's own time and before it;
though, afterwards, of course, abhorrence on the part of the Jew and
reverence on the part of the Christian caused it almost entirely to
disappear. But at the time when He bore it it was as undistinguished
a name as Simeon, or Judas, or any other of His followers' names. To
call upon the name of Jesus means to realise and bring near to
ourselves, for our consolation and encouragement, for our strength
and peace, the blessed thought of His manhood, so really and closely
knit to ours; to grasp the blessedness of the thought that He knows
our frame because He Himself has worn it, and understands and pities
our weakness, being Himself a man. To Him whom we adore as Lord we
draw near in tenderer, but not less humble and prostrate, adoration
as our brother when we call on the name of the Lord Jesus, and thus
embrace as harmonious, and not contradictory, both the divinity of
the Lord and the humanity of Jesus.

To call on the name of Christ is to embrace in our faith and to
beseech the exercise on our behalf of all which Jesus is as the
Messiah, anointed by God with the fulness of the Spirit. As such He
is the climax, and therefore the close of all revelation, who is the
long-expected fruition of the desire of weary hearts, the fulfilment,
and therefore the abolition, of sacrifice and temple and priesthood
and prophecy and all that witnessed for Him ere He came. We further
call on the name of Christ the Anointed, on whom the whole fulness of
the Divine Spirit dwelt in order that, calling upon Him, that fulness
may in its measure be granted to us.

So the name of the Lord Jesus Christ brings to view the divine, the
human, the Messiah, the anointed Lord of the Spirit, and Giver of the
divine life. To call on His name is to be blessed, to be made pure
and strong, joyous and immortal. 'The name of the Lord is a strong
tower, the righteous runneth into it and is safe.' Call on His name
in the day of trouble and ye shall be heard and helped.

III. Lastly, this text suggests what a Christian life should be.

We have already remarked that to call on the name of Jesus was the
distinctive peculiarity of the early believers, which marked them off
as a people by themselves. Would it be a true designation of the bulk
of so-called Christians now? You do not object to profess yourself a
Christian, or, perhaps, even to say that you are a disciple of
Christ, or even to go the length of calling yourself a follower and
imitator. But are you a worshipper of Him? In your life have you
the habit of meditating on Him as Lord, as Jesus, as Christ, and of
refreshing and gladdening dusty days and fainting strength by the
living water, drawn from the one unfailing stream from these triple
fountains? Is the invocation of His aid habitual with you?

There needs no long elaborate supplication to secure His aid. How
much has been done in the Church's history by short bursts of prayer,
as 'Lord, help me!' spoken or unspoken in the moment of extremity!
'They cried unto God in the battle.' They would not have time for
very lengthy petitions then, would they? They would not give much
heed to elegant arrangement of them or suiting them to the canons of
human eloquence. 'They cried unto God in the battle'; whilst the
enemy's swords were flashing and the arrows whistling about their
ears. These were circumstances to make a prayer a 'cry'; no composed
and stately utterance of an elegantly modulated voice, nor a languid
utterance without earnestness, but a short, sharp, loud call, such as
danger presses from panting lungs and parched throats. Therefore the
cry was answered, 'and He was entreated of them.' 'Lord, save us, we
perish!' was a very brief prayer, but it brought its answer. And so
we, in like manner, may go through our warfare and work, and day by
day as we encounter sudden bursts of temptation may meet them with
sudden jets of petition, and thus put out their fires. And the same
help avails for long-continuing as for sudden needs. Some of us may
have to carry lifelong burdens and to fight in a battle ever renewed.
It may seem as if our cry was not heard, since the enemy's assault is
not weakened, nor our power to beat it back perceptibly increased.
But the appeal is not in vain, and when the fight is over, if not
before, we shall know what reinforcements of strength to our weakness
were due to our poor cry entering into the ears of our Lord and
Brother. No other 'name' is permissible as our plea or as recipient
of our prayer. In and on the name of the Lord we must call, and if we
do, anything is possible rather than that the promise which was
claimed for the Church and referred to Jesus, in the very first
Christian preaching on Pentecost, should not be fulfilled--'Whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.'

'In every place.' We may venture to subject the words of my text to a
little gentle pressure here. The Apostle only meant to express the
universal characteristics of Christians everywhere. But we may
venture to give a different turn to the words, and learn from them
the duty of devout communion with Christ as a duty for each of us
wherever we are. If a place is not fit to pray in it is not fit to be
in. We may carry praying hearts, remembrances of the Lord, sweet,
though they may be swift and short, contemplations of His grace, His
love, His power, His sufficiency, His nearness, His punctual help,
like a hidden light in our hearts, into all the dusty ways of life,
and in every place call on His name. There is no place so dismal but
that thoughts of Him will make sunshine in it; no work so hard, so
commonplace, so prosaic, so uninteresting, but that it will become
the opposite of all these if whatever we do is done in remembrance of
our Lord. Nothing will be too hard for us to do, and nothing too
bitter for us to swallow, and nothing too sad for us to bear, if only
over all that befalls us and all that we undertake and endeavour we
make the sign of the Cross and call upon the name of the Lord. If 'in
every place' we have Him as the object of our faith and desire, and
as the Hearer of our petition, in 'every place' we shall have Him for
our help, and all will be full of His bright presence; and though we
have to journey through the wilderness we shall ever drink of that
spiritual rock that will follow us, and that Rock is Christ. In every
place call upon His name, and every place will be a house of God, and
a gate of heaven to our waiting souls.




PERISHING OR BEING SAVED

   'For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish
   foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power
   of God.'--1 COR. i. 18.


The starting-point of my remarks is the observation that a slight
variation of rendering, which will be found in the Revised Version,
brings out the true meaning of these words. Instead of reading 'them
that perish' and 'us which are saved,' we ought to read 'them that
_are perishing_,' and 'us which _are being_ saved.' That is to say,
the Apostle represents the two contrasted conditions, not so much as
fixed states, either present or future, but rather as processes which
are going on, and are manifestly, in the present, incomplete. That
opens some very solemn and intensely practical considerations.

Then I may further note that this antithesis includes the whole of
the persons to whom the Gospel is preached. In one or other of these
two classes they all stand. Further, we have to observe that the
consideration which determines the class to which men belong, is the
attitude which they respectively take to the preaching of the Cross.
If it be, and because it is, 'foolishness' to some, they belong to
the catalogue of the perishing. If it be, and because it is, 'the
power of God' to others, they belong to the class of those who are in
process of being saved.

So, then, we have the ground cleared for two or three very simple,
but, as it seems to me, very important thoughts.

I. I desire, first, to look at the two contrasted conditions,
'perishing' and 'being saved.'

Now we shall best, I think, understand the force of the darker of
these two terms if we first ask what is the force of the brighter and
more radiant. If we understand what the Apostle means by 'saving' and
'salvation' we shall understand also what he means by 'perishing.'

If, then, we turn for a moment to Scripture analogy and teaching, we
find that that threadbare word 'salvation,' which we all take it for
granted that we understand, and which, like a well-worn coin, has
been so passed from hand to hand that it scarcely remains
legible--that well-worn word 'salvation' starts from a double
metaphorical meaning. It means either--and is used for both--being
healed or being made safe. In the one sense it is often employed in
the Gospel narratives of our Lord's miracles, and it involves the
metaphor of a sick man and his cure; in the other it involves the
metaphor of a man in peril and his deliverance and security. The
negative side, then, of the Gospel idea of salvation is the making
whole from a disease, and the making safe from a danger. Negatively,
it is the removal from each of us of the one sickness, which is sin;
and the one danger, which is the reaping of the fruits and
consequences of sin, in their variety as guilt, remorse, habit, and
slavery under it, perverted relation to God, a fearful apprehension
of penal consequences here, and, if there be a hereafter, there, too.
The sickness of soul and the perils that threaten life, flow from the
central fact of sin, and salvation consists, negatively, in the
sweeping away of all of these, whether the sin itself, or the fatal
facility with which we yield to it, or the desolation and perversion
which it brings into all the faculties and susceptibilities, or the
perversion of relation to God, and the consequent evils, here and
hereafter, which throng around the evil-doer. The sick man is healed,
and the man in peril is set in safety.

But, besides that, there is a great deal more. The cure is incomplete
till the full tide of health follows convalescence. When God saves,
He does not only bar up the iron gate through which the hosts of evil
rush out upon the defenceless soul, but He flings wide the golden
gate through which the glad troops of blessings and of graces flock
around the delivered spirit, and enrich it with all joys and with all
beauties. So the positive side of salvation is the investiture of the
saved man with throbbing health through all his veins, and the
strength that comes from a divine life. It is the bestowal upon the
delivered man of everything that he needs for blessedness and for
duty. All good conferred, and every evil banned back into its dark
den, such is the Christian conception of salvation. It is much that
the negative should be accomplished, but it is little in comparison
with the rich fulness of positive endowments, of happiness, and of
holiness which make an integral part of the salvation of God.

This, then, being the one side, what about the other? If this be
salvation, its precise opposite is the Scriptural idea of
'perishing.' Utter ruin lies in the word, the entire failure to be
what God meant a man to be. That is in it, and no contortions of
arbitrary interpretation can knock that solemn significance out of
the dreadful expression. If salvation be the cure of the sickness,
perishing is the fatal end of the unchecked disease. If salvation be
the deliverance from the outstretched claws of the harpy evils that
crowd about the trembling soul, then perishing is the fixing of their
poisoned talons into their prey, and their rending of it into
fragments.

Of course that is metaphor, but no metaphor can be half so dreadful
as the plain, prosaic fact that the exact opposite of the salvation,
which consists in the healing from sin and the deliverance from
danger, and in the endowment with all gifts good and beautiful, is
the Christian idea of the alternative 'perishing.' Then it means the
disease running its course. It means the dangers laying hold of the
man in peril. It means the withdrawal, or the non-bestowal, of all
which is good, whether it be good of holiness or good of happiness.
It does not mean, as it seems to me, the cessation of conscious
existence, any more than salvation means the bestowal of conscious
existence. But he who perishes knows that he has perished, even as he
knows the process while he is in the process of perishing. Therefore,
we have to think of the gradual fading away from consciousness, and
dying out of a life, of many things beautiful and sweet and gracious,
of the gradual increase of distance from Him, union with whom is the
condition of true life, of the gradual sinking into the pit of utter
ruin, of the gradual increase of that awful death in life and life in
death in which living consciousness
makes the conscious subject aware that he is lost; lost to God, lost
to himself.

Brethren, it is no part of my business to enlarge upon such awful
thoughts, but the brighter the light of salvation, the darker the
eclipse of ruin which rings it round. This, then, is the first
contrast.

II. Now note, secondly, the progressiveness of both members of the
alternative.

All states of heart or mind tend to increase, by the very fact of
continuance. Life is a process, and every part of a spiritual being
is in living motion and continuous action in a given direction. So
the law for the world, and for every man in it, in all regions of his
life, quite as much as in the religious, is 'To him that hath shall
be given, and he shall have abundance.'

Look, then, at this thought of the process by which these two
conditions become more and more confirmed, consolidated, and
complete. Salvation is a progressive fact. In the New Testament we
have that great idea looked at from three points of view. Sometimes
it is spoken of as having been accomplished in the past in the case
of every believing soul--'Ye have been saved' is said more than once.
Sometimes it is spoken of as being accomplished in the present--'Ye
are saved' is said more than once. And sometimes it is relegated to
the future--'Now is our salvation nearer than when we believed,' and
the like. But there are a number of New Testament passages which
coincide with this text in regarding salvation as, not the work of
any one moment, but as a continuous operation running through life,
not a point either in the past, present, or future, but a continued
life. As, for instance, 'The Lord added to the Church daily those
that were being saved.' By one offering He hath perfected for ever
them that are being sanctified. And in a passage in the Second
Epistle to the Corinthians, which, in some respects, is an exact
parallel to that of my text, we read of the preaching of the Gospel
as being a 'savour of Christ in them that are being saved, and in
them that are perishing.'

So the process of being saved is going on as long as a Christian man
lives in this world; and every one who professes to be Christ's
follower ought, day by day, to be growing more and more saved, more
fully filled with that Divine Spirit, more entirely the conqueror of
his own lusts and passions and evil, more and more invested with all
the gifts of holiness and of blessedness which Jesus Christ is ready
to bestow upon him.

Ah, brethren! that notion of a progressive salvation at work in all
true Christians has all but faded away out of the beliefs, as it has
all but disappeared from the experience, of hosts of you that call
yourselves Christ's followers, and are not a bit further on than you
were ten years ago; are no more healed of your corruptions (perhaps
less so, for relapses are dangerous) than you were then--have not
advanced any further into the depths of God than when you first got a
glimpse of Him as loving, and your Father, in Jesus Christ--are
contented to linger, like some weak band of invaders in a strange
land, on the borders and coasts, instead of pressing inwards and
making it all your own. Growing Christians--may I venture to
say?--are not the majority of professing Christians. And, on the
other side, as certainly, there are progressive deterioration and
approximation to disintegration and ruin. How many men there are
listening to me now who were far nearer being delivered from their
sins when they were lads than they have ever been since! How many in
whom the sensibility to the message of salvation has disappeared, in
whom the world has ossified their consciences and their hearts, in
whom there is a more entire and unstruggling submission to low things
and selfish things and worldly things and wicked things, than there
used to be! I am sure that there are not a few among us now who were
far better, and far happier, when they were poor and young, and could
still thrill with generous emotion and tremble at the Word of God,
than they are to-day. Why! there are some of you that could no more
bring back your former loftier impulses, and compunction of spirit
and throbs of desire towards Christ and His salvation, than you could
bring back the birds' nests or the snows of your youthful years. You
are perishing, in the very process of going down and down into the
dark.

Now, notice, that the Apostle treats these two classes as covering
the whole ground of the hearers of the Word, and as alternatives. If
not in the one class we are in the other. Ah, brethren! life is no
level plane, but a steep incline, on which there is no standing
still, and if you try to stand still, down you go. Either up or down
must be the motion. If you are not more of a Christian than you were a
year ago, you are less. If you are not more saved--for there is a
degree of comparison--if you are not more saved, you are less saved.

Now, do not let that go over your head as pulpit thunder, meaning
nothing. It means _you_, and, whether you feel or think it or
not, one or other of these two solemn developments is at this moment
going on in you. And that is not a thought to be put lightly on one
side.

Further, note what a light such considerations as these, that
salvation and perishing are vital processes--'going on all the time,'
as the Americans say--throw upon the future. Clearly the two
processes are incomplete here. You get the direction of the line, but
not its natural termination. And thus a heaven and a hell are
demanded by the phenomena of growing goodness and of growing badness
which we see round about us. The arc of the circle is partially
swept. Are the compasses going to stop at the point where the grave
comes in? By no means. Round they will go, and will complete the
circle. But that is not all. The necessity for progress will persist
after death; and all through the duration of immortal being,
goodness, blessedness, holiness, Godlikeness, will, on the one hand,
grow in brighter lustre; and on the other, alienation from God, loss
of the noble elements of the nature, and all the other doleful
darknesses which attend that conception of a lost man, will increase
likewise. And so, two people, sitting side by side here now, may
start from the same level, and by the operation of the one principle
the one may rise, and rise, and rise, till he is lost in God, and so
finds himself, and the other sink, and sink, and sink, into the
obscurity of woe and evil that lies beneath every human life as a
possibility.

III. And now, lastly, notice the determining attitude to the Cross
which settles the class to which we belong.

Paul, in my text, is explaining his reason for not preaching the
Gospel with what he calls 'the words of man's wisdom,' and he says,
in effect, 'It would be of no use if I did, because what settles
whether the Cross shall look "foolishness" to a man or not is the
man's whole moral condition, and what settles whether a man shall
find it to be "the power of God" or not is whether he has passed into
the region of those that are being saved.'

So there are two thoughts suggested which sound as if they were
illogically combined, but which yet are both true. It is true that
men perish, or are saved, because the Cross is to them respectively
'foolishness' or 'the power of God'; and the other thing is also
true, that the Cross is to them 'foolishness,' or 'the power of God'
because, respectively, they are perishing or being saved. That is not
putting the cart before the horse, but both aspects of the truth are
true.

If you see nothing in Jesus Christ, and His death for us all, except
'foolishness,' something unfit to do you any good, and unnecessary to
be taken into account in your lives--oh, my friends! _that_ is the
condemnation of your eyes, and not of the thing you look at. If a
man, gazing on the sun at twelve o'clock on a June day, says to me,
'It is not bright,' the only thing I have to say to him is, 'Friend,
you had better go to an oculist.' And if to us the Cross is
'foolishness,' it is because already a process of 'perishing' has
gone so far that it has attacked our capacity of recognising the
wisdom and love of God when we see them.

But, on the other hand, if we clasp that Cross in simple trust, we
find that it is the power which saves us out of all sins, sorrows,
and dangers, and 'shall save us' at last 'into His heavenly kingdom.'

Dear friends, that message leaves no man exactly as it found him. My
words, I feel, in this sermon, have been very poor, set by the side
of the greatness of the theme; but, poor as they have been, you will
not be exactly the same man after them, if you have listened to them,
as you were before. The difference may be very imperceptible, but it
will be real. One more, almost invisible, film, over the eyeball; one
more thin layer of wax in the ear; one more fold of insensibility
round heart and conscience--or else some yielding to the love; some
finger put out to take the salvation; some lightening of the pressure
of the sickness; some removal of the peril and the danger. The same
sun hurts diseased eyes, and gladdens sound ones. The same fire melts
wax and hardens clay. 'This Child is set for the rise and fall of
many in Israel.' 'To the one He is the savour of life unto life; to
the other He is the savour of death unto death.' _Which_ is He, for
He _is_ one of them, to you?




THE APOSTLE'S THEME

   'I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus
   Christ, and Him crucified.'--1 COR. ii. 2.


Many of you are aware that to-day I close forty years of ministry in
this city--I cannot say to this congregation, for there are very,
very few that can go back with me in memory to the beginning of these
years. You will bear me witness that I seldom intrude personal
references into the pulpit, but perhaps it would be affectation not
to do so now. Looking back over these long years, many thoughts arise
which cannot be spoken in public. But one thing I may say, and that
is, that I am grateful to God and to you, dear friends, for the
unbroken harmony, confidence, affection, and forbearance which have
brightened and lightened my work. Of its worth I cannot judge; its
imperfections I know better than the most unfavourable critic; but I
can humbly take the words of this text as expressive, not, indeed, of
my attainments, but of my aims. One of my texts, on my first Sunday
in Manchester, was 'We preach Christ and Him crucified,' and I look
back, and venture to say that the noble words of this text have been,
however imperfectly followed, my guiding star.

Now, I wish to say a word or two, less personal perhaps, and yet, as
you can well suppose, not without a personal reference in my own
consciousness.

I. Note here first, then, the Apostolic theme--Jesus Christ and Him
crucified.

Now, the Apostle, in this context, gives us a little autobiographical
glimpse which is singularly and interestingly confirmed by some
slight incidental notices in the Book of the Acts. He says, in the
context, that he was with the Corinthians 'in weakness and in fear
and in much trembling,' and, if we turn to the narrative, we find
that a singular period of silence, apparent abandonment of his work
and dejection, seems to have synchronised with his coming to the
great city of Corinth. The reasons were very plain. He had recently
come into Europe for the first time and had had to front a new
condition of things, very different from what he had found in
Palestine or in Asia Minor. His experience had not been encouraging.
He had been imprisoned in Philippi; he had been smuggled away by
night from Thessalonica; he had been hounded from Berea; he had all
but wholly failed to make any impression in Athens, and in his
solitude he came to Corinth, and lay quiet, and took stock of his
adversaries. He came to the conclusion which he records in my text;
he felt that it was not for him to argue with philosophers, or to
attempt to vie with Sophists and professional orators, but that his
only way to meet Greek civilisation, Greek philosophy, Greek
eloquence, Greek self-conceit, was to preach 'Christ and Him
crucified.' The determination was not come to in ignorance of the
conditions that were fronting him. He knew Corinth, its wealth, its
wickedness, its culture, and knowing these he said, 'I have made up
my mind that I will know nothing amongst you save Jesus Christ and
Him crucified.'

So, then, this Apostle's conception of his theme was--the biography
of a Man, with especial emphasis laid on one act in His history--His
death. Christianity is Christ, and Christ is Christianity. His
relation to the truth that He proclaimed, and to the truths that may
be deducible from the story of His life and death, is altogether
different from the relation of any other founder of a religion to the
truths that he has proclaimed. For in these you can accept the
teaching, and ignore the teacher. But you cannot do that with
Christianity; 'I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life'; and in
that revealing biography, which is the preacher's theme, the
palpitating heart and centre is the death upon the Cross. So,
whatever else Christianity comes to be--and it comes to be a great
deal else--the principle of its growth, and the germ which must
vitalise the whole, lie in the personality and the death of Jesus
Christ.

That is not all. The history of the life and the death want something
more to make them a gospel. The fact, I was going to say, is the
least part of the fact; as in some vegetable growths, there is far
more underground than above. For, unless along with, involved in, and
deducible from, but capable of being stated separately from, the
external facts, there is a certain commentary or explanation of them:
the history is a history, the biography is a biography, the story of
the Cross is a touching narrative, but it is no gospel.

And what was Paul's commentary which lifted the bare facts up into
the loftier region? This--as for the person, Jesus Christ 'declared
to be the son of God with power'--as for the fact of the death, 'died
for our sins according to the Scriptures.' Let in these two
conceptions into the facts--and they are the necessary explanation
and presupposition of the facts--the Incarnation and the Sacrifice,
and then you get what Paul calls 'my gospel,' not because it was his
invention, but because it was the trust committed to him. That is the
