their service cannot according to Hindu opinion be judged by ordinary
laws of right and wrong. The god is supra-moral: the worshipper when
he enters the temple leaves conventionality outside.

Yet it is unfair to represent Hinduism as characterized by licence and
cruelty. Such tendencies are counterbalanced by the strength and
prevalence of ideas based on renunciation and self-effacement. All
desire, all attachment to the world is an evil; all self-assertion is
wrong. Hinduism is constantly in extremes: sometimes it exults in the
dances of Krishna or the destructive fury of Kali: more often it
struggles for release from the transitory and for union with the
permanent and real by self-denial or rather self-negation, which aims
at the total suppression of both pleasure and pain. This is on the
whole its dominant note.

In the records accessible to us the transition from Brahmanism--that
is, the religion of the Vedas and Brahmanas--to Hinduism does not
appear as direct but as masked by Buddhism. We see Buddhism grow at
the expense of Brahmanism. We are then conscious that it becomes
profoundly modified under the influence of new ideas. We see it decay
and the religion of the Brahmans emerge victorious. But that religion
is not what it was when Buddhism first arose, and is henceforth
generally known as Hinduism. The materials for studying the period in
which the change occurred--say 400 B.C. to 400 A.D.--are not scanty,
but they do not facilitate chronological investigation. Art and
architecture are mainly Buddhist until the Gupta period (c. 320 A.D.)
and literature, though plentiful, is undated. The Mahabharata and
Ramayana must have been edited in the course of these 800 years, but
they consist of different strata and it is not easy to separate and
arrange them without assuming what we want to prove. From 400 B.C. (if
not from an earlier date) onwards there grew up a great volume of epic
poetry, founded on popular ballads, telling the stories of Rama and
the Pandavas.[405] It was distinct from the canonical literatures of
both Brahmans and Buddhists, but though it was not in its essential
character religious, yet so general in India is the interest in
religion that whole theological treatises were incorporated in these
stories without loss, in Indian opinion, to the interest of the
narrative. If at the present day a congregation is seen in a Hindu
temple listening to a recitation, the text which is being chanted will
often prove to be part of the Mahabharata. Such a ceremony is not due
to forgetfulness of the Veda but is a repetition of what happened long
before our era when rhapsodists strung together popular narratives and
popular theology. Such theology cannot be rigidly separated from
Brahmanism and Buddhism. It grew up under their influence and accepted
their simpler ideas. But it brought with it popular beliefs which did
not strictly speaking belong to either system. By attacking the main
Brahmanic doctrines the Buddhists gave the popular religion its
opportunity. For instance, they condemned animal sacrifices and
derided the idea that trained priests and complicated rites are
necessary. This did not destroy the influence of the Brahmans but it
disposed them to admit that the Vedic sacrifices are not the only
means of salvation and to authorize other rites and beliefs. It was
about this time, too, that a series of invasions began to pour into
India from the north-west. It may be hard to distinguish between the
foreign beliefs which they introduced and the Indian beliefs which
they accepted and modified. But it is clear that their general effect
was to upset traditional ideas associated with a ritual and learning
which required lifelong study.


2


It has been well said[406] that Buddhism did not waste away in India
until rival sects had appropriated from it everything they could make
use of. Perhaps Hinduism had an even stronger doctrinal influence on
Buddhism. The deification of the Buddha, the invention of Bodhisattvas
who are equivalent to gods and the extraordinary alliance between late
Buddhism and Sivaism, are all instances of the general Indian view
overcoming the special Buddhist view. But Buddhism is closely
connected with the theory of incarnations and the development of the
Advaita philosophy, and in the externals of religion, in rites,
ceremonies and institutions, its influence was great and lasting. We
may take first the doctrine of Ahimsa, non-injury, or in other words
the sanctity of animal life. This beautiful doctrine, the glory of
India, if not invented by the Buddha at least arose in schools which
were not Brahmanic and were related to the Jain and Buddhist
movements. It formed no part of the Vedic religion in which sacrifice
often meant butchery. But in Hinduism, it meets with extensive though
not universal acceptance. With the Vaishnavas it is an article of
faith nor do the worshippers of Siva usually propitiate him with
animal sacrifices, though these are offered by the Saktas and also by
the small class of Brahmans who still preserve the Vedic ritual.[407]
Hardly any Hindus habitually eat meat and most abhor it, especially
beef. Yet beef-eating seems to have been permitted in Vedic times and
even when parts of the Mahabharata were composed.

Apart from animal sacrifices Buddhism was the main agent in effecting
a mighty revolution in worship and ritual. One is tempted to regard
the change as total and complete, but such wide assertions are rarely
true in India: customs and institutions are not swept away by
reformers but are cut down like the grass and like the grass grow up
again. They sometimes die out but they are rarely destroyed. The Vedic
sacrifices are still occasionally offered,[408] but for many centuries
have been almost entirely superseded by another form of worship
associated with temples and the veneration of images. This must have
become the dominant form of Hindu cultus in the first few centuries of
our era and probably earlier. It is one of the ironies of fate that
the Buddha and his followers should be responsible for the growth of
image worship, but it seems to be true. He laughed at sacrifices and
left to his disciples only two forms of religious exercise, sermons
and meditation. For Indian monks, this was perhaps sufficient, but the
laity craved for some outward form of worship. This was soon found in
the respect shown to the memory of the Buddha and the relics of his
body, although Hinduism never took kindly to relic worship. We hear
too of Cetiyas. In the Pitakas this word means a popular shrine
unconnected with either Buddhist or Brahmanic ceremonial, sometimes
perhaps merely a sacred tree or stone, probably honoured by such
simple rites as decorating it with paint or flowers. A little later,
in Buddhist times, the Cetiya became a cenotaph or reliquary,
generally located near a monastery and surrounded by a passage for
reverential circumambulation.

Allusions in the Pitakas also indicate that then as now there were
fairs. The early Buddhists thought that though such gatherings were
not edifying they might be made so. They erected sacred buildings near
a monastery, and held festivals so that people might collect together,
visit a holy place, and hear sermons. In the earliest known
sanctuaries, the funeral monument (for we can scarcely doubt that this
is the origin of the stupa)[409] has already assumed the conventional
form known as Dagoba, consisting of a dome and chest of relics, with a
spire at the top, the whole surrounded by railings or a colonnade, but
though the carving is lavish, no figure of the Buddha himself is to be
seen. He is represented by a symbol such as a footprint, wheel, or
tree. But in the later school of sculpture known as Gandhara or
Graeco-Buddhist he is frequently shown in a full length portrait. This
difference is remarkable. It is easy to say that in the older school
the Buddha was not depicted out of reverence, but less easy to see why
such delineation should have shocked an Indian. But at any rate there
is no difficulty in understanding that Greeks or artists influenced by
Greeks would think it obvious and proper to make an effigy of their
principal hero.

In these shrines we have if not the origin of the Hindu temple, at any
rate a parallel development more nearly allied to it than anything in
the Vedic religion.[410] For the Buddhist shrine was a monument built
over a receptacle containing relics and the essential feature of Hindu
temples is a cell containing an image or emblem and generally
surmounted by a tower. The surrounding courts and corridors may assume
gigantic proportions, but the central shrine is never large. Images
had no place in the Vedic sacrifices and those now worshipped in
temples are generally small and rude, and sometimes (as at
Bhuvaneshwar and Srirangam) the deity is represented by a block or
carved stone which cannot be moved, and may have been honoured as a
sacred rock long before the name of Vishnu or Siva was known in those
regions.[411] The conspicuous statues often found outside the shrine
are not generally worshipped and are merely ornaments. Buddhism did
not create the type of ritual now used in Hindu temples, yet it
contributed towards it, for it attacked the old Brahmanic sacrifices,
it countenanced the idea that particular places and objects are holy,
and it encouraged the use of images. It is strange that these
widespread ideas should find no place in the Vedic religion, but even
now-a-days whenever the old Vedic sacrifices are celebrated they are
uncontaminated by the temple ceremonial. More than this, the priests
or Pujaris who officiate in temples are not always Brahmans and they
rarely enjoy much consideration.[412] This curious and marked feature
may be connected with the inveterate Indian feeling that, though it is
well to multiply rites and rules for neophytes, no great respect is
due to men occupied with mere ceremonial. But it also testifies to a
dim consciousness that modern temples and their ceremonies have little
to do with the thoughts and mode of life which made the Brahmans a
force in India. In many ways the Brahmans dissociate themselves from
popular religion. Those of good family will not perform religious
rites for Sudras and treat the Brahmans who do so as inferiors.[413]

The simplest ceremonial in use at the present day is that employed in
some Sivaite temples. It consists in placing leaves on the linga and
pouring holy water over it. These rites, which may be descended from
prehistoric stone worship, are generally accompanied by the reading of
a Purana. But the commonest form of temple ritual consists in treating
the image or symbol as an honoured human being.[414] It is awakened,
bathed, dressed and put to bed at the close of day. Meals are served
to it at the usual hours. The food thus offered is called _prasad_ (or
favour) and is eaten by the devout. Once or twice a day the god holds
a levee and on festivals he is carried in procession. These ceremonies
are specially characteristic of the worship of Krishna whose images
receive all the endearments lavished on a pet child. But they are also
used in the temples of Siva and Parvati, and no less than twenty-two
of them are performed in the course of the day at the temple of
Bhuvaneshwar in Orissa. It is clear that the spirit of these rites is
very different from that which inspires public worship in other
civilized countries at the present day. They are not congregational or
didactic, though if any of the faithful are in the temple at the time
of the god's levee it is proper for them to enter and salute him.
Neither do they recall the magical ceremonies of the Vedic
sacrifices.[415] The waving of lights (arati) before the god and the
burning of incense are almost the only acts suggestive of
ecclesiastical ritual. The rest consists in treating a symbol or image
as if it were a living thing capable of enjoying simple physical
pleasures. Here there are two strata. We have really ancient rites,
such as the anointing or ornamenting of stones and offerings of food
in sacred places. In this class too we may reckon the sacrifice of
goats (and formerly of human beings) to Kali.[416] But on the other
hand the growing idea of Bhakti, that is faith or devotion, imported a
sentimental element and the worshipper endeavoured to pet, caress and
amuse the deity.

It is hard to see anything either healthy or artistic in this
emotional ritual. The low and foolish character of many temple
ceremonies disgusts even appreciative foreigners, but these services
are not the whole of Hindu worship. All Hindus perform in the course
of the day numerous acts of private devotion varying according to
sect, and a pious man is not dependent on the temple like a Catholic
on his church. Indian life is largely occupied with these private,
intimate, individual observances, hardly noticeable as ceremonies and
concerned with such things as dressing, ablution and the preparation
of food.

The monastic institutions of India seem due to Buddhism. There were
wandering monks before the Buddha's time, but the practice of founding
establishments where they could reside permanently, originated in his
order. There appears to be no record of Hindu (as opposed to Buddhist)
monasteries before the time of Sankara in the ninth century, though
there must have been places where the learned congregated or where
wandering ascetics could lodge. Sankara perceived the advantage of
the cenobitic life for organizing religion and founded a number of
maths or colleges. Subsequent religious leaders imitated him. At the
present day these institutions are common, yet it is clear that the
wandering spirit is strong in Hindus and that they do not take to
monastic discipline and fixed residence as readily as Tibetans and
Burmese. A math is not so much a convent as the abode of a teacher.
His pupils frequent it and may become semi-resident: aged pilgrims may
make it their last home, but the inmates are not a permanent body
following a fixed rule like the monks of a Vihara. The Sattras of
Assam, however, are true monasteries (though even there vows and
monastic costume are unknown) and so are the establishments of the
Swaminarayana sect at Ahmedabad and Wartal.


3


The vast and complicated organization of caste is mainly a post-Vedic
growth and in the Buddha's time was only in the making.[417] His order
was open to all classes alike, but this does not imply that he was
adverse to caste, so far as it then prevailed, or denied that men are
divided into categories determined by their deeds in other births. But
on the whole the influence of Buddhism was unfavourable to caste,
especially to the pretensions of the Brahmans, and an extant polemic
against caste is ascribed (though doubtfully) to Asvaghosha.[418] On
the other hand, though caste is in its origin the expression of a
social rather than of a religious tendency, the whole institution and
mechanism have long been supported and exploited by the Brahmans. Few
of them would dispute the proposition that a man cannot be a Hindu
unless he belongs to a caste. The reason of this support is
undisguised, namely, that they are the first and chief caste. They
make their own position a matter of religion and claim the power of
purifying and rehabilitating those who have lost caste but they do not
usually interfere with the rules of other castes or excommunicate
those who break them.[419] That is the business of the Pancayat or
caste council.

Sometimes religion and caste are in opposition, for many modern
religious leaders have begun by declaring that among believers there
are no social distinctions. This is true not only of teachers whose
orthodoxy is dubious, such as Nanak, the founder of the Sikhs, and
Basava, the founder of the Lingayats,[420] but also of Vallabhacarya
and Caitanya. But in nearly all cases caste reasserts itself. The
religious teachers of the sect receive extravagant respect and form a
body apart. This phenomenon, which recurs in nearly all communities,
shows how the Brahmans established their position. At the same time
social distinctions make themselves felt among the laity, and those
who claim to be of good position dissociate themselves from those of
lower birth. The sect ends by observing caste on ordinary occasions,
and it is only in some temples (such as that of Jagannath at
Puri)[421] that the worshippers mix and eat a sacred meal together.
Sometimes, however, the sect which renounces caste becomes itself a
caste. Thus, the Sikhs have become almost a nation and other modern
castes arising out of sects are the Atiths, who are Sivaites, the
Saraks, who appear to have been originally Buddhists, and the
Baishnabs (Vaishnavas), a name commonly given in Bengal to those
followers of Caitanya who persist in the original rule of disregarding
caste regulations within the sect, and hence now form a separate
community. But as a rule sect and caste are not co-extensive and the
caste is not a religious corporation. Thus the different subdivisions
of the Baniyas belong to different sects and even in the same
subdivision there is no religious uniformity.[422]

Caste in its later developments is so complex and irregular, that it
is impossible to summarize it in a formula or explain it as the
development of one principle. In the earliest form known two
principles are already in operation. We have first racial distinction.
The three upper castes represent the invading Aryans, the fourth the
races whom they found in India. In the modern system of caste, race is
not a strong factor. Many who claim to be Brahmans and Kshatriyas have
no Aryan blood, but still the Aryan element is strongest in the
highest castes and decreases as we descend the social scale and also
decreases in the higher castes in proportion as we move from the
north-west to the east and south. But secondly in the three upper
castes the dividing principle, as reported in the earliest accounts,
is not race but occupation. We find in most Aryan countries a division
into nobles and people, but in India these two classes become three,
the priests having been able to assume a prominence unknown elsewhere
and to stamp on literature their claim to the highest rank. This claim
was probably never admitted in practice so completely as the priests
desired. It was certainly disputed in Buddhist times and I have myself
heard a young Rajput say that the Brahmans falsified the Epics so as
to give themselves the first place.

It is not necessary for our purpose to describe the details of the
modern caste system. Its effect on Indian religion has been
considerable, for it created the social atmosphere in which the
various beliefs grew up and it has furnished the Brahmans with the
means of establishing their authority. But many religious reformers
preached that in religion caste does not exist--that there is neither
Jew nor Gentile in the language of another creed--and though the
application of this theory is never complete, the imperfection is the
result not of religious opposition but of social pressure. Hindu life
is permeated by the instinct that society must be divided into
communities having some common interest and refusing to intermarry or
eat with other communities. The long list of modern castes hardly
bears even a theoretical relation to the four classes of Vedic
times.[423] Numerous subdivisions with exclusive rules as to
intermarriage and eating have arisen among the Brahmans and the
strength of this fissiparous instinct is seen among the Mohammedans
who nominally have no caste but yet are divided into groups with much
the same restrictions.

This remarkable tendency to form exclusive corporations is perhaps
correlated with the absence of political life in India. Such ideas as
nationality, citizenship, allegiance to a certain prince, patriotic
feelings for a certain territory are rarer and vaguer than elsewhere,
and yet the Hindu is dependent on his fellows and does not like to
stand alone. So finding little satisfaction in the city or state he
clings the more tenaciously to smaller corporations. These have no one
character: they are not founded on any one logical principle but
merely on the need felt by people who have something in common to
associate together. Many are based on tribal divisions; some, such as
the Marathas and Newars, may be said to be nationalities. In many the
bond of union is occupation, in a few it is sectarian religion. We can
still observe how members of a caste who migrate from their original
residence tend to form an entirely new caste, and how intertribal
marriages among the aborigines create new tribes.


4


Sect[424] must not be confounded with caste. Hindu sects are of many
kinds; some, if not militant, are at least exceedingly self-confident.
Others are so gentle in stating their views that they might be called
schools rather than sects, were the word not too intellectual. The
notion that any creed or code can be _quod semper, quod ubique, quod
ab omnibus_, is less prevalent than in Europe and even the Veda,
though it is the eternal word, is admitted to exist in several
recensions. Hinduism is possible as a creed only to those who select.
In its literal sense it means simply all the beliefs and rites
recognized in India, too multifarious and inconsistent for the most
hospitable and addled brain to hold. But the Hindus, who are as loth
to abolish queer beliefs and practices as they are to take animal
life, are also the most determined seekers after a satisfying form of
religion. Brahmanic ritual and Buddhist monasticism demand the
dedication of a life. Not everyone can afford that, but the sect is
open to all. It attempts to sort out of the chaos of mythology and
superstition something which all can understand and all may find
useful. It selects some aspect of Hinduism and makes the best of it.
Sects usually start by preaching theism and equality in the sight of
God, but in a few generations mythology and social distinctions creep
in. Hence though the prevalence of sect is undoubtedly a feature of
modern Hinduism it is also intelligible that some observers should
assert that most Hindus belong to the same general religion and that
only the minority are definitely sectarian. The sectarian tendency is
stronger in Vishnuism than in Sivaism. The latter has produced some
definite sects, as, for instance, Lingayats, but is not like Vishnuism
split up into a number of Churches each founded by a human teacher and
provided by him with a special creed.

Most Indian sects are in their origin theistic, that is to say, they
take a particular deity and identify him with the Supreme Being. But
the pantheistic tendency does not disappear. Popular religion
naturally desires a personal deity. But it is significant that the
personal deity frequently assumes pantheistic attributes and is
declared to be both the world and the human soul. The best known sects
arose after Islam had entered India and some of them, such as the
Sikhs, show a blending of Hindu and Moslem ideas. But if Mohammedan
influence favoured the formation of corporations pledged to worship
one particular deity, it acted less by introducing something new than
by quickening a line of thought already existing. The Bhagavad-gita is
as complete an exposition of sectarian pantheism as any utterances
posterior to Mohammedanism.

The characteristic doctrine of sectarian Hinduism is _bhakti_, faith
or devotion. The older word _sraddha_, which is found in the Vedas, is
less emotional for it means simply belief in the existence of a deity,
whereas _bhakti_ can often be rendered by love. It is passionate,
self-oblivious devotion to a deity who in return (though many would
say there is no bartering) bestows his grace (_prasada_ or
_anugraha_). St. Augustine in defining faith says: "Quid est credere
in Deum? credendo amare, credendo diligere, credendo in eum ire, et
ejus membris incorporari."[425] This is an excellent paraphrase of
_bhakti_ and the words have an oriental ring which is not quite that
of the New Testament. Though the doctrine of _bhakti_ marks the
beginning of a new epoch in Hinduism it is not necessary to regard it
as an importation or due to Christianity. About the time of the
Christian era there was felt in many countries a craving for a gentler
and more emotional worship and though the history of Bhaktism is
obscure, Indian literature shows plainly how it may be a development
of native ideas. Its first great text-book is the Bhagavad-gita, but
it is also mentioned in the last verse of the Svetasvatara Upanishad
and Panini appears to allude to _bhakti_ felt for[426] Vasudeva. The
Katha Upanishad[427] contains the following passage:

"That Atman cannot be gained by the Veda, nor by understanding nor by
much learning. He whom the Atman chooses, by him the Atman can be
gained. The Atman chooses him as his own." Here we have not the idea
of faith or love, but we have the negative statement that the Atman is
not won by knowledge and the positive statement that this Atman
chooses his own. In the Rig Veda[428] there is a poem put into the
mouth of Vac or speech, containing such sentiments as "I give wealth
to him who gives sacrifice.... I am that through which one eats,
breathes, sees, and hears.... Him that I love I make strong, to be a
priest, a seer, a sage." This reads like an ancient preliminary study
for the Bhagavad-gita. Like Krishna the deity claims to be in all
and, like him, to reward her votaries. It is true that the "Come unto
me" is not distinctly expressed, but it is surely struggling for
expression.[429] Again, in the Kaushitaki Upanishad (III. 1 and 2)
Indra says to Pratardana, who had asked him for a boon, "Know me only:
that is, what I deem most beneficial to man, that he should know
me.... He who meditates on me as life and immortality gains his full
life in this world and in heaven immortality." Here the relation of
the devotee to the deity is purely intellectual not emotional, but the
idea that intellectual devotion directed to a particular deity will be
rewarded is clearly present. In the Rig Veda this same Indra is
called a deliverer and advocate; a friend, a brother and a father;
even a father and mother in one. Here the worshipper does not talk of
_bhakti_ because he does not analyze his feelings, but clearly these
phrases are inspired by affectionate devotion.

Nor is the spirit of _bhakti_ absent from Buddhism. The severe
doctrine of the older schools declares that the Buddha is simply a
teacher and that every man must save himself. But since the teacher is
the source of the knowledge which saves, it is natural to feel for him
grateful and affectionate devotion. This sentiment permeates the two
books of poems called Thera and Therigatha and sometimes finds clear
expression.[430] In the commentary on the Dhammapada[431] the doctrine
of salvation by devotion is affirmed in its extreme form, namely that
a dying man who has faith in the Buddha will be reborn in heaven. But
this commentary is not of early date and the doctrine quoted is
probably an instance of the Hinayana borrowing the attractive features
of the Mahayana. The sutras about Amitabha's paradise, which were
composed about the time of the Christian era and owe something to
Persian though not to Christian influence, preach faith in Amitabha as
the whole of religion. They who believe in him and call on his name
will go to heaven.

When bhakti was once accepted as a part of Indian religion, it was
erected into a principle, analogous or superior to knowledge and was
defined in Sutras[432] similar to those of the Sankhya and Vedanta.
But its importance in philosophy is small, whereas its power as an
impulse in popular religion has been enormous. To estimate its moral
and intellectual value is difficult, for like so much in Hinduism it
offers the sharpest contrasts. Its obvious manifestations may seem to
be acts of devotion which cannot be commended ethically and belief in
puerile stories: yet we find that this offensive trash continually
turns into gems of religious thought unsurpassed in the annals of
Buddhism and Christianity.

The doctrine of bhakti is common to both Vishnuites and Sivaites. It
is perhaps in general estimation associated with the former more than
with the latter, but this is because the Bhagavad-gita and various
forms of devotion to Krishna are well known, whereas the Tamil
literature of Dravidian Sivaism is ignored by many European scholars.
One might be inclined to suppose that the emotional faith sprang up
first in the worship of Vishnu, for the milder god seems a natural
object for love, whereas Siva has to undergo a certain transformation
before he can evoke such feelings. But there is no evidence that this
is the historical development of the bhakti sentiment, and if the
Bhagavad-gita is emphatic in enjoining the worship of Krishna only,
the Svetasvatara and Maitrayaniya Upanishads favour Siva, and he is
abundantly extolled in many parts of the Mahabharata. Here, as so
often, exact chronology fails us in the early history of these sects,
but it is clear that the practice of worshipping Siva and Vishnu, as
being each by himself all-sufficient, cannot have begun much later
than the Christian era and may have begun considerably earlier, even
though people did not call themselves Saivas or Vaishnavas.

Bhakti is often associated with the doctrine of the playfulness of
God. This idea--so strange to Europe[433]--may have its roots partly
in the odd non-moral attributes of some early deities. Thus the Rudra
of the Satarudriya hymn is a queer character and a trickster. But it
soon takes a philosophical tinge and is used to explain the creation
