
  [Illustration]
  Ga-kwe/-in-n[^a]n/ tshi-ha/-g[)e]-n[^a]/ ma-kwa/ ni-go/-tshi-ni/.
  I am trying you who are the bear.
    [The Mid[-e]/ who is chanting is shown in the figure; his eyes are
    looking into the candidate's heart. The lines from the mouth are
    also shown as denoting speech, directed to his hearer. The horns
    are a representation of the manner of indicating superior powers.]

  [Illustration]
  P[)i]-n[-e]/-si ka/-ka-g[-i]/-wai-yan/ wen/-dzhi man/-i-d[-o]/wid.
  The bird, the crow bird's skin is the reason why I am a spirit.
    [Although the crow is mentioned, the Thunder-bird (eagle) is
    delineated. The signification of the phrase is, that the speaker
    is equal in power to a man/id[-o], at the time of using the Mid[-e]/
    sack--which is of such a skin.]

  [Illustration]
  Tshin-gwe/-wi-he/-na n[-e]/, ka[n]/, tshi-w[^a]/-ba-ku-n[-e]t/.
  The sound of the Thunder is the white bear of fire.
    [The head is, in this instance, symbolical of the white bear
    man/id[-o]; the short lines below it denoting flame radiating from
    the body, the eyes also looking with penetrating gaze, as indicated
    by the double waving lines from each eye. The white bear man/id[-o]
    is one of the most powerful man/id[-o]s, and is so recognized.]

By the time this chant is completed the head of the procession reaches
the point of departure, just within the eastern door, and all of the
members return to their seats, only the four officiating Mid[-e]/
remaining with the candidate and his preceptor. To search further that
no malevolent man/id[-o]s may remain lurking within the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, the chief priests lead the candidate in a zigzag
manner to the western door, and back again to the east. In this way the
path leads past the side of the Mid[-e]/ stone, then right oblique to
the north of the heap of presents, thence left oblique to the south of
the first-degree post, then passing the second on the north, and so on
until the last post is reached, around which the course continues, and
back in a similar serpentine manner to the eastern door. The candidate
is then led to the blankets, upon which he seats himself, the four
officiating priests placing themselves before him, the preceptor
standing back near the first of the four degree posts.

The Mid[-e]/ priest of the fourth rank or place in order of precedence
approaches the kneeling candidate and in a manner similar to that which
has already been described shoots into his breast the m[-i]/gis; the
third, second and first Mid[-e]/ follow in like manner, the last named
alone shooting his m[-i]/gis into the candidate's forehead, upon which
he falls forward, spits out a m[-i]/gis shell which he had previously
secreted in his mouth, and upon the priests rubbing upon his back and
limbs their Mid[-e]/ sacks he recovers and resumes his sitting posture.

The officiating priests retire to either side of the inclosure to find
seats, when the newly received member arises and with the assistance of
the preceptor distributes the remaining parcels of tobacco, and lastly
the blankets, robes, and other gifts. He then begins at the southeastern
angle of the inclosure to return thanks for admission, places both hands
upon the first person, and as he moves them downward over his hair says:
Mi-gw[)e]tsh/ ga-o/-shi-t[-o]/-[)i]n bi-m[^a]/-d[)i]-s[)i]-win--"Thanks,
for giving to me life." The Mid[-e]/ addressed bows his head and
responds, hau/, [-e][n]/,--yes when the newly admitted member steps back
one pace, clasps his hands and inclines his head to the front. This
movement is continued until all present have been thanked, after which
he takes a seat in the southeastern corner of the inclosure.

A curious ceremony then takes place in which all the Mid[-e]/ on one
side of the inclosure arise and approach those upon the other, each
grasping his Mid[-e]/ sack and selecting a victim pretends to shoot into
his body the m[-i]/gis, whereupon the Mid[-e]/ so shot falls over, and
after a brief attack of gagging and retching pretends to gain relief by
spitting out of his mouth a m[-i]/gis shell. This is held upon the left
palm, and as the opposing party retreat to their seats, the side which
has just been subjected to the attack moves rapidly around among one
another as if dancing, but simply giving rapid utterance to the word
h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, and showing the
m[-i]/gis to everybody present, after which they place the flat hands
quickly to the mouth and pretend again to swallow their respective
shells. The members of this party then similarly attack their opponents,
who submit to similar treatment and go through like movements in
exhibiting the m[-i]/gis, which they again swallow. When quiet has been
restored, and after a ceremonial smoke has been indulged in, the
candidate sings, or chants, the production being either his own
composition or that of some other person from whom it has been
purchased. The chant presented herewith was obtained from Sikas/sig[)e],
who had received it in turn from his father when the latter was chief
priest of the Mid[-e]/wiwin at Mille Lacs, Minnesota. The pictographic
characters are reproduced on Pl. XVII, A, and the musical notation,
which is also presented, was obtained during the period of my
preliminary instruction. The phraseology of the chant, of which each
line and verse is repeated ad libitum as the singer may be inspired,
is as follows:

  [Illustration]
  Do-n[^a]/-ga-n[-i]/, Na/-wa-kwe/ in-do/-shi-t[-o]n/,
  do-n[^a]/-ga-n[-i]/.
  My dish, At noon I make it, my dish.
    [The singer refers to the feast which he gives to the Mid[-e]/ for
    admitting him into the Mid[-e]/wiwin.]

  [Music: 266_1]
  Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni,
  Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni;
  Na-/kwa-w[-e]/, In-do-shi-t[-o]n Donagani, Donaga-ni,
  Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni, Do-na-ga-ni.

  [Illustration: Plate XVII.
  Mnemonic Songs.]

  [Illustration]
  Man/-[-i]-d[-o]/ i-yan-n[-i]/, Esh-ko/-te nin/-do-we/-yo-w[)i]n/,
  I am such a spirit, My body is made of fire.
    [His power reaches to the sky, i.e., he has power to invoke the aid
    of Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]. The four degrees which he has received are
    indicated by the four short lines at the tip of the hand.]

  [Music: 267_1]
  Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni, Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni, Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni,
  Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya- ni, Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni; Esh/ko-te nin-do we-yo-win,
  Manid[-o]iya-ni, Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni,
  Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni, Ma/ni-d[-o]-i-ya-ni.

  [Illustration]
  K[)o]/-tshi-hai/-o-n[-i]/, Esh-ko/-te wa-ni/-y[-o].
  I have tried it, My body is of fire.
    [He likens himself to the Bear Man/id[-o], and has like power by
    virtue of his m[-i]/gis, which is shown below the lines running
    downward from the mouth. He is represented as standing in the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n--where his feet rest.]

  [Music: 267_2]
  Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni, Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni, Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni,
  Ko/tshihai/oni, Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni, Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni,
  Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni, Ko/tshi-hai/o-ni, Esh/kote/wani/yo,
  Ko/tshihaioni. Ko/tshihai/oni, Kotshihaioni, h[)e]/[-o], h[)e]/[-o].

  [Illustration]
  Pause. An offering of smoke is made to Ki/tshi Man/id[-o].

  [Illustration]
  Ni-m[-i]/-gi-s[)i]m/ man/-i-d[-o]/-we, hw[-e]/, h[-e]/,
  Sha/-go-dzh[)i]/-hi-na/.
  My m[-i]/gis spirit,
  I overpower death with.
    [His body is covered with m[-i]/gis as shown by the short lines
    radiating from the sides, and by this power he is enabled to
    overcome death.]

  [Music: 268_1]
  Nimegasi mani d[-o]-w[-e], hw[-e], h[-e],
  Nimegasi mani d[-o]- w[-e], hw[-e], h[-e],
  Shagodzhihinani-mega-si,
  Manido-w[-e], hw[-e], h[-e].
  Ni-me-ga-si-ma-ni-d[-o]-w[-e], hw[-e], h[-e].

  [Illustration]
  Ni/-ka-ni/ nin-man/-e-d[-o]/-we-ya/.
  Ya/-ho-ya/ man/-i-d[-o]/-wa nin-da/-ho-ha/.
  That is the way with me, spirit that I am.
    [The hand shows how he casts the m[-i]/gis forward into the person
    requiring life. He has fourfold power, i.e., he has received the
    m[-i]/gis four times himself and is thus enabled to infuse into the
    person requiring it.]

  [Music: 268_2]
  Ni/-ga-ne/ nin ma/ni-d[-o]/we ya Ni/-ga-ne/ nin ma/ni-d[-o]/we ya,
  Ya/ho-ya/ ma/nid[-o]-we,
  Nin/doh[-o]ha ni/gane, ma/ni-d[-o]-we, ya, h[-e].

  [Illustration]
  [-E]-kotsh/-i-na/-ha,
  [-E]-kotsh/-ha man/-i-d[-o]/ hwe-do/-w[-i].
  I hang it,
  I hang up the Spirit sack.
    [After using his Mid[-e]/ sack he hangs it against the wall of the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, as is usually done during the ceremonial of
    initiation.]

  [Music: 269_1]
  E-ko/tshi-na-ha, E-ko/tshi-na-ha, E-ko/tshi-na-ha, E-ko/-tshi-na-ha,
  E-ko/-tshi-na-ha, E-ki/-tshi-ma/-ni-d[-o]/ hwe-do-wi, E-ko/tshi-na-ha,
  E-ko/tshi-na-ha, E-ko/tshi-na-ha, h[)e]/a.

  [Illustration]
  He/-a-wi-non/-dam-a/-ni,
  Man/-i-d[-o]/ mi-de/-wi-he/
  ne/-ma-da/-wi-dzig/.
  Let them hear,
  Mid[-e]/ spirit, those who are sitting around.
    [He invokes Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] to make his auditors understand his
    power.]

  [Music: 269_2]
  He-a-wi-non/-da-ma-ni h[-e], He-a-wi-nonda-ma-ni h[-e];
  He/-a-wi-non-da-ma-ni h[-e], He/-a-wi-non-da-ma-ni h[-e];
  Manidomid[-e]wi h[-e], Nemadawi dzhig,
  Heawinondamani h[-e], h[-e], h[-e].

  [Illustration]
  He/-a-we-na/ ni/-we-d[-o]/,
  Man/-i-d[-o]/ we-a-n[-i]/
  Ni/-ka-n[-a]/ ni/-na-n[-a]/.
  He who is sleeping,
  The Spirit, I bring him, a kinsman.
    [In the employment of his powers he resorts to the help of Ki/tshi
    Man/id[-o]--his kinsman or Mid[-e]/ colleague.]

  [Music: 270_1]
  He-a-we-na-ne-we-d[-o], h[-o], He-a-we-na-ne-we-d[-o], h[-o],
  He-a-we-na-ne-we-d[-o], h[-o], He-a-we-na-ne-we-d[-o], h[-o];
  Ma/-ni-d[-o]-we-a-ni ni-ka-na ni-ka-na, h[-o], h[-o].

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/ we-a-n[-i]/
  Esh-ke/-ta we/-a-n[)i]/ man/-i-d[-o]/ we/-a-n[)i]/.
  I am a spirit,
  Fire is my spirit body.
    [The hand reaches to the earth to grasp fire, showing his ability
    to do so without injury and illustrating in this manner his
    supernatural power.]

  [Music: 270_2]
  Ma/ni-d[-o]/wi-a-ni h[-e], Ma/ni-d[-o]/wi-a-ni h[-e],
  Ma/-ni-d[-o]/-wi-a-ni h[-e], Ma/-ni-d[-o]/-wi-a-ni h[-e],
  Ma/-ni-d[-o]/wi-a-ni h[-e]; Esh/kato/weani h[-e],
  Ma/nid[-o]/wiani h[-e], Ma/nid[-o]/wia-ni h[-e].

  [Illustration]
  Ai-ya/-swa-k[)i]t-te/, h[-e]/, he/,
  He/-[-a]/ se-w[-i]/-kit-te/, h[-e]/, h[-e]/
  Na-se/-ma-g[)o]t/ nin-d[-e]/.
  It is leaning,
  My heart breathes.
    [The phrase refers to the m[-i]/gis within his heart. The short
    radiating lines indicate the magic power of the shell.]

  [Music: 271_1]
  He/-a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e], He/-a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e],
  He/a-si-wikit-te h[-e], He/a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e],
  Na/simagot nin/de h[-e], He/-a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e],
  He/-a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e], He/-a-si-wi-kit-te h[-e]/,
  He/a-si-wi-kitte h[-e].

  [Illustration]
  Rest, or pause, after which dancing accompanies the remainder of the
  song.

  [Illustration]
  Ni-ka/-nin-ko/-tshi/-ha ni/-ka-na
  Ni-ka/-na-nin-ko/-tshi-ha.
  Mid[-e]/ friends, I am trying, Mid[-e]/ friends, Mid[-e]/ friends,
  I am trying.
    [His hand and arm crossed by lines to denote magic power, in
    reaching to grasp more than four degrees have given him; he has
    in view a fifth, or its equivalent.]

  [Music: 271_2]
  Ni/-ka-ni ko/tshiha Ni/ka-ni ha, Ni/-ka-ni ko/tshini Ni/-ka-ni
  ha, Ni/-ka-ni ko/-tshi-ha Ni/-ka-ni ha.

  [Illustration]
  Hi/-ne-na-wa/ ni-be/-i-d[-o]n/ ni-di/-na.
  I hold that which I brought, and told him.
    [The singer is holding the m[-i]/gis and refers to his having its
    power, which he desires Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] to augment.]

  [Music: 272_1]
  He-ne-na-wa-ni-bei-d[-o]n, He-ne-na-wa-ni-bei-d[-o]n,
  He-ne-na-wa-ni-bei-d[-o]n, He-ne-na-wa-ni-bei-d[-o]n.

  [Illustration]
  Ye/-we-ni/-mi-d[-e]/, hwa/, da/, Ke-wa/-shi-mi-d[-e]/, h[)i]-a,
  hw[-e]/, Ye/-we-ni/-mi-d[-e]?
  Who is this grand Mid[-e]/? You have not much grand medicine.
  Who is the Mid[-e]/?
    [The first line, when used with the music, is
    a/-we-nin-o/-au-mid[-e]/. The whole phrase refers to boasters,
    who have not received the proper initiations which they profess.
    The figure is covered with m[-i]/gis shells, as shown by the short
    lines attached to the body.]

  [Music: 272_2]
  Ye-we-ni-mi-d[-e] hwa, da. Ke-wa-shi-mi-d[-e] h[)i]a, hw[-e],
  Ye-we-ni-mi-d[-e] hwa, da. Ke-wa-shi-mi-d[-e] h[)i]a, hwe.
  Ye-we-ni-mi-d[-e], Ye-we-ni-mi-d[-e] hwa, da.

  [Illustration]
  Nai/-a-na-wi/ na-ma/, ha/, Wa-na/-he-ne-ni-wa/, ha/,
  O/-ta-be-we-ni/, m[-e]/, h[-e]/.
  I can not reach it,
  Only when I go round the Mide/wig[^a]n;
  I can not reach it from where I sit.
    [The m[-i]/gis attached to the arrow signifies its swift and certain
    power and effect. The first line of the phrase, when spoken, is
    nin-na/-na-wi-nan/.]

  [Music: 273_1]
  Nai-a-na-wi-na-ma ha, Nai-a-na-wi-na-ma ha,
  Nai-a-na-wi-na-ma ha, Nai-a-na-wi-na-ma ha,
  Wa-na-he-ne-ni-wa ha, O-ta-be-we-ni-me ha.

  [Illustration]
  Ai-y[-a]/ ha/-na-wi/-na-ma/.
  I can not strike him.
    [The speaker is weeping because he can not see immediate prospects
    for further advancement in the acquisition of power. The broken ring
    upon his breast is the place upon which he was shot with the
    m[-i]/gis.]

  [Music: 273_2]
  Ai-ya-ha-na-wi-na-ma, Ai-ya-ha-na-wi-na-ma,
  Ai-ya-ha-na-wi-na-ma, Ai-ya-ha-na-wi-na--ma,
  h[)e][-o], h[)e][-o], h[)e][-o].

The following musical notation presents accurately the range of notes
employed by the preceptor. The peculiarity of Mid[-e]/ songs lies in the
fact that each person has his own individual series of notes which
correspond to the number of syllables in the phrase and add thereto
meaningless words to prolong the effect. When a song is taught, the
words are the chief and most important part, the musical rendering of a
second person may be so different from that of the person from whom he
learns it as to be unrecognizable without the words. Another fact which
often presents itself is the absence of time and measure, which prevents
any reduction to notation by full bars; e.g., one or two bars may appear
to consist of four quarter notes or a sufficient number of quarters and
eighths to complete such bars, but the succeeding one may consist of an
additional quarter, or perhaps two, thus destroying all semblance of
rythmic continuity. This peculiarity is not so common in dancing music,
in which the instruments of percussion are employed to assist regularity
and to accord with the steps made by the dancers, or vice versa.

In some of the songs presented in this paper the bars have been omitted
for the reasons presented above. The peculiarity of the songs as
rendered by the preceptor is thus more plainly indicated.

When the chant is ended the ushers, who are appointed by the chief
Mid[-e]/, leave the inclosure to bring in the vessels of food. This is
furnished by the newly elected member and is prepared by his female
relatives and friends. The kettles and dishes of food are borne around
four times, so that each one present may have the opportunity of eating
sufficiently. Smoking and conversation relating to the Mid[-e]/wiwin may
then be continued until toward sunset, when, upon an intimation from the
chief Mid[-e]/, the members quietly retire, leaving the structure by the
western door. All personal property is removed, and upon the following
day everybody departs.

DESCRIPTIVE NOTES.

The amount of influence wielded by Mid[-e]/ generally, and particularly
such as have received four degrees, is beyond belief. The rite of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin is deemed equivalent to a religion--as that term is
commonly understood by intelligent people--and is believed to elevate
such a Mid[-e]/ to the nearest possible approach to the reputed
character of Mi/nab[-o]/zho, and to place within his reach the
supernatural power of invoking and communing with Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]
himself.

By reference to Pl. III, A, No. 98, it will be observed that the human
figure is specially marked with very pronounced indications of m[-i]/gis
spots upon the head, the extremities, and more particularly the breast.
These are placed where the m[-i]gis was "shot" into the Mid[-e]/, and
the functions of the several parts are therefore believed to be greatly
augmented. All the spots are united by a line to denote unity and
harmony of action in the exercise of power.

The m[-i]/gis, typical of the fourth degree, consists of small pieces of
deer horn, covered with red paint on one end and green upon the other.
Sometimes but one color is employed for the entire object. The form is
shown on Pl. XI, No. 6. No. 2, upon the same plate, represents a shell,
used as a m[-i]/gis, observed at White Earth.

Figs. 5-11, on Pl. XV, present several forms of painting mid[-e]/ posts,
as practiced by the several societies in Minnesota. Each society claims
to preserve the ancient method. The cross, shown in No. 7, bears the
typical colors--red and green--upon the upper half, while the lower post
is square and colored white on the east, green on the south, red on the
west, and black on the north. The Mid[-e]/ explain the signification of
the colors as follows: White represents the east, the source of light
and the direction from which the sacred m[-i]/gis came; green,
sha/man[-o] the southern one, refers to the source of the rains, the
direction from which the Thunderers come in the spring, they who
revivify the earth; red refers to the land of the setting sun, the abode
of the shadows or the dead; and north being black, because that is the
direction from which come cold, hunger, and disease.

The words of the Mid[-e]/ priest alluding to "the path that has no end"
refer to the future course and conduct of the candidate for the last
degree, as well as to the possibility of attaining unlimited powers in
magic, and is pictorially designated upon the chart on Pl. III, A, at
No. 99. The path is devious and beset with temptations, but by strict
adherence to the principles of the Mid[-e]/wiwin the Mid[-e]/ may reach
the goal and become the superior of his confr[`e]res, designated
Mi-ni/-si-n[-o]/-shkwe, "he who lives on the island."

A Mid[-e]/-W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ of this degree is dreaded on account of his
extraordinary power of inflicting injury, causing misfortune, etc., and
most remarkable tales are extant concerning his astounding performances
with fire.

The following performance is said to have occurred at White Earth,
Minnesota, in the presence of a large gathering of Indians and mixed
bloods. Two small wig/iwams were erected, about 50 paces from each
other, and after the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ had crawled into one of them his
disparagers built around each of them a continuous heap of brush and
firewood, which were then kindled. When the blaze was at its height all
became hushed for a moment, and presently the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ called to
the crowd that he had transferred himself to the other wig/iwam and
immediately, to their profound astonishment, crawled forth unharmed.

This is but an example of the numerous and marvelous abilities with
which the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ of the higher grade is accredited.

The special pretensions claimed by the Mid[-e]-W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ have
already been mentioned, but an account of the properties and manner of
using the "love powder" may here be appropriate. This powder--the
composition of which has been given--is generally used by the owner to
accomplish results desired by the applicant. It is carried in a small
bag made of buckskin or cloth, which the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ carefully
deposits within his Mid[-e]/ sack, but which is transferred to another
sack of like size and loaned to the applicant, for a valuable
consideration.

During a recent visit to one of the reservations in Minnesota, I had
occasion to confer with a Catholic missionary regarding some of the
peculiar medical practices of the Indians, and the implements and other
accessories employed in connection with their profession. He related the
following incident as having but a short time previously come under his
own personal observation:
