by its own power, but by the power of the Word dwelling in the
flesh": because, as stated above (A. 2), the Godhead of the Word was
not severed from the flesh in death.

Reply Obj. 2: In those words Athanasius never meant to say that the
whole man was reassumed--that is, as to all his parts--as if the Word
of God had laid aside the parts of human nature by His death; but
that the totality of the assumed nature was restored once more in the
resurrection by the resumed union of soul and body.

Reply Obj. 2: Through being united to human nature, the Word of God
is not on that account called human nature: but He is called a
man--that is, one having human nature. Now the soul and the body are
essential parts of human nature. Hence it does not follow that the
Word is a soul or a body through being united with both, but that He
is one possessing a soul or a body.

Reply Obj. 4: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "In Christ's
death the soul was separated from the flesh: not one hypostasis
divided into two: because both soul and body in the same respect had
their existence from the beginning in the hypostasis of the Word; and
in death, though severed from one another, each one continued to have
the one same hypostasis of the Word. Wherefore the one hypostasis of
the Word was the hypostasis of the Word, of the soul, and of the
body. For neither soul nor body ever had an hypostasis of its own,
besides the hypostasis of the Word: for there was always one
hypostasis of the Word, and never two."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Was a Man During the Three Days of His Death?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was a man during the three
days of His death, because Augustine says (De Trin. iii): "Such was
the assuming [of nature] as to make God to be man, and man to be
God." But this assuming [of nature] did not cease at Christ's death.
Therefore it seems that He did not cease to be a man in consequence
of death.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix) that "each man is
his intellect"; consequently, when we address the soul of Peter after
his death we say: "Saint Peter, pray for us." But the Son of God
after death was not separated from His intellectual soul. Therefore,
during those three days the Son of God was a man.

Obj. 3: Further, every priest is a man. But during those three days
of death Christ was a priest: otherwise what is said in Ps. 109:4
would not be true: "Thou art a priest for ever." Therefore Christ was
a man during those three days.

_On the contrary,_ When the higher [species] is removed, so is the
lower. But the living or animated being is a higher species than
animal and man, because an animal is a sensible animated substance.
Now during those three days of death Christ's body was not living or
animated. Therefore He was not a man.

_I answer that,_ It is an article of faith that Christ was truly
dead: hence it is an error against faith to assert anything whereby
the truth of Christ's death is destroyed. Accordingly it is said in
the Synodal epistle of Cyril [*Act. Conc. Ephes. P. I, cap. xxvi]:
"If any man does not acknowledge that the Word of God suffered in the
flesh, and was crucified in the flesh and tasted death in the flesh,
let him be anathema." Now it belongs to the truth of the death of man
or animal that by death the subject ceases to be man or animal;
because the death of the man or animal results from the separation of
the soul, which is the formal complement of the man or animal.
Consequently, to say that Christ was a man during the three days of
His death simply and without qualification, is erroneous. Yet it can
be said that He was "a dead man" during those three days.

However, some writers have contended that Christ was a man during
those three days, uttering words which are indeed erroneous, yet
without intent of error in faith: as Hugh of Saint Victor, who (De
Sacram. ii) contended that Christ, during the three days that
followed His death, was a man, because he held that the soul is a
man: but this is false, as was shown in the First Part (I, Q. 75, A.
4). Likewise the Master of the Sentences (iii, D, 22) held Christ to
be a man during the three days of His death for quite another reason.
For he believed the union of soul and flesh not to be essential to a
man, and that for anything to be a man it suffices if it have a soul
and body, whether united or separated: and that this is likewise
false is clear both from what has been said in the First Part (I, Q.
75, A. 4), and from what has been said above regarding the mode of
union (Q. 2, A. 5).

Reply Obj. 1: The Word of God assumed a united soul and body: and the
result of this assumption was that God is man, and man is God. But
this assumption did not cease by the separation of the Word from the
soul or from the flesh; yet the union of soul and flesh ceased.

Reply Obj. 2: Man is said to be his own intellect, not because the
intellect is the entire man, but because the intellect is the chief
part of man, in which man's whole disposition lies virtually; just as
the ruler of the city may be called the whole city, since its entire
disposal is vested in him.

Reply Obj. 3: That a man is competent to be a priest is by reason of
the soul, which is the subject of the character of order: hence a man
does not lose his priestly order by death, and much less does Christ,
who is the fount of the entire priesthood.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 5]

Whether Christ's Was Identically the Same Body Living and Dead?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's was not identically the same
body living and dead. For Christ truly died just as other men do. But
the body of everyone else is not simply identically the same, dead
and living, because there is an essential difference between them.
Therefore neither is the body of Christ identically the same, dead
and living.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Metaph. v, text. 12),
things specifically diverse are also numerically diverse. But
Christ's body, living and dead, was specifically diverse: because the
eye or flesh of the dead is only called so equivocally, as is evident
from the Philosopher (De Anima ii, text. 9; _Metaph._ vii). Therefore
Christ's body was not simply identically the same, living and dead.

Obj. 3: Further, death is a kind of corruption. But what is corrupted
by substantial corruption after being corrupted, exists no longer,
since corruption is change from being to non-being. Therefore,
Christ's body, after it was dead, did not remain identically the
same, because death is a substantial corruption.

_On the contrary,_ Athanasius says (Epist. ad Epict.): "In that body
which was circumcised and carried, which ate, and toiled, and was
nailed on the tree, there was the impassible and incorporeal Word of
God: the same was laid in the tomb." But Christ's living body was
circumcised and nailed on the tree; and Christ's dead body was laid
in the tomb. Therefore it was the same body living and dead.

_I answer that,_ The expression "simply" can be taken in two senses.
In the first instance by taking "simply" to be the same as
"absolutely"; thus "that is said simply which is said without
addition," as the Philosopher put it (Topic. ii): and in this way the
dead and living body of Christ was simply identically the same: since
a thing is said to be "simply" identically the same from the identity
of the subject. But Christ's body living and dead was identical in
its suppositum because alive and dead it had none other besides the
Word of God, as was stated above (A. 2). And it is in this sense that
Athanasius is speaking in the passage quoted.

In another way "simply" is the same as "altogether" or "totally": in
which sense the body of Christ, dead and alive, was not "simply" the
same identically, because it was not "totally" the same, since life
is of the essence of a living body; for it is an essential and not an
accidental predicate: hence it follows that a body which ceases to be
living does not remain totally the same. Moreover, if it were to be
said that Christ's dead body did continue "totally" the same, it
would follow that it was not corrupted--I mean, by the corruption of
death: which is the heresy of the Gaianites, as Isidore says (Etym.
viii), and is to be found in the Decretals (xxiv, qu. iii). And
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii) that "the term 'corruption'
denotes two things: in one way it is the separation of the soul from
the body and other things of the sort; in another way, the complete
dissolving into elements. Consequently it is impious to say with
Julian and Gaian that the Lord's body was incorruptible after the
first manner of corruption before the resurrection: because Christ's
body would not be consubstantial with us, nor truly dead, nor would
we have been saved in very truth. But in the second way Christ's body
was incorrupt."

Reply Obj. 1: The dead body of everyone else does not continue united
to an abiding hypostasis, as Christ's dead body did; consequently the
dead body of everyone else is not the same "simply," but only in some
respect: because it is the same as to its matter, but not the same as
to its form. But Christ's body remains the same simply, on account of
the identity of the suppositum, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Since a thing is said to be the same identically
according to suppositum, but the same specifically according to form:
wherever the suppositum subsists in only one nature, it follows of
necessity that when the unity of species is taken away the unity of
identity is also taken away. But the hypostasis of the Word of God
subsists in two natures; and consequently, although in others the
body does not remain the same according to the species of human
nature, still it continues identically the same in Christ according
to the suppositum of the Word of God.

Reply Obj. 3: Corruption and death do not belong to Christ by reason
of the suppositum, from which suppositum follows the unity of
identity; but by reason of the human nature, according to which is
found the difference of death and of life in Christ's body.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 6]

Whether Christ's Death Conduced in Any Way to Our Salvation?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's death did not conduce in any
way to our salvation. For death is a sort of privation, since it is
the privation of life. But privation has not any power of activity,
because it is nothing positive. Therefore it could not work anything
for our salvation.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ's Passion wrought our salvation by way of
merit. But Christ's death could not operate in this way, because in
death the body is separated from the soul, which is the principle of
meriting. Consequently, Christ's death did not accomplish anything
towards our salvation.

Obj. 3: Further, what is corporeal is not the cause of what is
spiritual. But Christ's death was corporeal. Therefore it could not
be the cause of our salvation, which is something spiritual.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "The one death of
our Saviour," namely, that of the body, "saved us from our two
deaths," that is, of the soul and the body.

_I answer that,_ We may speak of Christ's death in two ways, "in
becoming" and "in fact." Death is said to be "in becoming" when
anyone from natural or enforced suffering is tending towards death:
and in this way it is the same thing to speak of Christ's death as of
His Passion: so that in this sense Christ's death is the cause of our
salvation, according to what has been already said of the Passion (Q.
48). But death is considered in fact, inasmuch as the separation of
soul and body has already taken place: and it is in this sense that
we are now speaking of Christ's death. In this way Christ's death
cannot be the cause of our salvation by way of merit, but only by way
of causality, that is to say, inasmuch as the Godhead was not
separated from Christ's flesh by death; and therefore, whatever
befell Christ's flesh, even when the soul was departed, was conducive
to salvation in virtue of the Godhead united. But the effect of any
cause is properly estimated according to its resemblance to the
cause. Consequently, since death is a kind of privation of one's own
life, the effect of Christ's death is considered in relation to the
removal of the obstacles to our salvation: and these are the death of
the soul and of the body. Hence Christ's death is said to have
destroyed in us both the death of the soul, caused by sin, according
to Rom. 4:25: "He was delivered up [namely unto death] for our sins":
and the death of the body, consisting in the separation of the soul,
according to 1 Cor. 15:54: "Death is swallowed up in victory."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's death wrought our salvation from the power of
the Godhead united, and not considered merely as His death.

Reply Obj. 2: Though Christ's death, considered "in fact" did not
effect our salvation by way of merit, yet it did so by way of
causality, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's death was indeed corporeal; but the body was
the instrument of the Godhead united to Him, working by Its power,
although dead.
_______________________

QUESTION 51

OF CHRIST'S BURIAL
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's burial, concerning which there are
four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was fitting for Christ to be buried?

(2) Concerning the manner of His burial;

(3) Whether His body was decomposed in the tomb?

(4) Concerning the length of time He lay in the tomb.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 51, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Be Buried?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting for Christ to have been buried,
because it is said of Him (Ps. 87:6): "He is [Vulg.: 'I am'] become
as a man without help, free among the dead." But the bodies of the
dead are enclosed in a tomb; which seems contrary to liberty.
Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ to have been buried.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing should be done to Christ except it was
helpful to our salvation. But Christ's burial seems in no way to be
conducive to our salvation. Therefore, it was not fitting for Him to
be buried.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems out of place for God who is above the high
heavens to be laid in the earth. But what befalls the dead body of
Christ is attributed to God by reason of the union. Therefore it
appears to be unbecoming for Christ to be buried.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (Matt. 26:10) of the woman who
anointed Him: "She has wrought a good work upon Me," and then He
added (Matt. 26:12)--"for she, in pouring this ointment upon My body,
hath done it for My burial."

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for Christ to be buried. First of
all, to establish the truth of His death; for no one is laid in the
grave unless there be certainty of death. Hence we read (Mk. 15:44,
45), that Pilate by diligent inquiry assured himself of Christ's
death before granting leave for His burial. Secondly, because by
Christ's rising from the grave, to them who are in the grave, hope is
given of rising again through Him, according to John 5:25, 28: "All
that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God . . .
and they that hear shall live." Thirdly, as an example to them who
dying spiritually to their sins are hidden away "from the disturbance
of men" (Ps. 30:21). Hence it is said (Col. 3:3): "You are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God." Wherefore the baptized likewise
who through Christ's death die to sins, are as it were buried with
Christ by immersion, according to Rom. 6:4: "We are buried together
with Christ by baptism into death."

Reply Obj. 1: Though buried, Christ proved Himself "free among the
dead": since, although imprisoned in the tomb, He could not be
hindered from going forth by rising again.

Reply Obj. 2: As Christ's death wrought our salvation, so likewise
did His burial. Hence Jerome says (Super Marc. xiv): "By Christ's
burial we rise again"; and on Isa. 53:9: "He shall give the ungodly
for His burial," a gloss says: "He shall give to God and the Father
the Gentiles who were without godliness, because He purchased them by
His death and burial."

Reply Obj. 3: As is said in a discourse made at the Council of
Ephesus [*P. iii, cap. 9], "Nothing that saves man is derogatory to
God; showing Him to be not passible, but merciful": and in another
discourse of the same Council [*P. iii, cap. 10]: "God does not
repute anything as an injury which is an occasion of men's salvation.
Thus thou shalt not deem God's Nature to be so vile, as though It may
sometimes be subjected to injuries."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 51, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Was Buried in a Becoming Manner?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was buried in an unbecoming
manner. For His burial should be in keeping with His death. But
Christ underwent a most shameful death, according to Wis. 2:20: "Let
us condemn Him to a most shameful death." It seems therefore
unbecoming for honorable burial to be accorded to Christ, inasmuch as
He was buried by men of position--namely, by Joseph of Arimathea, who
was "a noble counselor," to use Mark's expression (Mk. 15:43), and by
Nicodemus, who was "a ruler of the Jews," as John states (John 3:1).

Obj. 2: Further, nothing should be done to Christ which might set an
example of wastefulness. But it seems to savor of waste that in order
to bury Christ Nicodemus came "bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes
about a hundred pounds weight," as recorded by John (19:39),
especially since a woman came beforehand to anoint His body for the
burial, as Mark relates (Mk. 14:28). Consequently, this was not done
becomingly with regard to Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, it is not becoming for anything done to be
inconsistent with itself. But Christ's burial on the one hand was
simple, because "Joseph wrapped His body in a clean linen cloth," as
is related by Matthew (27:59), "but not with gold or gems, or silk,"
as Jerome observes: yet on the other hand there appears to have been
some display, inasmuch as they buried Him with fragrant spices (John
19:40). Consequently, the manner of Christ's burial does not seem to
have been seemly.

Obj. 4: Further, "What things soever were written," especially of
Christ, "were written for our learning," according to Rom. 15:4. But
some of the things written in the Gospels touching Christ's burial in
no wise seem to pertain to our instruction--as that He was buried "in
a garden . . . "in a tomb which was not His own," which was "new,"
and "hewed out in a rock." Therefore the manner of Christ's burial
was not becoming.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Isa. 11:10): "And His sepulchre
shall be glorious."

_I answer that,_ The manner of Christ's burial is shown to be seemly
in three respects. First, to confirm faith in His death and
resurrection. Secondly, to commend the devotion of those who gave Him
burial. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i): "The Gospel mentions as
praiseworthy the deed of those who received His body from the cross,
and with due care and reverence wrapped it up and buried it."
Thirdly, as to the mystery whereby those are molded who "are buried
together with Christ into death" (Rom. 6:4).

Reply Obj. 1: With regard to Christ's death, His patience and
constancy in enduring death are commended, and all the more that His
death was the more despicable: but in His honorable burial we can see
the power of the dying Man, who, even in death, frustrated the intent
of His murderers, and was buried with honor: and thereby is
foreshadowed the devotion of the faithful who in the time to come
were to serve the dead Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: On that expression of the Evangelist (John 19:40) that
they buried Him "as the manner of the Jews is to bury," Augustine
says (Tract. in Joan. cxx): "He admonishes us that in offices of this
kind which are rendered to the dead, the custom of each nation should
be observed." Now it was the custom of this people to anoint bodies
with various spices in order the longer to preserve them from
corruption [*Cf. Catena Aurea in Joan. xix]. Accordingly it is said
in De Doctr. Christ. iii that "in all such things, it is not the use
thereof, but the luxury of the user that is at fault"; and, farther
on: "what in other persons is frequently criminal, in a divine or
prophetic person is a sign of something great." For myrrh and aloes
by their bitterness denote penance, by which man keeps Christ within
himself without the corruption of sin; while the odor of the
ointments expresses good report.

Reply Obj. 3: Myrrh and aloes were used on Christ's body in order
that it might be preserved from corruption, and this seemed to imply
a certain need (in the body): hence the example is set us that we may
lawfully use precious things medicinally, from the need of preserving
our body. But the wrapping up of the body was merely a question of
becoming propriety. And we ought to content ourselves with simplicity
in such things. Yet, as Jerome observes, by this act was denoted that
"he swathes Jesus in clean linen, who receives Him with a pure soul."
Hence, as Bede says on Mark 15:46: "The Church's custom has prevailed
for the sacrifice of the altar to be offered not upon silk, nor upon
dyed cloth, but on linen of the earth; as the Lord's body was buried
in a clean winding-sheet."

Reply Obj. 4: Christ was buried "in a garden" to express that by His
death and burial we are delivered from the death which we incur
through Adam's sin committed in the garden of paradise. But for this
"was our Lord buried in the grave of a stranger," as Augustine says
in a sermon (ccxlviii), "because He died for the salvation of others;
and a sepulchre is the abode of death." Also the extent of the
poverty endured for us can be thereby estimated: since He who while
living had no home, after death was laid to rest in another's tomb,
and being naked was clothed by Joseph. But He is laid in a "new"
sepulchre, as Jerome observes on Matt. 27:60, "lest after the
resurrection it might be pretended that someone else had risen, while
the other corpses remained. The new sepulchre can also denote Mary's
virginal womb." And furthermore it may be understood that all of us
are renewed by Christ's burial; death and corruption being destroyed.
Moreover, He was buried in a monument "hewn out of a rock," as Jerome
says on Matt. 27:64, "lest, if it had been constructed of many
stones, they might say that He was stolen away by digging away the
foundations of the tomb." Hence the "great stone" which was set shows
that "the tomb could not be opened except by the help of many hands.
Again, if He had been buried in the earth, they might have said: They
dug up the soil and stole Him away," as Augustine observes [*Cf.
Catena Aurea]. Hilary (Comment. in Matth. cap. xxxiii) gives the
mystical interpretation, saying that "by the teaching of the
apostles, Christ is borne into the stony heart of the gentile; for it
is hewn out by the process of teaching, unpolished and new,
untenanted and open to the entrance of the fear of God. And since
naught besides Him must enter into our hearts, a great stone is
rolled against the door." Furthermore, as Origen says (Tract. xxxv in
Matth.): "It was not written by hazard: 'Joseph wrapped Christ's body
in a clean winding-sheet, and placed it in a new monument,'" and that
"'he rolled a great stone,' because all things around the body of
Jesus are clean, and new, and exceeding great."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 51, Art. 3]

Whether Christ's Body Was Reduced to Dust in the Tomb?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's body was reduced to dust in
the tomb. For just as man dies in punishment of his first parent's
sin, so also does he return to dust, since it was said to the first
man after his sin: "Dust thou art, and into dust thou shalt return"
(Gen. 3:19). But Christ endured death in order to deliver us from
death. Therefore His body ought to be made to return to dust, so as
to free us from the same penalty.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ's body was of the same nature as ours. But
directly after death our bodies begin to dissolve into dust, and are
disposed towards putrefaction, because when the natural heat departs,
there supervenes heat from without which causes corruption. Therefore
it seems that the same thing happened to Christ's body.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (A. 1), Christ willed to be buried
in order to furnish men with the hope of rising likewise from the
grave. Consequently, He sought likewise to return to dust so as to
give to them who have returned to dust the hope of rising from the
dust.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 15:10): "Nor wilt Thou suffer
Thy holy one to see corruption": and Damascene (De Fide Orth. iii)
expounds this of the corruption which comes of dissolving into
elements.

_I answer that,_ It was not fitting for Christ's body to putrefy, or
in any way be reduced to dust, since the putrefaction of any body
comes of that body's infirmity of nature, which can no longer hold
the body together. But as was said above (Q. 50, A. 1, ad 2),
Christ's death ought not to come from weakness of nature, lest it
might not be believed to be voluntary: and therefore He willed to
die, not from sickness, but from suffering inflicted on Him, to which
He gave Himself up willingly. And therefore, lest His death might be
ascribed to infirmity of nature, Christ did not wish His body to
putrefy in any way or dissolve no matter how; but for the
manifestation of His Divine power He willed that His body should
continue incorrupt. Hence Chrysostom says (Cont. Jud. et Gent. quod
'Christus sit Deus') that "with other men, especially with such as
have wrought strenuously, their deeds shine forth in their lifetime;
but as soon as they die, their deeds go with them. But it is quite
the contrary with Christ: because previous to the cross all is
sadness and weakness, but as soon as He is crucified, everything
comes to light, in order that you may learn it was not an ordinary
man that was crucified."

Reply Obj. 1: Since Christ was not subject to sin, neither was He
prone to die or to return to dust. Yet of His own will He endured
death for our salvation, for the reasons alleged above (Q. 51, A. 1).
But had His body putrefied or dissolved, this fact would have been
detrimental to man's salvation, for it would not have seemed credible
that the Divine power was in Him. Hence it is on His behalf that it
is written (Ps. 19:10): "What profit is there in my blood, whilst I
go down to corruption?" as if He were to say: "If My body corrupt,
the profit of the blood shed will be lost."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's body was a subject of corruption according to
the condition of its passible nature, but not as to the deserving
cause of putrefaction, which is sin: but the Divine power preserved
Christ's body from putrefying, just as it raised it up from death.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ rose from the tomb by Divine power, which is not
narrowed within bounds. Consequently, His rising from the grave was a
sufficient argument to prove that men are to be raised up by Divine
power, not only from their graves, but also from any dust whatever.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 51, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Was in the Tomb Only One Day and Two Nights?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not in the tomb during
only one day and two nights; because He said (Matt. 12:40): "As Jonas
was in the whale's belly three days and three nights: so shall the
Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights."
But He was in the heart of the earth while He was in the grave.
Therefore He was not in the tomb for only one day and two nights.

Obj. 2: Gregory says in a Paschal Homily (Hom. xxi): "As Samson
carried off the gates of Gaza during the night, even so Christ rose
in the night, taking away the gates of hell." But after rising He was
not in the tomb. Therefore He was not two whole nights in the grave.

Obj. 3: Further, light prevailed over darkness by Christ's death. But
night belongs to darkness, and day to light. Therefore it was more
fitting for Christ's body to be in the tomb for two days and a night,
rather than conversely.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "There were
thirty-six hours from the evening of His burial to the dawn of the
resurrection, that is, a whole night with a whole day, and a whole
night."

_I answer that,_ The very time during which Christ remained in the
tomb shows forth the effect of His death. For it was said above (Q.
50, A. 6) that by Christ's death we were delivered from a twofold
death, namely, from the death of the soul and of the body: and this
is signified by the two nights during which He remained in the tomb.
But since His death did not come of sin, but was endured from
charity, it has not the semblance of night, but of day: consequently
it is denoted by the whole day during which Christ was in the
sepulchre. And so it was fitting for Christ to be in the sepulchre
during one day and two nights.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii): "Some men,
ignorant of Scriptural language, wished to compute as night those
three hours, from the sixth to the ninth hour, during which the sun
was darkened, and as day those other three hours during which it was
restored to the earth, that is, from the ninth hour until its
setting: for the coming night of the Sabbath follows, and if this be
reckoned with its day, there will be already two nights and two days.
Now after the Sabbath there follows the night of the first day of the
Sabbath, that is, of the dawning Sunday, on which the Lord rose. Even
so, the reckoning of the three days and three nights will not stand.
It remains then to find the solution in the customary usage of speech
of the Scriptures, whereby the whole is understood from the part": so
that we are able to take a day and a night as one natural day. And so
the first day is computed from its ending, during which Christ died
and was buried on the Friday; while the second day is an entire day
with twenty-four hours of night and day; while the night following
belongs to the third day. "For as the primitive days were computed
from light to night on account of man's future fall, so these days
are computed from the darkness to the daylight on account of man's
restoration" (De Trin. iv).

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Trin. iv; cf. De Consens. Evang.
iii), Christ rose with the dawn, when light appears in part, and
still some part of the darkness of the night remains. Hence it is
said of the women that "when it was yet dark" they came "to the
sepulchre" (John 20:1). Therefore, in consequence of this darkness,
Gregory says (Hom. xxi) that Christ rose in the middle of the night,
not that night is divided into two equal parts, but during the night
itself: for the expression "early" can be taken as partly night and
partly day, from its fittingness with both.

Reply Obj. 3: The light prevailed so far in Christ's death (which is
denoted by the one day) that it dispelled the darkness of the two
nights, that is, of our twofold death, as stated above.
_______________________

QUESTION 52

OF CHRIST'S DESCENT INTO HELL
(In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's descent into hell; concerning which
there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was fitting for Christ to descend into hell?

(2) Into which hell did He descend?

(3) Whether He was entirely in hell?

(4) Whether He made any stay there?

(5) Whether He delivered the Holy Fathers from hell?

(6) Whether He delivered the lost from hell?

(7) Whether He delivered the children who died in original sin?

(8) Whether He delivered men from Purgatory?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Descend into Hell?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting for Christ to
descend into hell, because Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod. cliv.): "Nor
could I find anywhere in the Scriptures hell mentioned as something
good." But Christ's soul did not descend into any evil place, for
neither do the souls of the just. Therefore it does not seem fitting
for Christ's soul to descend into hell.

Obj. 2: Further, it cannot belong to Christ to descend into hell
according to His Divine Nature, which is altogether immovable; but
only according to His assumed nature. But that which Christ did or
suffered in His assumed nature is ordained for man's salvation: and
to secure this it does not seem necessary for Christ to descend into
hell, since He delivered us from both guilt and penalty by His
Passion which He endured in this world, as stated above (Q. 49, AA.
1, 3). Consequently, it was not fitting that Christ should descend
into hell.

Obj. 3: Further, by Christ's death His soul was separated from His
body, and this was laid in the sepulchre, as stated above (Q. 51).
But it seems that He descended into hell, not according to His soul
only, because seemingly the soul, being incorporeal, cannot be a
subject of local motion; for this belongs to bodies, as is proved in
_Phys._ vi, text. 32; while descent implies corporeal motion.
Therefore it was not fitting for Christ to descend into hell.

_On the contrary,_ It is said in the Creed: "He descended into hell":
and the Apostle says (Eph. 4:9): "Now that He ascended, what is it,
but because He also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth?" And a gloss adds: "that is--into hell."

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for Christ to descend into hell.
First of all, because He came to bear our penalty in order to free us
from penalty, according to Isa. 53:4: "Surely He hath borne our
infirmities and carried our sorrows." But through sin man had
incurred not only the death of the body, but also descent into hell.
Consequently since it was fitting for Christ to die in order to
deliver us from death, so it was fitting for Him to descend into hell
in order to deliver us also from going down into hell. Hence it is
written (Osee 13:14): "O death, I will be thy death; O hell, I will
be thy bite." Secondly, because it was fitting when the devil was
overthrown by the Passion that Christ should deliver the captives
detained in hell, according to Zech. 9:11: "Thou also by the blood of
Thy Testament hast sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit." And it
is written (Col. 2:15): "Despoiling the principalities and powers, He
hath exposed them confidently." Thirdly, that as He showed forth His
power on earth by living and dying, so also He might manifest it in
hell, by visiting it and enlightening it. Accordingly it is written
(Ps. 23:7): "Lift up your gates, O ye princes," which the gloss thus
interprets: "that is--Ye princes of hell, take away your power,
whereby hitherto you held men fast in hell"; and so "at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow," not only "of them that are in heaven,"
but likewise "of them that are in hell," as is said in Phil. 2:10.

Reply Obj. 1: The name of hell stands for an evil of penalty, and not
for an evil of guilt. Hence it was becoming that Christ should
descend into hell, not as liable to punishment Himself, but to
deliver them who were.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's Passion was a kind of universal cause of men's
salvation, both of the living and of the dead. But a general cause is
applied to particular effects by means of something special. Hence,
as the power of the Passion is applied to the living through the
sacraments which make us like unto Christ's Passion, so likewise it
is applied to the dead through His descent into hell. On which
account it is written (Zech. 9:11) that "He sent forth prisoners out
of the pit, in the blood of His testament," that is, by the power of
His Passion.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's soul descended into hell not by the same kind
of motion as that whereby bodies are moved, but by that kind whereby
the angels are moved, as was said in the First Part (Q. 53, A. 1).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Went Down into the Hell of the Lost?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ went down into the hell of the
lost, because it is said by the mouth of Divine Wisdom (Ecclus.
24:45): "I will penetrate to all the lower parts of the earth." But
the hell of the lost is computed among the lower parts of the earth
according to Ps. 62:10: "They shall go into the lower parts of the
earth." Therefore Christ who is the Wisdom of God, went down even
into the hell of the lost.

Obj. 2: Further, Peter says (Acts 2:24) that "God hath raised up
Christ, having loosed the sorrows of hell, as it was impossible that
He should be holden by it." But there are no sorrows in the hell of
the Fathers, nor in the hell of the children, since they are not
punished with sensible pain on account of any actual sin, but only
with the pain of loss on account of original sin. Therefore Christ
went down into the hell of the lost, or else into Purgatory, where
men are tormented with sensible pain on account of actual sins.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (1 Pet. 3:19) that "Christ coming in
spirit preached to those spirits that were in prison, which had some
time been incredulous": and this is understood of Christ's descent
into hell, as Athanasius says (Ep. ad Epict.). For he says that
"Christ's body was laid in the sepulchre when He went to preach to
those spirits who were in bondage, as Peter said." But it is clear
the unbelievers were in the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ went
down into the hell of the lost.

Obj. 4: Further, Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv): "If the sacred
Scriptures had said that Christ came into Abraham's bosom, without
naming hell or its woes, I wonder whether any person would dare to
assert that He descended into hell. But since evident testimonies
mention hell and its sorrows, there is no reason for believing that
Christ went there except to deliver men from the same woes." But the
place of woes is the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ descended
into the hell of the lost.

Obj. 5: Further, as Augustine says in a sermon upon the Resurrection:
Christ descending into hell "set free all the just who were held in
the bonds of original sin." But among them was Job, who says of
himself (Job 17:16): "All that I have shall go down into the deepest
pit." Therefore Christ descended into the deepest pit.

_On the contrary,_ Regarding the hell of the lost it is written (Job
10:21): "Before I go, and return no more, to a land that is dark and
covered with the mist of death." Now there is no "fellowship of light
with darkness," according to 2 Cor. 6:14. Therefore Christ, who is
"the light," did not descend into the hell of the lost.

_I answer that,_ A thing is said to be in a place in two ways. First
of all, through its effect, and in this way Christ descended into
each of the hells, but in different manner. For going down into the
hell of the lost He wrought this effect, that by descending thither
He put them to shame for their unbelief and wickedness: but to them
who were detained in Purgatory He gave hope of attaining to glory:
while upon the holy Fathers detained in hell solely on account of
original sin, He shed the light of glory everlasting.

In another way a thing is said to be in a place through its essence:
and in this way Christ's soul descended only into that part of hell
wherein the just were detained. so that He visited them "in place,"
according to His soul, whom He visited "interiorly by grace,"
according to His Godhead. Accordingly, while remaining in one part of
hell, He wrought this effect in a measure in every part of hell, just
as while suffering in one part of the earth He delivered the whole
world by His Passion.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, penetrated to all the
lower parts of the earth, not passing through them locally with His
soul, but by spreading the effects of His power in a measure to them
all: yet so that He enlightened only the just: because the text
quoted continues: "And I will enlighten all that hope in the Lord."

Reply Obj. 2: Sorrow is twofold: one is the suffering of pain which
men endure for actual sin, according to Ps. 17:6: "The sorrows of
hell encompassed me." Another sorrow comes of hoped-for glory being
deferred, according to Prov. 13:12: "Hope that is deferred afflicteth
the soul": and such was the sorrow which the holy Fathers suffered in
hell, and Augustine refers to it in a sermon on the Passion, saying
that "they besought Christ with tearful entreaty." Now by descending
into hell Christ took away both sorrows, yet in different ways: for
He did away with the sorrows of pains by preserving souls from them,
just as a physician is said to free a man from sickness by warding it
off by means of physic. Likewise He removed the sorrows caused by
glory deferred, by bestowing glory.

Reply Obj. 3: These words of Peter are referred by some to Christ's
descent into hell: and they explain it in this sense: "Christ
preached to them who formerly were unbelievers, and who were shut up
in prison"--that is, in hell--"in spirit"--that is, by His soul.
Hence Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "As He evangelized them who
are upon the earth, so did He those who were in hell"; not in order
to convert unbelievers unto belief, but to put them to shame for
their unbelief, since preaching cannot be understood otherwise than
as the open manifesting of His Godhead, which was laid bare before
them in the lower regions by His descending in power into hell.

Augustine, however, furnishes a better exposition of the text in his
Epistle to Evodius quoted above, namely, that the preaching is not to
be referred to Christ's descent into hell, but to the operation of
His Godhead, to which He gave effect from the beginning of the world.
Consequently, the sense is, that "to those (spirits) that were in
prison"--that is, living in the mortal body, which is, as it were,
the soul's prison-house--"by the spirit" of His Godhead "He came and
preached" by internal inspirations, and from without by the
admonitions spoken by the righteous: to those, I say, He preached
"which had been some time incredulous," i.e. not believing in the
preaching of Noe, "when they waited for the patience of God," whereby
the chastisement of the Deluge was put off: accordingly (Peter) adds:
"In the days of Noe, when the Ark was being built."

Reply Obj. 4: The expression "Abraham's bosom" may be taken in two
senses. First of all, as implying that restfulness, existing there,
from sensible pain; so that in this sense it cannot be called hell,
nor are there any sorrows there. In another way it can be taken as
implying the privation of longed-for glory: in this sense it has the
character of hell and sorrow. Consequently, that rest of the blessed
is now called Abraham's bosom, yet it is not styled hell, nor are
sorrows said to be now in Abraham's bosom.

Reply Obj. 5: As Gregory says (Moral. xiii): "Even the higher regions
of hell he calls the deepest hell . . . For if relatively to the
height of heaven this darksome air is infernal, then relatively to
the height of this same air the earth lying beneath can be considered
as infernal and deep. And again in comparison with the height of the
same earth, those parts of hell which are higher than the other
infernal mansions, may in this way be designated as the deepest hell."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 3]

Whether the Whole Christ Was in Hell?

Objection 1: It would seem that the whole Christ was not in hell. For
Christ's body is one of His parts. But His body was not in hell.
Therefore, the whole Christ was not in hell.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing can be termed whole when its parts are
severed. But the soul and body, which are the parts of human nature,
were separated at His death, as stated above (Q. 50, AA. 3, 4), and
it was after death that He descended into hell. Therefore the whole
(Christ) could not be in hell.

Obj. 3: Further, the whole of a thing is said to be in a place when
no part of it is outside such place. But there were parts of Christ
outside hell; for instance, His body was in the grave, and His
Godhead everywhere. Therefore the whole Christ was not in hell.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Symbolo iii): "The whole Son is
with the Father, the whole Son in heaven, on earth, in the Virgin's
womb, on the Cross, in hell, in paradise, into which He brought the
robber."

_I answer that,_ It is evident from what was said in the First Part
(Q. 31, A. 2, ad 4), the masculine gender is referred to the
hypostasis or person, while the neuter belongs to the nature. Now in
the death of Christ, although the soul was separated from the body,
yet neither was separated from the Person of the Son of God, as
stated above (Q. 50, A. 2). Consequently, it must be affirmed that
during the three days of Christ's death the whole Christ was in the
tomb, because the whole Person was there through the body united with
Him, and likewise He was entirely in hell, because the whole Person
of Christ was there by reason of the soul united with Him, and the
whole Christ was then everywhere by reason of the Divine Nature.

Reply Obj. 1: The body which was then in the grave is not a part of
the uncreated Person, but of the assumed nature. Consequently, the
fact of Christ's body not being in hell does not prevent the whole
Christ from being there: but proves that not everything appertaining
to human nature was there.

Reply Obj. 2: The whole human nature is made up of the united soul
and body; not so the Divine Person. Consequently when death severed
the union of the soul with the body, the whole Christ remained, but
His whole human nature did not remain.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Person is whole in each single place, but not
wholly, because it is not circumscribed by any place: indeed, all
places put together could not comprise His immensity; rather is it
His immensity that embraces all things. But it happens in those
things which are in a place corporeally and circumscriptively, that
if a whole be in some place, then no part of it is outside that
place. But this is not the case with God. Hence Augustine says (De
Symbolo iii): "It is not according to times or places that we say
that the whole Christ is everywhere, as if He were at one time whole
in one place, at another time whole in another: but as being whole
always and everywhere."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Made Any Stay in Hell?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not make any stay in hell.
For Christ went down into hell to deliver men from thence. But He
accomplished this deliverance at once by His descent, for, according
to Ecclus. 11:23: "It is easy in the eyes of God on a sudden to make
the poor man rich." Consequently He does not seem to have tarried in
hell.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion (clx) that
"of a sudden at our Lord and Saviour's bidding all 'the bars of iron
were burst'" (Cf. Isa. 45:2). Hence on behalf of the angels
accompanying Christ it is written (Ps. 23:7, 9): "Lift up your gates,
O ye princes." Now Christ descended thither in order to break the
bolts of hell. Therefore He did not make any stay in hell.

Obj. 3: Further, it is related (Luke 23:43) that our Lord while
hanging on the cross said to the thief: "This day thou shalt be with
Me in paradise": from which it is evident that Christ was in paradise
on that very day. But He was not there with His body, for that was in
the grave. Therefore He was there with the soul which had gone down
into hell: and consequently it appears that He made no stay in hell.

_On the contrary,_ Peter says (Acts 2:24): "Whom God hath raised up,
having loosed the sorrows of hell, as it was impossible that He
should be held by it." Therefore it seems that He remained in hell
until the hour of the Resurrection.

_I answer that,_ As Christ, in order to take our penalties upon
Himself, willed His body to be laid in the tomb, so likewise He
willed His soul to descend into hell. But the body lay in the tomb
for a day and two nights, so as to demonstrate the truth of His
death. Consequently, it is to be believed that His soul was in hell,
in order that it might be brought back out of hell simultaneously
with His body from the tomb.

Reply Obj. 1: When Christ descended into hell He delivered the saints
who were there, not by leading them out at once from the confines of
hell, but by enlightening them with the light of glory in hell
itself. Nevertheless it was fitting that His soul should abide in
hell as long as His body remained in the tomb.

Reply Obj. 2: By the expression "bars of hell" are understood the
obstacles which kept the holy Fathers from quitting hell, through the
guilt of our first parent's sin; and these bars Christ burst asunder
by the power of His Passion on descending into hell: nevertheless He
chose to remain in hell for some time, for the reason stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Our Lord's expression is not to be understood of the
earthly corporeal paradise, but of a spiritual one, in which all are
said to be who enjoy the Divine glory. Accordingly, the thief
descended locally into hell with Christ, because it was said to him:
"This day thou shalt be with Me in paradise"; still as to reward he
was in paradise, because he enjoyed Christ's Godhead just as the
other saints did.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 5]

Whether Christ Descending into Hell Delivered the Holy Fathers from
Thence?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ descending into hell did not
deliver the holy Fathers from thence. For Augustine (Epist. ad Evod.
clxiv) says: "I have not yet discovered what Christ descending into
hell bestowed upon those righteous ones who were in Abraham's bosom,
from whom I fail to see that He ever departed according to the
beatific presence of His Godhead." But had He delivered them, He
would have bestowed much upon them. Therefore it does not appear that
Christ delivered the holy Fathers from hell.

Obj. 2: Further, no one is detained in hell except on account of sin.
But during life the holy Fathers were justified from sin through
faith in Christ. Consequently they did not need to be delivered from
hell on Christ's descent thither.

Obj. 3: Further, if you remove the cause, you remove the effect. But
that Christ went down into hell was due to sin which was taken away
by the Passion, as stated above (Q. 49, A. 1). Consequently, the holy
Fathers were not delivered on Christ's descent into hell.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in the sermon on the Passion
already quoted that when Christ descended into hell "He broke down
the gate and 'iron bars' of hell, setting at liberty all the
righteous who were held fast through original sin."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 4, ad 2), when Christ descended
into hell He worked through the power of His Passion. But through
Christ's Passion the human race was delivered not only from sin, but
also from the debt of its penalty, as stated above (Q. 49, AA. 1, 3).
Now men were held fast by the debt of punishment in two ways: first
of all for actual sin which each had committed personally: secondly,
for the sin of the whole human race, which each one in his origin
contracts from our first parent, as stated in Rom. 5 of which sin the
penalty is the death of the body as well as exclusion from glory, as
is evident from Gen. 2 and 3: because God cast out man from paradise
after sin, having beforehand threatened him with death should he sin.
Consequently, when Christ descended into hell, by the power of His
Passion He delivered the saints from the penalty whereby they were
excluded from the life of glory, so as to be unable to see God in His
Essence, wherein man's beatitude lies, as stated in the Second Part
(I-II, Q. 3, A. 8). But the holy Fathers were detained in hell for
the reason, that, owing to our first parent's sin, the approach to
the life of glory was not opened. And so when Christ descended into
hell He delivered the holy Fathers from thence. And this is what is
written Zech. 9:11: "Thou also by the blood of Thy testament hast
sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water." And
(Col. 2:15) it is written that "despoiling the principalities and
powers," i.e. "of hell, by taking out Isaac and Jacob, and the other
just souls," "He led them," i.e. "He brought them far from this
kingdom of darkness into heaven," as the gloss explains.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking there against such as maintained
that the righteous of old were subject to penal sufferings before
Christ's descent into hell. Hence shortly before the passage quoted
he says: "Some add that this benefit was also bestowed upon the
saints of old, that on the Lord's coming into hell they were freed
from their sufferings. But I fail to see how Abraham, into whose
bosom the poor man was received, was ever in such sufferings."
Consequently, when he afterwards adds that "he had not yet discovered
what Christ's descent into hell had brought to the righteous of old,"
this must be understood as to their being freed from penal
sufferings. Yet Christ bestowed something upon them as to their
attaining glory: and in consequence He dispelled the suffering which
they endured through their glory being delayed: still they had great
joy from the very hope thereof, according to John 8:56: "Abraham your
father rejoiced that he might see my day." And therefore he adds: "I
fail to see that He ever departed, according to the beatific presence
of His Godhead," that is, inasmuch as even before Christ's coming
they were happy in hope, although not yet fully happy in fact.

Reply Obj. 2: The holy Fathers while yet living were delivered from
original as well as actual sin through faith in Christ; also from the
penalty of actual sins, but not from the penalty of original sin,
whereby they were excluded from glory, since the price of man's
redemption was not yet paid: just as the faithful are now delivered
by baptism from the penalty of actual sins, and from the penalty of
original sin as to exclusion from glory, yet still remain bound by
the penalty of original sin as to the necessity of dying in the body
because they are renewed in the spirit, but not yet in the flesh,
according to Rom. 8:10: "The body indeed is dead, because of sin; but
the spirit liveth, because of justification."

Reply Obj. 3: Directly Christ died His soul went down into hell, and
bestowed the fruits of His Passion on the saints detained there;
although they did not go out as long as Christ remained in hell,
because His presence was part of the fulness of their glory.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 6]

Whether Christ Delivered Any of the Lost from Hell?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did deliver some of the lost
from hell, because it is written (Isa. 24:22): "And they shall be
gathered together as in the gathering of one bundle into the pit, end
they shall be shut up there in prison: and after many days they shall
be visited." But there he is speaking of the lost, who "had adored
the host of heaven," according to Jerome's commentary. Consequently
it seems that even the lost were visited at Christ's descent into
hell; and this seems to imply their deliverance.

Obj. 2: Further, on Zech. 9:11: "Thou also by the blood of Thy
testament hast sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no
water," the gloss observes: "Thou hast delivered them who were held
bound in prisons, where no mercy refreshed them, which that rich man
prayed for." But only the lost are shut up in merciless prisons.
Therefore Christ did deliver some from the hell of the lost.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's power was not less in hell than in this
world, because He worked in every place by the power of His Godhead.
But in this world He delivered some persons of every state.
Therefore, in hell also, He delivered some from the state of the lost.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Osee 13:14): "O death, I will be
thy death; O hell, I will be thy bite": upon which the gloss says:
"By leading forth the elect, and leaving there the reprobate." But
only the reprobate are in the hell of the lost. Therefore, by
Christ's descent into hell none were delivered from the hell of the
lost.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 5), when Christ descended into
hell He worked by the power of His Passion. Consequently, His descent
into hell brought the fruits of deliverance to them only who were
united to His Passion through faith quickened by charity, whereby
sins are taken away. Now those detained in the hell of the lost
either had no faith in Christ's Passion, as infidels; or if they had
faith, they had no conformity with the charity of the suffering
Christ: hence they could not be cleansed from their sins. And on this
account Christ's descent into hell brought them no deliverance from
the debt of punishment in hell.

Reply Obj. 1: When Christ descended into hell, all who were in any
part of hell were visited in some respect: some to their consolation
and deliverance, others, namely, the lost, to their shame and
confusion. Accordingly the passage continues: "And the moon shall
blush, and the sun be put to shame," etc.

This can also be referred to the visitation which will come upon them
in the Day of Judgment, not for their deliverance, but for their yet
greater confusion, according to Sophon. i, 12: "I will visit upon the
men that are settled on their lees."

Reply Obj. 2: When the gloss says "where no mercy refreshed them,"
this is to be understood of the refreshing of full deliverance,
because the holy Fathers could not be delivered from this prison of
hell before Christ's coming.

Reply Obj. 3: It was not due to any lack of power on Christ's part
that some were not delivered from every state in hell, as out of
every state among men in this world; but it was owing to the very
different condition of each state. For, so long as men live here
below, they can be converted to faith and charity, because in this
life men are not confirmed either in good or in evil, as they are
after quitting this life.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 7]

Whether the Children Who Died in Original Sin Were Delivered by
Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that the children who died in original sin
were delivered from hell by Christ's descending thither. For, like
the holy Fathers, the children were kept in hell simply because of
original sin. But the holy Fathers were delivered from hell, as
stated above (A. 5). Therefore the children were similarly delivered
from hell by Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 5:15): "If by the offense of
one, many died; much more the grace of God and the gift, by the grace
of one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many." But the children
who die with none but original sin are detained in hell owing to
their first parent's sin. Therefore, much more were they delivered
from hell through the grace of Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, as Baptism works in virtue of Christ's Passion, so
also does Christ's descent into hell, as is clear from what has been
said (A. 4, ad 2, AA. 5, 6). But through Baptism children are
delivered from original sin and hell. Therefore, they were similarly
delivered by Christ's descent into hell.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 3:25): "God hath proposed
Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in His blood." But the
children who had died with only original sin were in no wise sharers
of faith in Christ. Therefore, they did not receive the fruits of
Christ's propitiation, so as to be delivered by Him from hell.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 6), Christ's descent into hell
had its effect of deliverance on them only who through faith and
charity were united to Christ's Passion, in virtue whereof Christ's
descent into hell was one of deliverance. But the children who had
died in original sin were in no way united to Christ's Passion by
faith and love: for, not having the use of free will, they could have
no faith of their own; nor were they cleansed from original sin
either by their parents' faith or by any sacrament of faith.
Consequently, Christ's descent into hell did not deliver the children
from thence. And furthermore, the holy Fathers were delivered from
hell by being admitted to the glory of the vision of God, to which no
one can come except through grace; according to Rom. 6:23: "The grace
of God is life everlasting." Therefore, since children dying in
original sin had no grace, they were not delivered from hell.

Reply Obj. 1: The holy Fathers, although still held bound by the debt
of original sin, in so far as it touches human nature, were
nevertheless delivered from all stain of sin by faith in Christ:
consequently, they were capable of that deliverance which Christ
brought by descending into hell. But the same cannot be said of the
children, as is evident from what was said above.

Reply Obj. 2: When the Apostle says that the grace of God "hath
abounded unto many," the word "many" [*The Vulgate reads 'plures,'
i.e. 'many more'] is to be taken, not comparatively, as if more were
saved by Christ's grace than lost by Adam's sin: but absolutely, as
if he said that the grace of the one Christ abounded unto many, just
as Adam's sin was contracted by many. But as Adam's sin was
contracted by those only who descended seminally from him according
to the flesh, so Christ's grace reached those only who became His
members by spiritual regeneration: which does not apply to children
dying in original sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is applied to men in this life, in which man's
state can be changed from sin into grace: but Christ's descent into
hell was vouchsafed to the souls after this life when they are no
longer capable of the said change. And consequently by baptism
children are delivered from original sin and from hell, but not by
Christ's descent into hell.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 52, Art. 8]

Whether Christ by His Descent into Hell Delivered Souls from
Purgatory?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ by His descent into hell
delivered souls from Purgatory--for Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod.
clxiv): "Because evident testimonies speak of hell and its pains,
there is no reason for believing that the Saviour came thither except
to rescue men from those same pains: but I still wish to know whether
it was all whom He found there, or some whom He deemed worthy of such
a benefit. Yet I do not doubt that Christ went into hell, and granted
this favor to them who were suffering from its pains." But, as stated
above (A. 6), He did not confer the benefit of deliverance upon the
lost: and there are no others in a state of penal suffering except
those in Purgatory. Consequently Christ delivered souls from
Purgatory.

Obj. 2: Further, the very presence of Christ's soul had no less
effect than His sacraments have. But souls are delivered from
Purgatory by the sacraments, especially by the sacrament of the
Eucharist, as shall be shown later (Suppl., Q. 71, A. 9). Therefore
much more were souls delivered from Purgatory by the presence of
Christ descending into hell.

Obj. 3: Further, as Augustine says (De Poenit. ix), those whom Christ
healed in this life He healed completely. Also, our Lord says (John
7:23): "I have healed the whole man on the sabbath-day." But Christ
delivered them who were in Purgatory from the punishment of the pain
of loss, whereby they were excluded from glory. Therefore, He also
delivered them from the punishment of Purgatory.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. xiii): "Since our Creator and
Redeemer, penetrating the bars of hell, brought out from thence the
souls of the elect, He does not permit us to go thither, from whence
He has already by descending set others free." But He permits us to
go to Purgatory. Therefore, by descending into hell, He did not
deliver souls from Purgatory.

_I answer that,_ As we have stated more than once (A. 4, ad 2, AA. 5,
6, 7), Christ's descent into hell was one of deliverance in virtue of
His Passion. Now Christ's Passion had a virtue which was neither
temporal nor transitory, but everlasting, according to Heb. 10:14:
"For by one oblation He hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified." And so it is evident that Christ's Passion had no
greater efficacy then than it has now. Consequently, they who were
such as those who are now in Purgatory, were not set free from
Purgatory by Christ's descent into hell. But if any were found such
as are now set free from Purgatory by virtue of Christ's Passion,
then there was nothing to hinder them from being delivered from
Purgatory by Christ's descent into hell.

Reply Obj. 1: From this passage of Augustine it cannot be concluded
that all who were in Purgatory were delivered from it, but that such
a benefit was bestowed upon some persons, that is to say, upon such
as were already cleansed sufficiently, or who in life, by their faith
and devotion towards Christ's death, so merited, that when He
descended, they were delivered from the temporal punishment of
Purgatory.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's power operates in the sacraments by way of
healing and expiation. Consequently, the sacrament of the Eucharist
delivers men from Purgatory inasmuch as it is a satisfactory
sacrifice for sin. But Christ's descent into hell was not
satisfactory; yet it operated in virtue of the Passion, which was
satisfactory, as stated above (Q. 48, A. 2), but satisfactory in
general, since its virtue had to be applied to each individual by
something specially personal (Q. 49, A. 1, ad 4, 5). Consequently, it
does not follow of necessity that all were delivered from Purgatory
by Christ's descent into hell.

Reply Obj. 3: Those defects from which Christ altogether delivered
men in this world were purely personal, and concerned the individual;
whereas exclusion from God's glory was a general defect and common to
all human nature. Consequently, there was nothing to prevent those
detained in Purgatory being delivered by Christ from their privation
of glory, but not from the debt of punishment in Purgatory which
pertains to personal defect. Just as on the other hand, the holy
Fathers before Christ's coming were delivered from their personal
defects, but not from the common defect, as was stated above (A. 7,
ad 1; Q. 49, A. 5, ad 1).
_______________________

QUESTION 53

OF CHRIST'S RESURRECTION
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider those things that concern Christ's
Exaltation; and we shall deal with (1) His Resurrection; (2) His
Ascension; (3) His sitting at the right hand of God the Father;
(4) His Judiciary Power. Under the first heading there is a fourfold
consideration: (1) Christ's Resurrection in itself; (2) the quality
of the Person rising; (3) the manifestation of the Resurrection;
(4) its causality. Concerning the first there are four points of
inquiry:

(1) The necessity of His Resurrection;

(2) The time of the Resurrection;

(3) Its order;

(4) Its cause.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 53, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Necessary for Christ to Rise Again?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not necessary for Christ to
rise again. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): "Resurrection is
the rising again of an animate being, which was disintegrated and
fallen." But Christ did not fall by sinning, nor was His body
dissolved, as is manifest from what was stated above (Q. 51, A. 3).
Therefore, it does not properly belong to Him to rise again.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever rises again is promoted to a higher state,
since to rise is to be uplifted. But after death Christ's body
continued to be united with the Godhead, hence it could not be
uplifted to any higher condition. Therefore, it was not due to it to
rise again.

Obj. 3: Further, all that befell Christ's humanity was ordained for
our salvation. But Christ's Passion sufficed for our salvation, since
by it we were loosed from guilt and punishment, as is clear from what
was said above (Q. 49, A. 1, 3). Consequently, it was not necessary
for Christ to rise again from the dead.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 24:46): "It behooved Christ to
suffer and to rise again from the dead."

_I answer that,_ It behooved Christ to rise again, for five reasons.
First of all; for the commendation of Divine Justice, to which it
belongs to exalt them who humble themselves for God's sake, according
to Luke 1:52: "He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and hath
exalted the humble." Consequently, because Christ humbled Himself
even to the death of the Cross, from love and obedience to God, it
behooved Him to be uplifted by God to a glorious resurrection; hence
it is said in His Person (Ps. 138:2): "Thou hast known," i.e.
approved, "my sitting down," i.e. My humiliation and Passion, "and my
rising up," i.e. My glorification in the resurrection; as the gloss
expounds.

Secondly, for our instruction in the faith, since our belief in
Christ's Godhead is confirmed by His rising again, because, according
to 2 Cor. 13:4, "although He was crucified through weakness, yet He
liveth by the power of God." And therefore it is written (1 Cor.
15:14): "If Christ be not risen again, then is our preaching vain,
and our [Vulg.: 'your'] faith is also vain": and (Ps. 29:10): "What
profit is there in my blood?" that is, in the shedding of My blood,
"while I go down," as by various degrees of evils, "into corruption?"
As though He were to answer: "None. 'For if I do not at once rise
again but My body be corrupted, I shall preach to no one, I shall
gain no one,'" as the gloss expounds.

Thirdly, for the raising of our hope, since through seeing Christ,
who is our head, rise again, we hope that we likewise shall rise
again. Hence it is written (1 Cor. 15:12): "Now if Christ be preached
that He rose from the dead, how do some among you say, that there is
no resurrection of the dead?" And (Job 19:25, 27): "I know," that is
with certainty of faith, "that my Redeemer," i.e. Christ, "liveth,"
having risen from the dead; "and" therefore "in the last day I shall
rise out of the earth . . . this my hope is laid up in my bosom."

Fourthly, to set in order the lives of the faithful: according to
Rom. 6:4: "As Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the
Father, so we also may walk in newness of life": and further on;
"Christ rising from the dead dieth now no more; so do you also reckon
that you are dead to sin, but alive to God."

Fifthly, in order to complete the work of our salvation: because,
just as for this reason did He endure evil things in dying that He
might deliver us from evil, so was He glorified in rising again in
order to advance us towards good things; according to Rom. 4:25: "He
was delivered up for our sins, and rose again for our justification."

Reply Obj. 1: Although Christ did not fall by sin, yet He fell by
death, because as sin is a fall from righteousness, so death is a
fall from life: hence the words of Mic. 7:8 can be taken as though
spoken by Christ: "Rejoice not thou, my enemy, over me, because I am
fallen: I shall rise again." Likewise, although Christ's body was not
disintegrated by returning to dust, yet the separation of His soul
and body was a kind of disintegration.

Reply Obj. 2: The Godhead was united with Christ's flesh after death
by personal union, but not by natural union; thus the soul is united
with the body as its form, so as to constitute human nature.
Consequently, by the union of the body and soul, the body was
uplifted to a higher condition of nature, but not to a higher
personal state.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion wrought our salvation, properly
speaking, by removing evils; but the Resurrection did so as the
beginning and exemplar of all good things.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 53, Art. 2]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Rise Again on the Third Day?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that Christ should have risen
again on the third day. For the members ought to be in conformity
with their head. But we who are His members do not rise from death on
the third day, since our rising is put off until the end of the
world. Therefore, it seems that Christ, who is our head, should not
have risen on the third day, but that His Resurrection ought to have
been deferred until the end of the world.

Obj. 2: Further, Peter said (Acts 2:24) that "it was impossible for
Christ to be held fast by hell" and death. Therefore it seems that
Christ's rising ought not to have been deferred until the third day,
but that He ought to have risen at once on the same day; especially
since the gloss quoted above (A. 1) says that "there is no profit in
the shedding of Christ's blood, if He did not rise at once."

Obj. 3: The day seems to start with the rising of the sun, the
presence of which causes the day. But Christ rose before sunrise: for
it is related (John 20:1) that "Mary Magdalen cometh early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre": but Christ was already risen, for
it goes on to say: "And she saw the stone taken away from the
sepulchre." Therefore Christ did not rise on the third day.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 20:19): "They shall deliver
Him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, and
the third day He shall rise again."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1) Christ's Resurrection was
necessary for the instruction of our faith. But our faith regards
Christ's Godhead and humanity, for it is not enough to believe the
one without the other, as is evident from what has been said (Q. 36,
A. 4; cf. II-II, Q. 2, AA. 7, 8). Consequently, in order that our
faith in the truth of His Godhead might be confirmed it was necessary
that He should rise speedily, and that His Resurrection should not be
deferred until the end of the world. But to confirm our faith
regarding the truth of His humanity and death, it was needful that
there should be some interval between His death and rising. For if He
had risen directly after death, it might seem that His death was not
genuine and consequently neither would His Resurrection be true. But
to establish the truth of Christ's death, it was enough for His
rising to be deferred until the third day, for within that time some
signs of life always appear in one who appears to be dead whereas he
is alive.

Furthermore, by His rising on the third day, the perfection of the
number "three" is commended, which is "the number of everything," as
having "beginning, middle, and end," as is said in De Coelo i. Again
in the mystical sense we are taught that Christ by "His one death"
(i.e. of the body) which was light, by reason of His righteousness,
"destroyed our two deaths" (i.e. of soul and body), which are as
darkness on account of sin; consequently, He remained in death for
one day and two nights, as Augustine observes (De Trin. iv).

And thereby is also signified that a third epoch began with the
Resurrection: for the first was before the Law; the second under the
Law; and the third under grace. Moreover the third state of the
saints began with the Resurrection of Christ: for, the first was
under figures of the Law; the second under the truth of faith; while
the third will be in the eternity of glory, which Christ inaugurated
by rising again.

Reply Obj. 1: The head and members are likened in nature, but not in
power; because the power of the head is more excellent than that of
the members. Accordingly, to show forth the excellence of Christ's
power, it was fitting that He should rise on the third day, while the
resurrection of the rest is put off until the end of the world.

Reply Obj. 2: Detention implies a certain compulsion. But Christ was
not held fast by any necessity of death, but was "free among the
dead": and therefore He abode a while in death, not as one held fast,
but of His own will, just so long as He deemed necessary for the
instruction of our faith. And a task is said to be done "at once"
which is performed within a short space of time.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 51, A. 4, ad 1, 2), Christ rose
early when the day was beginning to dawn, to denote that by His
Resurrection He brought us to the light of glory; just as He died
when the day was drawing to its close, and nearing to darkness, in
order to signify that by His death He would destroy the darkness of
sin and its punishment. Nevertheless He is said to have risen on the
third day, taking day as a natural day which contains twenty-four
hours. And as Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "The night until the
dawn, when the Lord's Resurrection was proclaimed, belongs to the
third day. Because God, who made the light to shine forth from
darkness, in order that by the grace of the New Testament and
partaking of Christ's rising we might hear this--'once ye were
darkness, but now light in the Lord'--insinuates in a measure to us
that day draws its origin from night: for, as the first days are
computed from light to darkness on account of man's coming fall, so
these days are reckoned from darkness to light owing to man's
restoration." And so it is evident that even if He had risen at
midnight, He could be said to have risen on the third day, taking it
as a natural day. But now that He rose early, it can be affirmed that
He rose on the third day, even taking the artificial day which is
caused by the sun's presence, because the sun had already begun to
brighten the sky. Hence it is written (Mk. 16:2) that "the women come
to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen"; which is not contrary to
John's statement "when it was yet dark," as Augustine says (De Cons.
Evang. iii), "because, as the day advances the more the light rises,
the more are the remaining shadows dispelled." But when Mark says
"'the sun being now risen,' it is not to be taken as if the sun were
already apparent over the horizon, but as coming presently into those
parts."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 53, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Was the First to Rise from the Dead?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not the first to rise from
the dead, because we read in the Old Testament of some persons raised
to life by Elias and Eliseus, according to Heb. 11:35: "Women
received their dead raised to life again": also Christ before His
Passion raised three dead persons to life. Therefore Christ was not
the first to rise from the dead.

Obj. 2: Further, among the other miracles which happened during the
Passion, it is narrated (Matt. 27:52) that "the monuments were
opened, and many bodies of the saints who had slept rose again."
Therefore Christ was not the first to rise from the dead.

Obj. 3: Further, as Christ by His own rising is the cause of our
resurrection, so by His grace He is the cause of our grace, according
to John 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have received." But in point of
time some others had grace previous to Christ--for instance all the
fathers of the Old Testament. Therefore some others came to the
resurrection of the body before Christ.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 Cor. 15:20): "Christ is risen
from the dead, the first fruits of them that sleep--because," says
the gloss, "He rose first in point of time and dignity."

_I answer that,_ Resurrection is a restoring from death to life. Now
a man is snatched from death in two ways: first of all, from actual
death, so that he begins in any way to live anew after being actually
dead: in another way, so that he is not only rescued from death, but
from the necessity, nay more, from the possibility of dying again.
Such is a true and perfect resurrection, because so long as a man
lives, subject to the necessity of dying, death has dominion over him
in a measure, according to Rom. 8:10: "The body indeed is dead
because of sin." Furthermore, what has the possibility of existence,
is said to exist in some respect, that is, in potentiality. Thus it
is evident that the resurrection, whereby one is rescued from actual
death only, is but an imperfect one.

Consequently, speaking of perfect resurrection, Christ is the first
of them who rise, because by rising He was the first to attain life
utterly immortal, according to Rom. 6:9: "Christ rising from the dead
dieth now no more." But by an imperfect resurrection, some others
have risen before Christ, so as to be a kind of figure of His
Resurrection.

And thus the answer to the first objection is clear: because both
those raised from the dead in the old Testament, and those raised by
Christ, so returned to life that they had to die again.

Reply Obj. 2: There are two opinions regarding them who rose with
Christ. Some hold that they rose to life so as to die no more,
because it would be a greater torment for them to die a second time
than not to rise at all. According to this view, as Jerome observes
on Matt. 27:52, 53, we must understand that "they had not risen
before our Lord rose." Hence the Evangelist says that "coming out of
the tombs after His Resurrection, they came into the holy city, and
appeared to many." But Augustine (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv) while giving
this opinion, says: "I know that it appears some, that by the death
of Christ the Lord the same resurrection was bestowed upon the
righteous as is promised to us in the end; and if they slept not
again by laying aside their bodies, it remains to be seen how Christ
can be understood to be 'the first-born of the dead,' if so many
preceded Him unto that resurrection. Now if reply be made that this
is said by anticipation, so that the monuments be understood to have
been opened by the earthquake while Christ was still hanging on the
cross, but that the bodies of the just did not rise then but after He
had risen, the difficulty still arises--how is it that Peter asserts
that it was predicted not of David but of Christ, that His body would
not see corruption, since David's tomb was in their midst; and thus
he did not convince them, if David's body was no longer there; for
even if he had risen soon after his death, and his flesh had not seen
corruption, his tomb might nevertheless remain. Now it seems hard
that David from whose seed Christ is descended, was not in that
rising of the just, if an eternal rising was conferred upon them.
Also that saying in the Epistle to the Hebrews (11:40) regarding the
ancient just would be hard to explain, 'that they should not be
perfected without us,' if they were already established in that
incorruption of the resurrection which is promised at the end when we
shall be made perfect": so that Augustine would seem to think that
they rose to die again. In this sense Jerome also in commenting on
Matthew (27:52, 53) says: "As Lazarus rose, so also many of the
bodies of the saints rose, that they might bear witness to the risen
Christ." Nevertheless in a sermon for the Assumption [*Ep. ix ad
Paul. et Eustoch.; among the supposititious works ascribed to St.
Jerome] he seems to leave the matter doubtful. But Augustine's
reasons seem to be much more cogent.

Reply Obj. 3: As everything preceding Christ's coming was preparatory
for Christ, so is grace a disposition for glory. Consequently, it
behooved all things appertaining to glory, whether they regard the
soul, as the perfect fruition of God, or whether they regard the
body, as the glorious resurrection, to be first in Christ as the
author of glory: but that grace should be first in those that were
ordained unto Christ.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 53, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Was the Cause of His Own Resurrection?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ was not the cause of His own
Resurrection. For whoever is raised up by another is not the cause of
his own rising. But Christ was raised up by another, according to
Acts 2:24: "Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the sorrows of
hell": and Rom. 8:11: "He that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead,
shall quicken also your mortal bodies." Therefore Christ is not the
cause of His own Resurrection.

Obj. 2: Further, no one is said to merit, or ask from another, that
of which he is himself the cause. But Christ by His Passion merited
the Resurrection, as Augustine says (Tract. civ in Joan.): "The
lowliness of the Passion is the meritorious cause of the glory of the
Resurrection." Moreover He asked the Father that He might be raised
up again, according to Ps. 40:11: "But thou, O Lord, have mercy on
me, and raise me up again." Therefore He was not the cause of His
rising again.

Obj. 3: Further, as Damascene proves (De Fide Orth. iv), it is not
the soul that rises again, but the body, which is stricken by death.
But the body could not unite the soul with itself, since the soul is
nobler. Therefore what rose in Christ could not be the cause of His
Resurrection.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord says (John 10:18): "No one taketh My soul
from Me, but I lay it down, and I take it up again." But to rise is
nothing else than to take the soul up again. Consequently, it appears
that Christ rose again of His own power.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 50, AA. 2, 3) in consequence of
death Christ's Godhead was not separated from His soul, nor from His
flesh. Consequently, both the soul and the flesh of the dead Christ
can be considered in two respects: first, in respect of His Godhead;
secondly, in respect of His created nature. Therefore, according to
the virtue of the Godhead united to it, the body took back again the
soul which it had laid aside, and the soul took back again the body
which it had abandoned: and thus Christ rose by His own power. And
this is precisely what is written (2 Cor. 13:4): "For although He was
crucified through" our "weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God."
But if we consider the body and soul of the dead Christ according to
the power of created nature, they could not thus be reunited, but it
was necessary for Christ to be raised up by God.

Reply Obj. 1: The Divine power is the same thing as the operation of
the Father and the Son; accordingly these two things are mutually
consequent, that Christ was raised up by the Divine power of the
Father, and by His own power.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ by praying besought and merited His
Resurrection, as man and not as God.

Reply Obj. 3: According to its created nature Christ's body is not
more powerful than His soul; yet according to its Divine power it is
more powerful. Again the soul by reason of the Godhead united to it
is more powerful than the body in respect of its created nature.
Consequently, it was by the Divine power that the body and soul
mutually resumed each other, but not by the power of their created
nature.
_______________________

QUESTION 54

OF THE QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider the quality of the rising Christ, which
presents four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ had a true body after His Resurrection?

(2) Whether He rose with His complete body?

(3) Whether His was a glorified body?

(4) Of the scars which showed in His body.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 54, Art. 1]

Whether Christ Had a True Body After His Resurrection?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not have a true body after
His Resurrection. For a true body cannot be in the same place at the
same time with another body. But after the Resurrection Christ's body
was with another at the same time in the same place: since He entered
among the disciples "the doors being shut," as is related in John
20:26. Therefore it seems that Christ did not have a true body after
His Resurrection.

Obj. 2: Further, a true body does not vanish from the beholder's
sight unless perchance it be corrupted. But Christ's body "vanished
out of the sight" of the disciples as they gazed upon Him, as is
related in Luke 24:31. Therefore, it seems that Christ did not have a
true body after His Resurrection.

Obj. 3: Further, every true body has its determinate shape. But
Christ's body appeared before the disciples "in another shape," as is
evident from Mk. 15:12. Therefore it seems that Christ did not
possess a true body after His Resurrection.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 24:37) that when Christ
appeared to His disciples "they being troubled and frightened,
supposed that they saw a spirit," as if He had not a true but an
imaginary body: but to remove their fears He presently added: "Handle
and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see Me to
have." Consequently, He had not an imaginary but a true body.

_I answer that,_ As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): that is said
to rise, which fell. But Christ's body fell by death; namely,
inasmuch as the soul which was its formal perfection was separated
from it. Hence, in order for it to be a true resurrection, it was
necessary for the same body of Christ to be once more united with the
same soul. And since the truth of the body's nature is from its form
it follows that Christ's body after His Resurrection was a true body,
and of the same nature as it was before. But had His been an
imaginary body, then His Resurrection would not have been true, but
apparent.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's body after His Resurrection, not by miracle
but from its glorified condition, as some say, entered in among the
disciples while the doors were shut, thus existing with another body
in the same place. But whether a glorified body can have this from
some hidden property, so as to be with another body at the same time
in the same place, will be discussed later (Suppl., Q. 83, A. 4) when
the common resurrection will be dealt with. For the present let it
suffice to say that it was not from any property within the body, but
by virtue of the Godhead united to it, that this body, although a
true one, entered in among the disciples while the doors were shut.
Accordingly Augustine says in a sermon for Easter (ccxlvii) that some
men argue in this fashion: "If it were a body; if what rose from the
sepulchre were what hung upon the tree, how could it enter through
closed doors?" And he answers: "If you understand how, it is no
miracle: where reason fails, faith abounds." And (Tract. cxxi super
Joan.) he says: "Closed doors were no obstacle to the substance of a
Body wherein was the Godhead; for truly He could enter in by doors
not open, in whose Birth His Mother's virginity remained inviolate."
