of the terrible atrocities which extended over several centuries and
have come to be known, taken collectively, as the "Witchcraft
Persecutions." The Devil, with his subordinate demons and the human
beings who sold their souls to him, were supposed to be both capable and
guilty of blighting the crops; causing the lightning; bringing
destructive storms; withholding the rain; drying up cows; killing
domestic and wild beasts; afflicting the nations with pestilence,
famine, and war; causing all manner of diseases; betwitching men, women,
and children; planting doubts in the mind and weeds in the fields; and
in brief, doing about everything that was disagreeable to man in
general, or that offended the priests as a caste.

Thus buttressed by the Bible, and with the nearly entire current of
Church literature setting in the same direction, it is no wonder that
the witchcraft delusion became one of the most appalling, if not the
most appalling, fact in the development of the Christian religion.

There is extant no other record of destruction and cruel slaughter
growing out of such beliefs in supernatural persons and powers that can
ever begin to tell such a story of degradation and mercilessness as the
record made by the Christian Church. Theologians laid stress especially
upon the famous utterances of the Psalmist that "All the gods of the
Heathens are devils," and St. Paul, "The things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to the devils."

Those suspected of heresy and witchcraft must confess; they were to be
tortured until they did confess. This made suspicion equivalent to
confession and conviction. In the witch "trial" the victim must not only
incriminate herself but her accomplices, or all whom she "knew" to be in
partnership with the Devil. She was bound to be tortured until she had
given the names or described the persons of those she had seen at the
"witches' sabbath." Then they would be put to the torture and the
process repeated. It was not in human nature long to bear the awful
pain; soon the leading questions of the inquisitors would be answered as
they wanted them answered. It would be incredible were it not attested
by such a multitude of witnesses, that men could honestly believe that
testimony so extorted had the slightest value. But it is indisputable
that hundreds of thousands of human beings were sent to a cruel death on
this utterly worthless "evidence."

As few people realize the degree in which these superstitions were
encouraged by the Church that claims infallibility, I may mention that
the reality of this particular crime was implied and its perpetrators
anathematized by the provincial councils or synods of Troyes, Lyons,
Milan, Tours, Bourges, Narbonne, Ferrar, Saint Malo, Mont Corsin,
Orleans, and Grenoble; by the Rituals of Autun, Chartres, Perigueux,
Evreux, Paris, Chalons, Bologna, Troyes, Beauvais, Meaux, Rheims, etc.,
and by the decrees of a long series of bishops.

The infection was everywhere--Germany, Spain, Portugal, France, Italy,
England, Scotland, and even America was scourged. It has been estimated
that one hundred thousand perished in Germany from the middle of the
fifteenth century to the middle of the sixteenth century.

Pope Gregory IX wrote a great mass of nonsense to the bishop and other
chiefs urging stringent methods against the Stedingers, Frieslanders,
inhabiting the country between Weser and Zeider Zee. He wrote, "The
Devil appears to them (the Stedingers) in different shapes, sometimes as
a goose or duck, and at other times in the figure of a pale, black-eyed
youth, with a melancholy aspect, whose embrace fills their hearts with
eternal hatred against the Holy Church of Christ. This Devil presides at
their sabbath when they all kiss him and dance around him. He then
envelops them in total darkness, and they all, male and female, give
themselves up to the grossest and most disgusting debauchery."

The infallible pope of Rome!

The result was that the Stedingers, men, women, and children, were
slain, the cottages and woods burned, the cattle stolen and the land
laid waste. The pope's letter is a fair example of the theological
literature of the time; the slaughter of the Stedingers an average
illustration of the evangelistic methods of the Church.

Millions of men, women, and children were tortured, strangled, drowned,
or burned on "evidence" that today would be accepted nowhere unless by a
court and jury composed of the inmates of a lunatic asylum, if even by
them. It is unnecessary to say that the more severe the persecution, the
more widespread did witchcraft become. Every person tortured accused
others and whole communities went mad with grief and fear and
superstition. No amount of human evidence establishing the actual
whereabouts of the accused at the time they were asserted by the witness
on the rack to have been at the sabbath would avail. The husbands were
told that they had seen or held only the devil-created semblance of
their wives. The originals were with Satan under the oak. The
confessions of tens of thousands of witches are to be found in Europe's
judicial records of the period of the Inquisition.

"The Protestant Reformers zealously seconded the exertions of Rome to
extirpate witchcraft; they felt that they must prove that they were as
orthodox as the Catholics, and were as loyal to the Bible. No one urged
their fundamental ideas more than did Luther, Calvin, Beza, the Swedish
Lutherans, Casaubon, Wesley, Richard Baxter, the Mathers,--all stood
loyally by Rome." (_Lecky._)

At Lisbon, a horse whose master had taught him many tricks, was tried in
1601 and found guilty of being possessed by the Devil, for which he was
burned.

The witchcraft mania proper in England began in the sixteenth century
and reached its climax in the early part of the seventeenth century. Sir
Matthew Hale, the great jurist, sanctioned the delusions and passed
sentences of death by burning.

Queen Elizabeth made witchcraft a capital offense in England; and King
James I wrote a book on the subject, and lent his personal aid and royal
support to the persecutions.

Joan of Arc, the noblest of all the victims of this belief, perished by
English hands, though on French soil, and under the sentence of a French
bishop.

In Scotland, during the sixteenth century, as well as the seventeenth,
were seen the most horrible examples of what domination of superstitious
minds by ecclesiastics could do.

"Nothing was natural, all was supernatural. The entire course of affairs
was governed, not by their antecedents, but by a series of miracles.
Going still further, they claimed the power (the clergy) not only of
foretelling the future state, but also of controlling it; and they did
not scruple to affirm that, by their censures, they could open and shut
the Kingdom of Heaven. As if this were not enough, they also gave out
that a word of theirs could hasten the moment of death, and by cutting
off the sinner in his prime, could bring him at once before the
Judgment Seat of God.

"The Scotch clergy preached that, 'Hell was created before man came into
the world. The Almighty,' they did not scruple to say, 'having spent his
previous leisure in preparing and completing this place of torture, so
that, when the human race appeared, it might be ready for their
reception.'

"Of all the means of intimidation employed by the Scotch clergy none was
more efficacious than the doctrines they propounded respecting evil
spirits and future punishment. On these subjects, they constantly
uttered the most appalling threats. The language which they used was
calculated to madden men with fear and to drive them to the depths of
despair.

"It was generally believed that the world was overrun by evil spirits
who went not only up and down the earth, but also lived in the air, and
whose business it was to tempt and hurt mankind. Their number was
infinite, and they were to be found at all places and in all seasons.

"At their head was Satan himself, whose delight it was to appear in
person ensnaring or terrifying every one he met. With this object, he
assumed various forms. One day he would visit the earth as a black dog,
on another day as a raven, on still another day he would be heard in the
distance roaring like a bull. He appeared sometimes as a white man in
black clothes, and sometimes he became a black man in black clothes,
when it was remarked that his voice was ghastly, that he wore no shoes,
and that one of his feet was cloven. His stratagems were endless. For,
in the opinion of divines, his cunning increased with his age; and
having been studying for more than 5000 years, he had now attained to
unexampled dexterity. He could, and he did, seize both men and women
and carry them away through the air. Usually he wore the garb of laymen,
but it was said that, on more than one occasion, he had impudently
attired himself as a minister of the Gospel. At all events, in one dress
or other, he frequently appeared to the clergy, and tried to coax them
over to his side. In that, of course, he failed; but out of the
ministers thus tempted, few indeed could withstand him. He could raise
storms and tempests. He could work, not only on the mind, but also on
the organs of the body, making men hear and see whatever he chose. Of
his victims, some he prompted to suicide, others to commit murder.
Still, formidable as he was, no Christian was considered to have
attained to a full religious experience unless he had literally seen
him, talked to him, and fought with him.

"The clergy were constantly preaching about him, and preparing their
audiences for an interview with their great enemy. The consequence was
that the people became almost crazed with fear. Whenever the preacher
mentioned Satan, the consternation was so great that the church
resounded with sighs and groans. They believed that the Devil was always
and literally at hand; that he was haunting them, speaking to them, and
tempting them. The clergy boasted that it was their special mission to
thunder out the wrath and curses of the Lord. In their eyes the Deity
was not a Beneficent Being, but a cruel and remorseless tyrant. They
declared that all mankind, a very small portion only excepting, were
doomed to eternal misery.

"The Scotch clergy taught their hearers that the Almighty was
sanguinary, and so prone to anger that he raged even against walls and
houses, and senseless creatures, wreaking his fury more than ever, and
scattering desolation on every side.

"The people, credulous and ignorant, listened and believed.

"For in Scotland as elsewhere, directly the clergy succeeded in
occupying a more than ordinary amount of public attention, they availed
themselves of that circumstance to propagate those ascetic doctrines
which, while they strike at the root of human happiness, benefit no one
except the class which advocates them; that class, indeed, can hardly
fail to reap the advantages from a policy which by increasing the
apprehensions to which the ignorance and timidity of men make them
liable, does also increase their eagerness to fly for support to their
spiritual advisers; and the greater their apprehension, the greater the
eagerness." (_Buckle: "The History of Civilization in England."_)

James I of England had become imbued with the idea of witchcraft while
in Scotland, and he believed that his stormy passage on his return from
Denmark was due to witches. This storm was the origin of one of the most
horrible of the many horrible Scotch trials on record. One Dr. Fian was
suspected of having aroused the wind and a confession was wrung from him
by torture which, however, he almost immediately retracted. Every form
of torture was in vain employed to vanquish his obduracy; the bones of
his legs were broken into small pieces in the boot. All the torments
that Scottish law knew of were successively applied. At last, the king
(who personally presided over the tortures) suggested a new and more
horrible device. The prisoner, who had been removed during the
deliberation, was brought in and "His nails upon his fingers were riven
and pulled off with an instrument, called in Scottish a 'turkas,' which
in England we call a 'payre' or 'pincers' and under everie nayle there
was thrust in two needles over, even up to the heads. So deeply had the
devil entered his heart, that he utterly denied all that which he
avouched," and he was burnt unconfessed.

And this from a king of England!

The methods of obtaining a confession were as follows: If the witch was
obdurate, the first, and it was said, the most effective method of
obtaining confession was by what was termed "waking her." An iron bridle
or hoop was bound across her face with four prongs which were thrust
into her mouth. It was fastened behind to the wall by a chain, in such a
manner that the victim was unable to lie down, and in this position she
was sometimes kept for several days, while men were constantly with her
to prevent her from closing her eyes for a moment in sleep. Partly in
order to effect this object, and partly to discover the insensible mark
which was the sure sign of a witch, long pins were thrust into her body.
At the same time, as it was a saying in Scotland that a witch would
never confess while she could drink, excessive thirst was added to her
torments. Some prisoners have been "waked" for five nights, one it is
said, even for nine.

The physical and mental suffering of such a process was sufficient to
overcome the resolution of many, and to distract the understanding of
not a few. But other and perhaps worse tortures were in reserve. The
three principal ones that were habitually applied were the "pennywinks,
the boot, and the caschielawis." The first was a kind of thumbscrew; the
second was a frame in which the leg was inserted, and in which it was
broken by wedges driven in by a hammer; the third was also an iron frame
for the leg, which was from time to time heated over a brazier.
Fire-matches were sometimes applied to the body of the victim. We read
in a contemporary legal register, of one man who was kept for
forty-eight hours in "vehement torture" in the caschielawis; and of
another who remained in the same frightful machine for eleven days and
nights, whose legs were broken daily for fourteen days in the boots, and
who was so scourged that the whole skin was torn from his body. This
was, it is true, censured as an extreme case, but it was only an
excessive application of the common torture.

The witches were commonly strangled before they were burnt, but this
merciful provision was very frequently omitted. An Earl of Wear tells
how, with a piercing yell, some women once broke half-burnt from the
slow fire consuming them, struggled for a few moments with a despairing
energy among the spectators, but soon with shrieks of blasphemy and wild
protestations of innocence sank writhing in agony amid the flames.

But just picture this scene for a moment! The horror of such a scene!
What a crime for one human to commit against another! A burnt offering
to the gods! How well pleased the Almighty God must have been with the
stench of burning human flesh rising to his nostrils. And how well he
must have rewarded his faithful servants, for was this not done in His
name? "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

As Lecky points out in his famous work on the "History of European
Morals," such incidents are but illustrations of the great truth that
when men have come to regard a certain class of their fellow creatures
as doomed by the Almighty to eternal and excruciating agonies, and when
their theology directs their minds with intense and realizing
earnestness to the contemplation of such agonies, the result will be an
indifference to the suffering of those whom they deem the enemies of
their God, as absolute as it is perhaps possible for human nature to
attain.

It is a historical fact that in 1591, a lady of rank, Eufame Macalyane,
sought the assistance of Agnes Sampson for the relief of pain at the
time of birth of her two sons. Agnes Sampson was tried before King James
for her heresy, was condemned as a witch, and was burned alive on the
Castle Hill of Edinburgh.

It is generally said that the last execution in Scotland was in 1722,
but Captain Burt, who visited the country in 1730, speaks of a woman who
was burnt as late as 1727. As late as 1736, the divines of the
Associated Presbytery passed a resolution declaiming their belief in
witchcraft, and deploring the scepticism that was then general.

The Pilgrim Fathers brought to our shores the seeds of the Witchcraft
Delusion at a time when it was rapidly fading in England, and again
history furnishes us with an example of a people with strong religious
instincts who, being freed from their persecutors, became in turn the
most violent persecutors of those that did not profess their particular
creed. It was particularly due to the preaching of Cotton Mather that a
panic of fear was created through the New England Colonies. Mrs. Ann
Hibbons was tried before the Great and General Court of Massachusetts,
sentenced and hanged on the 19th of June, 1656. "Goody Oliver" was
executed as a witch on November 16th, 1688.

There were twenty murders in 1692, and these before a civil court. The
trials took place before the illegal Court of Oyer and Terminer,
appointed by Governor Phipps, at the instigation of the
Lieutenant-Governor and Chief Justice Stoughton, and Joseph Dudley,
formerly governor, and the Chief Judge of the Court which, in 1688, had
sent "Goody Oliver" to her death at the gallows.

Cotton Mather defended this practice in his book, "The Wonders of The
Invisible World," and Increase Mather, the father of Cotton, was equally
as strenuous in the "Witch Hunt." Increase Mather survived this massacre
thirty years, and his son, five years longer, but there is hardly a word
of regret or sympathy to be found anywhere, even in their private
diaries and correspondence. These executions in Massachusetts form one
of the darkest pages in the history of America.

It is not surprising that the clergy of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries supported both in practice and theory the Witchcraft Delusion,
but when we find the ablest minds of the laity bursting into print with
a vehement defense of this belief, it is difficult for us, in the
present day, to conceive of such folly. And yet, today, we have able
minds defending a precept of which the Witchcraft Delusion is but a
part.

"The defenders of the belief (Witchcraft), who were men of great and
distinguished talent, maintained that there was no fact in all history
more fully attested, and that to reject it would be to strike at the
root of all historical evidence of the miraculous." (_Lecky._)

The subject was examined in tens of thousands of cases, in almost every
country in Europe, by tribunals which included the acutest lawyers and
