
The Karamians hold that the different parts of the body will not cease to
be, but that at the last God will gather them together. "Thinketh man that
we shall not re-unite his bones? Aye! his very finger tips we are able
evenly to replace." (Sura lxxv. 3, 4.) The orthodox, however, hold that
this verse does not disprove the fact of previous annihilation, a belief
supported by the Prophet's saying, "All the sons of men will be
annihilated." It will be a re-creation though the body will return to its
former state.

The learned are not agreed as to the state of the soul during this period
of the death of the body, and therefore disagree with regard to its
revival. Some assert that it is wrong to speak of a resurrection of the
soul, for it exists in the body as "fire in coal," hence its revival is
included in the resurrection of the body; others maintain that as it is a
distinct entity, it is not annihilated with the body. The scholastics
favour the first idea. Practically the result seems the same in both cases.
The resurrection body has a soul. Wise and foolish, devils and beasts,
insects and birds--all will rise at the last day. Muhammad will come first
in order and be the first to enter Paradise.

(2). The descent of the Books (Tatair-i-saha,if). After the resurrection,
men will wander about for forty years, during which time the "Books of
Actions" will be given to them. These books contain the record kept by the
Kiram-ul-Katibin, (Ante p. 141). Traditions recorded by Abu Huraira state:
"Men will rise up naked, and confused; some will walk about, some stand for
forty years. All will be constantly looking up toward the heavens (_i.e._
expecting the books.) They will perspire profusely through {164} excess of
sorrow.[159] Then God will say to Abraham, 'put on clothes.' He will put on
a robe of Paradise. Then He will call Muhammad for whose benefit a fountain
will flow forth not far from Mecca. The people, too, shall thirst no more."
The Prophet said: "I will also put on a dress and will stand near the
throne, where no one else will be allowed to stand and God will say: 'Ask
and it shall be granted to thee; intercede, thy intercession shall be
accepted.'" Each book flies from the treasury under the Throne of God and
is given to its proper owner. "Every man's fate have We fastened about his
neck; and on the day of resurrection will We bring forth to him (every man)
a book which shall be proffered to him wide open: 'Read thy book, there
needeth none but thyself to make out an account against thee this day.'"
(Sura xvii. 15). "He into whose _right_ hand his book shall be given, shall
be reckoned, with an easy reckoning, and shall turn, rejoicing, to his
kindred. But he whose book shall be given behind his back (_i.e._ into his
_left_ hand) shall invoke destruction." (Sura lxxxiv. 8-11.) "He, who shall
have his book given into his _left_ hand will say: 'O that my book had
never been given me! and that I had not known my reckoning.'" (Sura lxix.
25). It is always said that wicked Musalmans will be seized by the _right_
hand before they are cast into the fire, which is a proof that they are not
always to remain there. Some hold that the expression "Read thy book"
implies a literal reading; others that it is a metaphorical expression
which simply means that all the past actions will be known. Those who
believe in a literal reading say that each believer will read the account
of his faults only, and that other persons will read that of his good
deeds. The face of the believer as he reads will shine resplendently, but
black will be the face of the infidel.

{165}

(3). The Balances (Mizan). This belief is based on the authority of the
Quran, Sunnat and the Ijma'; no Muslim, therefore, can have any doubt about
it. Thus: "They whose balances shall be heavy, shall be the blest; but they
whose balances shall be light,--these are they who shall lose their souls,
abiding in hell for ever." (Sura xxiii. 104). "As to him whose balances are
heavy, his shall be a life that shall please him well: and as to him whose
balances are light, his dwelling-place shall be the pit. And who shall
teach thee what the pit (Al-Hawia) is? A raging fire!" (Sura ci. 5-8). The
Traditions on this point are very numerous. The Ijma' is also strong on the
reality, the objective existence, of a balance with scales, &c., complete.
They also state that the "Books of Actions" (Saha,if-i-A'mal) will be
weighed. In the Sahih-i-Bukhari it is said that the Believers will not be
weighed in the balances, for "God will say, 'O Muhammad make those of thy
people, from whom no account is taken, enter into Paradise.'" Prophets and
angels will also be exempt. Such a test also is not required for the
unbelievers, for their state is very evident; "By their tokens shall the
sinners be known, and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their
feet." (Sura lv. 41). Thus it is evident that, with regard to true
believers and unbelievers, the works of such only as God may choose need be
weighed. Some, however, maintain that no unbeliever will have this test
applied to his case and quote: "Vain therefore, are their works; and no
weight will we allow them on the day of resurrection." (Sura xviii. 105).
To this it is answered, that all that is here denied is the fact of "a
weighing in _their favour_." The place where the weighing will take place
is situated midway between heaven and hell. Gabriel standing by watches the
movement of the scales and Michael guards the balance. The orthodox are not
agreed as to whether there will be a separate balance for each tribe of
men, and also for each of the 'good works' {166} of the believers. Those
who hold that there will be a balance for prayer, another for fasting and
so on, adduce the use of the plural form, balances (muwazin) in proof of
their statement. There is also a difference of opinion as to whether the
"works" themselves, or the books (saha,if) will be weighed. The latter
opinion is supported by a Tradition recorded by Tirmizi. "The Prophet said:
'Ninety-nine registers will be distributed. Each register will extend as
far as the eye can reach. God will say: 'What! dost thou deny this, or have
the recording angels treated thee unjustly?' Each will say: 'No! O Lord.'
'Hast thou then any excuse?' 'No! O Lord.' Then God will display a cloth on
which the Kalima is written. This will be put into one scale, and God will
say: 'To thee will be no evil if thou hast a register in this scale, and
this cloth in the other, for the first scale will be light.'" This is
considered conclusive testimony with regard to the weighing of the Saha,if.
The Mutazilites objected to statements such as these, for said they:
"actions are accidents, and the qualities of lightness and heaviness cannot
be attributed to accidents." They explained the verses of the Quran and the
statements of the Traditions on this point, as being a figurative way of
saying that perfect justice will be done to all in the Day of Judgment.

(4). The Bridge (Sirat). The meaning of the word Sirat is a road, a way. It
is so used in the Quran. In connection with the Day of Judgment it is said:
"If we pleased we would surely put out their eyes: yet even then would they
speed on with rivalry in their path (Sirat)." (Sura xxxvi. 66). "Gather
together those who have acted unjustly, and their consorts (demons), and
the gods whom they have adored beside God; and guide them to the road
(Sirat) for hell." (Sura xxxvii. 23). It is nowhere in the Quran called a
bridge, but Tradition is very clear on this point. The Prophet said: "There
will be a bridge sharper than the edge of a sword, finer than a hair,
suspended over {167} hell. Iron spikes on it will pierce those whom God
wills. Some will pass over it in the twinkling of an eye, some like a flash
of lightning, others with the speed of a swift horse. The angels will call
out, 'O Lord! save and protect.' Some Muslims will be saved, some will fall
headlong into hell." Bukhari relates a similar Tradition. The infidels will
all fall into hell and there remain for ever. Muslims will be released
after a while.

The Mutazilites deny the existence of such a bridge. "If we admit it," say
they, "it would be a trouble for the believers, and such there is not for
them in the Day of Judgment." To this the orthodox reply that the believers
pass over it to show how they are saved from fire, and that thus they may
be delighted with Paradise, and also that the infidels may feel chagrin at
those who were with them on the bridge being now safe for ever.

Al A'raf is situated between heaven and hell. It is described thus: "On
(the wall) Al A'raf shall be men who know all, by their tokens,[160] and
they shall cry to the inhabitants of Paradise, 'Peace be on you!' but they
shall not yet enter it, although they long to do so. And when their eyes
are turned towards the inmates of the fire, they shall say, 'O our Lord!
place us not with offending people &c.'" (Sura vii. 44, 45). Sale's summary
of the opinions regarding Al A'raf in his Preliminary Discourse is
exceedingly good. It is as follows:--

    "They call it Al Orf, and more frequently in the plural, Al Araf, a
    word derived from the verb _Arafa_, which signifies to distinguish
    between things, or to part them; though some commentators give another
    reason for the imposition of this name, because, say they, those who
    stand on this partition will _know_ and _distinguish_ the blessed from
    the damned, by their respective marks or characteristics: and others
    way the word properly intends anything that is _high raised_ or
    _elevated_, as such a wall of separation must be supposed to {168} be.
    Some imagine it to be a sort of _limbo_ for the patriarchs and
    prophets, or for the martyrs and those who have been most eminent for
    sanctity. Others place here such whose good and evil works are so equal
    that they exactly counterpoise each other, and therefore deserve
    neither reward nor punishment; and these, say they, will on the last
    day be admitted into Paradise, after they shall have performed an act
    of adoration, which will be imputed to them as a merit, and will make
    the scale of their good works to overbalance. Others suppose this
    intermediate space will be a receptacle for those who have gone to war,
    without their parents' leave, and therein suffered martyrdom; being
    excluded from Paradise for their disobedience, and escaping hell
    because they are martyrs."

There is also an interval, between the death of the body in this world and
the Last Day, called Al-Barzakh. "Behind them shall be a barrier (barzakh),
until the day when they shall be raised again." (Sura xxiii. 102). When
death takes place, the soul is separated from the body by the Angel of
death; in the case of the good with ease, in that of the wicked with
violence. It then enters into Al-Barzakh.[161]

It is a doctrine founded on Ijma', that God will not pardon Shirk, that is,
the ascribing plurality to the Divine Being. The Mushrik, one who does so,
will remain in hell for ever, for as Kufr, infidelity, is an eternal crime,
its punishment must also be eternal. "The unbelievers among the people of
the Book, and among the Polytheists shall go into the fire of Gehenna to
abide therein for aye. Of all creatures are they the worst?" (Sura xcviii.
5). "Cast into Hell every infidel, every hardened one, the hinderer of the
good, the transgressor, the doubter who set up other Gods with God. Cast ye
him into the fierce torment." (Sura 1. 23-25.)

Muslims who commit great (Kabira) sins, though they die unrepentant, will
not remain in hell for ever, for, "whosoever shall have wrought an atom's
weight of good shall {169} behold it." (Sura xcix. 7). It is asserted that
the fact of believing in Islam is a good work and merits a reward: this
cannot be given before the man enters hell to be punished for his sins, and
therefore he must be, after a while, released from punishment. "Perfect
faith (Iman-i-Kamil) consists in believing with sincerity of heart and
acting in accordance thereto, but the actions are not the faith itself.
Great sins, therefore, prevent a man from having "perfect faith," but do
not destroy faith (Iman), nor make the Muslim an infidel, but only a
sinner."[162] The Mutazilites teach that the Muslim who enters hell will
remain there for ever. They maintain that the person who, having committed
great sins, dies unrepentant, though not an infidel, ceases to be a
believer and hence suffers as the infidels do.

The orthodox belief is that Muhammad is now an Intercessor and will be so
at the Last Day. The intercession then is of several kinds. There is the
'great intercession' to which the words, "it may be that thy Lord will
raise thee to a _glorious station_," (Sura xvii. 81) are supposed to refer.
The Maqam-i-mahmud, (glorious station), is said to be the place of
intercession in which all persons will praise the Prophet.[163] In the
Zad-ul-Masir it is said that the Maqam-i-mahmud refers to the fact that God
will place the Prophet on His Throne. Others say that it is a place in
which a standard will be given to the Prophet, around whom all the other
prophets will then gather to do him honour. The first interpretation is,
however, the ordinary one. The people will be in great fear. Muhammad will
say: "O my people! I am appointed for intercession." Their fear will then
pass away. The second intercession is made so that they may enter into
Paradise without rendering an account. The authorities differ with regard
to this. The third intercession is on behalf of those Muslims who {170}
ought to go to hell. The fourth for those who are already there. No one but
the Prophet can make these intercessions. The fifth intercession is for an
increase of rank to those who are in Paradise. The Mutazilites maintained
that there would be no intercession for Muslims guilty of great sins, and
adduced in favour of their opinion the verse: "Fear ye the day when soul
shall not satisfy for soul at all, nor shall any intercession be accepted
from them, nor shall any ransom be taken, neither shall they be helped."
(Sura ii. 45). The orthodox bring in reply this Hadis-i-Sahih: "The Prophet
said: 'my intercession is for the men of my following who have committed
great sins.'" If this Tradition is disputed, they then say that the verse
in the Quran just quoted does not refer to Muslims at all, but to the
Infidels.[164]

According to a Tradition related by Anas the Prophet said: "In the day of
resurrection Musalmans will not be able to move, and they will be greatly
distressed and say: 'would to God that we had asked Him to create some one
to intercede for us, that we might be taken from this place, and be
delivered from tribulation and sorrow.'" The Tradition goes on to state how
they sought help from Adam and the prophets of the old dispensation, who,
one and all, excused themselves on account of their own sinfulness. At
length Moses told them to go to Jesus, the Apostle of God, the Spirit of
God and the Word of God. They did so and Jesus said: "Go to Muhammad who is
a servant, whose sins God has forgiven both first and last." The Prophet
continued, according to the Tradition, "then the Musalmans will come to me,
and I will ask permission to go into God's presence and intercede for
them."[165]

The second advent of Christ is a sign of the last day. "Jesus is no more
than a servant whom We favoured ... {171} and he shall be a sign of the
last hour." (Sura xliii. 61). He will not, according to the Quran, come as
a judge, but like other prophets to be judged. "We formed with them (_i.e._
prophets) a strict covenant, that God may question the men of truth as to
their truth, (_i.e._ how they have discharged their prophetic functions)."
(Sura xxxiii. 7, 8). He will come to bear witness against the Jews who
reject him: "In the day of resurrection, He will be a witness against
them." (Sura iv. 158).

It is necessary to believe in the pond of the Prophet called Kausar. This
faith is founded on the verse "Truly we have given thee an _abundance_."
(Sura cviii. 1). Bukhari says: "The meaning of Kausar is the 'abundance of
good' which God gives to the Prophet. Abu Bash said to one Sa'id, 'the
people think that Kausar is a river of Paradise.' Sa'id replied, 'Kausar is
a river in which there is abundance of good.'" According to the same
authority Muhammad said: "My pond is square, its water is whiter than milk,
its perfume better than that of musk, whosoever drinks thereof will thirst
no more."

There are many degrees of felicity in heaven to which the believers are
admitted. The Prophet, according to Tirmizi, said there were one hundred.
Some of these may possibly be meant by the eight names they give to
Paradise. (1.) Jannat-ul-Khuld. "Say: Is this, or the _Garden of Eternity_
which was promised to the God-fearing, best?" (Sura xxv. 16.) (2.)
Jannat-us-Salam. "For them is a _Dwelling of Peace_ with their Lord." (Sura
vi. 127.) (3.) Dar-ul-Qarar. "The life to come is the _Mansion which
abideth_." (Sura xl. 42.) (4.) Jannat-ul-'Adan. "To the Faithful, both men
and women, God promiseth gardens and goodly mansions in the _Garden of
Eden_." (Sura ix. 73.) (5.) Jannat-ul-Mawa. "Near which is the _Garden of
Repose_." (Sura liii. 15.) (6) Jannat-un-Na'im. "Amid _delights_ shall the
righteous dwell." (Sura lxxxii. 13.) (7) Jannat-ul-Illiyun. "The register
of the righteous is {172} in _Illiyun_." (Sura lxxxiii. 18,) (8.)
Jannat-ul-Firdaus. "Those who believe and do the things that are right,
they shall have the _Gardens of Paradise_ for their abode." (Sura xviii.
107.)

Hell is said to have seven divisions. The Quran, though it mentions the
names of these divisions, does not state what classes of persons will be
sent to each; but Muslim Commentators have supplied the needed information.
They classify them thus:--(1.) Jahannam, for sinners who die without
repentance. (2.) Lazwa, for the infidels (_i.e._, Christians.) (3.) Hutama,
a fire for Jews, and according to some for Christians. (4.) Sa'ir, for
devils, the descendants of Iblis. (5.) Saqar, for the magians: also for
those who neglect prayer. (6.) Jahim, a boiling caldron for idolaters: also
for Gog and Magog. (7.) Hawia, a bottomless pit for hypocrites. It is said
that heaven has one division more than hell to show that God's mercy
exceeds His justice.

The Muhammadan writers give very full and minute accounts of the events
connected with the resurrection, judgment and future state of those who are
lost, and of those who are saved. Sale gives such an excellent summary of
these opinions, that it is not necessary to enter into details here. The
orthodox belief is that the statements in the Quran and the Traditions
regarding the pleasures of Paradise are to be taken literally.[166]

6. THE PREDESTINATION OF GOOD AND EVIL.--I have already in the section in
which the attribute "will" is described (p. 118) given some account of the
dogmatic statements concerning the doctrine of predestination; but as it
always forms a distinct chapter in Musalman books, I treat it separately
here. Having, however, in the passage referred {173} to, given Al Berkevi's
words on the attribute "will," it is only necessary to make a short extract
from his dogmatic statement concerning Predestination. He says:--

    "It is necessary to confess that good and evil take place by the
    predestination and predetermination of God, that all that has been and
    all that will be was decreed in eternity, and written on the _preserved
    table_;[167] that the faith of the believer, the piety of the pious and
    good actions are foreseen, willed, predestinated, decreed by the
    writing on the _preserved table_, produced and approved by God; that
    the unbelief of the unbeliever, the impiety of the impious and bad
    actions come to pass with the fore-knowledge, will, predestination and
    decree of God, but not with His satisfaction and approval. Should any
    ask why God willeth and produceth evil, we can only reply that He may
    have wise ends in view which we cannot comprehend."

Another confession of faith has:--

    "Whoever shall say, that God is not delighted with virtue and faith,
    and is not wroth with vice and infidelity, or that God has decreed good
    and evil with equal complacency is an infidel."

There are three well-defined schools of thought on the subject:--

First.--The Jabrians, so called from the word "_jabr_" compulsion, deny all
free agency in man and say that man is necessarily constrained by the force
of God's eternal and immutable decree to act as he does.[168] They hold
that as {174} God is the absolute Lord, He can, if He so wills, admit all
men into Paradise, or cast all into hell. This sect is one of the branches
of the Ash'arians with whom on most points they agree.

Secondly.--The Qadrians, who deny _Al-Qadr_, or God's absolute decree, say
that evil and injustice ought not to be attributed to God but to man, who
is altogether a free agent. God has given him the power to do or not to do
an act. This sect is generally considered to be a branch of the Mutazilite
body, though in reality it existed before Wasil quitted the school of his
master Hasan (Ante. p. 125). As Wasil, however, followed the opinions of
Mabad-al-Johni, the leading Kadrian divine, the Mutazilites and Qadrians
are practically one and the same.

Thirdly.--The Ash'arians, of whom I have already given some account,
maintain that God has one eternal will which is applied to whatsoever He
willeth, both of His own actions and those of men; that He willeth that
which He knoweth and what is written on the _preserved table_; that He
willeth both good and evil. So far they agree with the Jabrians; but then
they seem to allow some power to man, a tenet I have already explained when
describing their idea of "Kasb" (Ante. p. 130). The orthodox, or Sunni
belief is theoretically Ash'arian, but practically the Sunnis are confirmed
