the faithful witness being borne throughout the period; (4) the great
evil leader and the character of the persecution he wages; (5) the
visitation of judgments upon earth with the great gathering of nations
to battle against God; (6) the world system of evil; and (7) the coming
of our Lord Jesus to judge evil and set up the kingdom.


Still He Waits.

It will at once be noted that these things group up, naturally and
easily, under _three headings_. First, there is a terrible _persecution_
of God's people. This will end in a _visitation_ of _judgments_,
including great plagues. There will be a gathering of the armies of all
nations, and a great battle. It will end in a decisive defeat for them
by the personal coming of the Lord Jesus, and will be accompanied by a
terrific earthquake and an equally terrific shake-up of the heavenly
bodies connected with the earth, sun, moon, and stars. Then comes the
establishment of the _Kingdom of God_ upon earth. These three things
stand dominantly out.

It comes as a surprise to one who has not been thinking especially about
it, to find how these three things are the same three that stood out so
prominently at the close of the study of future items in the old
prophetic books. It is natural that it should be so, of course, since
the Book of God is one in its essential unity.

But there is a great fascination in finding the parts to come together
so simply and naturally. As we gather up the Old Testament pages these
three things sift out and group together as distinctly not yet
fulfilled, and so future. As we listen to our Lord Jesus talking, again
these same three items are emphasized by Him. And now the same three are
found here.

Dr. A. F. Schauffler tells of a striking experience he had in connection
with his mission work in New York City. A letter came to him from a
stranger in Germany. It said: "I know you are a city missionary. I am
sending a trunk in your care. Inclosed in this letter you will find a
piece of paper cut. A man will come and present to you a piece of paper
matching this piece. Please give him the trunk." And enclosed in the
letter was a piece of paper cut in zigzags.

Letter and paper were laid away to await developments. Some weeks later
a stranger came in and presented a queerly cut piece of paper, saying:
"I think you have a piece that matches this." Dr. Schauffler got out his
piece of paper, laid the two side by side, found that they matched, and
said to his visitor: "There's your trunk."

Even so these prophetic pages of the New Testament are found to fit
exactly the pages of the Old, written centuries before. It is not
surprising, however. One hand cut the paper into two pieces in Germany,
and naturally they fitted when put together in New York. One Hand has
guided the men writing in both Old and New.

When Jeremiah was first called to his work as God's messenger he was
shown in vision the branch of an almond tree. The almond tree is the
earliest of all trees to wake from its winter's sleep at the first hint
of spring warmth coming. And so it was called the "watching" or
"watcher" tree. Then God said to Jeremiah: "Even so, I eagerly watch
over my word to bring it to life and fruitage at the very earliest
opportunity."[165] And so the word of this watching God and its
fulfilment match, regardless of the thing we call time, even running
into centuries.

And it is very helpful for those of us who have had a sort of dread of
prophecy as of a vague something that we can't understand, to find after
all how simple it is. Just three great items stand out of these
prophetic pages that are waiting fulfilment.

Such is the seven-fold view, which is taken up almost wholly with the
clearing-up storm in the King's realm. But all this is still future. We
are still in that waiting time. Our Lord Jesus still stands among the
candlesticks. Still He is waiting for His Church to be faithful. He
still waits for each of us who is a bit of His Church. He is depending
on us to be faithful, by His grace, day by day, during this waiting
time. And while He waits _all His limitless power is at our disposal_,
as we follow His leading. We may take as much as we need. But the taking
must be with the life.

A dear missionary friend told of a simple experience that meant much to
him. We were walking together in the town in Korea where his mission
work is. His school was the centre of the recent troublous times in
Korea, and the storm seemed to rage about his own person at its
outburst. As we talked all his native teachers and several of his older
students were in prison. The experience he told me was of earlier days
in this country, but had come back to his memory as a great refreshment
during the troublous times.

He was a professor in a small college in our Middle West. Special funds
were being raised, for extension. He was to ask a certain man of wealth
for a large donation. He planned and prayed much, and at last went to
see the man in another city by appointment. He had a keen sense of the
responsibility of his task.

As he entered the building where the man's office was he was greeted
cordially by a young man whom he remembered as a former student, to whom
he had been friendly in some time of minor need. But he had not
connected him in his mind with this wealthy man, whose son he was. Now
as the former student learned of his professor friend's errand, he said
with all the confidence of a son on good terms with his father:

"Come right in; father's here."

As they stepped into the man's office the son said, simply:

"Father, this is an old friend of mine. He's all right. Give him
whatever he wants."

And the father, busy at his desk, with barely a look at the appointed
visitor, reached one hand over for his checkbook, and simply said:

"How much do you want?"

My friend, taken completely by surprise at the unexpected turn of
events, managed to name the large sum he had been thinking and praying
over so much. And before he could quite recover from his surprise, he
found himself outside walking up the street with the coveted check in
his pocket, praising God for such an answer to his prayers. It had been
years before, but as we walked and talked it all came back with a fresh
flush of feeling.

The present is a waiting time. It may seem to some as though they are in
the wilderness. Clear and distinct comes a quiet voice:

"What'll you have? Whatever you choose to ask, for My Son's sake."

May we reach out to take as much as He is reaching down to give. But the
taking must be with the life.


FOOTNOTES:

[107] Isaiah xiii.-xxiv.

[108] Jeremiah xlvi.-li.

[109] Ezekiel xxv.-xxxii., xxxviii.-xxxix.

[110] Daniel, throughout, notably vii.-xii.

[111] The book of Isaiah falls naturally into two parts, chapters
i.-xl., and xli.-lxvi. The historical allusions in each make it quite
clear that these two parts belong in two periods far apart. One hundred
and eighty years intervene between the close of the time stated in
Isaiah's first chapter as the period of his ministry and the beginning
of the return from exile into which the second part fits.

But the full inspiration of the second part is in no wise affected. This
rarely Spirit-controlled man modestly or unconsciously withholds his
name from his writings. And they are grouped by the old Hebrew compilers
with those of Isaiah.

[112] Isaiah ii. 2-4.

[113] Isaiah xi. 1-9; xxxii. 1-6.

[114] Micah iv. 1-8.

[115] Isaiah xi. 11-16; xxvii. 12-13.

[116] Zechariah xii. 10-14.

[117] Jeremiah xxxi. 8-19, 33, 34.

[118] Isaiah xxvi. 19; Daniel xii. 2.

[119] Micah iv. 1-2.

[120] Isaiah xxv. 7

[121] Isaiah iv. 2-5.

[122] Isaiah xxiv. 1-13, 17-20; ii. 12-19; Micah vii. 15-17.

[123] Zechariah xii. 1-9; xiv. 1-2.

[124] Isaiah xiii. 1-13.

[125] Zechariah xiv. 1-8.

[126] Isaiah xxiv. 21-22; xxvii. 1.

[127] Jeremiah xxx. 7-8.

[128] Daniel xii. 1.

[129] Matthew xxiv.-xxv; Mark xiii; Luke xxi.

[130] Matthew xxiv. 21, 29.

[131] Mark xiii. 19.

[132] Revelation vii. 14 literally.

[133] Leviticus xxvi. 14-39.

[134] Deuteronomy xxviii. 15-68.

[135] Deuteronomy xxxii.

[136] Daniel iii.

[137] Chapters vi.-vii.

[138] Chapter xix.

[139] Isaiah ii. 10-22.

[140] II Corinthians i. 22; Ephesians i. 13; iv. 30.

[141] Isaiah ii. 2.

[142] Revelation xvii. 9-10.

[143] Jeremiah li. 25.

[144] Revelation viii. 10, see also ix. 1; Isaiah xiv. 12-15.

[145] In regard to Elijah, see Malachi iv. 5-6. John the Baptist came in
the spirit and power of Elijah, and of him our Lord said, "this is he
who was to come."

Yet the events of judgment spoken of in Malachi did not take place when
John the Baptist and Jesus came. The events spoken of prophetically in
connection with His coming are divided into two groups, those of
graciousness, finding fulfilment at the first coming, those of judgment
followed by graciousness, at the second coming. So John the Baptist
fulfils the Elijah part at the first of these two; in all probability
Elijah himself at the second part, _i.e._, "before the great and
_terrible_ day of Jehovah come."

In regard to Enoch, the passage in Jude, verse 14, is of significance.
The language, "Enoch prophesied, ... the Lord _came_, etc.," is probably
spoken in the sense, familiar in the Bible, of a future action seen as
already done. Here Enoch is spoken of as prophesying or preaching, _not_
to the people before the Flood, but to a certain class of men belonging
to Jude's generation, that is to the Church generation. The likeliest
meaning of the words is that Enoch, the seventh and so on, _will_
prophesy, saying, "behold the Lord _cometh_," and so on to close of
verse 15.

[146] Revelation xii. 1-6.

[147] Revelation xii. 7-17.

[148] Revelation xii.

[149] Revelation xiii.

[150] Chapter xiii. 9-10.

[151] Revelation xiv. 1-5.

[152] Revelation xiv. 6-20.

[153] Revelation xv.-xvi.

[154] Revelation xiv. 1-5.

[155] Revelation xi. 19.

[156] Psalm xi. 6; lx. 3; lxxv. 8; Job xxi. 20; Isaiah li. 17, 22, 23;
Jeremiah xxv. 15-17; Ezekiel xxiii. 31-33; Habakkuk ii. 16; Zechariah
xii. 2.

[157] Isaiah xi. 15-16.

[158] Revelation vi. 15-17.

[159] Revelation xi. 14.

[160] Chapters xvii. and xviii.

[161] Revelation xvii. 8-12.

[162] Revelation i. 4, 8; iv. 8.

[163] Revelation xi. 17; xvi. 5.

[164] Ezekiel xxxix. 17-20.

[165] Jeremiah i. 11-12.




VII.--THE CROWNED CHRIST REIGNING

(Revelation, Chapters xx: 4-xxii.)


      "On this side of the river and on that was the tree of life,
      bearing twelve fruits."

 "A garden is a lovesome thing, God wot!
         Rose plot,
         Fringed pool,
         Ferned grot--
   The veriest school
 Of peace; and yet the fool
   Contends that God is not--
 Not God! in gardens! when the eve is cool?
   Nay, but I have a sign;
 'Tis very sure God walks in mine."


Day Is Coming.

It's a long lane that has no turning. Every valley leads up a hillside
to a hilltop. Every storm ends in sunshine at the last. Every night runs
out; the dawn _will_ break; the new day comes; the shadows flee before
the new shining. The battle for right will end in victory, and in a
decisive victory. There'll be no draw here. Faith wins at last. It's
been a long night of fighting. Sometimes it seems endless.

The man in the thick of the fight, with moist brow, and clenched hand,
and quick breath and throbbing heart, sometimes sobs out the prayer, "O
Lord, how long before the night is over, and the dawn breaks?" And
quietly through the smoke and din of the conflict a still, small voice
says, "Steady, my child, steady; the day is surely coming, and with day
victory; steady, steady a bit longer."

Now here in vision the fight is over, the victory won. And God's visions
always become realities. The vision is yet for the appointed time, and
it panteth breathlessly toward the realization, and will not fail nor
delay. Though it tarry, wait for it; it will certainly come on time; it
will not be late.[166]

In the seventh view the kingdom follows immediately that decisive
conflict and the putting of Satan out of the way for the time being. The
redeemed ones at once begin their blessed service of fellowship with the
King in reigning over the kingdom. Emphasis is placed on the fact that
at this time there has been a resurrection of believers. And these
resurrected ones join with those caught up without death in
administering the kingdom. This kingdom is said to last for a thousand
years, that length of time being named only here, and here six times.

There is much talk in our day about the kingdom. All Christendom has
been repeating for nineteen centuries the petition, "Thy kingdom come."
It will be of intense and practical interest to see just what the
kingdom is, as pictured in the Bible. It is barely mentioned in this
place in Revelation, to fit it into its place in the scheme of future
events being outlined.

But it is the chief theme in these old prophetic pages, around which all
others group. Immediate historical events furnish the setting, but there
is a continual swinging to the coming future greatness. The yellow
glory-light of the coming kingdom is never out of the prophetic sky.
Jeremiah is the one most absorbed in the boiling of the political pot of
his own strenuous time, but even he, at times, lifts his head and gets
such a glimpse of the coming kingdom as causes him to mix some rose
tincture with the jet black ink he habitually uses.

