
But the festive character of the celebration, the giving of presents,
the feasting and merriment, the use of evergreen and holly and
mistletoe, are all remnants of Pagan rites.

Continuing, the same editorial called attention to the antiquity of
the institution:

Long before the shepherds on the Judean plains saw the star rise in
the east and heard the tidings of "Peace on earth, good will to man,"
the Roman populace surged through the streets at the feast of Saturn,
giving themselves up to wild license and boisterous merry making. They
exchanged presents, they decorated their dwellings and temples with
green boughs; slaves were given special privileges, and the spirit of
good will was abroad among men. This Roman Saturnalia came at the
winter solstice, the same as does our Christmas day, while the birth
of Christ is widely believed to have taken place at some other season
of the year.

But Dr. Bartlett may have had in mind the quotation from Anastasius:

"Our Lord, Jesus Christ, was born of the Holy Virgin, Mary, in
Bethlehem, at one o'clock in the afternoon of December 25th,"--appearing
to quote from some old manuscript which, unfortunately, is not to be
found anywhere. But Clement of Alexandria, in the year 210 A. D.,
dismisses all guesses as to when Jesus was born,--the 18th of April,
19th of May, etc.,--as products of reckless speculation. March 28th
is given as Jesus' birthday in _De Pascha Computius_, in the year 243.
Jan. 5th is the date defended by Epiphanius. Baradaens, Bishop of
Odessa, says: "No one knows exactly the day of the nativity of our
Lord: this only is certain from what Luke writes, that he was born in
the night." Poor Dr. Bartlett, his December 25th does not receive
support from the Fathers.

For our clerical brother's sake, we quote some more from the
_Tribune_ editorial:

Primeval man looked upon the sun as the revelation of divinity. When
the shortest day of the year was passed, when the sun began his march
northward, the primitive man rejoiced in the thought of the coming
seedtime and summer, and he made feasts and revelry the mode of
expressing the gladness of his heart. Among the sun worshipers of
Persia, among the Druids of the far north, among the Phoenicians,
among the Romans, and among the ancient Goths and Saxons the winter
solstice was the occasion of festivities. Many of them were rude and
barbarous, but they were all distinguished by hearty and profuse
hospitality.

And yet our neighbor calls it "distortion of history" to connect
Christmas with the Pagan festival, celebrated about this time. We
quote once more from the Secular press:

The Christian church did not abolish these heathen ceremonies, but
grafted upon them a deeper spiritual meaning. For this reason
Christmas is an institution which memorializes the best there was in
Pagan man. Its good cheer, its charity, its sports, its feasting, and
the features which most endear it to children are all the heritage of
our Pagan ancestors.

How refreshing this, compared with the clergyman's silence, or cry of
"distortion." But in one thing the doctor is correct. The early
Christians did bewail the Pagan festivals, as they did everything else
that was Pagan. But it did not help them at all; they were compelled
to acquiesce. The Christians have "fasted and prayed" also against
science, progress, and modern thought, but what good has it done? They
asked God to hook Theodore Parker's tongue; to overthrow Darwin, and
to confound the wisdom of this world, but the prayer remains
unanswered. Yes, the doctor is right, the church has "fasted and
prayed" against religious tolerance, against the use of Sunday as a
day of recreation,--the opening of galleries and libraries on that
day, the advancement of women, the emancipation of the negro, the
secularization of education, the revision of old creeds, and a
thousand other things. But their opposition has only damaged their own
cause. They did try to suppress the Pagan festival, which we call
Christmas, and the Puritans in this country, until recently, abstained
from all recognition of the day, and called it "Popery," and
"Paganism," but their efforts bore no fruit. Dr. Bartlett, if he will
read, will learn that for many years, in England and in this country,
the observance of Christmas was forbidden by law under severe
penalties. As to our being indebted for the cheer and merriment of the
December festival to the "Bethlehem babe," the doctor must inform
himself of those acts of Parliament which, under the Puritan regime,
compelled people to mourn on Christmas day and to abstain from
merrymaking. In Christian Connecticut, for a man to have a sprig of
holly in his house on Christmas day was a finable crime. In
Massachusetts, any Christian detected celebrating Christmas was fined
five shillings and costs. But, see, having failed to suppress these
good institutions, they now turn about and claim that they have always
believed in them, and that, in fact, we would not now be enjoying any
one of these benefits but for the Christian Church.

In conclusion, we have one other word to say to the three clerical
teachers from whose writings we have quoted. Against them we are
constrained to bring the charge of looseness in thought. They seem to
have little conscience for evidence. Mr. Jones says, for instance:

"In short, I am compelled to think that this Light of Souls, this
saving and redeeming spirit, was the loved and loving child of Joseph,
the carpenter, and the loyal wife Mary. I believe this,
notwithstanding the stories of immaculate conceptions, star-guided
magi, choiring angels and adoring shepards that gathered around the
birth-night."

Which is another way of saying that he is "compelled to believe"
against the evidence, merely because it is his pleasure or interest to
do so. This is not very edifying, to be sure. Mr. Jones takes all his
information about Joseph and Mary and Jesus from the gospels, and yet
the gospels clearly contradict his conclusions. Mary, the mother of
Jesus, gives her word of honor that Joseph was not the father of her
child, and Joseph himself testifies that he is not Jesus' father, but
Mr. Jones pays no attention to their testimony; he wishes Joseph to be
the father of Jesus, and that ought to be sufficient evidence, he
thinks. We quote from the gospel:

"Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary
had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found
with child of the Holy Ghost. And Joseph, her husband, being a
righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, was
minded to put her away privily. But when he thought on these things,
behold, an angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying,
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife;
for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost."

Now, if Joseph admits he was not Jesus' father, and Mary corroborates
his testimony (See Luke, 1st chapter), Jesus was, if he ever lived,
and the records which give Mr. Jones his ideal Jesus are reliable, the
son of a man who has succeeded in concealing his identity, unless, of
course, we believe in the virgin birth. If the real father of Jesus
had come forth and owned his son, and Mary had acknowledged that he
was the father of her child, what would have become of Christianity?
We hope these clergymen who have dwelt, as Emerson says, "with noxious
exaggeration about the person of Jesus," will reflect upon this, and
while doing so, will they not also remember this other saying of the
Concord philosopher: "The vice of our theology is seen in the
claim...that Jesus was something different from a man."

We take our leave of the three clergymen, assuring them that in what
we have said we have not been actuated, in the least, by any personal
motive whatever, and that we have only done to them what we would have
them do to us.

[Illustration: Head of a God with Horns. Museum of St. Germain.]




A LIBERAL JEW ON JESUS

FELIX ADLER, PRAISES JESUS



That it is very easy for scholars to follow the people instead of
leading them, and to side with the view that commands the majority,
receives fresh confirmation from the recent utterances of the founder
of the Ethical Culture Society in New York. Professor Adler, the son
of a rabbi, and at one time a freethinker, has slowly drifted into
orthodox waters, after having tried for a period of years the open
seas, and has become a more enthusiastic champion of the god of the
Christians than many a Christian scholar whom we could name. The
pendulum in the Adler case has swung clear to the opposite side. We do
not find fault with a man because he changes his views, we only ask
for reasons for the change. It will be seen by the following extracts
from Adler's printed lectures that he has made absolutely no critical
study of the sources of the Jesus story, but has merely, and hurriedly
at that, accepted the conventional estimate of Jesus and enlarged upon
it. Jesus is entitled to all the praise which is due him, but it must
first be shown that in praising him we are not sacrificing the truth.
Praising any man at such a cost is merely flattering the masses and
bowing to the fashion of the day.

Let us hear what Professor Adler has to say about Jesus. He writes:

It has been said that if Christ came to New York or Chicago, they
would stone him in the very churches. It is not so! If Christ came to
New York or Chicago, the publicans and sinners would sit at his feet!
For they would know that he cared for them better than they in their
darkness knew how to care for themselves, and they would love him as
they loved him in the days of yore.

This would sound pious in the mouth of a Moody or a Torrey, but, we
confess, it sounds like affectation in the mouth of the free thinking
son of a rabbi. That Prof. Adler enters here into a field for which
his early Jewish training has not fitted him, is apparent from the
hasty way in which he has put his sentences together. "It has been
said," he writes, "that if Christ came to New York or Chicago, they
would stone him in the very churches. It is not so." Why is it not so?
And he answers: "If Christ came to New York or Chicago, the publicans
and sinners would sit at his feet." But what has the reception which
publicans and sinners might give Jesus to do with how _the churches_
would receive him? He proves that Jesus would not be stoned in the
churches of New York and Chicago by saying that the "publicans and
sinners would sit at his feet." Does he mean that "New York and
Chicago churches" and "publicans and sinners" are the same thing?
"Publicans and sinners" might welcome him, and still the churches
might stone him, which in fact, according to Adler's own admission,
was the case in Jerusalem, where the synagogues conspired against
Jesus, while Mary Magdalene sat at his feet. Nor are his words about
"the publicans and sinners loving Jesus as they loved him in the
days of yore" edifying. Who does he mean by the "publicans and
sinners," and how many of them loved Jesus in the days of yore, and
why should this class of people have felt a special love for him?

On the question of the resurrection of Jesus, Prof. Adler says this:

"It is sometimes insinuated that the entire Christian doctrine depends
on the accounts contained in the New Testament, purporting that Jesus
actually rose on the third day and was seen by his followers; and that
if these reports are found to be contradictory, unsupported by
sufficient evidence, and in themselves incredible, then the bottom
falls out of the belief in immortality as represented by
Christianity."

It was the Apostle Paul himself who said that "if Jesus has not risen
from the dead, then is our faith in vain,--and we are, of all men,
most miserable." So, you see, friend Adler, it is not "sometimes
insinuated," as you say, but it is openly, and to our thinking,
logically asserted, that if Jesus did not rise from the dead, the
whole fabric of Christian eschatology falls to the ground. But we must
remember that Prof. Adler has not been brought up a Christian. He has
acquired his Christian predilections only recently, so to speak, hence
his unfamiliarity with its Scriptures. Continuing, the Professor says:

"But similar reports have arisen in the world time and again,
apparitions of the dead have been seen and have been taken for real;
and yet such stories, after being current for a time, invariably have
passed into oblivion. Why did this particular story persist, despite
the paucity and the insufficiency of the evidence? Why did it get
itself believed and take root?"

What shall we think of such reasoning from the platform of a
presumable rationalist movement? Does not the Professor know that the
story of the resurrection of Jesus is not original, but a repetition
of older stories of the kind? Had the world never heard of such after-
death apparitions before Jesus' day, it would never have invented the
story of his resurrection. And how does the Professor know that the
story of Jesus' resurrection is not going to meet the same fate which
has overtaken all other similar stories? Is it not already passing
into the shade of neglect? Are not the intelligent among the
Christians themselves beginning to explain the resurrection of Jesus
allegorically, denying altogether that he rose from the dead in a
literal sense? Moreover, the pre-Christian stories of similar
resurrections lived to an old age,--two or three thousand years--before
they died, and the story of Jesus' resurrection has yet to prove its
ability to live longer. All miraculous beliefs are disappearing, and
the story of the Christian resurrection will not be an exception. But
Prof. Adler's motive in believing that the story of the resurrection
of Jesus shall live, is to offer it as an argument for immortality,
and in so doing he strains the English language in lauding Jesus. He
says:

"In my opinion, people believed in the resurrection of Jesus because
of the precedent conviction in the minds of the disciples that such a
man as Jesus could not die, because of the conviction that a
personality of such superlative excellence, so radiant, so
incomparably lofty in mien and port and speech and intercourse with
others, could not pass away like a forgotten wind, that such a star
could not be quenched."

We regret to say that there are as many assumptions in the above
sentence as there are lines in it. Of course, if we are for
emotionalism and not for exact and accurate conclusions, Adler's
estimate of Jesus is as rhetorical as that of Jones or Boyle, but if
we have any love for historical truth, there is not even the shadow of
evidence, for instance, that the disciples could not believe "that
such a man as Jesus could die." On the contrary, the disciples left
him at the cross and fled, and believed him dead, until it was
reported to them that he had been seen alive, and even then "some
doubted," and one wished to feel the flesh with his fingers before he
would credit his eyes. Jesus had to eat and drink with them, he had to
"open their eyes," and perform various miracles before they would
believe that he was not dead. The text which says that the apostles
hesitated to believe in the resurrection because "as yet they knew not
the scripture, that he would rise from the dead," shows conclusively
how imaginary is the idea that there was a "precedent conviction" in
the minds of the disciples that such a man as Jesus could not die.
Apparently it was all a matter of prophecy, not of moral character at
all. Yet in the face of all the evidence to the contrary, Prof. Adler
tells his Carnegie Hall audience, who unfortunately are even less
informed in Christian doctrine than their leader, that "there was a
precedent conviction in the minds of the disciples that such a man as
Jesus could not die." And what gave the disciples this supposed
"precedent conviction?" "That a personality of such superlative
excellence, so radiant, so incomparably lofty in mien and port and
speech and intercourse with others, could not pass away like a
forgotten wind, that such a star could not be quenched." We are simply
astonished, and grieved as well, to see the use which so enlightened a
man as Prof. Adler makes of his gifts. Will this Jewish admirer of the
god of Christendom kindly tell us wherein Jesus was superlatively
excellent, or incomparably lofty in mien and port and speech and
intercourse with others? Was there a weakness found in men like
Buddha, Confucius, Socrates, etc., from which Jesus was free? That
Jesus created no such ideal impression upon his disciples, is shown by
the fact that they represented him as a sectarian and an egotist who
denounced all who had preceded him as unworthy of respect and to be
despised. And how could a man whose public life did not cover more
than two or three years of time, and who lived as a celibate and a
monk, returning every night to his cave in the Mount of Olives, taking
no active part in the business life--supporting no family or parents,
assuming no civil or social duties--how can such a man, we ask, be
held up as a model for the men and women of today? Jesus, according to
his biographers, believed he could raise the dead, and announced
himself the equal of God. "I and my father are one," he is reported to
have said; and one of his apostles writes: "He (Jesus) thought it no
robbery to be equal to God." Either this report is true, or it is not.
If it is, what shall we think of a man who thought he was a god and
could raise the dead? If the report is not true, what reliance can we
place in his biographers when the things which they affirm with the
greatest confidence are to be rejected?

Yet Prof. Adler, swept off his feet by the popular and conventional
enthusiasm about Jesus, describes him as "a personality of such
superlative excellence, so radiant, so incomparably lofty in mien and
port and speech and intercourse with others," that his followers could
