perfected in the heavens.

Only remember the condition, 'By Me if any man enter in.' That is not
a thing to be done once for all, but needs perpetual repetition. When
we clasp anything in our hands, however tight the initial grasp,
unless there is a continual effort of renewed tightening, the muscles
become lax, and we have to renew the tension, if we are to keep the
grasp. So in our Christian life it is only the continual repetition of
the act which our Lord here calls 'entering in by Him' that will bring
to us this continual exemption from, and immunity in, the dangers that
beset us.

Keep Christ between you and the storm. Keep on the lee side of the
Rock of Ages. Keep behind the breakwater, for there is a wild sea
running outside; and your little boat, undecked and with a feeble hand
at the helm, will soon be swamped. Keep within the fold, for wolves
and lions lie in every bush. Or, in plain English, live moment by
moment in the realising of Christ's presence, power, and grace. So,
and only so, shall you be safe.

II. Now, secondly, note, in Jesus Christ any man may find a field for
the unrestricted exercise of his activity.

That metaphor of 'going in and out' is partly explained to us by the
image of the flock, which passes into the fold for peaceful repose,
and out again, without danger, for exercise and food; and is partly
explained by the frequent use, in the Old Testament and in common
conversation, of the expression 'going out and in' as the designation
of the two-sided activity of human life. The one side is the
contemplative life of interior union with God by faith and love; the
other, the active life of practical obedience in the field of work
which God provides for us. These two are both capable of being raised
to their highest power, and of being discharged with the most
unrestricted and joyous activity, on condition of our keeping close to
Christ, and living by the faith of Him.

Note, then, 'He shall go in.' That comes first, though it interferes
with the propriety of the metaphor, since the previous words already
contemplate an initial 'entering in by Me, the Door.' That is to say,
that, given the union with Jesus Christ by faith, there must then, as
the basis of all activity, follow very frequent and deep inward acts
of contemplation, of faith, and aspiration, and desire. You must go
into the depths of God through Christ. You must go into the depths of
your own souls through Him. You must become accustomed to withdraw
yourselves from spreading yourselves out over the distractions of any
external activity, howsoever imperative, charitable, or necessary, and
live alone with Jesus, 'in the secret place of the Most High.' It is
through Him that we have access to the mysteries and innermost shrine
of the Temple. It is through Him that we draw near to the depths of
Deity. It is through Him that we learn the length and breadth and
height and depth of the largest and loftiest and noblest truths that
concern the spirit. It is through Him that we become familiar with the
inmost secrets of our own selves. And only they who habitually live
this hidden and sunken life of solitary and secret communion will ever
do much in the field of outward work. Christians of this generation
are far too much accustomed to live only in the front rooms of the
house, that look out upon the street; and they know very little--far
too little for their soul's health, and far too little for the
freshness of their work and its prosperity--of that inward life of
silent contemplation and expectant adoration, by which all strength is
fed. Do not keep all your goods in the shop windows, and have nothing
on your shelves but dummies, as is the case with far too many of us
to-day. Remember that the Lord said first, 'He shall go in,' and
unless you do you will not be 'saved.'

But then, further, if there have been, and continue to be, this
unrestricted exercise through Christ of that sweet and silent life of
solitary communion with Him, then there will follow upon that an
enlargement of opportunity, and power for outward service such as
nothing but emancipation by faith in Him can ever bring. Howsoever, by
external circumstances, you and I may be hampered and hindered,
however often we may feel that if something outside of us were
different, the development of our active powers would be far more
satisfactory, and we could do a great deal more in Christ's cause, the
true hindrance lies never without, but within; and it is only to be
overcome by that plunging into the depths of fellowship with Him. And
then, if we carry with us into the field of work, whether it be the
commonplace, dusty, tedious, and often repulsive duties of our
monotonous business; or whether it be the field of more distinctly
unselfish and Christian service--if we carry with us into all places
where we go to labour, the sweet thought of His presence, of His
example, of His love, and of the smile that may come on His face as
the reward of faithful service, then we shall find that external
labour, drawing its pattern, its motive, its law, and the power for
its discharge, from communion with Him, is no more task-work nor
slavery; and even 'the rough places will be made smooth, and the
crooked things will be made straight,' and distasteful work will be
made at least tolerable, and hard burdens will be lightened, and the
things that are 'seen and temporal' will shimmer into transparency,
through which will shine out the things that are 'unseen and eternal.'

Some of us are constitutionally made to prefer the one of these forms
of Christian activity; some of us to prefer the other. The tendencies
of this generation are far too much to the latter, to the exclusion of
the former. It is hard to reconcile the conflicting claims, and I know
of no better way to hit the just medium than by trying to keep
ourselves always in touch with Jesus Christ, and then outward labour
of any sort, whether for the bread that perishes or for His kingdom
and righteousness, will never become so absorbing but that in it we
may have our hearts in heaven, and the silent hour of communion with
Him will never be so prolonged as to neglect outward duties. There was
a demoniac boy in the plain, and therefore it was impossible to build
tabernacles on the Mount of Transfiguration. But the disciples that
had not climbed the Mount were all impotent to cast out the demoniac
boy. We, if we keep near to Jesus Christ, will find that through Him
we can 'go in and out,' and in both be pursuing the one uniform
purpose of serving and pleasing Him. So shall be fulfilled in our
cases the Psalmist's prayer, that 'I may dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of ray life, to behold His beauty, and to inquire in
His Temple.'

III. Lastly, in Jesus Christ any man may receive sustenance. 'They
shall find pasture.'

The imagery of the sheep and the fold is still, of course, present to
the Master's mind, and shapes the form in which this great promise is
set forth.

I need only remind you, in illustration of it, of two facts, one, that
in Jesus Christ Himself all the true needs of humanity are met and
satisfied. He is 'the Bread of God that came down from heaven to give
life to the world.' Do I want an outward object for my intellect? I
have it in Him. Does my heart feel with its tendrils, which have no
eyes at the ends of them, after something round which it may twine,
and not fear that the prop shall ever rot or be cut down or pulled up?
Jesus Christ is the home of love in which the dove may fold its wings
and be at rest. Do I want (and I do if I am not a fool) an absolute
and authoritative command to be laid upon my will; some one 'whose
looks enjoin, whose lightest words are spells'? I find absolute
authority, with no taint of tyranny, and no degradation to the
subject, in that Infinite Will of His. Does my conscience need some
strong detergent to be laid upon it which shall take out the stains
that are most indurated, inveterate, and ingrained? I find it only in
the 'blood that cleanseth from all sin.' Do my aspirations and desires
seek for some solid and substantial and unquestionable and
imperishable good to which, reaching out, they may be sure that they
are not anchoring on cloudland? Christ is our hope. For all this
complicated and craving commonwealth that I carry within my soul,
there is but one satisfaction, even Jesus Christ Himself. Nothing else
nourishes the whole man at once, but in Him are all the constituents
that the human system requires for its nutriment and its growth in
every part. So in and through Christ we find 'pasture.'

But beyond that, if we are knit to Him by simple and continual faith,
love, and obedience, then what is else barrenness becomes full of
nourishment, and the unsatisfying gifts of the world become rich and
precious. They are nought when they are put first, they are much when
they are put second.

I remember when I was in Australia seeing some wretched cattle trying
to find grass on a yellow pasture where there was nothing but here and
there a brown stalk that crumbled to dust in their mouths as they
tried to eat it. That is the world without Jesus Christ. And I saw the
same pasture six weeks after, when the rains had come, and the grass
was high, rich, juicy, satisfying. That is what the world may be to
you, if you will put it second, and seek first that your souls shall
be fed on Jesus Christ. Then, and only then, will what is else water
be turned by His touch and blessing into wine that shall fill the
great jars to the brim, and be pronounced by skilled palates to be the
good wine. 'I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high
mountains of Israel shall their fold be. There shall they lie in a
good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of
Israel.'




THE GOOD SHEPHERD

'I am the Good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. 15.
As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My
life for the sheep.'--JOHN x. 14,15.

'I am the Good Shepherd.' Perhaps even Christ never spoke more
fruitful words than these. Just think how many solitary, wearied
hearts they have cheered, and what a wealth of encouragement and
comfort there has been in them for all generations. The little child
as it lays itself down to sleep, cries--

  'Jesus, tender Shepherd, hear me,
  Bless Thy little lamb to-night,'

and the old man lays himself down to die murmuring to himself, 'Though
I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil,
for Thou art with me.' 'I am the Good Shepherd.' No preaching can do
anything but weaken and dilute the force of such words, and yet,
though in all their sweet, homely simplicity they appeal to every
heart, there are great depths in them that are worth pondering, and
profound thoughts that need some elucidation.

There are three points to be noticed--First, the general force of the
metaphor, and then the two specific applications of it which our Lord
Himself makes.

I. First of all, then, let me say a few words as to the general
application of the metaphor. The usual notion of these words confines
itself to the natural meaning, and runs out into very true, but
perhaps a little sentimental, considerations, laying hold of what is
so plain on the very surface that I need not spend any time in
speaking about it. Christ's pattern is my law; Christ's providence is
my guidance and defence--which in the present case means Christ's
companionship--is my safety, my sustenance--which in the present case
means that Christ Himself is the bread of my soul. The Good Shepherd
exercises care, which absolves the sheep from care, and in the present
case means that my only duty is meek following and quiet trust. 'I am
the Good Shepherd'--here is guidance, guardianship, companionship,
sustenance--all responsibility laid upon His broad shoulders, and all
tenderness in His deep heart, and so for us simple obedience and quiet
trust.

Another way by which we get the whole significance of this symbol is
by noticing how the idea is strengthened by the word that accompanies
it. Christ does not say 'I am a Shepherd,' but He says, 'I am _the
good_ Shepherd.' At first sight that word 'good' is interpreted, as I
have said, in a kind of sentimental, poetic way, as expressing our
Lord's tenderness and love and care; but I do not think that is the
full meaning here. You find up and down this Gospel of St. John
phrases such as, 'I am the true bread,' 'I am the true vine,' and the
meaning of the word that is here translated 'good' is very nearly
parallel with that idea. The true bread, the true vine, the true
Shepherd--which comes to this, to use modern phraseology, that Jesus
Christ, in His relation to you and me, fulfils all that in figure and
shadow is represented to the meditative eye by that lower relationship
between the material shepherd and his sheep. That is the picture, this
the reality. There is another point to be made clear, and that is,
that whilst the word 'good' is perhaps a fair enough representation of
that which is employed by our Lord, there is a special force and
significance attached to the original, which is lost in our Bible. I
do not know that it could have been preserved; but still it is
necessary to state it. The expression here is the one that is
generally rendered 'fair,' or 'lovely,' or 'beautiful,' and it belongs
to the genius of that wonderful tongue in which the New Testament is
written that it has a name for moral purity, considered as being
lovely, the highest goodness, and the serenest beauty, which was what
the old Greeks taught, howsoever little they may have practised it in
their lives. And so here the thought is that _the_ Shepherd stands
before us, the realisation of all which that name means, set forth in
such a fashion as to be infinitely lovely and perfectly fair, and to
draw the admiration of any man who can appreciate that which is
beautiful, and can admire that which is of good report.

There is another point still in reference to this first view of the
text. Our Lord not only declares that He is the reality of which the
earthly shepherd is the shadow, and that He as such is the flawless,
perfect One, but that He alone is the reality. 'I am the Good
Shepherd; in Me and in Me alone is that which men need.' And that
leads me to another point which must just be mentioned, that we shall
not reach the full meaning of these great words without taking into
account the history of the metaphor in the Old Testament. Christ gives
a second edition of the figure, and we are to remember all that went
before. 'The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want'; 'Thou leddest Thy
people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.' These are but
specimens of a continuous series of utterances in the old Revelation
in which Jehovah Himself is the Shepherd of mankind; and there is also
another class of passages of which I will quote one or two. 'He shall
feed His flock like a shepherd, and carry them in His arms.' 'Awake, O
sword, against the Man who is my fellow; smite the Shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered.' There were, we should remember, two streams
of representation, according to the one of which God Himself was the
Shepherd of Israel, and according to the other of which the Messiah
was the Shepherd; and here, as I believe, Jesus lays His hand on both
the one and the other, and says: 'They are Mine, and they testify of
Me.' So sweet, so gracious are the words, that we lose the sense of
the grandeur of them, and need to think before we are able to
understand how great and immense the claim that is made here upon our
faith, and that this Man stands before us and arrogates to Himself the
divine prerogative witnessed from of old by psalmist and prophet, and
says that for Him were meant the prophecies of ancient times that
spake of a human shepherd, and asserts that all the sustenance, care,
authority, command, which the emblem suggests meet in Him in perfect
measure.

II. Now let us turn to the two special points which our Lord
emphasises here, as being those in which His relation as the Good
Shepherd is most conspicuously given. The language of my text runs: 'I
am the Good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the
Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father.' Our Western ways fail
to bring out the full meaning of the emblem; but all Eastern
travellers tell us what a strange bond of sympathy and loving regard,
and docile recognition, springs up between the shepherd and his sheep
away there in the Eastern pastures and deserts; and how he knows every
one, though to a stranger's eye they are so like each other; and how
even the dumb instincts and the narrow intelligence of the silly sheep
recognise the shepherd, and will not be deceived by shepherd's
garments worn to deceive, and will not follow the voice of a stranger.

But we must further note that Christ lays hold of the dumb instincts
of the animal, as illustrating, at the one end of the scale, the
relation between Him and His followers, and lays hold of the communion
between the Father and the Son at the other end of the scale, as
illustrating the same thing. 'I know My sheep.' That is a knowledge
like the knowledge of the shepherd, a bond of close intimacy. But He
does not know them by reason of looking at them and thinking about
them. It is something far more blessed than that. He knows me because
He loves me; He knows me because He has sympathy with me, and I know
Him, if I know Him at all, by my love, and I know Him by my sympathy,
and I know Him by my communion. A loveless heart does not know the
Shepherd, and unless the Shepherd's heart was all love He would not
know His sheep. The Shepherd's love is an individualised love. He
knows His flock as a flock because He knows the units of it, and we
can rest ourselves upon the personal knowledge, which is personal love
and sympathy, of Jesus Christ. 'And My sheep know Me'--not by force of
intellect, not by understanding certain truths, all-important as that
may be, but by having our hearts harmonised in Him, and our spirits
put into sympathy and communion with Him. 'They know Me,' and rest
comes with the knowledge; 'they know Me,' and in that knowing is the
best answer to all doubt and fear. They are exposed to danger, but in
the fold they can go quietly to rest, for they know that He is at the
door watching through all dangers.

III. Turn for a moment to the last point, 'I lay down My life for the
sheep.' I have said that our Western ways fail to bring out fully the
element of the metaphor which refers to the kind of sympathy between
the shepherd and the sheep; and our Western life also fails to bring
out this other element also. Shepherds in England never have need to
lay down their life for the sheep. Shepherds in Palestine often did,
and sometimes do. You remember David with the lion and the bear, which
is but an illustration of the reality which underlies this metaphor.
So, then, in some profound way, the shepherd's death is the sheep's
safety. First of all, look at that most unmistakable, emphatic--I was
going to say vehement, at any rate, intense--expression of the
absolute voluntariness of Christ's death, 'I lay down My life,' as a
man might strip off a vesture. And this application of the metaphor is
made all the stronger by the words which follow: 'Therefore doth My
Father love Me, because I lay down My life that I might take it again.
No man taketh it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again.' We read, 'Smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered,' but here, somehow or
other, the smiting of the Shepherd is not the scattering but the
gathering of the flock. Here, somehow or other, the dead Shepherd has
power to guard, to guide, to defend them. Here, somehow or other, the
death of the Shepherd is the security of the sheep; and I say to you,
the flock, that for every soul the entrance into the flock of God is
through the door of the dying Christ, who laid down His life for the
sheep, and makes them His sheep who trust in Him.




'OTHER SHEEP'

[Footnote: Preached before the Baptist Missionary Society.]

'Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear My voice; and they shall become one flock
and one Shepherd.'--JOHN x. 16 (R.V.).

There were many strange and bitter lessons in this discourse for the
false shepherds, the Pharisees, to whom it was first spoken. But there
was not one which would jar more upon their minds, and as they
fancied, on their sacredest convictions, than this, that God's flock
was wider than God's fold. Our Lord distinctly recognises Judaism with
its middle wall of partition as a divine institution, and then as
distinctly carries His gaze beyond it. To His hearers 'this fold,'
their own national polity, held all the flock. Without were dogs, a
doleful land, where 'the wild beasts of the desert met with the wild
beasts of the islands.' And now this new Teacher, not content with
declaring them hirelings, and Himself the only true Shepherd of
Israel, breaks down the hedges and speaks of Himself as the Shepherd
of men. No wonder that they said, 'He hath a devil and is mad.'

During His earthly life our Lord, as we know, confined His own
personal ministry for the most part to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Not exclusively so, for He made at least one journey into the
coasts of Tyre and Sidon, teaching and healing; a Syro-Phcenician
woman held His feet, and received her request; and one of His
miracles, of feeding the multitude, was wrought for hungry Gentiles.
But while His work was in Israel, it was for mankind; and while 'this
fold,' generally speaking, circumscribed His toils, it did not confine
His love nor His thoughts. More than once world-wide declarations and
promises broke from His lips, even before the final universal
commission, 'Preach the Gospel to every creature.' 'I, if I be lifted
up, will draw all men unto Me.' 'I am the Light of the world.' These
and other similar sayings give us His lofty consciousness that He has
received 'the heathen for His inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for His possession.' Parallel with them in substance are the
words before us, which, for our present purpose, we may regard as
containing lessons from our Lord Himself of how He looked and would
have us look on the heathen world, on His work and ours, and on the
certain issues of both.

I. We have here Christ teaching us how to think of the heathen world.

Observe that His words are not a declaration that all mankind are His
sheep. The previous verses have distinctly defined a class of men as
possessing the name, and the succeeding ones reiterate the definition,
and with equal distinctness exclude another class. 'Ye believe not,
because ye are not My sheep as I said unto you.' His sheep are they
who know Him and are known of Him. Between Him and them there is a
communion of love, a union of life, and a consequent reciprocal
knowledge, which transcends the closest intimacies of earthly life,
and finds its only analogue in that deep and mysterious oneness which
subsists between the Father, who alone knoweth the Son, and the only
begotten Son, who being ever in the bosom of the Father, alone knoweth
Him and revealeth Him to us. 'I know My sheep and am known of Mine; as
the Father knoweth Me and I know the Father. They hear My voice and
follow Me, and I give unto them eternal life.' Such are the
characteristics of that relation between Christ and men by which they
become His sheep. It is such souls as these whom our Lord beholds in
the wasteful wilderness. He is speaking not of a relation which all
men bear to Him by virtue of their creation, but of one which _they_
bear to Him who believe in His name.

Now this interpretation of the words does by no means contradict, but
rather presupposes and rests upon the truth that all mankind come
within the love of the divine heart, that He died for all, that all
may be the subjects of His mediatorial kingdom, recipients of the
offered mercy of God in Christ, and committed to the stewardship of
the missionary Church. Resting upon these truths, the words of our
text advance a step further and contemplate those who 'shall hereafter
believe on Me.' Whether they be few or many is not the matter in hand.
Whether at any future time they shall include all the dwellers upon
earth is not the matter in hand. That every soul of man is included in
the adaptation and intention and offer of the Gospel is not the matter
in hand. But this is the matter in hand, that Jesus Christ in that
moment of lofty elevation when He looked onwards to giving His life
for the sheep, looked outwards also, far afield, and saw in every
nation and people souls that He knew were His, and would one day know
Him, and be led by Him 'in green pastures and beside still waters.'

But where or what were they when He spoke? He does not mean that
already they had heard His voice and were following His steps, and
knew His love, and had received eternal life at His hand. This He
cannot mean, for the plain reason that He goes on to speak of His
'bringing' them and of their 'hearing,' a work yet to be done. It can
only be, then, that He speaks of them thus in the fullness of that
divine knowledge which 'calls things that are not as though they
were.' It is then a prophetic word which He speaks here.

We have only to think of the condition of the civilised heathendom of
Christ's own day in order to feel the force of our text in its primary
application. While the work of salvation was being prepared for the
world in the life and death of our Lord, the world was being prepared
for the tidings of salvation. Everywhere men were losing their faith
in their idols, and longing for some deliverer. Some had become weary
of the hollowness of philosophical speculation, and, like Pilate, were
asking 'What is truth?' whilst, unlike Him, they waited for an answer,
and will believe it when it comes from the lips of the Incarnate
wisdom. Such were the Magi who were led by their starry science to His
cradle, and went back to the depths of the Eastern lands with a better
light than had guided them thither. Such were not a few of the early
Christian converts, who had long been seeking hopelessly for goodly
pearls, and had so been learning to know the worth of the One when it
was offered to them. There were men who had been long sickening with
despair amidst the rottenness of decaying mythologies and corrupting
morals, and longing for some breath from heaven to blow health to
themselves and to the world, and had so been learning to welcome 'the
rushing mighty wind' when it came in power. There were simple souls,
without as well as within the chosen people, waiting for the
Consolation, though they knew not whence it was to come. There were
many who had already learned to believe that 'salvation is of the
Jews,' though they had still to learn that salvation is in Jesus. Such
were that Aethiopian statesman who was poring over Isaiah when Philip
joined him, the Roman centurion at Caesarea whose prayers and alms
came up with acceptance before God, these Greeks of the West who came
to His cross as the Eastern sages to His cradle, and were in Christ's
eyes the advance guard and first scattered harbingers of the flocks
who should come flying for refuge to Him lifted on the Cross, 'like
doves to their windows.' The whole world showed that the fullness of
time had come; and the history of the early years of the Church
reveals in how many souls the process of preparation had been silently
going on. It was like the flush of early spring, when all the buds
that had been maturing and swelling in the cold, burst, and the tender
flowers that had been reaching upwards to the surface in all the hard
winter laugh out in beauty, and a green veil covers all the hedges at
the first flash of the April sun.

Not only these were in our Lord's thoughts when He saw His sheep in
heathen lands. There were many who had no such previous preparation,
but were plunged in all the darkness, nor knew that it was dark. Not
only those wearied of idolatry, and dissatisfied with creeds outworn,
but the barbarous people of Illyricum, the profligates of Corinth,
hard rude men like the jailer at Philippi, and many more were before
His penetrating eye. He who sees beneath the surface, and beyond the
present, beholds His sheep where men can only see wolves. He sees an
Apostle in the blaspheming Saul, a teacher for all generations in the
African Augustine while yet a sensualist and a Manichee, a reformer in
the eager monk Luther, a poet-evangelist in the tinker Bunyan. He sees
the future saint in the present sinner, the angel's wings budding on
many a shoulder where the world's burdens lie heavy, and the new name
written on many a forehead that as yet bears but the mark of the
beast, and the number of His name.

And the sheep whom He sees while He speaks are not only the men of
that generation. These mighty words are world-wide and world-lasting.
The whole of the ages are in His mind. All nations are gathered before
His prophetic vision, even as they shall one day be gathered before
His judgment throne, and in all the countless mass His hand touches
and His love clasps those who to the very end of time shall come to
His call with loving faith, shall follow His steps with glad
obedience.

Thus does Christ look out upon the world that lay beyond the fold. I
cannot stay to do more than refer in passing to the spirit which the
words of our text breathe. There is the lofty consciousness that He is
the Leader and Guide, the Friend and Helper of all, that He stands
solitary in His power to bless. There is the full confidence that the
earth is His to its uttermost border. There is the clear vision of the
sorrowful condition of these heathen people, without a shepherd and
without a fold, wandering on every high mountain and dying in every
thirsty land where there is no water. There are the tenderest pity and
yearning love for them in their extremity. There is the clear
assurance that they will come and be blessed in Him. I pass by all the
other thoughts, which naturally found themselves on these words, in
order to urge the one which is most appropriate to our present
engagement. Let us, dear brethren, take Christ as our pattern in our
contemplations of the heathen world.

He has set us the example of an outgoing look directed far beyond the
limits of the existing churches, far beyond the point of present
achievement. We are but too apt to circumscribe our operative thoughts
and our warm sympathies within the circle of our sight, or of our own
personal associations. Our selfishness and our indolence affect the
objects of our contemplations quite as much as they do the character
of our work. They vitiate both, by making ourselves the great object
of both, and by weakening the force of both in a ratio that increases
rapidly with the increasing distance from that favourite centre. It is
but a subtle form of the same disease which keeps our thoughts penned
within the bounds of any fold, or limited by the progress already
achieved. For us the whole world is the possession of our Lord, who
has died to redeem us. By us the whole ought to be contemplated with
that same spirit of prophetic confidence which filled Him when He
said, 'Other sheep I have which are not of this fold.' To press
onwards, 'forgetting the things that are behind, and reaching forth to
those which are before,' is the only fitting attitude for Christian
men, either in regard to the gradual purifying of their own
characters, or in regard to the gradual winning of the world for
Christ. We ought to make all past successes stepping-stones to nobler
things. The true use of the present is to reach up from it to a
loftier future. The distance beckons; well for us if it do not beckon
us in vain. We have yet to learn the first lesson of our Master's
spirit, as expressed in these words, if we have not become familiar
with the pitying contemplation of the wastes beyond the fold, nor
fixed deep in our minds the faith that the amplitude of its walls will
have to be widened with growing years till it fills the world. The cry
echoes to us from of old, 'Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes, for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left.'
We take the first step to respond to the summons when we make the
'regions beyond' one of the standing subjects of our devout thoughts,
and take heed of supposing that the Church as we know it, has the same
measurement which the man with the golden rod has measured for the
eternal courts of Jerusalem, that shall be the joy of the whole earth.
The very genius of the Gospel is aspiring. It is content with nothing
short of universality for the sweep, and eternity for the duration,
and absolute completeness for the measure, of its bestowments on man.
We should be like men on a voyage of discovery, whose task is felt to
be incomplete until headland after headland that fades in the dim
distance has been rounded and surveyed, and the flag of our country
planted upon it. After each has been passed another arises from the
water, onwards we must go. There is no pause for our thoughts, none
for our sympathy, none for our work, till our keels have visited, and
the 'shout of a King' has been heard on every shore that fills 'the
breadth of Thy land, O Emmanuel!' The limits of the visible community
of Christ's Church to-day are far within the borders to which it must
one day stretch. It is for us, taught by His words, to understand that
we are yet as it were but encamped by Jericho, and at the beginning of
the campaign. Ai and Bethhoron, and many a fight more are before us
yet. The camp of the invaders, when they lay around the city of
palm-trees, with the mountains in front and the Jordan behind, was not
more unlike the settled order of the nation when it filled the land,
than the ranks of Christ's army to-day are to the mighty multitudes
that shall one day name His name, and follow His banner. Let us live
in the future, and lay strongly hold on the distant; for both are our
Lord's, and by so doing we shall the better do our Master's work in
the present, and at hand.

He has set us the example of a _penetrating_ gaze into heathenism,
which reveals beneath its monotonous miseries, the souls that are His.
We ought to look on every field of Christian effort with the assurance
that in it there are some who will hear His voice. As it was when He
came, so it is ever and everywhere. The world is being prepared for
the Gospel. In some broad regions, faith in idolatry is dying out, and
the moral condition of the people is undergoing a slow elevation.
Individuals are being weaned from their gods, they know not how, and
they will not know why till they hear of Christ. He sees in every land
where the Gospel is being taken 'a people prepared for the Lord.' He
sees the gold gleaming in the crevices of the caves, the gems, rough
and unpolished, lying in the matrix. He looks not merely on the great
mass of idolaters, but He sees the single souls who shall hear. It is
for us to look on the same mass with confidence caught from His.
Neither apathetic indifference nor faint-hearted doubt should be
permitted to weaken our hands. The prospect may seem very dark, the
power of the enemy very great, our resources very inadequate; but let
us look with Christ's eye, we shall know that everywhere we may hope
to find a response to our message. Who they may be, we know not. How
many they may be, we know not. How they may be guided by Him, they
know not. But He knows all. We may know that they are there. And as we
cannot tell who they are but only that they are, we are bound to
cherish hopes for all--the most degraded and outcast of our race. We
have no right to give up any field or any man as hopeless. Christ's
sheep will be found coming out of the midst of wolves and goats.
Darkness may cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; but if we
look upon it as Christ did, and as He would have us to look, we shall
see lights flickering here and there in the obscurity, which shall
burst out into a blaze. The prophetic eye, the boundlessly hopeful
heart, the strong confidence that in every land where He is preached
there will be those who shall hear--these are what He gives us when He
says, 'Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold.'

There is one other thought connected with these words which may be
briefly referred to. It is that even now, in all lands where the
Gospel has been preached, there are those whom Christ has received,
although they have no connection with His visible Church.

There are many goats within the fold. There are many sheep without it.
Even in lands where the Gospel has long been preached, we do not
venture to identify profession by Church fellowship with living union
with Christ. Much more is this true of our missionary efforts, and the
apparent converts whom they make. The results that appear are no
measure of the results that have actually been accomplished. We often
hear of men who had caught up some stray word in a Bengali
market-place, or received a tract by the roadside from some passing
missionary, and who, having carried away the seed in their hearts, had
long been living as Christians remote from all churches and unknown by
any. We can easily conceive that timidity in some cases, and distance
in others, swell the ranks of these secret disciples. Though they
follow not the footsteps of the flock, the Shepherd will lead them in
their solitude. There will be many more names in the Lamb's book of
life, depend upon it, than ever are written on the roll-calls of our
churches, or in missionary statistics. The shooting-stars that yearly
fill our sky are visible to us for a moment, when their orbit passes
into the lighted heavens, and then they disappear in the shadow of the
earth. But astronomers tell us that they are always there though to us
they seem to blaze but for a moment. We cannot see them, but they move
on their darkling path and have a sun round which they circle. So be
sure that in many heathen lands there are believing souls, seen by us
but for an instant and then lost, who yet fill their unseen place, and
move obedient round the Sun of Righteousness. Their names on earth are
dark, but when the manifestation of the sons of God shall come, they
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for
ever and ever. Our work has results beyond our knowledge now. When the
Church, the Lamb's wife, shall lift up her eyes at the end of the
days, prophecy tells us that she shall wonder to see her thronging
children, whom she had never known till then, and will say, 'Who hath
begotten me these? Behold I was left alone. These, where had they
been?' These were God's hidden ones, nourished and brought up beyond
the pale of the outward Church, but brought at last to share her
triumph, and to abide at her side. 'Other sheep I have, which are not
of this fold.'

What confidence then, what tender pity, what hope should fill our
minds when we look on the heathen world! We must never be contented
with present achievements. We are committed to a task which cannot end
till all the world hears the joyful sound and is blessed by walking in
the light of His countenance. When the great Roman Catholic
missionary, the Apostle of the East, was lying on his dying bed among
the barbarous people whom he loved, his passing spirit was busy about
his work, and, even in the article of death, while the glazing eye saw
no more clearly and the ashen lips had begun to stiffen into eternal
silence, visions of further conquests flashed before him, and his last
word was 'Amplius'--_Onward_! It ought to be the motto of the
missionary work of us, who boast a purer faith, to carry to the
heathen and to fire our own souls. If ever we are tempted to repose,
to despondency, to rest and be thankful when we number up our work and
our converts, let us listen to His voice as it speaks in that supreme
hour when He beheld the vision of the Cross, and beyond it that of a
gathered world: 'Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold.'

We have here--

II. Christ teaching us how to think of His work and ours.

'Them also I must bring.' A necessity is laid upon Him, which springs
at once from that divine work which is the law of His life, and from
His own love and pity. The means for accomplishing this necessary work
are implied in the context, as in other parallel Scriptural sayings,
to be His propitiatory death. The instrumentality employed is not only
His own personal agency on earth, nor only His throned rule on the
right hand of God with power over the Spirit of holiness, but also the
work of His Church, and His work through them. Of that He is mainly
speaking when He says, 'Them also I must bring.' Here, then, are some
truths which ought to underlie and shape as well as animate our
efforts for heathenism.

And first, remember that the same sovereign necessity which was laid
on Him presses on us.

The 'Spirit of life' which was in Christ had its 'law,' which was the
will of God. That shaped all His being, and He set us the example of
perfectly clear recognition of, and perfect obedience to it, from the
first moment when He said, 'I must be about My Father's business,' to
the last, when He sighed forth, 'Father, into Thy hands I commit My
spirit.' Hence the frequent sayings setting forth His work as
determined by an imperative 'must,' which, whether it be alleged in
reference to some apparently small or to some manifestly great thing
in His life, is always equally imperative, and whether it seem to be
based on the need for the fulfilment of some prophetic word, or on the
proprieties and congruities of sonship, reposes at last on the will of
God. His final words on the Passover night, before he went out to
Gethsemane in the moonlight, contain the influence which moulded His
whole earthly life, 'As the Father gave Me commandment, even so I do.'

And this divine will constitutes for Him the deepest ground of the
necessity in the case before us. The eternal counsels of God had
willed that 'all the ends of the earth should see the salvation of the
Lord'; therefore, whatever the toils and the pains, the loss and the
death, He, whose meat and drink was to do the will of Him that sent
Him, must give Himself to the task, nor rest till, one by one, the
weary wanderers are brought back on His shoulders and folded in His
love.

In all which, let us remember, Jesus Christ is our pattern, not in His
work for the salvation of men, but in the spirit in which He did His
work. The solemn law of duty before which He bowed His head is a law
for us also. The authoritative imperative which He obeyed has power
over us. If we would have our lives holy and strong, wise and good, we
must have 'the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, making us
free from the law of sin and death,' for the obedience to the higher
law enfranchises from slavery to the lower, and all other authority
ceases over us when we are Christ's men. We are bound to service
directed to the same end as His--even the salvation of the world. The
same voice which says to Him, 'I will give Thee for a light to the
Gentiles,' says to us, 'Ye are My witnesses, and My servant whom I
have chosen.' The same Will which hath constituted Him the anointed
Prophet, says of us, 'Touch not Mine anointed and do My prophets no
harm.' We are redeemed that we may show forth God's praises. Not for
ourselves alone, nor for purposes terminating in our own personal
acceptance with God, or the perfecting of our own characters,
priceless as these are, but for ends which affect the world has God
had mercy on us. We are bought with a price that we may be the
servants of God. We have received that we may give forth,

  'God doth with us, as we with torches do,
  Not light them for themselves.'

'Arise, shine, for thy light is come.'

This missionary work of ours, then, is not one that can be taken up
and laid down at our own pleasure. It is no excrescence, or accidental
outgrowth of the Church's life. We are all too apt to think of it as
an extra, a kind of work of supererogation, which those may engage in
who have a liking that way, and which those who do not care about it
may leave alone, and no harm done. When shall we come to feel deeply,
constantly, practically, that it must be done, and that we are sinning
when we neglect it? Dear brethren, have we laid on our hearts and
consciences the solemn weight of that necessity which moulded His
life? Have we felt the awful power of God's plainly spoken will,
driving us to this task? Do we know anything of that spirit which
hears ever-pealing in our ears that awful commandment, 'Go, go to all
the world, preach, preach the Gospel to every creature?' God commands
us to take the trumpet, and if we would not soil our souls with gross
and palpable sin, we must set it to our lips and sound an alarm, that
by His grace shall wake the sleepers, and make the hoary walls of the
robber-city that has afflicted the earth for so many weary
millenniums, rock to their fall, that the redeemed of the Lord may
pass over and set the captives free.

If we felt this as we ought, surely our consecration would be more
complete, and our service more worthy. A clear conviction of God's
will pointing the path for us, is, in all things, a wondrous help to
vigorous action, to calmness of heart, and thus to success. In this
mighty work, it would brace us for larger efforts, and fit us for
larger results. It would simplify and deepen our motives, and thus
