pretending that their zeal for the Sabbath was the result of their
zeal for God, while it was only zeal for their Rabbinical niceties,
and had no religious element in it at all. They wished to make the
Sabbath law tight enough to restrain Jesus from miracles, while they
made it loose enough to allow them to look after their own
interests.

Men may be unconscious hypocrites, and these are the most hopeless.
We are all in danger of fancying that we are displaying our zeal for
the Lord, when we are only contending for our own additions to, or
interpretations of, His will. There is no religion necessarily
implied in enforcing forms of belief or conduct.

Our Lord's defence is, first of all, a conclusive _argumentum ad
hominem_, which shuts the mouths of the objectors; but it is much
more. The Talmud has minute rules for leading out animals on the
Sabbath: An ass may go out with his pack saddle if it was tied on
before the Sabbath, but not with a bell or a yoke; a camel may go
out with a halter, but not with a rag tied to his tail; a string of
camels may be led if the driver takes all the halters in his hand,
and does not twist them, but they must not be tied to one another--and
so on for pages. If, then, these sticklers for rigid observance of the
Sabbath admitted that a beast's thirst was reason enough for work to
relieve it, it did not lie in their mouths to find fault with the
relief of a far greater human need.

But the words hold a wider truth, applicable to our conduct. The
relief of human sorrow is always in season. It is a sacred duty
which hallows any hour. 'Is not this the fast [and the feast too]
that I have chosen ... to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke?' The spirit of the words is to put the exercise of
beneficence high above the formalities of worship.

Note, too, the implied assertion of the dignity of humanity, the
pitying tone of the 'lo, these eighteen years,' the sympathy of the
Lord with the poor woman, and the implication of the terrible
tragedy of Satan's bondage. If we have His Spirit in us, and look at
the solemn facts of life as He did, all these pathetic
considerations will be present to our minds as we behold the misery
of men, and, moved by the thoughts of their lofty place in God's
scheme of things, of their long and dreary bondage, of the evil
power that holds them fast, and of what they may become, even sons
and daughters of the Highest, we shall be fired with the same
longing to help which filled Christ's heart, and shall count that
hour consecrated, and not profaned, in which we are able to bring
liberty to the captives, and an upward gaze of hope to them that
have been bowed down.




THE STRAIT GATE


    'And He went through the cities and villages, teaching,
    and journeying toward Jerusalem. 23. Then said one unto
    Him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And He said
    unto them, 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate:
    for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and
    shall not he able. 25. When once the Master of the
    house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye
    begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
    saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and He shall answer
    and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are:
    26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk
    in Thy presence, and Thou hast taught in our streets.
    27. But He shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence
    ye are; depart from Me, all ye workers of iniquity.
    28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
    ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
    prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves
    thrust out. 29. And they shall come from the east, and
    from the west, and from the north, and from the south,
    and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. 30. And,
    behold, there are last which shall be first and there
    are first which shall be last.'--LUKE xiii. 22-30

'Are there few that be saved?' The questioner's temper and motives
may be inferred from the tone of Christ's answer, which turns
attention from a mere piece of speculative curiosity to the grave
personal aspect of the condition of 'salvation,' and the possibility
of missing it. Whether few or many went in, there would be many left
out, and among these some of the listeners. Jesus speaks to 'them,'
the multitude, not to the questioner. The men who approach solemn
subjects lightly, and use them as material for raising profitless
questions for the sake of getting religious teachers in a corner,
exist still, and are best answered after Christ's manner.

Of course, the speaker meant by being 'saved' participation in
Messiah's kingdom, regarded in the carnal Jewish fashion; and our
Lord's reply is primarily directed to setting forth the condition of
entrance into that kingdom, as the Jew expected it to be manifested
on earth. But behind that immediate reference lies a solemn
unveiling of the conditions of salvation in its deepest meaning, and
of the danger of exclusion from it.

I. We note, first, the all-important exhortation with which Christ
seeks to sober a frivolous curiosity. In its primary application, the
'strait gate' may be taken to be the lowliness of the Messiah, and the
consequent sharp contrast of His kingdom with Jewish high-flown and
fleshly hopes. The passage to the promised royalty was not through a
great portal worthy of a palace, but by a narrow, low-browed wicket,
through which it took a man trouble to squeeze. For us, the narrow
gate is the self-abandonment and self-accusation which are
indispensable for entrance into salvation.

'The door of faith' is a narrow one; for it lets no self-righteousness,
no worldly glories, no dignities, through. Like the Emperor at Canossa,
we are kept outside till we strip ourselves of crowns and royal robes,
and stand clothed only in the hair-shirt of penitence. Like Milton's
rebel angels entering their council chamber, we must make ourselves
small to get in. We must creep on our knees, so low is the vault; we
must leave everything outside, so narrow is it. We must go in one by
one, as in the turnstiles at a place of entertainment. The door opens
into a palace, but it is too strait for any one who trusts to himself.

There must be effort in order to enter by it. For everything in our
old self-confident, self-centred nature is up in arms against the
conditions of entrance. We are not saved by effort, but we shall not
believe without effort. The main struggle of our whole lives should
be to cultivate self-humbling trust in Jesus Christ, and to 'fight
the good fight of faith.'

II. We note the reason for the exhortation. It is briefly given in
verse 24 (last clause), and both parts of the reason there are
expanded in the following verses. Effort is needed for entrance,
because many are shut out. The questioner would be no better for
knowing whether few would enter, but he and all need to burn in on
their minds that many will _not_.

Very solemnly significant is the difference between _striving_
and _seeking_. It is like the difference between wishing and
willing. There may be a seeking which has no real earnestness in it,
and is not sufficiently determined, to do what is needful in order
to find. Plenty of people would like to possess earthly good, but
cannot brace themselves to needful work and sacrifice. Plenty would
like to 'go to heaven,' as they understand the phrase, but cannot
screw themselves to the surrender of self and the world. Vagrant,
halfhearted seeking, such as one sees many examples of, will never
win anything, either in this world or in the other. We must strive,
and not only seek.

That is true, even if we do not look beyond time; but Jesus carries
our awed vision onwards to the end of the days, in the expansion of
his warning, which follows in verses 25-27. No doubt, the words had
a meaning for His hearers in reference to the Messianic kingdom, and
a fulfilment in the rejection of the nation. But we have to discern
in them a further and future significance.

Observe that the scene suggested differs from the similar parable of
the virgins waiting for their Lord, in that it does not describe a
wedding feast. Here it is a householder already in his house, and,
at the close of the day, locking up for the night. Some of his
servants have not returned in time, have not come in through the
narrow gate, which is now not only narrow, but closed by the
master's own hand. The translation of that is that, by a decisive
act of Christ's in the future, the time for entrance will he ended.
As in reference to each stage of life, specific opportunities are
given in it for securing specific results, and these can never be
recovered if the stage is past; so mortal life, as a whole, is the
time for entrance, and if it is not used for that purpose, entrance
is impossible. If the youth will not learn, the man will be
ignorant. If the sluggard will not plough because the weather is
cold, he will 'beg in harvest.' If we do not strive to enter at the
gate, it is vain to seek entrance when the Master's own hand has
barred it.

The language of our Lord here seems to shut us up to the conclusion
that life is the time in which we can gain our entrance. It is no
kindness to suggest that perhaps He does not shut the door quite
fast. We know, at all events, that it is wide open now.

The words put into the mouths of the excluded sufficiently define
their characters, and the reasons why they sought in vain. Why did
they want to be in? Because they wished to get out of the cold
darkness into the warm light of the bountiful house. But they
neither knew the conditions of entrance nor had they any desire
after the true blessings within. Their deficiencies are plainly
marked in their pleas for admission. At first, they simply ask for
entrance, as if thinking that to wish was to have. Then, when the
Householder says that He knows nothing about them, and cannot let
strangers in, they plead as their qualification that they had eaten
and drunk in His presence, and that He had taught in their streets.
In these words, the relations of Christ's contemporaries are
described, and their immediate application to them is plain.

Outward connection with Jesus gave no claim to share in His kingdom.
We have to learn the lesson which we who live amidst a widely
diffused, professing Christianity sadly need. No outward connection
with Christ, in Christian ordinances or profession, will avail to
establish a claim to have the door opened for us. A man may be a
most respectable and respected church-member, and have listened to
Christian teaching all his days, and have in life a vague wish to be
'saved,' and yet be hopelessly unfit to enter, and therefore
irremediably shut out.

The Householder's answer, in its severity and calmness, indicates
the inflexible impossibility of opening to such seekers. It puts
stress on two things--the absence of any vital relationship between
Him and them, and their moral character. He knows nothing about
them, and not to be known by the Master of the house is necessarily
to be shut out from His household. They are known of the Shepherd
who know Him and hear His voice. They who are not must stay in the
desert. Such mutual knowledge is the basis of all righteousness, and
righteousness is the essential condition of entrance.

These seekers are represented as still working iniquity. They had
not changed their moral nature. They wished to enter heaven, but
they still loved evil. How could they come in, even if the door had
been open? Let us learn that, while faith is the door, without
holiness no man shall see the Lord. The worker of iniquity has only
an outward relation to Jesus. Inwardly he is separated from Him,
and, at last, the outward relation will be adjusted to the inward,
and departure from Him will be inevitable, and that is ruin.

III. Boldly and searchingly personal as the preceding words had
been, the final turn of Christ's answer must have had a still
sharper and more distasteful edge. He had struck a blow at Jewish
trust in outward connection with Messiah as ensuring participation
in His kingdom. He now says that the Gentiles shall fill the vacant
places. Many Jews will be unable to enter, for all their seeking,
but still there will be many saved; for troops of hated Gentiles
shall come from every corner of the earth, and the sight of them
sitting beside the fathers of the nation, while Israel after the
flesh is shut out, will move the excluded to weeping--the token of
sorrow, which yet has in it no softening nor entrance-securing
effect, because it passes into 'gnashing of teeth,' the sign of
anger. Such sorrow worketh death.

Such fierce hatred, joined with stiff-necked obstinacy, has
characterised the Jew ever since Jerusalem fell. 'If God spared not
the natural branches, take heed lest He also spare not thee.' Israel
was first, and has become last. The same causes which sent it from
the van to the rear have worked like effects in 'Christendom,' as
witness Asia Minor and the mosques into which Christian churches
have been turned.

These causes will produce like effects wherever they become
dominant. Any church and any individual Christian who trusts in
outward connection with Christ, and works iniquity, will sooner or
later fall into the rear, and if repentance and faith do not lead it
or him through the strait gate, will be among those 'last' who are
so far behind that they are shut out altogether. Let us 'be not
high-minded, but fear.'




CHRIST'S MESSAGE TO HEROD


    'And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox,
    Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and
    to-morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.
    33. Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow,
    and the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet
    perish out of Jerusalem.'--LUKE xiii. 32, 33.

Even a lamb might be suspicious if wolves were to show themselves
tenderly careful of its safety. Pharisees taking Christ's life under
their protection were enough to suggest a trick. These men came to
Christ desirous of posing as counterworking Herod's intention to
slay Him. Our Lord's answer, bidding them go and tell Herod what He
immediately communicates to them, shows that He regarded them as in
a plot with that crafty, capricious kinglet. And evidently there was
an understanding between them. For some reason or other, best known
to his own changeable and whimsical nature, the man who at one
moment was eagerly desirous to see Jesus, was at the next as eagerly
desirous to get Him out of his territories; just as he admired and
murdered John the Baptist. The Pharisees, on the other hand, desired
to draw Him to Jerusalem, where they would have Him in their power
more completely than in the northern district. If they had spoken
all their minds they would have said, 'Go hence, or else we cannot
kill Thee.' So Christ answers the hidden schemes, and not the
apparent solicitude, in the words that I have taken for my text.
They unmask the plot, they calmly put aside the threats of danger.
They declare that His course was influenced by far other
considerations. They show that He clearly saw what it was towards
which He was journeying. And then, with sad irony, they declare that
it, as it were, contrary to prophetic decorum and established usage
that a prophet should be slain anywhere but in the streets of the
bloody and sacred city.

There are many deep things in the words, which I cannot touch in the
course of a single sermon; but I wish now, at all events, to skim
their surface, and try to gather some of their obvious lessons.

I. First, then, note Christ's clear vision of His death.

There is some difficulty about the chronology of this period with
which I need not trouble you. It is enough to note that the incident
with which we are concerned occurred during that last journey of our
Lord's towards Jerusalem and Calvary, which occupies so much of this
Gospel of Luke. At what point in that fateful journey it occurred
may be left undetermined. Nor need I enter upon the question as to
whether the specification of time in our text, 'to-day, and to-morrow,
and the third day,' is intended to be taken literally, as some
commentators suppose, in which case it would be brought extremely
near the goal of the journey; or whether, as seems more probable from
the context, it is to be taken as a kind of proverbial expression for
a definite but short period. That the latter is the proper
interpretation seems to be largely confirmed by the fact that there
is a slight variation in the application of the designation of time
in the two verses of our text, 'the third day' in the former verse
being regarded as the period of the perfecting, whilst in the latter
verse it is regarded as part of the period of the progress towards
the perfecting. Such variation in the application is more congruous
with the idea that we have here to deal with a kind of proverbial
expression for a limited and short period. Our Lord is saying in
effect, 'My time is not to be settled by Herod. It is definite, and
it is short. It is needless for him to trouble himself; for in three
days it will be all over. It is useless for him to trouble himself,
or for you Pharisees to plot, for until the appointed days are past
it will not be over, whatever you and he may do.' The course He had
yet to run was plain before Him in this last journey, every step of
which was taken with the Cross full in view.

Now the worst part of death is the anticipation of death; and it
became Him who bore death for every man to drink to its dregs that
cup of trembling which the fear of it puts to all human lips. We
rightly regard it as a cruel aggravation of a criminal's doom if he
is carried along a level, straight road with his gibbet in view at
the end of the march. But so it was that Jesus Christ travelled
through life.

My text comes at a comparatively late period of His history. A few
months or weeks at the most intervened between Him and the end. But
the consciousness which is here so calmly expressed was not of
recent origin. We know that from the period of His transfiguration
He began to give His death a very prominent place in His teaching,
but it had been present with Him long before He thus laid emphasis
upon it in His communications with His disciples. For, if we accept
John's Gospel as historical, we shall have to throw back His first
public references to the end to the very beginning of His career.
The cleansing of the Temple, at the very outset of His course, was
vindicated by Him by the profound words, 'Destroy this Temple, and
in three days I will raise it up.' During the same early visit to
the capital city He said to Nicodemus, 'As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted
up.' So Christ's career was not like that of many a man who has
begun, full of sanguine hope as a possible reformer and benefactor
of his fellows, and by slow degrees has awakened to the
consciousness that reformers and benefactors need to be martyrs ere
their ideals can be realised. There was no disillusioning in
Christ's experience. From the commencement He knew that He came, not
only to minister, but also 'to give His life a ransom for the many.'
And it was _not_ a mother's eye, as a reverent modern painter
has profoundly, and yet erroneously, shown us in his great work in
our own city gallery--it was not a mother's eye that first saw the
shadow of the Cross fall on her unconscious Son, but it was Himself
that all through His earthly pilgrimage knew Himself to be the Lamb
appointed for the sacrifice. This Isaac toiled up the hill, bearing
the wood and the knife, and knew where and who was the Offering.

Brethren, I do not think that we sufficiently realise the importance
of that element in our conceptions of the life of Jesus Christ. What
a pathos it gives to it all! What a beauty it gives to His
gentleness, to His ready interest in others, to His sympathy for all
sorrow, and tenderness with all sin! How wonderfully it deepens the
significance, the loveliness, and the pathos of the fact that 'the
Son of Man came eating and drinking,' remembering everybody but
Himself, and ready to enter into all the cares and the sorrows of
other hearts, if we think that all the while there stood, grim and
certain, before Him that Calvary with its Cross! Thus, through all
His path, He knew to what He was journeying.

II. Then again, secondly, let me ask you to note here our Lord's own
estimate of the place which His death holds in relation to His whole
work.

Notice that remarkable variation in the expression in our text. 'The
third day I shall be _perfected_.... It cannot be that a
prophet _perish_ out of Jerusalem.' Then, somehow or other, the
'perishing' is 'perfecting.' There may be a doubt as to the precise
rendering of the word translated by 'perfecting'; but it seems to me
that the only meaning congruous with the context is that which is
suggested by the translation of our Authorised Version, and that our
Lord does not mean to say 'on the third day I shall complete My work
of casting out devils and curing diseases,' but that He masses the
whole of His work into two great portions--the one of which
includes all His works and ministrations of miracles and of mercy;
and the other of which contains one unique and transcendent fact,
which outweighs and towers above all these others, and is the
perfecting of His work, and the culmination of His obedience,
service, and sacrifice.

Now, of course, I need not remind you that the 'perfecting' thus
spoken of is not a perfecting of moral character or of individual
nature, but that it is the same perfecting which the Epistle to the
Hebrews speaks about when it says, 'Being made perfect, He became
the Author of eternal salvation to all them which obey Him.' That is
to say, it is His perfecting in regard to office, function, work for
the world, and not the completion or elevation of His individual
character. And this 'perfecting' is effected in His 'perishing.'

Now I want to know in what conceivable sense the death of Jesus Christ
can be the culmination and crown of His work, without which it would
be a torso, an incomplete fragment, a partial fulfilment of the
Father's design, and of His own mission, unless it be that that death
was, as I take it the New Testament with one voice in all its parts
declares it to be, a sacrifice for the sins of the world. I know of
no construing of the fact of the death on the Cross which can do
justice to the plain words of my text, except the old-fashioned
belief that therein He made atonement for sin, and thereby, as the
Lamb of God, bore away the sins of the world.

Other great lives may be crowned by fair deaths, which henceforward
become seals of faithful witness, and appeals to the sentiments of
the heart, but there is no sense that I know of in which from
Christ's death there can flow a mightier energy than from such a
life, unless in the sense that the death is a sacrifice.

Now I know there has been harm done by the very desire to exalt
Christ's great sacrifice on the Cross; when it has been so separated
from His life as that the life has not been regarded as a sacrifice,
nor the death as obedience. Rather the sacrificial element runs
through His whole career, and began when He became flesh and
tabernacled amongst us; but yet as being the apex of it all, without
which it were all-imperfect, and in a special sense redeeming men
from the power of death, that Cross is set forth by His own word.
For Him to 'perish' was to 'be perfected.' As the ancient prophet
long before had said, 'When His soul shall make an offering for
sin,' then, paradoxical as it may seem, the dead Man shall 'see,'
and 'shall see His seed.' Or, as He Himself said, 'If a corn of
wheat fall into the ground it abideth alone, but if it die it
bringeth forth much fruit.'

I do not want to insist upon any theories of Atonement. I do want to
insist that Christ's own estimate of the significance and purpose
and issue of His death shall not be slurred over, but that,
recognising that He Himself regarded it as the perfecting of His
work, we ask ourselves very earnestly how such a conception can be
explained if we strike out of our Christianity the thought of the
sacrifice for the sins of the world. Unless we take Paul's gospel,
'How that He died for our sins according to the Scriptures,' I for
one do not believe that we shall ever get Paul's results, 'Old
things are passed away; all things are become new.' If you strike
the Cross off the dome of the temple, the fires on its altars will
soon go out. A Christianity which has to say much about the life of
Jesus, and knows not what to say about the death of Christ, will be
a Christianity that will neither have much constraining power in our
lives, nor be able to breathe a benediction of peace over our
deaths. If we desire to be perfected in character, we must have
faith in that sacrificial death which was the perfecting of Christ's
work.

III. And so, lastly, notice our Lord's resolved surrender to the
discerned Cross.

There is much in this aspect in the words of my text which I cannot
touch upon now; but two or three points I may briefly notice.

Note then, I was going to say, the superb heroism of His calm
indifference to threats and dangers. He will go hence, and relieve
the tyrant's dominions of His presence; but He is careful to make it
plain that His going has no connection with the futile threatenings
by which they have sought to terrify Him. 'Nevertheless'--although I
do not care at all for them or for him--'nevertheless I must journey
to-day and tomorrow! But that is not because I fear death, but
because I am going to My death; for the prophet must die in
Jerusalem.' We are so accustomed to think of the 'gentle Jesus, meek
and mild' that we forget the 'strong Son of God.' If we were talking
about a man merely, we should point to this calm, dignified answer
as being an instance of heroism, but we do not feel that that word
fits Him. There are too many vulgar associations connected with it,
to be adapted to the gentleness of His fixed purpose that blenched
not, nor faltered, whatsoever came in the way.

Light is far more powerful than lightning. Meekness may be, and in
Him was, wedded to a will like a bar of iron, and a heart that knew
not how to fear. If ever there was an iron hand in a velvet glove it
was the hand of Christ. And although the perspective of virtues
which Christianity has introduced, and which Christ exhibited in His
life, gives prominence to the meek and the gentle, let us not forget
that it also enjoins the cultivation of the 'wrestling thews that
throw the world.' 'Quit you like men; be strong; let all your deeds
be done in charity.'

Then note, too, the solemn law that ruled His life. 'I _must_
walk.' That is a very familiar expression upon His lips. From that
early day when He said, 'Wist ye not that I _must_ be about My
Father's business,' to that last when He said, 'The Son of Man
_must_ be lifted up,' there crops out, ever and anon, in the
occasional glimpses that He allows us to have of His inmost spirit,
this reference of all His actions to a necessity that was laid upon
Him, and to which He ever consciously conformed. That necessity
determined what He calls so frequently 'My time; My hour'; and
influenced the trifles, as they are called, as well as the great
crises, of His career. It was the Father's will which made the Son's
_must_. Hence His unbroken communion and untroubled calm.

If we want to live near God, and if we want to have lives of peace
amidst convulsions, we, too, must yield ourselves to that all
encompassing sovereign necessity, which, like the great laws of the
universe, shapes the planets and the suns in their courses and their
stations; and holds together two grains of dust, or two motes that
dance in the sunshine. To gravitation there is nothing great and
nothing small. God's _must_ covers all the ground of our lives,
and should ever be responded to by our 'I will.'

And that brings me to the last point, and that is, our Lord's glad
acceptance of the necessity and surrender of the Cross. What was it
that made Him willing to take that 'must' as the law of His life?
First, a Son's obedience; second, a Brother's love. There was no
point in Christ's career, from the moment when in the desert He put
away the temptation to win the kingdoms of the world by other than
the God-appointed means, down to the last moment when on His dying
ears there fell another form of the same temptation in the taunt,
'Let Him come down from the cross, and we will believe on Him'; when
He could not, if He had chosen to abandon His mission, have saved
Himself. No compulsion, no outward hand impelling Him, drove Him
along that course which ended on Calvary; but only that He would
save others, and therefore 'Himself He cannot save.'

True, there were natural human shrinkings, just as the weight and
impetus of some tremendous billow buffeting the bows of the ship
makes it quiver; but this never affected the firm hand on the
rudder, and never deflected the vessel from its course. Christ's
'soul was troubled,' but His will was fixed, and it was fixed by His
love to us. Like one of the men who in after ages died for His dear
sake, He may be conceived as refusing to be bound to the stake by
any bands, willing to stand there and be destroyed because He wills.
Nothing fastened Him to the Cross but His resolve to save the world,
in which world was included each of us sitting listening and
standing speaking, now. Oh, brethren! shall not we, moved by such
love, with like cheerfulness of surrender, give ourselves to Him who
gave Himself for us?




THE LESSONS OF A FEAST


    'And it came to pass, as He went into the house of one
    of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabbath day,
    that they watched Him. 2. And, behold, there was a
    certain man before Him which had the dropsy. 3. And
    Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees,
    saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? 4. And
    they held their peace. And He took him, and healed him,
    and let him go; 5. And answered them, saying, Which of
    you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and
    will not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day?
    6. And they could not answer Him again to these things.
    7. And He put forth a parable to those which were
    bidden, when He marked how they chose out the chief
    rooms; saying unto them, 8. When thou art bidden of any
    man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room,
    lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him;
    9. And he that bade thee and him come and say to thee,
    Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take
    the lowest room. 10. But when thou art bidden, go and
    sit down in the lowest room; that when he that bade
    thee cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up
    higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presence
    of them that sit at meat with thee. 11. For whosoever
    exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth
    himself shall be exalted. 12. Then said He also to him
    that bade Him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper,
    call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy
    kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also bid
    thee again, and a recompense be made thee. 13. But when
    thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
    lame, the blind: 14. And thou shalt be blessed; for
    they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be
    recompensed at the resurrection of the just.'
    --LUKE xiv. 1-14.

Jesus never refused an invitation, whether the inviter were a
Pharisee or a publican, a friend or a foe. He never mistook the
disposition of His host. He accepted 'greetings where no kindness
is,' and on this occasion there was none. The entertainer was a spy,
and the feast was a trap. What a contrast between the malicious
watchers at the table, ready to note and to interpret in the worst
sense every action of His, and Him loving and wishing to bless even
them! The chill atmosphere of suspicion did not freeze the flow of
His gentle beneficence and wise teaching. His meek goodness remained
itself in the face of hostile observers. The miracle and the two
parables are aimed straight at their errors.

I. How came the dropsical man there? Possibly he had simply strayed
in to look on at the feast, as the freedom of manners then would
permit him to do. The absence of any hint that he came hoping for a
cure, and of any trace of faith on his part, or of speech to him on
Christ's, joined with his immediate dismissal after his cure, rather
favours the supposition that he had been put as the bait of the
trap, on the calculation that the sight of him would move Jesus to
heal him. The setters of the snare were 'watching' whether it would
work, and Jesus 'answered' their thoughts, which were, doubtless,
visible in their eyes. His answer has three stages--a question which
is an assertion, the cure, and another affirming question. All three
are met with sulky silence, which speaks more than words would have
done. The first question takes the 'lawyers' on their own ground,
and in effect asserts that to heal did not break the Sabbath. Jesus
challenges denial of the lawfulness of it, and the silence of the
Pharisees confesses that they dare not deny. 'The bare fact of
healing is not prohibited,' they might have said, 'but the acts
necessary for healing are.' But no acts were necessary for this
Healer's power to operate. The outgoing of His will had power. Their
finespun distinctions of deeds lawful and unlawful were spiders'
webs, and His act of mercy flew high above the webs, like some fair
winged creature glancing in the sunshine, while the spider sits in
his crevice balked. The broad principle involved in Jesus' first
question is that no Sabbath law, no so-called religious restriction,
can ever forbid helping the miserable. The repose of the Sabbath is
deepened, not disturbed, by activity for man's good.

The cure is told without detail, probably because there were no
details to tell. There is no sign of request or of faith on the
sufferer's part; there seems to have been no outward act on Christ's
beyond 'taking' him, which appears simply to mean that He called him
nearer, and then, by a simple exercise of His will, healed him.
There is no trace of thanks or of wonder in the heart of the
sufferer, who probably never had anything more to do with his
benefactor. Silently he comes on the stage, silently he gets his
blessing, silently he disappears. A strange, sad instance of how
possible it is to have a momentary connection with Jesus, and even
to receive gifts from His hand, and yet to have no real, permanent
relation to Him!

The second question turns from the legal to a broader consideration.
The spontaneous workings of the heart are not to be dammed back by
ceremonial laws. Need calls for immediate succour. You do not wait
for the Sabbath's sun to set when your ox or your ass is in a pit.
(The reading 'son' instead of 'ox,' as in the Revised Version
margin, is incongruous.) Jesus is appealing to the instinctive wish
to give immediate help even to a beast in trouble, and implies that
much more should the same instinct be allowed immediate play when
its object is a man. The listeners were self-condemned, and their
obstinate silence proves that the arrow had struck deep.

II. The cure seems to have taken place before the guests seated
themselves. Then came a scramble for the most honourable places, on
which He looked with perhaps a sad smile. Again the silence of the
guests is noticeable, as well as the calm assumption of authority
by Jesus, even among such hostile company. Where He comes a guest,
He becomes teacher, and by divine right He rebukes. The lesson is
given, says Luke, as 'a parable,' by which we are to understand that
our Lord is not here giving, as might appear if His words are
superficially interpreted, a mere lesson of proper behaviour at a
feast, but is taking that behaviour as an illustration of a far
deeper thing. Possibly some too ambitious guest had contrived to
seat himself in the place of honour, and had had to turn out, and,
with an embarrassed mien, had to go down to the very lowest place,
as all the intermediate ones were full. His eagerness to be at the
top had ended in his being at the bottom. That is a 'parable,' says
Jesus, an illustration in the region of daily life, of large truths
in morals and religion. It is a poor motive for outward humility and
self-abasement that it may end in higher honour. And if Jesus was
here only giving directions for conduct in regard to men, He was
inculcating a doubtful kind of morality. The devil's

  darling sin
  Is the pride that apes humility.'

Jesus was not recommending that, but what is crafty ambition,
veiling itself in lowliness for its own purposes, when exercised in
outward life, becomes a noble, pure, and altogether worthy, thing in
the spiritual sphere. For to desire to be exalted in the kingdom is
wholly right, and to humble one's self with a direct view to that
exaltation is to tread the path which He has hallowed by His own
footsteps. The true aim for ambition is the honour that cometh from
God only, and the true path to it is through the valley; for 'God
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.'

III. Unbroken silence still prevailed among the guests, but again
Jesus speaks as teacher, and now to the host. A guest does not
usually make remarks on the composition of the company, Jesus could
make no 'recompense' to His entertainer, but to give him this
counsel. Again, He inculcated a wide general lesson under the guise
of a particular exhortation appropriate to the occasion. Probably
the bulk of the guests were well-to-do people of the host's own
social rank, and, as probably, there were onlookers of a lower
degree, like the dropsical man. The prohibition is not directed
against the natural custom of inviting one's associates and equals,
but against inviting them only, and against doing so with a sharp
eye to the advantages to be derived from it. That weary round of
giving a self-regarding hospitality, and then getting a return
dinner or evening entertainment from each guest, which makes up so
much of the social life among us, is a pitiful affair, hollow and
selfish. What would Jesus say--what does Jesus say--about it all?
The sacred name of hospitality is profaned, and the very springs of
it dried up by much of our social customs, and the most literal
application of our Lord's teaching here is sorely needed.

But the words are meant as a 'parable,' and are to be widened out to
include all sorts of kindnesses and helps given in the sacred name
of charity to those whose only claim is their need. 'They cannot
recompense thee'--so much the better, for, if an eye to their doing
so could have influenced thee, thy beneficence would have lost its
grace and savour, and would have been simple selfishness, and, as
such, incapable of future reward. It is only love that is lavished
on those who can make no return which is so free from the taint of
secret regard to self that it is fit to be recognised as love in the
revealing light of that great day, and therefore is fit to be
'recompensed in the resurrection of the just.'




EXCUSES NOT REASONS


    'They all with one consent began to make excuse.
    --LUKE xiv. 18.

Jesus Christ was at a feast in a Pharisee's house. It was a strange
place for Him--and His words at the table were also strange. For He
first rebuked the guests, and then the host; telling the former to
take the lower rooms, and bidding the latter widen his hospitality
to those that could not recompense him. It was a sharp saying; and
one of the other guests turned the edge of it by laying hold of our
Lord's final words: 'Thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just,' and saying, no doubt in a pious tone and with a devout
shake of the head, 'Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
Kingdom of God.' It was a very proper thing to say, but there was a
ring of conventional, commonplace piety about it, which struck
unpleasantly on Christ's ear. He answers the speaker with that
strange story of the great feast that nobody would come to, as if He
had said, 'You pretend to think that it is a blessed thing to eat
bread in the Kingdom of God, Why! You will not eat bread when it is
offered to you.'

I dare say you all know enough of the parable to make it unnecessary
for me to go over it. A great feast is prepared; invitations, more
or less general, are sent out at first, everything is ready; and,
behold, there is a table, and nobody to sit at it. A strange
experience for a hospitable man! And so he sends his servants to
beat up the unwilling guests, and, one after another, with more or
less politeness, refuses to come.

I need not follow the story further. In the latter part of the
parable our Lord shadows the transference of the blessings of the
Kingdom to the Gentiles, outcasts as the Jews thought them, skulking
in the hedges and tramping on the highways. In the first part He
foreshadows the failure of His own preaching amongst His own people.
But Jews and Englishmen are very much alike. The way in which these
invited guests treated the invitation to this feast is being
repeated, day by day, by thousands of men round us; and by some of
ourselves. 'They all, with one consent, began to make excuse.'

I. The first thing that I would desire you to notice is the
strangely unanimous refusal.

The guests' conduct in the story is such as life and reality would
afford no example of. No set of people, asked to a great banquet,
would behave as these people in the parable do. Then, is the
introduction of such an unnatural trait as this a fault in the
construction of narrative? No! Rather it is a beauty, for the very
point of the story is the utter unnaturalness of the conduct
described, and the contrast that is presented between the way in
which men regard the lower blessings from which these people are
represented as turning, and in which they regard the loftier
blessings that are offered. Nobody would turn his hack upon such a
banquet if he had the chance of going to it. What, then, shall we
say of those who, by platoons and regiments, turn their backs upon
this higher offer? The very preposterous unnaturalness of the
conduct, if the parable were a true story, points to the deep
meaning that lies behind it: that in that higher region the
unnatural is the universal, or all but universal.

And, indeed, it is so. One would almost venture to say that there is
a kind of law according to which the more valuable a thing is the
less men care to have it; or, if you like to put it into more
scientific language, the attraction of an object is in the inverse
ratio to its worth. Small things, transitory things, material
things, everybody grasps at; and the number of graspers steadily
decreases as you go up the scale in preciousness, until, when you
reach the highest of all, there are the fewest that want them. Is
there anything lower than good that merely gratifies the body? Is
there anything that the most of men want more? Are there many things
lower in the scale than money? Are there many things that pull more
strongly? Is not truth better than wealth? Are there more pursuers
of it than there are of the former? For one man who is eager to
know, and counts his life well spent, in following knowledge

  'Like a sinking star,
  Beyond the furthest bounds of human thought,'

there are a hundred who think it rightly expended in the pursuit
after the wealth that perishes. Is not goodness higher than truth,
and are not the men that are content to devote themselves to
becoming wise more numerous than those that are content to devote
themselves to becoming pure? And, topmost of all, is there anything
to be compared with the gifts that are held out to us in that great
Saviour and in His message? And is there anything that the mass of
men pass by with more unanimous refusal than the offered feast which
the great King of humanity has provided for His subjects? What is
offered for each of us, pressed upon us, in the gift of Jesus
Christ? Help, guidance, companionship, restfulness of heart, power
of obedience, victory over self, control of passions, supremacy over
circumstances, tranquillity deep and genuine, death abolished,
Heaven opened, measureless hopes following upon perfect fruition,
here and hereafter. These things are all gathered into, and their
various sparkles absorbed in, the one steady light of that one great
encyclopaediacal word--Salvation. These gifts are going begging,
lying at our doors, offered to every one of us, pressed upon all on
the simple condition of taking Christ for Saviour and King. And what
do we do with them? 'They all, with one consent, began to make
excuse.'

One hears of barbarous people that have no use for the gold that
abounds in their country, and do not think it half as valuable as
glass beads. That is how men estimate the true and the trumpery
treasures which Christ and the world offer. I declare it seems to me
that, calmly looking at men's nature, and their duration, and then
thinking of the aims of the most of them, we should not be very far
wrong if we said an epidemic of insanity sits upon the world. For
surely to turn away from the gold and to hug the glass beads is very
little short of madness. 'This their way is their folly, and their
posterity approve their sayings.'

And now notice that this refusal may be, and often in fact is,
accompanied with lip recognition of the preciousness of the
neglected things. That Pharisee who put up the pillow of his pious
sentiment--a piece of cant, because he did not feel what he was
saying--to deaden the cannon-ball of Christ's word, is only a
pattern of a good many of us who think that to say, 'Blessed is he
that eateth bread in the Kingdom of God,' with the proper unctuous
roll of the voice, is pretty nearly as good as to take the bread
that is offered to us. There are no more difficult people to get at
than the people, of whom I am sure I have some specimens before me
now, who bow their heads in assent to the word of the Gospel, and by
bowing them escape its impact, and let it whistle harmlessly over.
You that believe every word that I or my brethren preach, and never
dream of letting it affect your conduct--if there be degrees in that
lunatic asylum of the world, surely you are candidates for the
highest place.

II. Now, secondly, notice the flimsy excuses.

'They all, with one consent, began.' I do not suppose that they had
laid their heads together, or that our Lord intends us to suppose
that there was a conspiracy and concert of refusal, but only that
