
Again (v. 24) comes a petition with its result. And here there is no
mention of the effect of the answer on the world. For the moment the
thoughts of isolation in, and a message to, the world fade away. The
partially-possessed 'glory' seems to have led on Christ's thoughts to
the calm home of perfection waiting for Him who was 'not of the world'
and was sent into it, and for the humble ones who had taken Him for
Lord. 'I will that'--that is a strange tone for a prayer. What
consciousness on Christ's part does it involve? The disciples are not
now called 'them that should believe on Me,' but 'that which Thou hast
given Me,' the individuals melt into the great whole. They are
Christ's, not merely by their faith or man's preaching, but by the
Father's gift. And the fact of that gift is used as a plea with Him, to
'perfect that which concerneth' them, and to complete the unity of
believers with Jesus by bringing them to be 'with Him' in His
triumphant session at the right hand. To 'behold' will be the same as
to share His glory, not only that which we beheld when He tabernacled
among us, but that which He had in the pouring out on Him of God's love
'before the foundation of the world.' Our dim eyes cannot follow the
happy souls as they are lost in the blaze, but we know that they walk
in light and are like Him, for they 'see Him as He is.'

The last statement (vs. 25, 26) is not petition but vow, and, to our
ears, promise. The contrast of the world and believers appears for the
last time. What made the world a 'world' was its not knowing God; what
made believers isolated in, and having an errand to, the world, was
that they 'knew' (not merely 'believed,' but knew by experience) that
Jesus had been sent from God to make known His name. All our knowledge
of God comes through Him; it is for us to recognise His divine mission,
and then He will unveil, more and more, with blessed continuity of
increasing knowledge, the Name, and with growing knowledge of it
growing measures of God's love will be in us, and Jesus Himself will
'dwell in our hearts by faith' more completely and more blessedly
through an eternity of wider knowledge and more fervent love.



THE FOLDED FLOCK

'I will that they also, whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me where I am;
that they may behold My glory.'--JOHN xvii. 24.

This wonderful prayer is (_a_) for Jesus Himself, (_b_) for the
Apostles, (_c_) for the whole Church on earth and in heaven.

I. The prayer.

'I will' has a strange ring of authority. It is the expression of His
love to men, and of His longing for their presence with Him in His
glory. Not till they are with Him there, shall He 'see of the travail
of His soul and be satisfied.'

We have here a glimpse of the blessed state of the dead in Christ.

(_a_) Local presence with Christ. His glorified body is somewhere. The
value of this thought is that it gives solidity to our ideas of a
future life. There they _are_. We need not dwell on the metaphysical
difficulties about locality for disembodied spirits.

If a spirit can be localised in a body, I suppose it can be localised
without a body; but passing by all that, we have the hope held out here
of a real local presence with the glorified humanity of our Lord. We
speak of the dead as gone _from us_, and we have that idea far more
vividly in our minds than that of their having gone _to Him_. We speak
of the 'departed,' but we do not think of them as 'arrived.' We look
down to the narrow grave, but we forget 'He is not here, He is risen.
Why seek ye the living among the dead?' Ah! if we could only bring home
to our hearts the solid prose of the conviction that where Christ is
there His servants are, and that not in the diffused ubiquity of His
Divine Omnipresence, it would go far to remove the darkness and vague
mist which wrap the future, and to set it as it really is before us, as
a solid definite reality. We see the sails glide away out into the west
as the sun goes down, and we think of them as tossing on a midnight
sea, an unfathomable waste. Try to think of them more truly. As in that
old miracle, He comes to them walking on the water in the night watch,
and if at first they are terrified, His voice brings back hope to the
heart that is beginning to stand still, and immediately they are at the
land whither they go. Now, as they sink from our sight, they are in
port, sails furled and anchor dropped, and green fields round them,
even while we watch the sinking masts, and cannot yet rightly tell
whether the fading sail has faded wholly.

(_b_) Communion with Christ.

Our Lord says not only 'that where I am, they also may be,' but adds
'with Me.' That is not a superfluous addition, but emphasises the
thought of a communion which is more intimate and blessed than local
presence alone would be.

The communion here is real but imperfect. It is perfected there on our
part by the dropping away of flesh and sin, by change of circumstances,
by emancipation from cares and toils necessary here, by the development
of new powers and surroundings, and on His side by new manifestations.

(_c_) Vision of His glory.

The crown of this utterance of Christ's will is 'that they may behold
My glory.' In an earlier part of this prayer our Lord had spoken of the
'glory which I had with Thee before the world was.' But probably the
glory 'given' is not that of essential Divinity, but that of His
mediatorial work. To His people 'with Him where He is,' are imparted
fuller views of Christ as Saviour, deeper notions of His work, clearer
perception of His rule in providence and nature. This is the loftiest
employment of the spirits who are perfected and lapped in 'pleasures
for evermore' by their union with the glorified Jesus.

Surely this is grander than all metaphorical pictures of heaven.

II. The incipient fulfilment now going on.

The prayer has been in process of fulfilment ever since. The dead in
Christ have entered on its answer now.

We need not discuss difficulties about the 'intermediate state,' for
this at all events is true, that to be 'absent from the body' is to be
'present with the Lord.'

A Christian death is an answer to this prayer. True, for Christians as
for all, the physical necessity is an imperative law. True, the
punitive aspect of death is retained for them. But yet the law is
wielded by Christ, and while death remains, its whole aspect is
changed. So we may think of those who have departed in His faith and
fear as gone in answer to this prayer.

How beautiful that is! Slowly, one by one, they are gathered in, as the
stars one by one light up. Place after place is filled.

Thus through the ages the prayer works on, and our dear ones have gone
from us, but they have gone to Him. We weep, but they rejoice. To us
their departure is the result of an iron law, of a penal necessity, of
some secondary cause; but to them it is seen to be the answer to His
mighty prayer. They hear His voice and follow Him when He says, 'Come
up hither.'

III. The final fulfilment still future.

The prayer looks forward to a perfect fulfilment. His prayer cannot be
vain.

(_a_) Perfect in degree.

(_b_) Perfect in extent, when all shall be gathered together and the
'whole family' shall be 'in heaven,' and Christ's own word receives its
crowning realisation, that 'of all whom the Father hath given Him He
has lost nothing.'

And these are not some handful picked out by a decree which we can
neither fathom nor alter, but Christ is given to us all, and if we
choose to take Him, then for us He has ascended; and as we watch Him
going up the voice comes to us: 'I go to prepare a place for you. I
will come again and receive you unto Myself, that where I am, there ye
may be also.'



CHRIST'S SUMMARY OF HIS WORK

'I have declared onto them Thy name, and will declare it: that the love
wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in them, and I in them.'--JOHN
xvii. 26.

This is the solemn and calm close of Christ's great High-priestly
prayer; the very last words that He spoke before Gethsemane and His
passion. In it He sums up both the purpose of His life and the
petitions of His prayer, and presents the perfect fulfilment of the
former as the ground on which He asks the fulfilment of the latter.
There is a singular correspondence and contrast between these last
words to God and the last words to the disciples, which immediately
preceded them. These were, 'In the world ye shall have tribulation, but
be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.' In both He sums up His
life, in both He is unconscious of flaw, imperfection, or limitation;
in both He shares His own possessions among His followers. But His
words to men carry a trace of His own conflict and a foreboding of
theirs. For Him life had been, and for them it was to be, tribulation
and a battle, and the highest thing that He could promise them was
victory won by conflict. But from the serene elevation of the prayer
all such thoughts disappear. Unbroken calm lies over it. His life has
been one continual manifestation of the name of God; and the portion
that He promises to His followers is not victory won by strife, but the
participation with Himself in the love of God.

Both views are true--true to His experience, true to ours. The
difference between them lies in the elevation of the beholder's eye.
Looked at on the outward side, His life and ours must be always a
battle and often a sorrow. Looked at from within, His life was an
unbroken abiding in the love of God, and a continual impartation of the
name of God, and our lives may be an ever growing knowledge of God,
leading to and being a fuller and fuller possession of His love, and of
a present Christ. So let us ponder these deep words: our Lord's own
summing up of His work and aims; His statement of what we may hope to
attain; and the path by which we may attain it. I shall best bring out
the whole fullness of their meaning if I simply follow them word by
word.

I. Note, first, the backward look of the revealing Son.

'I have declared Thy name.'

The first thing that strikes one about these words is their boldness.
Remember that they are spoken to God, at the close of a life the
heights and depths of which they sum up. They are an appeal to God's
righteous judgment of the whole character of the career. Do they
breathe the tone that we might expect? Surely the prophet or teacher
who has most earnestly tried to make himself a mirror, without spot to
darken and without dint to distort the divine ray, will be the first to
feel, as he looks back, the imperfections of his repetition of his
message. But Jesus Christ, when He looks back over His life, has no
flaw, limitation, incompleteness, to record or to confess. As always so
here, He is absolutely unconscious of anything in the nature of
weakness, error, or sin. As when He looked back upon His life as a
conflict, He had no defeats to remember with shame, so here, when He
looks upon it as the revelation of God He feels that everything which
He has received of the Father He has made known unto men.

And the strange thing is that we admit the claim, and have become so
accustomed to regard it as being perfectly legitimate that we forget
how enormous it is. He takes an attitude here which in any other man
would be repulsive, but in Him is supremely natural. We criticise other
people, we outgrow their teachings, we see where their doctrines have
deviated from truth by excess or defect, or disproportion; but when He
says 'I have declared Thy name,' we feel that He says nothing more than
the simple facts of His life vindicate and confirm.

Not less remarkable is the implication in these words, not only of the
completeness of His message, but of the fullness of His knowledge of
God, and its entirely underived nature. So He claims for Himself an
altogether special and unique position here: He has learned God from
none; He teaches God to all. 'That was the true Light which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world.'

Looking a little more closely at these words before us, we have here
Christ's own account of His whole life. The meaning of it all is the
revelation of the heart of God. Not by words, of course; not by words
only, but far more by deeds. And I would have you ask yourselves this
question--If the deeds of a man are a declaration of the name of God,
what sort of a man is He who thus declares Him? Must we not feel that
if these words, or anything like them, really came from the lips of
Jesus Christ, we are here in the presence of something other than a
holy life of a simple humanity, which might help men to climb to the
apprehension of a God who was perfect love; and that when He says 'He
that hath seen Me hath seen the Father,' we stand before 'God manifest
in the flesh.'

What is that name of God which the revealing Son declares? Not the mere
syllables by which we call Him, but the manifested character of the
Father. That one name, in the narrower sense of the word, carries the
whole revelation that Jesus Christ has to make; for it speaks of
tenderness, of kindred, of paternal care, of the transmission of a
nature, of the embrace of a divine love. And it delivers men from all
their creeping dreads, from all their dark peradventures, from all
their stinging fears, from all the paralysing uncertainties which, like
clouds, always misty and often thunder-bearing, have shut out the sight
of the divine face. If this Christ, in His weakness and humanity, with
pity welling from His eyes, and making music of His voice, with the
swift help streaming from His fingers-tips to every pain and weariness,
and the gracious righteousness that drew little children and did not
repel publicans and harlots, is our best image of God, then love is the
centre of divinity, and all the rest that we call God is but
circumference and fringe of that central brightness.

  'So through the thunder comes a human voice
  Saying, "O heart I made! a heart beats here."'

He has declared God's name, His last best name of Love.

Need I dwell for one moment on the fact that that name is only declared
by this Son? There is no need to deny the presence of manifold other
precious sources in men's experience and lives from which something may
be inferred of what God truly is. But all these, rich and manifold as
they are, fall into nothingness before the life of Jesus Christ,
considered as the making visible of God. For all the rest are partial
and incomplete. 'At sundry times and in divers manners' God flung forth
syllables of the name, and 'fragments of that mighty voice came rolling
down the wind.' But in Jesus Christ the whole name, in all its
syllables, is spoken. Other sources of knowledge are ambiguous, and
need the interpretation of Christ's life and Cross ere they can be
construed into a harmonious whole. Life, nature, our inmost being,
history, all these sources speak with two voices; and it is only when
we hear the deep note that underlies them in the word of Christ that
their discord becomes a harmony. Other sources lack authority. They
come at the most with a 'may be.' He comes with a 'Verily, verily.'
Other sources speak to the understanding, or the conscience, or to
fear. Christ speaks to the heart. Other sources leave the man who
accepts them unaffected. Christ's message penetrates to the
transforming and assimilation of the whole being.

So, dear brethren! for all generations, and for this generation most of
all, the plain alternative lies between the declaration of the name of
God in Jesus Christ and a godless and orphan world. Modern thought will
make short work of all other sources of certitude about the character
of God, and will leave men alone in the dark. Christ, the historical
fact of the life and death of Jesus Christ, is the sole surviving
source of certitude, which is blessedness, as to whether there is a
God, and what sort of a God He is.

II. Secondly, note here that strange forward look of the dying Man: 'I
have declared Thy name and _will declare it_.'

And that was said within eight and forty hours of the Cross, which, if
He had been a simple human teacher and martyr, would have ended all His
activity in the world. But here He is not merely summing up His life,
and laying it aside, writing the last sentence, as it were, which
gathers up the whole of the completed book, but He is closing the first
volume, and in the act of doing so He stretches out His hand to open
the second. 'I will declare it.' When? How? Did not earthly life, then,
put a stop to this Teacher's activity? Was there still prophetic
function to be done after death had sealed His lips? Certainly.

That anticipation, which at once differentiates Him from all the brood
of merely human teachers and prophets, even the highest, does indeed
include as future, at the moment when He speaks, the swiftly coming and
close Cross; but it goes beyond it. How much of Christendom's knowledge
of God depended upon the Passion, on the threshold of which Christ was
standing? He, hanging on the Cross in weakness, and dying there amidst
the darkness that overspread the land, is a strange Revealer of the
omnipotent, infinite, ever-blessed God. But Oh! if we strike Gethsemane
and Calvary out of Christ's manifestation of the Father, how infinitely
poorer are we and the world! 'God commendeth,' (rather 'establisheth,')
'His love toward us in that whilst we were yet sinners Christ died for
us.' And so as we turn ourselves to the little knoll outside the gate,
where the Nazarene carpenter hangs faint and dying, we--wonder of
Wonders, and yet certainty of certainties!--have to say, 'Lo! this is
our God; we have waited for Him.'

But that future revelation extends beyond the Cross, and includes
resurrection, ascension, Pentecost, and the whole history of the Church
right onwards through the ages. The difference between the two volumes
of revelation--that which includes the work of Christ upon earth, and
that which includes His revelation from the heavens--is this, that the
first volume contains all the facts, and the second volume contains His
interpretation and application of the facts in the understandings and
hearts of His people. We have no more facts from which to construe God
than these which belong to the earthly life of Jesus Christ, and we
never shall have, here at all events. But whilst the first volume to
the bottom of the last page is finished and tolerates and needs no
additions, day by day, moment by moment, epoch by epoch Christ is
bringing His people to a fuller understanding of the significance of
the first volume, and writing the second more and more upon their
hearts.

So we have an ever-living Christ, still the active Teacher of His
Church. Times of unsettlement and revolutionary change and the 'shaking
of the things that are made,' like the times in which we live, are but
times in which the great Teacher is setting some new lesson from the
old Book to His slow scholars. There is always a little confusion in
the schoolroom when the classes are being rearranged and new books are
being put into old hands. The tributary stream, as it rushes in, makes
broken water for a moment. Do not let us be afraid when 'the things
that can be shaken' shake, but let us see in the shaking the attendant
of a new curriculum on which the great Teacher is launching His
scholars, and let us learn the new lessons of the old Gospel which He
is then teaching.

III. Thirdly, note the participation in the Father's love which is the
issue of the knowledge of the Father's name.

Christ says that His end, an end which is surely attained in the
declaration of the divine name, is that 'the love wherewith Thou hast
loved Me may be in them.' We are here touching upon heights too dizzy
for free and safe walking, on glories too bright for close and steady
gaze. But where Christ has spoken we may reverently follow. Mark, then,
that marvellous thought of the identity between the love which was His
and the love which is ours. 'From everlasting' that divine love lay on
the Eternal Word which in the hoary beginning, before the beginning of
creatures, 'was with God, and was God.' The deepest conception that we
can form of the divine nature is of a Being who in Himself carries the
Subject and the Object of an eternal love, which we speak of in the
deep emblem of 'the Word,' and the God with whom He eternally 'was.'
That love lay upon Christ, without limitation, without reservation,
without interruption, finding nothing there from which it recoiled, and
nothing there which did not respond to it. No mist, no thunderstorm,
ever broke that sunshine, no tempest ever swept across that calm.
Continuous, full, perfect was the love that knit the Father to the Son,
and continuous, full, and perfect was the consciousness of abiding in
that love, which lay like light upon the spirit of Him that said 'I
delight to do Thy will.' 'The Father hath not left Me alone.'

And all that love Christ gives to us as deep, as continuous, as
unreserved. Our consciousness of God's love is meant by Christ to be
like His own. Alas! alas! is that our experience, Christian people? The
sun always shines on the rainless land of Egypt, except for a month or
two in the year. The contrast between the unclouded blue and continuous
light and heat there, and our murky skies and humid atmosphere, is like
the contrast between our broken and feeble consciousness of the shining
of the divine love and the uninterrupted glory of light and joy of
communion which poured on Christ's heart. But it is possible for us
indefinitely to approximate to such an experience; and the way by which
we reach it is that plain and simple one of accepting Christ's
declaration of the Father's name.

IV. And so, lastly, notice the indwelling Christ who makes our
participation in the divine love possible: 'And I in them.'

One may well say, 'How can it be that love should be transferred? How
can it be that the love of God to me shall be identical with the love
of God to Christ?' There is only one answer. If Christ dwells in me,
then God's love to Him falls upon me by no transference, but by my
incorporation into Him. And I would urge that this great truth of the
actual indwelling of Christ in the soul is no mere piece of rhetorical
exaggeration, nor a wild and enthusiastic way of putting the fact that
the influence of His teaching and the beauty of His example can sway
us; but it is a plain and absolute truth that the divine Christ can
come into and abide in the narrow room of our poor hearts. And if He
does this, then 'he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit'; and the
Christ in me receives the sunshine of the divine love. That does not
destroy, but heightens, my individuality. I am more and not less myself
because 'I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.'

