still--piercing ourselves through too often, as the Apostle warned us--
with many sorrows, and falling into foolish and hurtful lusts, which 
drown men in destruction and perdition.  We are luxurious--more and more 
fond of show; more apt to live up to our incomes, and probably a little 
beyond; more and more craving for this or that gew-gaw, especially in 
dress and ornament, which if our neighbour has, we must have too, or we 
shall be mortified, envious.  Nay, so strong is this temper of rivalry, 
of allowing no superiors, grown in us, that we have made now-a-days a god 
of what used to be considered the basest of all vices--the vice of envy--
and dignify it with the names of equality and independence.  Men in this 
temper of mind cannot be at peace.  They are not content; they cannot be 
content.

But with what are they not content?  That is a question worth asking.  
For there is a discontent (as I have told you ere now) which is noble, 
manful, heroic, and divine.  Just as there is a discontent which is base, 
mean, unmanly, earthly--sometimes devilish.  There is a discontent which 
is certain, sooner or later, to bring with it the peace of God.  There is 
a discontent which drives the peace of God away, for ever and a day.  And 
the noble and peace-bringing discontent is to be discontented with 
ourselves, as very few are.  And the mean peace-destroying discontent is 
to be discontented with things around us, as too many are.  Now, my 
friends, I cannot see into your hearts; and I ought not to see.  For if I 
saw, I should be tempted to judge; and if I judged, I should most 
certainly judge rashly, shallowly, and altogether wrong.  Therefore 
examine yourselves, and judge yourselves in this matter.  Ask yourselves 
each, Am I at peace?  And if not, then apply to yourselves the rule of 
old Epictetus, the heroic slave, who, heathen though he was, sought God, 
and the peace of God, and found them, doubt it not, long, long ago.  Ask 
yourselves with Epictetus, Am I discontented with things which are in my 
own power, or with things which are not in my own power?--that is, 
discontented with myself, or with things which are not myself?  Am I 
discontented with myself, or with things about me, and outside of me?  
Consider this last question well, if you wish to be true Christians, true 
philosophers, and, indeed, true men and women.

But what is it that troubles you?  What is it you want altered?  On what 
have you set your heart and affections?  Is it something outside you?--
something which is NOT you yourself?  If so, there is no use in 
tormenting your soul about it; for it is not in your own power, and you 
will never alter it to your liking; and more, you need not alter it, for 
you are not responsible for it.  God sends it as it is, for better, for 
worse, and you must make up your mind to what God sends.  Do I mean that 
we are to submit slavishly to circumstances, like dumb animals?  Heaven 
forbid.  We are not, like Epictetus, slaves, but free men.  And we are 
made in God's image, and have each our spark, however dim, of that 
creative genius, that power of creating or of altering circumstances, by 
which God made all worlds; and to use that, is of our very birthright, or 
what would all education, progress, civilisation be, save rebellion 
against God?  But when we have done our utmost, how little shall we have 
done!  Canst thou,--asks our Lord, looking with loving sadness on the 
hurry and the struggle of the human anthill--canst thou by taking thought 
add one cubit to thy stature?  Why, is there a wise man or woman in this 
abbey, past fifty years of age, who does not know that, in spite of all 
their toil and struggle, they have gone not whither they willed, but 
whither God willed?  Have they not found out that for one circumstance of 
their lives which they could alter, there have been twenty which they 
could not, some born with them, some forced on them by an overruling 
Providence, irresistible indeed--but, as I hold, most loving and most 
fatherly, though often severe--even to agony--but irresistible still--
till what they have really gained by fighting circumstance, however 
valiantly, has been the MORAL gain, the gain in character?--the power to 
live the heroic life, which


   "Is not as idle ore,
But heated hot with burning fears,
And bathed in baths of hissing tears,
And batter'd, with the shocks of doom,
To shape and use."


Ah! if a man be learning that lesson, which is the primer of eternal 
life, then I hardly pity him, though I see him from youth to age tearing 
with weak hands at the gates of brass, and beating his soul's wings to 
pieces against the bars of the iron cage.  But, alas! the majority of 
mankind tear at the gates of brass, and beat against the iron cage, with 
no such good purpose, and therefore with no such good result.  They fight 
with circumstances, not that they may become better themselves, not that 
they may right the wrongs or elevate the souls of their fellow-men, not 
even that they may fulfil the sacred duty of maintaining, and educating, 
and providing for the children whom they have brought into the world, and 
for whom they are responsible alike to God and to man; but simply because 
circumstances are disagreeable to them; because the things around them do 
not satisfy their covetousness, their luxury, their ambition, their 
vanity.  And therefore the majority of mankind want to be, and to do, and 
to have a hundred things which are not in their own power, and of which 
they have no proof that God intends to give them; no proof either that if 
they had them, they would make right use of them, and certainly no proof 
at all that if they had them they would find peace.  They war and fight, 
and have not, because they ask not.  They ask, and have not, because they 
ask amiss, to consume it on their lusts; and so they spend their lives 
without peace, longing, struggling for things outside them, the greater 
part of which they do not get, because the getting them is not in their 
own power, and which if they got they could not keep, for they can carry 
nothing away with them when they die, neither can their pomp follow them.  
And therefore does man walk in a vain shadow, and disquiet himself in 
vain, looking for peace where it is not to be found--in everything and 
anything save in his own heart, in duty, and in God.

But happy are they who are discontented with the divine discontent, 
discontented with themselves.  Happy are they who hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, that they may become righteous and good men.  Happy are 
they who have set their hearts on the one thing which is in their own 
power--being better than they are, and doing better than they do.  Happy 
are they who long and labour after the true riches, which neither mobs 
nor tyrants, man nor devil, prosperity nor adversity, or any chance or 
change of mortal life, can take from them--the true and eternal wealth, 
which is the Spirit of God.  The man, I say, who has set his heart on 
being good, has set his heart on the one thing which is in his own power; 
the one thing which depends wholly and solely on his own will; the one 
thing which he can have if he chooses, for it is written, "If ye then 
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more 
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?"  
Moreover, he has set his heart on the one thing which cannot be taken 
from him.  God will not take it from him; and man, and fortune, and 
misfortune, cannot take it from him.  Poverty, misery, disease, death 
itself, cannot make him a worse man, cannot make him less just, less 
true, less pure, less charitable, less high-minded, less like Christ, and 
less like God.

Therefore he is at peace, for he is, as it were, intrenched in an 
impregnable fortress, against all men and all evil influences.  And that 
castle is his own soul.  And the keeper of that castle is none other than 
Almighty God, Jesus Christ our Lord, to whose keeping he has committed 
his soul, as unto a faithful and merciful Saviour, able to keep to the 
uttermost that which is committed to Him in faith and holiness.

Therefore that man is at peace with himself, for his conscience tells him 
that he is, if not doing his best, yet trying to do his best, better and 
better day by day.  He is at peace with all the world; for most men are 
longing and quarrelling for pleasant things outside them, for which he 
does not greatly care, while he is longing and striving for good things 
inside him in his own heart and soul; and so the world goes one way, and 
he another, and their desires do not interfere with each other.

But, more, that man is at peace with God.  He is at peace with God the 
Father; for he is behaving as the Father wishes His children to behave.  
He is at peace with God the Son; for he is trying to do that which God 
the Son did when He came not to do His own will, but His Father's; not to 
grasp at anything for himself, but simply to sacrifice himself for duty, 
for the good of man.  And he is at peace with God the Holy Spirit; for he 
is obeying the gracious inspirations of that Spirit, and growing a better 
man day by day.  And so the peace of God keeps that man's heart free from 
vain desires and angry passions, and his mind from those false and 
foolish judgments which make the world think things important which are 
quite unimportant; and, again, fancy things unimportant which are more 
important to them than the riches of the whole world.

My dear friends, take my words home with you, and if you wish for the 
only true and sound peace, which is the peace of God, do your duty.  Try 
to be as good as you can, each in his station in life.  So help you God.

Take an example from the soldier on the march; and if you do that, you 
will all understand what I mean.  The bad soldier has no peace, just 
because he troubles himself about things outside himself, and not in his 
own power.  "Will the officers lead us right?" That is not in his power.  
Let him go where the officers lead him, and do his own duty.  "Will he 
get food enough, water enough, care enough, if he is wounded?"  I hope 
and trust in God he will; but that is not in his own power.  Let him take 
that, too, as it comes, and do his duty.  "Will he be praised, rewarded, 
mentioned in the newspapers, if he fights well?"  That, too, is not in 
his own power.  Let him take that, too, as it comes, and do his duty; and 
so of everything else.  If the soldier on the march torments himself with 
these matters which are not in his own power, he is the man who will be 
troublesome and mutinous in time of peace, and in time of war will be the 
first to run away.  He will tell you, "A man must have justice done him; 
a man must see fair play for himself; a man must think of himself."  Poor 
fool!  He is not thinking of himself all the while, but of a number of 
things which are outside him, circumstances which stand round him, and 
outside him, and are not himself at all.  Because he thinks of them--the 
things outside him--he is a coward or a mutineer, while he fancies he is 
taking care of himself--as it is written, "Whosoever shall seek to save 
his life shall lose it."

But if the man will really think of himself, of that which is inside him, 
of his own character, his own honour, his own duty--then he will say, 
Well fed or ill fed, well led or ill led, praised and covered with 
medals, or neglected and forgotten, and dying in a ditch, I, by myself I, 
am the same man, and I have the same work to do.  I have to be--myself, 
and I have to do--my duty.  So help me God.  And therefore, so help me 
God, I will be discontented with no person or thing, save only with 
myself; and I will be discontented with myself, not when I have left 
undone something extraordinary, which I know I could not have done, but 
only when I have left undone something ordinary, some plain duty which I 
know I could have done, had I asked God to help me to do it.  Then in 
that soldier would be fulfilled--has been fulfilled, thank God, a 
thousand times, by men who lie in this abbey, and by men, too, of whom we 
never heard, "whose graves are scattered far and wide, by mount, by 
stream, by sea,"--in him would be fulfilled, I say, the words, "He that 
will lose his life shall save it."  Then would he have in his heart, and 
in his mind likewise, a peace which victory and safety cannot give, and 
which defeat, and wounds, ay, death itself, can never take away.

And are not you, too, soldiers--soldiers of Jesus Christ?  Then even as 
that good soldier, you may be at peace, through all the battles, 
victories, defeats of mortal life, if you will be discontented with 
nothing save yourselves, and vow, in spirit and in truth, the one oath 
which is no blasphemy, but an act of faith, and an act of prayer, and a 
confession of the true theology--So help me God.  For then God will help 
you.  Neither you nor I know how; and I am sure neither you nor I know 
why--save that God is utterly good.  God, I say, will help you, by His 
Holy Spirit the Comforter, to do your duty, and to be at peace.  And then 
the peace of God will rule in your hearts and make you kings to God.  For 
He will enable YOU each to rule, serene, though weary, over a kingdom--
or, alas! rather a mob, the most unruly, the most unreasonable, the most 
unstable, and often the most fierce, which you are like to meet on earth.  
To rule, I say, over a mob, of which you each must needs be king or 
slave, according as you choose.  And what is that mob?  What but your own 
faculties, your own emotions, your own passions--in one word, your own 
selves?  Yes, with the peace of God ruling in your hearts, you will be 
able to become what without it you will never be--and that is--masters of 
yourselves.



SERMON XXVI.  SINS OF PARENTS VISITED



Eversley. 19th Sunday after Trinity, 1868.

Ezekiel xviii. 1-4.  "The word of the Lord came unto me again, saying, 
What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, 
saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are 
set on edge?  As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion 
any more to use this proverb in Israel.  Behold, all souls are mine; as 
the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine:  the soul 
that sinneth, it shall die."

This is a precious chapter, and a comfortable chapter likewise, for it 
helps us to clear up a puzzle which has tormented the minds of men in all 
ages whenever they have thought of God, and of whether God meant them 
well, or meant them ill.

For all men have been tempted.  We are tempted at times to say,--The 
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.  
That is, we are punished not for what we have done wrong, but for what 
our fathers did wrong.  One man says,--My forefathers squandered their 
money, and I am punished by being poor.  Or, my forefathers ruined their 
constitutions, and, therefore, I am weakly and sickly.  My forefathers 
were ignorant and reckless, and, therefore, I was brought up ignorant, 
and in all sorts of temptation.  And so men complain of their ill-luck 
and bad chance, as they call it, till they complain of God, and say, as 
the Jews said in Ezekiel's time, God's ways are unequal--partial--unfair.  
He is a respecter of persons.  He has not the same rule for all men.  He 
starts men unequally in the race of life--some heavily weighted with 
their father's sins and misfortunes, some helped in every way by their 
father's virtue and good fortune--and then He expects them all to run 
alike.  God is not just and equal.  And then some go on,--men who think 
themselves philosophers, but are none--to say things concerning God of 
which I shall say nothing here, lest I put into your minds foolish 
thoughts, which had best be kept out of them.

But, some of you may say, Is it not so after all?  Is it not true?  Is 
not God harder on some than on others?  Does not God punish men every day 
for their father's sins?  Does He not say in the Second Commandment that 
He will do so, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children to the 
third and fourth generation; and how can you make that agree with what 
Ezekiel says,--"The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father."  My 
dear friends, I know that this is a puzzle, and always has been one.  
Like the old puzzle of God's foreknowledge and our free will, which seem 
to contradict each other.  Like the puzzle that we must help ourselves, 
and yet that God must help us, which seem to contradict each other.  So 
with this.  I believe of it, as of the two others I just mentioned, that 
there is no real contradiction between the two cases; and that some-when, 
somehow, somewhere, in the world to come, we shall see them clearly 
reconciled; and justify God in all His dealings, and glorify Him in all 
His ways.  But surely already, here, now, we may see our way somewhat 
into the depths of this mystery.  For Christ has come to give us light, 
and in His light we may see light, even into this dark matter.

For see:  God visits the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the 
third and fourth generation--but of whom?--of them that hate Him.  Now, 
by those who hate God is meant, those who break His commandments, and are 
bad men.  If so, then, I say that God is not only just but merciful, in 
visiting the sins of the fathers on the children.

For, consider two cases.  Suppose these bad men, from father to son, and 
from son to grandson, go on in the same evil ways, and are incorrigible.  
Then is not God merciful to the world in punishing them, even in 
destroying them out of the world, where they only do harm?  The world 
does not want fools, it wants wise men.  The world does not want bad men, 
it wants good men; and we ought to thank God, if, by His eternal laws, He 
gets rid of bad men for us; and, as the saying is, civilizes them off the 
face of the earth in the third or fourth generation.  And God does so.  
If a family, or a class, or a whole nation becomes incorrigibly 
profligate, foolish, base, in three or four generations they will either 
die out or vanish.  They will sink to the bottom of society, and become 
miserably poor, weak, and of no influence, and so unable to do harm to 
any but themselves.  Whole families will sink thus, I have seen it; you 
may have seen it.  Whole nations will sink thus; as the Jews sank in 
Ezekiel's time, and again in our Lord's time; and be conquered, trampled 
on, counted for nothing, because they were worth nothing.

But now suppose, again, that the children, when their father's sins are 
visited on them, are NOT incorrigible.  Suppose they are like the wise 
son of whom Ezekiel speaks, in the 14th verse, who seeth all his father's 
sins, and considereth, and doeth not such like--then has not God been 
merciful and kind to him in visiting his father's sins on him?  He has.  
God is justified therein.  His eternal laws of natural retribution, 
severe as they are, have worked in love and in mercy, if they have taught 
the young man the ruinousness, the deadliness of sin.  Have the father's 
sins made the son poor?  Then he learns not to make his children poor by 
his sin.  Have his father's sins made him unhealthy?  Then he learns not 
to injure his children's health.  Have his father's sins kept him 
ignorant, or in anywise hindered his rise in life?  Then he learns the 
value of a good education, and, perhaps, stints himself to give his 
children advantages which he had not himself--and, as sure as he does so, 
the family begins to rise again after its fall.  This is no fancy, it is 
fact.  You may see it.  I have seen it, thank God.  How some of the 
purest and noblest women, some of the ablest and most right-minded men, 
will spring from families, will be reared in households, where everything 
was against them--where there was everything to make them profligate, 
false, reckless, in a word--bad--except the grace of God, which was 
trying to make them good, and succeeded in making them good; and how, 
though they have felt the punishment of their parents' sins upon them in 
many ways during their whole life, yet that has been to them not a mere 
punishment, but a chastisement, a purifying medicine, a cross to be 
borne, which only stirred them up to greater watchfulness against sin, to 
greater earnestness in educating their children, to greater activity and 
energy in doing right, and giving their children the advantages which 
they had not themselves.  And so were fulfilled in them two laws of God.  
The one which Ezekiel lays down--that the bad man's son who executes 
God's judgments and walks in God's statutes shall not die for the 
iniquity of his father, but surely live; and the other law which Moses 
lays down--that God shews mercy unto thousands of generations, as I 
believe it means--that is, to son after father, and son after father 
again, without end--as long as they love Him and keep His commandments.

I do not, therefore, see that there is any real contradiction between 
what Moses says in the second commandment and what Ezekiel says in this 
chapter.  They are but two different sides of the same truth; and Moses 
is shewing the Jews one side, because they needed most to be taught that 
in his time, and Ezekiel showing them the other, because that was the 
teaching which they needed most then.  For they were fancying themselves, 
in their calamities, the victims of some blind and cruel fate, and had 
forgotten that, when God said that He visited the sins of the fathers on 
the children, He qualified it by saying, "of them that hate Me."

Therefore, be hopeful about yourselves, and hopeful about your children 
after you.  If any one here feels--I am fallen very low in the world--
here all has been so much against me--my parents were the ruin of me--Let 
him remember this one word of Ezekiel.  "Have I any pleasure at all that 
the wicked should die? saith the Lord God:  and not that he should return 
from his ways, and live?"  Let him turn from his father's evil ways, and 
do that which is lawful and right, and then he can say with the Prophet, 
in answer to all the strokes of fortune and the miseries of circumstance, 
"Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy:  when I fall I shall arise."  
Provided he will remember that God requires of all men something, which 
is, to be as good as they can be; then he may remember also that our Lord 
