Gospel which alone answers to the facts which he deals with; and that
is the Gospel which, God helping me, I have for forty years tried to
preach.

We hear a great deal at present, or we did a few years ago, about
this generation having recovered Jesus Christ, and about the
necessity of going 'back to the Christ of the Gospels.' By all means,
I say, if in the process you do not lose the Christ of the Epistles,
who is the Christ of the Gospels, too. I am free to admit that a past
generation has wrapped theological cobwebs round the gracious figure
of Christ with disastrous results. For it is perfectly possible to
know the things that are said about Him, and not to know Him about
whom these things are said. But the mistake into which the present
generation is far more likely to fall than that of substituting
theology for Christ, is the converse one--that of substituting an
undefined Christ for the Christ of the Gospels and the Epistles, the
Incarnate Son of God, who died for our salvation. And that is a more
disastrous mistake than the other, for you can know nothing about Him
and He can be nothing to you, except as you grasp the Apostolic
explanation of the bare facts--seeing in Him the Word who became
flesh, the Son who died that we might receive the adoption of sons.

I would further point out that a clear conception of what the theme
is, goes a long way to determine the method in which it shall be
proclaimed. The Apostle says, in the passage which is parallel to the
present one, in the previous chapter, 'We preach Christ crucified';
with strong emphasis on the word 'preach.' 'The Jew required a sign';
he wanted a man who would do something. The Greek sought after
wisdom; he wanted a man who would perorate and argue and dissertate.
Paul says, 'No!' 'We have nothing to _do_. We do not come to
philosophise and to argue. We come with a message of fact that has
occurred, of a Person that has lived.' And, as most of you know, the
word which he uses means in its full signification, 'to proclaim as a
herald does.'

Of course, if my business were to establish a set of principles,
theological or otherwise, then argumentation would be my weapon,
proofs would be my means, and my success would be that I should win
your credence, your intellectual consent, and conviction. If I were
here to proclaim simply a morality, then the thing that I would aim
to secure would be obedience, and the method of securing it would be
to enforce the authority and reasonableness of the command. But,
seeing that my task is to proclaim a living Person and a historical
fact, then the way to do that is to do as the herald does when in the
market-place he stands, trumpet in one hand and the King's message in
the other--proclaim it loudly, confidently, not 'with bated breath
and whispering humbleness,' as if apologising, nor too much concerned
to buttress it up with argumentation out of his own head, but to say,
'Thus saith the Lord,' and to what the Lord saith conscience says,
'Amen.' Brethren, we need far more, in all our pulpits, of that
unhesitating confidence in the plain, simple proclamation, stripped,
as far as possible, of human additions and accretions, of the great
fact and the great Person on whom all our salvation depends.

II. So let me ask you to notice the exclusiveness which this theme
demands.

'Nothing but,' says Paul. I might venture to say--though perhaps the
tone of the personal allusions in this sermon may seem to contradict
it--that this exclusiveness is to be manifested in one very difficult
direction, and that that is, the herald shall efface himself. We have
to hold up the picture; and if I might take such a metaphor, like a
man in a gallery who is displaying some masterpiece to the eyes of
the beholders, we have to keep ourselves well behind it; and it will
be wise if not even a finger-tip is allowed to steal in front and
come into sight. One condition, I believe, of real power in the
ministration of the Gospel, is that people shall be convinced that
the preacher is thinking not at all about himself, but altogether
about his message. You remember that wonderfully pathetic utterance
from John the Baptist's stern lips, which derives much additional
pathos and tenderness from the character of the man from whom it
came, when they asked him, 'Who art thou?' and his answer was, 'I am
a Voice.' I am a Voice; that is all! Ah, that is the example! We
preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord. We must efface
ourselves if we would proclaim Christ.

But I turn to another direction in which this theme demands
exclusiveness, and I revert to the previous chapter where in the
parallel portion to the words of my text, we find the Apostle very
clearly conscious of the two great streams of expectation and wish
which he deliberately thwarted and set at nought. 'The Jews require a
sign--but we preach Christ crucified. The Greeks seek after wisdom,'
but again, 'we preach Christ crucified.' Now, take these two. They
are representations, in a very emphatic way, of two sets of desires
and mental characteristics, which divide the world between them.

On the one hand, there is the sensuous tendency that wants something
done for it, something to see, something that sense can grasp at; and
so, as it fancies, work itself upwards into a higher region. 'The Jew
requires a sign'--that is, not merely a miracle, but something to
look at. He wants a visible sacrifice; he wants a priest. He wants
religion to consist largely in the doing of certain acts which may be
supposed to bring, in some magical fashion, spiritual blessings. And
Paul opposes to that, 'We preach Christ crucified.' Brethren, the
tendency is strong to-day, not only in those parts of the Anglican
communion where sacramentarian theories are in favour, but amongst
all sections of the Christian Church, in which there is obvious a
drift towards more ornate ritual, and aesthetic services, as means of
attracting to church or chapel, and as more important than
proclaiming Christ. I am free to confess that possibly some of us,
with our Puritan upbringing and tendency, too much disregard that
side of human nature. Possibly it is so. But for all that I
profoundly believe that if religion is to be strong it must have a
very, very small infusion of these external aids to spiritual
worship, and that few things more weaken the power of the Gospel that
Paul preached than the lowering of the flag in conformity with
desires of men of sense, and substituting for the simple glory of the
preached Word the meretricious, and in time impotent, and always
corrupting, attractions of a sensuous worship.

Further, 'The Greeks seek after wisdom.' They wanted demonstration,
abstract principles, systematised philosophies, and the like. Paul
comes again with his 'We preach Christ and Him crucified.' The wisdom
is there, as I shall have to say in a moment, but the form that it
takes is directly antagonistic to the wishes of these wisdom-seeking
Greeks. The same thing in modern guise besets us to-day. We are
called upon, on all sides, to bring into the pulpit what they call an
ethical gospel; putting it into plain English, to preach morality,
and to leave out Christ. We are called upon, on all sides, to preach
an applied Christianity, a social gospel--that is to say, largely to
turn the pulpit into a Sunday supplement to the daily newspaper. We
are asked to deal with the intellectual difficulties which spring
from the collision of science, true or false, with religion, and the
like. All that is right enough. But I believe from my heart that the
thing to do is to copy Paul's example, and to preach Christ and Him
crucified. You may think me right or you may think me wrong, but here
and now, at the end of forty years, I should like to say that I have
for the most part ignored that class of subjects deliberately, and of
set purpose, and with a profound conviction, be it erroneous or not,
that a ministry which listens much to the cry for 'wisdom' in its
modern forms, has departed from the true perspective of Christian
teaching, and will weaken the churches which depend upon it. Let who
will turn the pulpit into a professor's chair, or a lecturer's
platform, or a concert-room stage or a politician's rostrum, I for
one determine to know nothing among you save Jesus Christ and Him
crucified.

III. Lastly, observe the all-sufficient comprehensiveness which this
theme secures.

Paul says 'nothing but'; he might have said 'everything in.' For
'Jesus Christ and Him crucified' covers all the ground of men's
needs. No doubt many of you will have been saying to yourselves
whilst you have been listening, if you have been listening, to what I
have been saying, 'Ah! old-fashioned narrowness; quite out of date in
this generation.' Brethren, there are two ways of adapting one's
ministry to the times. One is falling in with the requirements of the
times, and the other is going dead against them, and both of these
methods have to be pursued by us.

But the exclusiveness of which I have been speaking, is no narrow
exclusiveness. Paul felt that, if he was to give the Corinthians what
they needed, he must refuse to give them what they wanted, and that
whilst he crossed their wishes he was consulting their necessities.
That is true yet, for the preaching that bases itself upon the life
and death of Jesus Christ, conceived as Paul had learned from Jesus
Christ to conceive them, that Gospel, whilst it brushes aside men's
superficial wishes, goes straight to the heart of their deep-lying
universal necessities, for what the Jew needs most is not a sign, and
what the Greek needs most is not wisdom, but what they both need most
is deliverance from the guilt and power of sin. And we all, scholars
and fools, poets and common-place people, artists and ploughmen, all
of us, in all conditions of life, in all varieties of culture, in all
stages of intellectual development, in all diversities of occupation
and of mental bias, what we all have in common is that human heart in
which sin abides, and what we all need most to have is that evil drop
squeezed out of it, and our souls delivered from the burden and the
bondage. Therefore, any man that comes with a sign, and does not deal
with the sin of the human heart, and any man that comes with a
philosophical system of wisdom, and does not deal with sin, does not
bring a Gospel that will meet the necessities even of the people to
whose cravings he has been aiming to adapt his message.

But, beyond that, in this message of Christ and Him crucified, there
lies in germ the satisfaction of all that is legitimate in these
desires that at first sight it seems to thwart. 'A sign?' Yes, and
where is there power like the power that dwells in Him who is the
Incarnate might of omnipotence? 'Wisdom?' Yes, and where is there
wisdom, except 'in Him in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge'? Let the Jew come to the Cross, and in the weak Man
hanging there, he will find a mightier revelation of the power of God
than anywhere else. Let the Greek come to the Cross, and there he
will find wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption.
The bases of all social, economical, political reform and well-being,
lie in the understanding and the application to social and national
life, of the principles that are wrapped in, and are deduced from,
the Incarnation and the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. We have not
learned them all yet. They have not all been applied to national and
individual life yet. I plead for no narrow exclusiveness, but for one
consistent with the widest application of Christian principles to all
life. Paul determined to know nothing but Jesus, and to know
everything in Jesus, and Jesus in everything. Do not begin your
building at the second-floor windows. Put in your foundations first,
and be sure that they are well laid. Let the Sacrifice of Christ, in
its application to the individual and his sins, be ever the basis of
all that you say. And then, when that foundation is laid, exhibit, to
your heart's content, the applications of Christianity and its social
aspects. But be sure that the beginning of them all is the work of
Christ for the individual sinful soul, and the acceptance of that
work by personal faith.

Dear friends, ours has been a long and happy union but it is a very
solemn one. My responsibilities are great; yours are not small. Let
me beseech you to ask yourselves if, with all your kindness to the
messenger, you have given heed to the message. Have you passed beyond
the voice that speaks, to Him of whom it speaks? Have you taken the
truth--veiled and weakened as I know it has been by my words, but yet
in them--for what it is, the word of the living God? My occupancy of
this pulpit must in the nature of things, before long, come to a
close, but the message which I have brought to you will survive all
changes in the voice that speaks here. 'All flesh is grass ... the
Word of the Lord endureth for ever.' And, closing these forty years,
during a long part of which some of you have listened most lovingly
and most forbearingly, I leave with you this, which I venture to
quote, though it is my Master's word about Himself, 'I judge you not;
the word which I have spoken unto you, the same shall judge you in
the last day.'




GOD'S FELLOW-WORKERS

   'Labourers together with God.'--1 COR. iii. 9.


The characteristic Greek tendency to factions was threatening to rend
the Corinthian Church, and each faction was swearing by a favourite
teacher. Paul and his companion, Apollos, had been taken as the
figureheads of two of these parties, and so he sets himself in the
context, first of all to show that neither of the two was of any real
importance in regard to the Church's life. They were like a couple of
gardeners, one of whom did the planting, and the other the watering;
but neither the man that put the little plant into the ground, nor
the man that came after him with a watering-pot, had anything to do
with originating the mystery of the life by which the plant grew.
That was God's work, and the pair that had planted and watered were
nothing. So what was the use of fighting which of two nothings was
the greater?

But then he bethinks himself that that is not quite all. The man that
plants and the man that waters are something after all. They do not
communicate life, but they do provide for its nourishment. And more
than that, the two operations--that of the man with the dibble and
that of the man with the watering-pot--are one in issue; and so they
are partners, and in some respects may be regarded as one. Then what
is the sense of pitting them against each other?

But even that is not quite all; though united in operation, they are
separate in responsibility and activity, and will be separate in
reward. And even that is not all; for, being nothing and yet
something, being united and yet separate, they are taken into
participation and co-operation with God; and as my text puts it, in
what is almost a presumptuous phrase, they are 'labourers together
with Him.' That partnership of co-operation is not merely a
partnership of the two, but it is a partnership of the three--God and
the two who, in some senses, are one.

Now whilst this text is primarily spoken in regard to the apostolic
and evangelistic work of these early teachers, the principle which it
embodies is a very wide one, and it applies in all regions of life
and activity, intellectual, scholastic, philanthropic, social.
Where-ever men are thinking God's thoughts and trying to carry into
effect any phase or side of God's manifold purposes of good and
blessing to the world, there it is true. We claim no special or
exclusive prerogative for the Christian teacher. Every man that is
trying to make men understand God's thought, whether it is expressed
in creation, or whether it is written in history, or whether it is
carven in half-obliterated letters on the constitution of human
nature, every man who, in any region of society or life, is seeking
to effect the great designs of the universal loving Father--can take
to himself, in the measure and according to the manner of his special
activity, the great encouragement of my text, and feel that he, too,
in his little way, is a fellow-helper to the truth and a
fellow-worker with God. But then, of course, according to New
Testament teaching, and according to the realities of the case, the
highest form in which men thus can co-operate with God, and carry
into effect His purposes is that in which men devote themselves,
either directly or indirectly, to spreading throughout the whole
world the name and the power of the Saviour Jesus Christ, in whom all
God's will is gathered, and through whom all God's blessings are
communicated to mankind. So the thought of my text comes
appropriately when I have to bring before you the claims of our
missionary operations.

Now, the first way in which I desire to look at this great idea
expressed in these words, is that we find in it

I. A solemn thought.

'Labourers together with God.' Cannot He do it all Himself? No. God
needs men to carry out His purposes. True, on the Cross, Jesus spoke
the triumphant word, 'It is finished!' He did not thereby simply mean
that He had completed all His suffering; but He meant that He had
then done all which the world needed to have done in order that it
should be a redeemed world. But for the distribution and application
of that finished work God depends on men. You all know, in your own
daily businesses, how there must be a middleman between the mill and
the consumer. The question of organising a distributing agency is
quite as important as any other part of the manufacturer's business.
The great reservoir is full, but there has to be a system of
irrigating-channels by which the water is carried into every corner
of the field that is to be watered. Christian men individually, and
the Church collectively, supply--may I call it the missing
link?--between a redeeming Saviour and the world which He has
redeemed in act, but which is not actually redeemed, until it has
received the message of the great Redemption that is wrought. The
supernatural is implanted in the very heart of the mass of leaven by
the Incarnation and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; but the spreading of
that supernatural revelation is left in the hands of men who work
through natural processes, and who thus become labourers together
with God, and enable Christ to be to single souls, in blessed
reality, what He is potentially to the world, and has been ever
since. He died upon the Cross. 'It is finished.' Yes--because it is
finished, our work begins.

Let me remind you of the profound symbolism in that incident where
our Lord for once appeared conspicuously, and almost ostentatiously,
before Israel as its true King. He had need--as He Himself said--of
the meek beast on which He rode. He cannot pass, in His coronation
procession, through the world unless He has us, by whom He may be
carried into every corner of the earth. So 'the Lord has need' of us,
and we are 'fellow-labourers with Him.'

But this same thought suggests another point. We have here a solemn
call addressed to every Christian man and woman.

Do not let us run away with the idea that, because here the Apostle
is speaking in regard to himself and Apollos, he is enunciating a
truth which applies only to Apostles and evangelists. It is true of
all Christians. My knowledge of and faith in Jesus Christ as my own
personal Saviour impose upon me the obligation, in so far as my
opportunities and capacities extend, thus to co-operate with Him in
spreading His great Name. Every Christian man, just because he is a
Christian, is invested with the power--and power to its last particle
is duty--and is, therefore, burdened with the honourable obligation
to work for God. There is such a thing as 'coming to the help of the
Lord,' though that phrase seems to reverse altogether the true
relation. It is the duty of every Christian, partly because of
loyalty to Jesus, and partly because of the responsibility which the
very constitution of society lays upon every one of us, to diffuse
what he possesses, and to be a distributing agent for the life that
he himself enjoys. Brethren! there is no possibility of Christian men
or women being fully faithful to the Saviour, unless they recognise
that the duty of being a fellow-labourer with God inevitably follows
on being a possessor of Christ's salvation; and that no Apostle, no
official, no minister, no missionary, has any more necessity laid
upon him to preach the Gospel, nor pulls down any heavier woe on
himself if he is unfaithful, than has and does each one of Christ's
servants.

So 'we are fellow-labourers with God.' Alas! alas! how poorly the
average Christian realises--I do not say discharges, but
realises--that obligation! Brethren, I do not wish to find fault, but
I do beseech you to ask yourselves whether, if you are Christians,
you are doing anything the least like what my text contemplates as
the duty of all Christians.

May I say a word or two with regard to another aspect of this solemn
call? Does not the thought of working along with God prescribe for us
the sort of work that we ought to do? We ought to work in God's
fashion, and if we wish to know what God's fashion is, we have but to
look at Jesus Christ. We ought to work in Jesus Christ's fashion. We
all know what that involved of self-sacrifice, of pain, of weariness,
of utter self-oblivious devotion, of gentleness, of tenderness,
of infinite pity, of love running over. 'The master's eye makes a good
servant.' The Master's hand working along with the servant ought to
make the servant work after the Master's fashion. 'As My Father hath
sent Me, so send I you.' If we felt that side by side with us, like
two sailors hauling on one rope, 'the Servant of the Lord' was
toiling, do you not think it would burn up all our selfishness, and
light up all our indifference, and make us spend ourselves in His
service? A fellow-labourer with God will surely never be lazy and
selfish. Thus my text has in it, to begin with, a solemn call.

It suggests

II. A signal honour.

Suppose a great painter, a Raphael or a Turner, taking a little boy
that cleaned his brushes, and saying to him, 'Come into my studio,
and I will let you do a bit of work upon my picture.' Suppose an
aspirant, an apprentice in any walk of life, honoured by being
permitted to work along with some one who was recognised all over the
world as being at the very top of that special profession. Would it
not be a feather in the boy's cap all his life? And would he not
think it the greatest honour that ever had been done him that he was
allowed to co-operate, in however inferior a fashion, with such an
one? Jesus Christ says to us, 'Come and work here side by side with
Me,' But Christian men, plenty of them, answer, 'It is a perpetual
nuisance, this continual application for money! money! money! work!
work! work! It is never-ending, and it is a burden!' Yes, it is a
burden, just because it is an honour. Do you know that the Hebrew
word which means 'glory' literally means 'weight'? There is a great
truth in that. You cannot get true honours unless you are prepared to
carry them as burdens. And the highest honour that Jesus Christ gives
to men when He says to them, not only 'Go work to-day in My
vineyard,' but 'Come, work here side by side with Me,' is a heavy
weight which can only be lightened by a cheerful heart.

Is it not the right way to look at all the various forms of Christian
activity which are made imperative upon Christian people, by their
possession of Christianity as being tokens of Christ's love to us? Do
you remember that this same Apostle said, 'Unto me who am less than
the least of all saints is this grace given, that I should preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ?' He could speak about burdens and
heavy tasks, and being 'persecuted but not forsaken,' almost crushed
down and yet not in despair, and about the weights that came upon him
daily, 'the care of all the churches,' but far beneath all the sense
of his heavy load lay the thrill of thankful wonder that to him, of
all men in the world, knowing as he did better than anybody else
could do his own imperfection and insufficiency, this distinguishing
honour had been bestowed, that he was made the Apostle to the
Gentiles. That is the way in which the true man will always look at
what the selfish man, and the half-and-half Christian, look at as
being a weight and a weariness, or a disagreeable duty, which is to
be done as perfunctorily as possible. One question that a great many
who call themselves Christians ask is, 'With how little service can I
pass muster?' Ah, it is because we have so little of the Spirit of
Christ in us that we feel burdened by His command, 'Go ye into all
the world,' as being so heavy; and that so many of us--I leave you to
judge if you are in the class--so many of us make it criminally light
if we do not ignore it altogether. I believe that, if it were
possible to conceive of the duty and privilege of spreading Christ's
name in the world being withdrawn from the Church, all His real
servants would soon be yearning to have it back again. It is a token
of His love; it is a source of infinite blessings to ourselves; 'if
the house be not worthy, your peace shall return to you again.'

And now, lastly, we have suggested by this text

III. A strong encouragement.

'Fellow-labourers with God'--then, God is a Fellow-labourer with us.
The co-operation works both ways, and no man who is seeking to spread
that great salvation, to distribute that great wealth, to irrigate
some little corner of the field by some little channel that he has
dug, needs to feel that he is labouring alone. If I am working
with God, God is working with me. Do you remember that most striking
picture which is drawn in the verses appended to Mark's Gospel, which
tells how the universe seemed parted into two halves, and up above in
the serene the Lord 'sat on the right hand of God,' while below, in
the murky and obscure, 'they went everywhere preaching the Word.' The
separation seems complete, but the two halves are brought together by
the next word--'The Lord also,' sitting up yonder, 'working with
them' the wandering preachers down here, 'confirming the words with
signs following.' Ascended on high, entered into His rest, having
finished His work, He yet is working with us, if we are labourers
together with God. If we turn to the last book of Scripture, which
draws back the curtain from the invisible world which is all filled
with the glorified Christ, and shows its relations to the earthly
militant church, we read no longer of a Christ enthroned in apparent
ease, but of a Christ walking amidst the candlesticks, and of a Lamb
standing in the midst of the Throne, and opening the seals, launching
forth into the world the sequences of the world's history, and of the
Word of God charging His enemies on His white horse, and behind Him
the armies of God following. The workers who labour with God have the
ascended Christ labouring with them.

But if God works with us, success is sure. Then comes the old
question that Gideon asked with bitterness of heart, when he was
threshing out his handful of wheat in a corner to avoid the
oppressors, 'If the Lord be with us, wherefore is all this come upon
us? Will any one say that the progress of the Gospel in the world has
been at the rate which its early believers expected, or at the rate
which its own powers warranted them to expect? Certainly not. And so
it comes to this, that whilst every true labourer has God working
with him, and therefore success is certain, the planter and the
waterer can delay the growth of the plant by their unfaithfulness, by
not expecting success, by not so working as to make it likely, or by
neutralising their evangelistic efforts by their worldly lives. When
Jesus Christ was on earth, it is recorded, 'He could there do no
mighty works because of their unbelief, save that He laid His hands
on a few sick folk and healed them.' A faithless Church, a worldly
Church, a lazy Church, an unspiritual Church, an un-Christlike
Church--which, to a large extent, is the designation of the so-called
Church of to day--can clog His chariot-wheels, can thwart the work,
can hamper the Divine Worker. If the Christians of Manchester were
revived, they could win Manchester for Jesus. If the Christians of
England lived their Christianity, they could make England what it
never has been but in name--a Christian country. If the Church
universal were revived, it could win the world. If the single
labourer, or the community of such, is labouring 'in the Lord,' their
labour will not be in vain; and if they thus plant and water, God
will give the increase.



THE TESTING FIRE

   'Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver,
   precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: 13. Every man's work
   shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it,
   because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall
   try every man's work of what sort it is.'--1 COR. iii. 12, 13.


Before I enter upon the ideas which the words suggest, my exegetical
conscience binds me to point out that the original application of the
text is not exactly that which I purpose to make of it now. The
context shows that the Apostle is thinking about the special subject
of Christian teachers and their work, and that the builders of whom
he speaks are the men in the Corinthian Church, some of them his
allies and some of them his rivals, who were superimposing upon the
foundation of the preaching of Jesus Christ other doctrines and
principles. The 'wood, hay, stubble' are the vapid and trivial
doctrines which the false teachers were introducing into the Church.
The 'gold, silver, and precious stones' are the solid and substantial
verities which Paul and his friends were proclaiming. And it is about
these, and not about the Christian life in the general, that the
tremendous metaphors of my text are uttered.

But whilst that is true, the principles involved have a much wider
range than the one case to which the Apostle applies them. And,
though I may be slightly deflecting the text from its original
direction, I am not doing violence to it, if I take it as declaring
some very plain and solemn truths applicable to all Christian people,
in their task of building up a life and character on the foundation
of Jesus Christ; truths which are a great deal too much forgotten in
our modern popular Christianity, and which it concerns us all very
clearly to keep in view. There are three things here that I wish to
say a word about--the patchwork building, the testing fire, the fate
of the builders.

I. First, the patchwork structure.

'If any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble.' In the original application of the metaphor,
Paul is thinking of all these teachers in that church at Corinth as
being engaged in building the one structure--I venture to deflect
here, and to regard each of us as rearing our own structure of life
and character on the foundation of the preached and accepted Christ.

Now, what the Apostle says is that these builders were, some of them,
laying valuable things like gold and silver and costly stones--by
which he does not mean jewels, but marbles, alabasters, polished
porphyry or granite, and the like; sumptuous building materials,
which were employed in great palaces or temples--and that some of
them were bringing timber, hay, stubble, reeds gathered from the
marshes or the like, and filling in with such trash as that. That is
a picture of what a great many Christian people are doing in their
own lives--the same man building one course of squared and solid and
precious stones, and topping them with rubbish. You will see in the
walls of Jerusalem, at the base, five or six courses of those massive
blocks which are the wonders of the world yet; well jointed, well
laid, well cemented, and then on the top of them a mass of poor
stuff, heaped together anyhow; scamped work--may I use a modern
vulgarism?--'jerry-building.' You may go to some modern village, on
an ancient historic site, and you will find built into the mud walls
of the hovels in which the people are living, a marble slab with fair
carving on it, or the drum of a great column of veined marble, and on
the top of that, timber and clay mixed together.

That is the type of the sort of life that hosts of Christian people
are living. For, mark, all the builders are on the foundation. Paul
is not speaking about mere professed Christians who had no faith at
all in them, and no real union with Jesus Christ. These builders were
'on the foundation'; they were building on the foundation, there was
a principle deep down in their lives--which really lay at the bottom
of their lives--and yet had not come to such dominating power as to
mould and purify and make harmonious with itself the life that was
reared upon it. We all know that that is the condition of many men,
that they have what really are the fundamental bases of their lives,
in belief and aim and direction; and which yet are not strong enough
to master the whole of the life, and to manifest themselves through
it. Especially it is the condition of some Christian people. They
have a real faith, but it is of the feeblest and most rudimentary
kind. They are on the foundation, but their lives are interlaced with
the most heterogeneous mixty-maxty of good and evil, of lofty, high,
self-sacrificing thoughts and heavenward aspirations, of resolutions
never carried out into practice; and side by side with these there
shall be meannesses, selfishnesses, tempers, dispositions all
contradictory of the former impulses. One moment they are all fire
and love, the next moment ice and selfishness. One day they are all
for God, the next day all for the world, the flesh, and the devil.
Jacob sees the open heavens and the face of God and vows; to-morrow
he meets Laban and drops to shifty ways. Peter leaves all and follows
his Master, and in a little while the fervour has gone, and the fire
has died down into grey ashes, and a flippant servant-girl's tongue
leads him to say 'I know not the man.' 'Gold, silver, precious
stones,' and topping them, 'wood, hay, stubble!'

The inconsistencies of the Christian life are what my text, in the
application that I am venturing to make of it, suggests to us. Ah,
dear friends! we do not need to go to Jacob and Peter; let us look at
our own hearts, and if we will honestly examine one day of our lives,
I think we shall understand how it is possible for a man, on the
foundation, yet to build upon it these worthless and combustible
things, 'wood, hay, stubble.'

We are not to suppose that one man builds _only_ 'gold, silver,
precious stones.' There is none of us that does that. And we are not
to suppose that any man who _is_ on the foundations has so little
grasp of it, as that he builds _only_ 'wood, hay, stubble.'

There is none of us who has not intermingled his building, and there
is none of us, if we are Christians at all, who has not sometimes
laid a course of 'precious stones.' If your faith is doing _nothing_
for you except bringing to you a belief that you are not going to
hell when you die, then it is no faith at all. 'Faith without works
is dead.' So there is a mingling in the best, and--thank God!--there
is a mingling of good with evil, in the worst of real Christian
people.

II. Note here, the testing fire.

Paul points to two things, the day and the fire.

'The day shall declare it,' that is the day on which Jesus Christ
comes to be the Judge; and it, that is 'the day,' 'shall be revealed
in fire; and the fire shall test every man's work.' Now, it is to be
noticed that here we are moving altogether in the region of lofty
symbolism, and that the metaphor of the testing fire is suggested by
the previous enumeration of building materials, gold and silver being
capable of being assayed by flame; and 'wood, hay, stubble' being
combustible, and sure to be destroyed thereby. The fire here is not
an emblem of punishment; it is not an emblem of cleansing. There is
no reference to anything in the nature of what Roman Catholics call
purgatorial fires. The allusion is simply to some stringent and
searching means of testing the quality of a man's work, and of
revealing that quality.

So then, we come just to this, that for people 'on the foundation,'
there is a Day of revelation and testing of their life's work. It is
a great misfortune that so-called Evangelical Christianity does not
say as much as the New Testament says about the judgment that is to
be passed on 'the house of God.' People seem to think that the great
doctrine of salvation, 'not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but by His mercy,' is, somehow or other, interfered with when
we proclaim, as Paul proclaims, speaking to Christian people, 'We
must be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ,' and declares
that 'Every man will receive the things done in his body, according
to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.' Paul saw no
contradiction, and there is no contradiction. But a great many
professing Christians seem to think that the great blessing of their
salvation by faith is, that they are exempt from that future
revelation and testing and judgment of their acts. That is not the
New Testament teaching. But, on the contrary, 'Whatsoever a man
soweth that shall he also reap,' was originally said to a church of
Christian people. And here we come full front against that solemn
truth, that the Lord will 'gather together His saints, those that
have made a covenant with Him by sacrifice, that He may judge His
people.' Never mind about the drapery, the symbolism, the expression
in material forms with which that future judgment is arranged, in
order that we may the more easily grasp it. Remember that these
pictures in the New Testament of a future judgment are highly
symbolical, and not to be interpreted as if they were plain prose;
but also remember that the heart of them is this, that there comes
for Christian people as for all others, a time when the light will
shine down upon their past, and will flash its rays into the dark
chambers of memory, and when men will--to themselves if not to
others--be revealed 'in the day when the Lord shall judge the secrets
of men according to my Gospel.'

We have all experience enough of how but a few years, a change of
circumstances, or a growth into another stage of development, give us
fresh eyes with which to estimate the moral quality of our past. Many
a thing, which we thought to be all right at the time when we did it,
looks to us now very questionable and a plain mistake. And when we
shift our stations to up yonder, and get rid of all this blinding
medium of flesh and sense, and have the issues of our acts in our
possession, and before our sight--ah! we shall think very differently
of a great many things from what we think of them now. Judgment will
begin at the house of God.

And there is the other thought, that the fire which reveals and tests
has also in it a power of destruction. Gold and silver will lose no
atom of their weight, and will be brightened into greater lustre as
they flash back the beams. The timber and the stubble will go up in a
flare, and die down into black ashes. That is highly metaphorical, of
course. What does it mean? It means that some men's work will be
crumpled up and perish, and be as of none effect, leaving a great,
black sorrowful gap in the continuity of the structure, and that
other men's work will stand. Everything that we do is, in one sense,
immortal, because it is represented in our final character and
condition, just as a thin stratum of rock will represent forests of
ferns that grew for one summer millenniums ago, or clouds of insects
that danced for an hour in the sun. But whilst that is so, and
nothing human ever dies, on the other hand, deeds which have been in
accordance, as it were, with the great stream that sweeps the
universe on its bosom will float on that surface and never sink. Acts
which have gone against the rush of God's will through creation will
be like a child's go-cart that comes against the engine of an express
train--be reduced, first, to stillness, all the motion knocked out of
them, and then will be crushed to atoms. Deeds which stand the test
will abide in blessed issue for the doer, and deeds which do not will
pass away in smoke, and leave only ashes. Some of us, building on the
foundation, have built more rubbish than solid work, and that will be

  'Cast as rubbish to the void
  When God has made the pile complete.'

III. So, lastly, we have here the fate of the two builders.

The one man gets wages. That is not the bare notion of salvation, for
both builders are conceived of as on the foundation, and both are
saved. He gets wages. Yes, of course! The architect has to give his
certificate before the builder gets his cheque. The weaver, who has
been working his hand-loom at his own house, has to take his web to
the counting-house and have it overlooked before he gets his pay. And
the man who has built 'gold, silver, precious stones,' will
have--over and above the initial salvation--in himself the blessed
consequences, and unfold the large results, of his faithful service;
while the other man, inasmuch as he has not such work, cannot have
the consequences of it, and gets no wages; or at least his pay is
subject to heavy deductions for the spoiled bits in the cloth, and
for the gaps in the wall.

The Apostle employs a tremendous metaphor here, which is masked in
our Authorised Version, but is restored in the Revised. 'He shall be
saved, yet so as' (not 'by' but) 'through fire'; the picture being
that of a man surrounded by a conflagration, and making a rush
through the flames to get to a place of safety. Paul says that he
will get through, because down _below_ all inconsistency and
worldliness, there was a little of that which ought to have been
_above_ all the inconsistency and the worldliness--a true faith
in Jesus Christ. But because it was so imperfect, so feeble, so
little operative in his life as that it could not keep him from
piling up inconsistencies into his wall, therefore his salvation is
so as through the fire.

Brethren, I dare not enlarge upon that great metaphor. It is meant
for us professing Christians, real and imperfect Christians--it is
meant for us; and it just tells us that there are degrees in that
future blessedness proportioned to present faithfulness. We begin
there where we left off here. That future is not a dead level; and
they who have earnestly striven to work out their faith into their
lives shall 'summer high upon the hills of God.' One man, like Paul
in his shipwreck, shall lose ship and lading, though 'on broken
pieces of the ship' he may 'escape safe to land'; and another shall
make the harbour with full cargo of works of faith, to be turned into
gold when he lands. If we build, as we all may, 'on that foundation,
gold and silver and precious stones,' an entrance 'shall be
ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ'; whilst if we bring a preponderance of
'wood, hay, stubble,' we shall be 'saved, yet so as through the
fire.'




TEMPLES OF GOD

   'Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?'--1 COR. iii. 16


The great purpose of Christianity is to make men like Jesus Christ.
As He is the image of the invisible God we are to be the images of
the unseen Christ. The Scripture is very bold and emphatic in
attributing to Christ's followers likeness to Him, in nature, in
character, in relation to the world, in office, and in ultimate
destiny. Is He the anointed of God? We are anointed--Christs in Him.
Is He the Son of God? We in Him receive the adoption of sons. Is He
the Light of the world? We in Him are lights of the world too. Is He
a King? A Priest? He hath made us to be kings and priests.

Here we have the Apostle making the same solemn assertion in regard
to Christian men, 'Know ye not that ye are'--as your Master, and
because your Master is--'that ye are the temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you?'

Of course the allusion in my text is to the whole aggregate of
believers--what we call the Catholic Church, as being collectively
the habitation of God. But God cannot dwell in an aggregate of men,
unless He dwells in the individuals that compose the aggregate.
And God has nothing to do with institutions except through the people
who make the institutions. And so, if the Church as a whole is a
Temple, it is only because all its members are temples of God.

Therefore, without forgetting the great blessed lesson of the unity
of the Church which is taught in these words, I want rather to deal
with them in their individual application now; and to try and lay
upon your consciences, dear brethren, the solemn obligations and the
intense practical power which this Apostle associated with the
thought that each Christian man was, in very deed, a temple of God.

It would be very easy to say eloquent things about this text, but
that is no part of my purpose.

I. Let me deal, first of all, and only for a moment or two, with the
underlying thought that is here--that every Christian is a
dwelling-place of God.

Now, do not run away with the idea that that is a metaphor. It was
the outward temple that was the metaphor. The reality is that which
you and I, if we are God's children in Jesus Christ, experience.
There was no real sense in which that Mighty One whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain, dwelt in any house made with hands. But the
Temple, and all the outward worship, were but symbolical of the facts
of the Christian life, and the realities of our inward experience.
These are the truths whereof the other is the shadow. We use words to
which it is difficult for us to attach any meaning, when we talk
about God as being locally present in any material building; but we
do not use words to which it is so difficult to attach a meaning,
when we talk about the Infinite Spirit as being present and abiding
in a spirit shaped to hold Him, and made on purpose to touch Him and
be filled by Him.

All creatures have God dwelling in them in the measure of their
capacity. The stone that you kick on the road would not be there if
there were not a present God. Nothing would happen if there were not
abiding in creatures the force, at any rate, which is God. But just
as in this great atmosphere in which we all live and move and have
our being, the eye discerns undulations which make light, and the ear
catches vibrations which make sound, and the nostrils are recipient
of motions which bring fragrance, and all these are in the one
atmosphere, and the sense that apprehends one is utterly unconscious
of the other, so God's creatures, each through some little narrow
slit, and in the measure of their capacity, get a straggling beam
from Him into their being, and therefore they are.
