

CHAPEL OF SAN MIGUELITO

One of the vistas of San Luis Obispo was a rancheria known as San
Miguelito, and here in 1809 the governor gave his approval that a chapel
should be erected. San Luis had several such vistas, and I am told that
the ruins of several chapels are still in existence in that region.



CHAPEL AT SANTA ISABEL (SAN DIEGO)

In 1816-19 the padres at San Diego urged the governor to give them
permission to erect a chapel at Santa Isabel, some forty miles away,
where two hundred baptized Indians were living. The governor did not
approve, however, and nothing was done until after 1820. By 1822 the
chapel was reported built, with several houses, a granary, and a
graveyard. The population had increased to 450, and these materially
aided San Diego in keeping the mountainous tribes, who were hostile,
in check.

A recent article in a Southern California magazine thus describes the
ruins of the Mission of Santa Isabel:

     "Levelled by time, and washed by winter rains, the adobe
     walls of the church have sunk into indistinguishable heaps of
     earth which vaguely define the outlines of the ancient
     edifice. The bells remain, hung no longer in a belfry, but on
     a rude framework of logs. A tall cross, made of two saplings
     nailed in shape, marks the consecrated spot. Beyond it rise
     the walls of the brush building, _enramada_, woven of green
     wattled boughs, which does duty for a church on Sundays and
     on the rare occasions of a visit from the priest, who makes a
     yearly pilgrimage to these outlying portions of his diocese.
     On Sundays, the Captain of the tribe acts as lay reader and
     recites the services. Then and on Saturday nights the bells
     are rung. An Indian boy has the office of bell-ringer, and
     crossing the ropes attached to the clappers, he skilfully
     makes a solemn chime."

The graveyard at Santa Isabel is neglected and forlorn, and yet bears
many evidences of the loving thoughtfulness of the loved ones who
remain behind.

CHAPEL OF MESA GRANDE

Eleven miles or so from Santa Isabel, up a steep road, is the Indian
village of Mesa Grande. The rancheria (as the old Spaniards would call
it) occupies a narrow valley and sweep of barren hillside. On a level
space at the foot of the mountain the little church is built. Santo
Domingo is the patron saint.

A recent visitor thus describes it:

     "The church was built like that of Santa Isabel, of green
     boughs, and the chancel was decorated with muslin draperies
     and ornaments of paper and ribbon, in whose preparation a
     faithful Indian woman had spent the greater part of five
     days. The altar was furnished with drawn-work cloths, and in
     a niche above it was a plaster image of Santo Domingo, one
     hand holding a book, the other outstretched in benediction.
     Upon the outstretched hand a rosary had been hung with
     appropriate effect. Some mystic letters appeared in the
     muslin that draped the ceiling, which, being interpreted,
     proved to be the initials of the solitary member of the altar
     guild, and of such of her family as she was pleased to
     commemorate."



CHAPEL OF SANTA MARGARITA (SAN LUIS OBISPO)

One of the ranches of San Luis Obispo was that of Santa Margarita on the
north side of the Sierra Santa Lucia. As far as I know there is no
record of the date when the chapel was built, yet it was a most
interesting and important structure.

In May, 1904, its identity was completely destroyed, its interior walls
being dynamited and removed and the whole structure roofed over to be
used as a barn.

It originally consisted of a chapel about 40 feet long and 30 feet wide,
and eight rooms. The chapel was at the southwest end. The whole building
was 120 feet long and 20 feet wide. The walls were about three feet
thick, and built of large pieces of rough sandstone and red bricks, all
cemented strongly together with a white cement that is still hard and
tenacious. It is possible there was no _fachada_ to the chapel at the
southwest end, for a well-built elliptical arched doorway, on the
southeast side, most probably was the main entrance.

It has long been believed that this was not the only Mission building at
Santa Margarita. Near by are three old adobe houses, all recently
renovated out of all resemblance to their original condition, and all
roofed with red Mission tiles. These were built in the early days. The
oldest Mexican inhabitants of the present-day Santa Margarita remember
them as a part of the Mission building.

Here, then, is explanation enough for the assumption of a large Indian
population on this ranch, which led the neighboring padres to establish
a chapel for their Christianization and civilization. Undoubtedly in its
aboriginal days there was a large Indian population, for there were all
the essentials in abundance. Game of every kind--deer, antelope,
rabbits, squirrels, bear, ducks, geese, doves, and quail--yet abound;
also roots of every edible kind, and more acorns than in any other equal
area in the State. There is a never failing flow of mountain water and
innumerable springs, as well as a climate at once warm and yet bracing,
for here on the northern slopes of the Santa Lucia, frost is
not uncommon.

CHAPEL OF SANTA ISABEL (SAN MIGUEL)

I have elsewhere referred to the water supply of Santa Isabel as being
used for irrigation connected with San Miguel Mission. There is every
evidence that a large rancheria existed at Santa Isabel, and that for
many years it was one of the valued rancheros of the Mission. Below the
Hot Springs the remains of a large dam still exist, which we now know
was built by the padres for irrigation purposes. A large tract of land
below was watered by it, and we have a number of reports of the annual
yield of grain, showing great fertility and productivity. Near the
present ranch house at Santa Isabel are large adobe ruins, evidently
used as a house for the majordomo and for the padre on his regular
visitations to the rancheria. One of the larger rooms was doubtless a
chapel where mass was said for the neophytes who cultivated the soil in
this region.

CHAPEL OF SAN ANTONIO DE PALA

The chapel at Pala is perhaps the best known of all the asistencias on
account of its picturesque campanile. It was built by the indefatigable
Padre Peyri, in 1816, and is about twenty miles from San Luis Rey, to
which it belonged. Within a year or two, by means of a resident padre,
over a thousand converts were gathered, reciting their prayers and
tilling the soil. A few buildings, beside the chapel, were erected, and
the community, far removed from all political strife, must have been
happy and contented in its mountain-valley home. The chapel is a long,
narrow adobe structure, 144 by 27 feet, roofed with red tiles. The walls
within were decorated in the primitive and singular fashion found at
others of the Missions, and upon the altar were several statues which
the Indians valued highly.

Pala is made peculiarly interesting as the present home of the evicted
Palatingwa (Hot Springs) Indians of Warner's Ranch. Here these
wretchedly treated "wards of the nation" are now struggling with the
problem of life, with the fact ever before them, when they think, (as
they often do, for several of them called my attention to the fact) that
the former Indian population of Pala has totally disappeared. At the
time of the secularization of San Luis Rey, Pala suffered with the rest;
and when the Americans finally took possession it was abandoned to the
tender mercies of the straying, seeking, searching, devouring
homesteader. In due time it was "home-steaded" The chapel and graveyard
were ultimately deeded back; and when the Landmarks Club took hold it
was agreed that the ruins "revert to their proper ownership,
the church."

[Illustration: CAMPANILE AND CHAPEL, SAN ANTONIO DE PALA.]

[Illustration: ANOTHER VIEW OF THE CAMPANILE AND CHAPEL, SAN ANTONIO DE
PALA.]

[Illustration: MAIN DOORWAY AT SANTA MARGARITA CHAPEL.]

Though all the original Indians were ousted long ago from their lands at
Pala, those who lived anywhere within a dozen or a score miles still
took great interest in the old buildings, the decorations of the church,
and the statues of the saints. Whenever a priest came and held services
a goodly congregation assembled, for a number of Mexicans, as well as
Indians, live in the neighborhood.

That they loved the dear old asistencia was manifested by Americans,
Mexicans, and Indians alike, for when the Landmarks Club visited it in
December, 1901, and asked for assistance to put it in order, help was
immediately volunteered to the extent of $217, if the work were paid for
at the rate of $1.75 per day.

With a desire to promote the good feeling aimed at in recent dealings
with the evicted Indians of Warner's Ranch, now located at Pala, the
bishop of the diocese sent them a priest. He, however, was of an alien
race, and unfamiliar with either the history of the chapel, its
memories, or the feelings of the Indians; and to their intense
indignation, they found that without consulting them, or his own
superiors, he had destroyed nearly all the interior decorations by
covering them with a coating of whitewash.

The building now is in fairly good condition and the Indians have a
pastor who holds regular services for them. In the main they express
themselves as highly contented with their present condition, and on a
visit paid them in April, 1913, I found them happy and prosperous.



CHAPTER XXXII

THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THE MISSION INDIANS

The disastrous effect of the order of secularization upon the Indians,
as well as the Missions themselves, has been referred to in a special
chapter. Here I wish to give, in brief, a clearer idea of the present
condition of the Indians than was there possible. In the years 1833-1837
secularization actually was accomplished. The knowledge that it was
coming had already done much injury. The Pious Fund, which then amounted
to upwards of a half-million dollars, was confiscated by the Mexican
government. The officials said it was merely "borrowed." This
practically left the Indians to their own resources. A certain amount of
land and stock were to be given to each head of a family, and tools were
to be provided. Owing to the long distance between California and the
City of Mexico, there was much confusion as to how the changes should be
brought about. There have been many charges made, alleging that the
padres wilfully allowed the Mission property to go to ruin, when they
were deprived of its control. This ruin would better be attributed to
the general demoralization of the times than to any definite policy.
For it must be remembered that the political conditions of Mexico at
that time were most unsettled. None knew what a day or an hour might
bring forth. All was confusion, uncertainty, irresponsibility. And in
the _melee_ Mission property and Mission Indians suffered.

What was to become of the Indians? Imagine the father of a family--that
had no mother--suddenly snatched away, and all the property, garden,
granary, mill, storehouse, orchards, cattle, placed in other hands. What
would the children do?

So now the Indians, like bereft children, knew not what to do, and,
naturally, they did what our own children would do. Led by want and
hunger, some sought and found work and food, and others, alas, became
thieves. The Mission establishment was the organized institution that
had cared for them, and had provided the work that supported them. No
longer able to go and live "wildly" as of old, they were driven to evil
methods by necessity unless the new government directed their energies
into right channels. Few attempted to do this; hence the results that
were foreseen by the padres followed.

July 7, 1846, saw the Mexican flag in California hauled down, and the
Stars and Stripes raised in its place; but as far as the Indian was
concerned, the change was for the worse instead of the better. Indeed,
it may truthfully be said that the policies of the three governments,
Spanish, Mexican, and American, have shown three distinct phases, and
that the last is by far the worst.

Our treatment of these Indians reads like a hideous nightmare.
Absolutely no forceful and effective protest seems to have been made
against the indescribable wrongs perpetrated. The gold discoveries of
1849 brought into the country a class of adventurers, gamblers, liquor
sellers, and camp followers of the vilest description. The Indians
became helpless victims in the hands of these infamous wretches, and
even the authorities aided to make these Indians "good."

Bartlett, who visited the country in 1850 to 1853, tells of meeting with
an old Indian at San Luis Rey who spoke glowingly of the good times they
had when the padres were there, but "now," he said, "they were scattered
about, he knew not where, without a home or protectors, and were in a
miserable, starving condition." Of the San Francisco Indians he says:

     "They are a miserable, squalid-looking set, squatting or
     lying about the corners of the streets, without occupation.
     They have now no means of obtaining a living, as their lands
     are all taken from them; and the Missions for which they
     labored, and which provided after a sort for many thousands
     of them, are abolished. No care seems to be taken of them by
     the Americans; on the contrary, the effort seems to be to
     exterminate them as soon as possible."

According to the most conservative estimates there were over thirty
thousand Indians under the control of the Missions at the time of
secularization in 1833. To-day, how many are there? I have spent long
days in the different Mission localities, arduously searching for
Indians, but oftentimes only to fail of my purpose. In and about San
Francisco, there is not one to be found. At San Carlos Borromeo, in both
Monterey and the Carmelo Valley, except for a few half-breeds, no one of
Indian blood can be discovered. It is the same at San Miguel, San Luis
Obispo, and Santa Barbara. At Pala, that romantic chapel, where once the
visiting priest from San Luis Rey found a congregation of several
hundreds awaiting his ministrations, the land was recently purchased
from white men, by the United States Indian Commission, as a new home
for the evicted Palatingwa Indians of Warner's Ranch. These latter
Indians, in recent interviews with me, have pertinently asked: "Where
did the white men get this land, so they could sell it to the government
for us? Indians lived here many centuries before a white man had ever
seen the 'land of the sundown sea.' When the 'long-gowns' first came
here, there were many Indians at Pala. Now they are all gone. Where? And
how do we know that before long we shall not be driven out, and be gone,
as they were driven out and are gone?"

At San Luis Rey and San Diego, there are a few scattered families, but
very few, and most of these have fled far back into the desert, or to
the high mountains, as far as possible out of reach of the civilization
that demoralizes and exterminates them.

A few scattered remnants are all that remain.

Let us seek for the real reason why.

The system of the padres was patriarchal, paternal. Certain it is that
the Indians were largely treated as if they were children. No one
questions or denies this statement. Few question that the Indians were
happy under this system, and all will concede that they made wonderful
progress in the so-called arts of civilization. From crude savagery they
were lifted by the training of the fathers into usefulness and
productiveness. They retained their health, vigor, and virility. They
were, by necessity perhaps, but still undeniably, chaste, virtuous,
temperate, honest, and reasonably truthful. They were good fathers and
mothers, obedient sons and daughters, amenable to authority, and
respectful to the counsels of old age.

All this and more may unreservedly be said for the Indians while they
were under the control of the fathers. That there were occasionally
individual cases of harsh treatment is possible. The most loving and
indulgent parents are now and again ill-tempered, fretful, or nervous.
The fathers were men subject to all the limitations of other men.
Granting these limitations and making due allowance for human
imperfection, the rule of the fathers must still be admired for its
wisdom and commended for its immediate results.

Now comes the order of secularization, and a little later the domination
of the Americans. Those opposed to the control of the fathers are to set
the Indians free. They are to be "removed from under the irksome
restraint of cold-blooded priests who have held them in bondage not far
removed from slavery"!! They are to have unrestrained liberty, the
broadest and fullest intercourse with the great American people, the
white, Caucasian American, not the dark-skinned Mexican!!!

What was the result. Let an eye-witness testify:

     "These thousands of Indians had been held in the most rigid
     discipline by the Mission Fathers, and after their
     emancipation by the Supreme Government of Mexico, had been
     reasonably well governed by the local authorities, who found
     in them indispensable auxiliaries as farmers and harvesters,
     hewers of wood and drawers of water, and besides, the best
     horse-breakers and herders in the world, necessary to the
     management of the great herds of the country. These Indians
     were Christians, docile even to servility, and excellent
     laborers. Then came the Americans, followed soon after by the
     discovery of, and the wild rush for, gold, and the relaxation
     for the time being of a healthy administration of the laws.
     The ruin of this once happy and useful people commenced. The
     cultivators of vineyards began to pay their Indian _peons_
     with _aguardiente_, a real 'firewater.' The consequence was
     that on receiving their wages on Saturday evening, the
     laborers habitually met in great gatherings and passed the
     night in gambling, drunkenness, and debauchery. On Sunday the
     streets were crowded from morning until night with
     Indians,--males and females of all ages, from the girl of ten
     or twelve to the old man and woman of seventy or eighty.

     "By four o'clock on Sunday afternoon, Los Angeles Street,
     from Commercial to Nigger Alley, Aliso Street from Los
     Angeles to Alameda, and Nigger Alley, were crowded with a
     mass of drunken Indians, yelling and fighting: men and women,
     boys and girls using tooth and nail, and frequently knives,
     but always in a manner to strike the spectator with horror.

     "At sundown, the pompous marshal, with his Indian special
     deputies, who had been confined in jail all day to keep them
     sober, would drive and drag the combatants to a great corral
     in the rear of the Downey Block, where they slept away their
     intoxication. The following morning they would be exposed for
     sale, as slaves for the week. Los Angeles had its slave-mart
     as well as New Orleans and Constantinople,--only the slaves
     at Los Angeles were sold fifty-two times a year, as long as
     they lived, a period which did not generally exceed one, two,
     or three years under the new dispensation. They were sold for
     a week, and bought up by vineyard men and others at prices
     ranging from one to three dollars, one-third of which was to
     be paid to the _peon_ at the end of the week, which debt, due
     for well-performed labor, was invariably paid in
     _aguardiente,_ and the Indian made happy, until the following
     Monday morning, he having passed through another Saturday
     night and Sunday's saturnalia of debauchery and bestiality.
     Those thousands of honest, useful people were absolutely
     destroyed in this way."

In reference to these statements of the sale of the Indians as slaves,
it should be noted that the act was done under the cover of the law. The
Indian was "fined" a certain sum for his drunkenness, and was then
turned over to the tender mercies of the employer, who paid the fine.
Thus "justice" was perverted to the vile ends of the conscienceless
scoundrels who posed as "officers of the law."

Charles Warren Stoddard, one of California's sweetest poets, realized to
the full the mercenary treatment the Missions and the Indians had
received, and one of the latest and also most powerful poems he ever
wrote, "The Bells of San Gabriel," deals with this spoliation as a
theme. The poem first appeared in _Sunset Magazine, the Pacific
Monthly,_ and with the kind consent of the editor I give the
last stanza.

     "Where are they now, O tower!
       The locusts and wild honey?
