Just art Thou, O Lord, and true is Thy judgment,(1) and with
this, The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether.(2)  My judgments are to be feared, not to be disputed
on, because they are incomprehensible to human understanding.

2. "And be not given to inquire or dispute about the merits of
the Saints, which is holier than another, or which is the greater
in the Kingdom of Heaven.  Such questions often beget useless
strifes and contentions: they also nourish pride and vain glory,
whence envyings and dissensions arise, while one man arrogantly
endeavoureth to exalt one Saint and another another.  But to wish
to know and search out such things bringeth no fruit, but it
rather displeaseth the Saints; for I am not the God of confusion
but of peace;(3) which peace consisteth more in true humility
than in self-exaltation.

3. "Some are drawn by zeal of love to greater affection to these
Saints or those; but this is human affection rather than divine.
I am He Who made all the Saints: I gave them grace, I brought
them glory; I know the merits of every one; I prevented them with
the blessings of My goodness.(4)  I foreknew my beloved ones from
everlasting, I chose them out of the world;(5) they did not
choose Me.  I called them by My grace, drew them by My mercy, led
them on through sundry temptations.  I poured mighty consolations
upon them, I gave them perseverance, I crowned their patience.

4. "I acknowledge the first and the last; I embrace all with
inestimable love.  I am to be praised in all My Saints; I am to
be blessed above all things, and to be honoured in every one whom
I have so gloriously exalted and predestined, without any
preceding merits of their own.  He therefore that shall despise
one of the least of these My people, honoureth not the great;
because I made both small and great.(6)  And he who speaketh
against any of My Saints speaketh against Me, and against all
others in the Kingdom of Heaven."

   They are all one through the bond of charity; they think the
same thing, will the same thing, and all are united in love one
to another.

5. "But yet (which is far better) they love Me above themselves
and their own merits.  For being caught up above themselves, and
drawn beyond self-love, they go all straightforward to the love
of Me, and they rest in Me in perfect enjoyment.  There is
nothing which can turn them away or press them down; for being
full of Eternal Truth, they burn with the fire of
inextinguishable charity.  Therefore let all carnal and natural
men hold their peace concerning the state of the Saints, for they
know nothing save to love their own personal enjoyment.  They
take away and add according to their own inclination, not as it
pleaseth the Eternal Truth.

6. "In many men this is ignorance, chiefly is it so in those who,
being little enlightened, rarely learn to love any one with
perfect spiritual love.  They are still much drawn by natural
affection and human friendship to these or to those: and as they
reckon of themselves in lower matters, so also do they frame
imaginations of things heavenly.  But there is an immeasurable
difference between those things which they imperfectly imagine,
and these things which enlightened men behold through
supernatural revelation.

7. "Take heed, therefore, My son, that thou treat not curiously
those things which surpass thy knowledge, but rather make this
thy business and give attention to it, namely, that thou seek to
be found, even though it be the least, in the Kingdom of God.
And even if any one should know who were holier than others, or
who were held greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; what should that
knowledge profit him, unless through this knowledge he should
humble himself before Me, and should rise up to give greater
praise unto My name?  He who considereth how great are his own
sins, how small his virtues, and how far he is removed from the
perfection of the Saints, doeth far more acceptably in the sight
of God, than he who disputeth about their greatness or
littleness.

8. "They are altogether well content, if men would learn to be
content, and to refrain from vain babbling.  They glory not of
their own merits, seeing they ascribe no good unto themselves,
but all unto Me, seeing that I of my infinite charity have given
them all things.  They are filled with so great love of the
Divinity, and with such overflowing joy, that no glory is lacking
to them, neither can any felicity be lacking.  All the Saints,
the higher they are exalted in glory, the humbler are they in
themselves, and the nearer and dearer are they unto Me.  And so
thou hast it written that they cast their crowns before God and
fell on their faces before the Lamb, and worshipped Him that
liveth for ever and ever.(7)

9. "Many ask who is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, who know
not whether they shall be worthy to be counted among the least.
It is a great thing to be even the least in Heaven, where all are
great, because all shall be called, and shall be, the sons of
God.  A little one shall become a thousand, but the sinner being
an hundred years old shall be accursed.  For when the disciples
asked who should be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, they
received no other answer than this, Except ye be converted and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.  But whosoever shall humble himself as this little child,
the same shall be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven."(8)

10. Woe unto them who disdain to humble themselves willingly with
the little children; for the low gate of the kingdom of Heaven
will not suffer them to enter in.  Woe also to them who are rich,
who have their consolation here;(9) because whilst the poor
enter into the kingdom of God, they shall stand lamenting
without.  Rejoice ye humble, and exult ye poor, for yours is the
kingdom of God if only ye walk in the truth.

(1) Psalm cxix. 137.  (2) Psalm xix. 9.
(3) Corinthians xiv. 33.   (4) Psalm xxi. 3.   (5) John xv. 19.
(6) Wisd. vi. 8.   (7) Revelation iv. 10; v. 14.
(8) Matthew xviii. 3.   (9) Philippians ii. 21.


CHAPTER LIX

That all hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone

O Lord, what is my trust which I have in this life, or what is my
greatest comfort of all the things which are seen under Heaven?
Is it not Thou, O Lord my God, whose mercies are without number?
Where hath it been well with me without Thee?  Or when could it
be evil whilst Thou wert near?  I had rather be poor for Thy
sake, than rich without Thee.  I choose rather to be a pilgrim
upon the earth with Thee than without Thee to possess heaven.
Where Thou art, there is heaven; and where Thou are not, behold
there death and hell.  Thou art all my desire, and therefore must
I groan and cry and earnestly pray after Thee.  In short I can
confide fully in none to give me ready help in necessities, save
in Thee alone, O my God.  Thou art my hope, Thou art my trust,
Thou art my Comforter, and most faithful in all things.

2. All men seek their own;(1) Thou settest forward only my
salvation and my profit, and turnest all things unto my good.
Even though Thou dost expose me to divers temptations and
adversities, Thou ordainest all this unto my advantage, for Thou
are wont to prove Thy beloved ones in a thousand ways.  In which
proving Thou oughtest no less to be loved and praised, than if
Thou wert filling me full of heavenly consolations.

3. In Thee, therefore, O Lord God, I put all my hope and my
refuge, on Thee I lay all my tribulation and anguish; because I
find all to be weak and unstable whatsoever I behold out of Thee.
For many friends shall not profit, nor strong helpers be able to
succour, nor prudent counsellors to give a useful answer, nor the
books of the learned to console, nor any precious substance to
deliver, nor any secret and beautiful place to give shelter, if
Thou Thyself do not assist, help, strengthen, comfort, instruct,
keep in safety.

4. For all things which seem to belong to the attainment of peace
and felicity are nothing when Thou art absent, and bring no
felicity at all in reality.  Therefore art Thou the end of all
good, and the fulness of Life, and the soul of eloquence; and to
hope in Thee above all things is the strongest solace of Thy
servants.  Mine eyes look unto Thee,(2) in Thee is my trust, O my
God, Father of mercies.

5. Bless and sanctify my soul with heavenly blessing that it may
become Thy holy habitation, and the seat of Thy eternal glory;
and let nothing be found in the Temple of Thy divinity which may
offend the eyes of Thy majesty.  According to the greatness of
Thy goodness and the multitude of Thy mercies look upon me, and
hear the prayer of Thy poor servant, far exiled from Thee in the
land of the shadow of death.  Protect and preserve the soul of
Thy least servant amid so many dangers of corruptible life, and
by Thy grace accompanying me, direct it by the way of peace unto
its home of perpetual light.  Amen.

(1) Luke vi.   (2) Psalm cxli. 8.




THE FOURTH BOOK



OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR

A devout exhortation to the Holy Communion

The Voice of Christ

Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you,(1) saith the Lord.  The bread that I will give is My
flesh which I give for the life of the world.(2)  Take, eat: this
is My Body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of
Me.(3)  He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood dwelleth in
Me and I in him.  The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.(4)

(1) Matthew xi. 28   (2) John vi. 51.
(3) Matthew xxi. 26; Luke xxii. 19.   (4) John vi. 51, 63.


CHAPTER I

With how great reverence Christ must be received

The Voice of the Disciple

These are Thy words, O Christ, Eternal Truth; though not uttered
at one time nor written together in one place of Scripture.
Because therefore they are Thy words and true, I must gratefully
and faithfully receive them all.  They are Thine, and Thou hast
uttered them; and they are mine also, because Thou didst speak
them for my salvation.  Gladly I receive them from Thy mouth,
that they may be more deeply implanted in my heart.  Words of
such great grace arouse me, for they are full of sweetness and
love; but my own sins terrify me, and my impure conscience
driveth me away from receiving so great mysteries.  The sweetness
of Thy words encourageth me, but the multitude of my faults
presseth me down.

2. Thou commandest that I draw near to Thee with firm confidence,
if I would have part with Thee, and that I receive the food of
immortality, if I desire to obtain eternal life and glory.  Come
unto Me, sayest Thou, all that labour and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you.  Oh, sweet and lovely word in the ear of the
sinner, that Thou, O Lord my God, dost invite the poor and needy
to the Communion of Thy most holy body and blood.  But who am I,
O Lord, that I should presume to approach unto Thee?  Behold the
heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee, and yet Thou sayest, Come
ye all unto Me.

3. What meaneth this most gracious condescension, this most
lovely invitation?  How shall I dare to come, who know no good
thing of myself, whence I might be able to presume?  How shall I
bring Thee within my house, seeing that I so often have sinned in
Thy most loving sight?  Angels and Archangels stand in awe of
Thee, the Saints and just men fear Thee, and Thou sayest, Come
unto Me!  Except Thou, Lord, hadst said it, who should believe it
true?  And except Thou hadst commanded, who should attempt to draw
near?

4. Behold, Noah, that just man, laboured for a hundred years in
building the ark, that he might be saved with the few; and I, how
shall I be able in one hour to prepare myself to receive the
Builder of the world with reverence?  Moses, Thy servant, Thy
great and especial friend, made an ark of incorruptible wood,
which also he covered with purest gold, that he might lay up in
it the tables of the law, and I, a corruptible creature, shall I
dare thus easily to receive Thee, the Maker of the Law and the
Giver of life?  Solomon, the wisest of the kings of Israel, was
seven years building his magnificent temple to the praise of Thy
Name, and for eight days celebrated the feast of its dedication,
offered a thousand peace offerings, and solemnly brought up the
Ark of the Covenant to the place prepared for it, with the sound
of trumpets and great joy, and I, unhappy and poorest of mankind,
how shall I bring Thee into my house, who scarce know how to
spend half an hour in devotion?  And oh that it were even one
half hour worthily spent!

5. O my God, how earnestly these holy men strove to please Thee!
And alas! how little and trifling is that which I do! how short
a time do I spend, when I am disposing myself to Communion.
Rarely altogether collected, most rarely cleansed from all
distraction.  And surely in the saving presence of Thy Godhead no
unmeet thought ought to intrude, nor should any creature take
possession of me, because it is not an Angel but the Lord of
the Angels, that I am about to receive as my Guest.

6. Yet there is a vast difference between the Ark of the Covenant
with its relics, and Thy most pure Body with its ineffable
virtues, between those sacrifices of the law, which were figures
of things to come, and the true sacrifice of Thy Body, the
completion of all the ancient sacrifices.

7. Wherefore then do I not yearn more ardently after Thy adorable
presence?  Why do I not prepare myself with greater solicitude to
receive Thy holy things, when those holy Patriarchs and Prophets
of old, kings also and princes, with the whole people, manifested
so great affection of devotion towards Thy Divine Service?

8. The most devout king David danced with all his might before
the Ark of God, calling to mind the benefits granted to his
forefathers in days past; he fashioned musical instruments of
various sorts, put forth Psalms, and appointed them to be sung
with joy, played also himself ofttimes on the harp, being
inspired with the grace of the Holy Ghost; he taught the people
of Israel to praise God with the whole heart, and with unity of
voice to bless and praise Him every day.  If so great devotion
was then exercised, and celebration of divine praise was carried
on before the Ark of the Testimony, how great reverence and
devotion ought now to be shown by me and all Christian people at
the ministering of the Sacrament, at receiving the most precious
Body and Blood of Christ.

9. Many run to diverse places to visit the memorials of departed
Saints, and rejoice to hear of their deeds and to look upon the
beautiful buildings of their shrines.  And behold, Thou art
present here with me, O my God, Saint of Saints, Creator of men
and Lord of the Angels.  Often in looking at those memorials men
are moved by curiosity and novelty, and very little fruit of
amendment is borne away, especially when there is so much
careless trifling and so little true contrition.  But here in the
Sacrament of the Altar, Thou art present altogether, My God, the
Man Christ Jesus; where also abundant fruit of eternal life is
given to every one soever that receiveth Thee worthily and
devoutly.  But to this no levity draweth, no curiosity, nor
sensuality, only steadfast faith, devout hope, and sincere
charity.

10. O God, invisible Creator of the world, how wondrously dost
Thou work with us, how sweetly and graciously Thou dealest with
Thine elect, to whom Thou offerest Thyself to be received in this
Sacrament!  For this surpasseth all understanding, this specially
draweth the hearts of the devout and enkindleth their affections.
For even thy true faithful ones themselves, who order their whole
life to amendment, oftentimes gain from this most excellent
Sacrament great grace of devotion and love of virtue.

11. Oh admirable and hidden grace of the Sacrament, which only
Christ's faithful ones know, but the faithless and those who serve
sin cannot experience!  In this Sacrament is conferred spiritual
grace, and lost virtue is regained in the soul, and the beauty
which was disfigured by sin returneth again.  So great sometimes
is this grace that out of the fulness of devotion given, not only
the mind but also the weak body feeleth that more strength is
supplied unto it.

12. But greatly must we mourn and lament over our lukewarmness
and negligence, that we are not drawn by greater affection to
become partakers of Christ, in whom all the hope and the merit of
those that are to be saved consist.  For He Himself is our
sanctification and redemption.(1)  He is the consolation of
pilgrims and the eternal fruition of the Saints.  Therefore it is
grievously to be lamented that many so little consider this
health-giving mystery, which maketh heaven glad and preserveth
the whole world.  Alas for the blindness and hardness of man's
heart, that he considereth not more this unspeakable gift, and
even slippeth down through the daily use, into carelessness.

13. For if this most holy Sacrament were celebrated in one place
only, and were consecrated only by one priest in the whole world,
with what great desire thinkest thou, would men be affected
towards that place and towards such a priest of God, that they
might behold the divine mysteries celebrated?  But now are many
men made priests and in many places the Sacrament is celebrated,
that the grace and love of God towards men might the more appear,
the more widely the Holy Communion is spread abroad over all the
world.  Thanks be unto Thee, O good Jesus, Eternal Shepherd, who
hast vouchsafed to refresh us, poor and exiled ones, with Thy
precious Body and Blood, and to invite us to partake these holy
mysteries by the invitation from Thine own mouth, saying, Come
unto Me, ye who labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you.

(1) 1 Corinthians i. 30.


CHAPTER II

That the greatness and charity of God is shown to men in the
