
S: And there does not come to them a new reminder from the Beneficent
Allah but they turn aside from it.

026.006
Y: They have indeed rejected (the Message): so they will know soon
(enough) the truth of what they mocked at!

P: Now they have denied (the Truth); but there will come unto them
tidings of that whereat they used to scoff.

S: So they have indeed rejected (the truth), therefore the news of that
which they mock shall soon come to them.

026.007
Y: Do they not look at the earth,- how many noble things of all kinds We
have produced therein?

P: Have they not seen the earth, how much of every fruitful kind We make
to grow therein?

S: Do they not see the earth, how many of every noble kind We have
caused to grow in it?

026.008
Y: Verily, in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent; yet most of them are not believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in that, but most of them will not
believe.

026.009
Y: And verily, thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.010
Y: Behold, thy Lord called Moses: "Go to the people of iniquity,"-

P: And when thy Lord called Moses, saying: Go unto the wrongdoing folk,

S: And when your Lord called out to Musa, saying: Go to the unjust
people,

026.011
Y: "The people of the Pharaoh: will they not fear Allah?"

P: The folk of Pharaoh. Will they not ward off (evil)?

S: The people of Firon: Will they not guard (against evil)?

026.012
Y: He said: "O my Lord! I do fear that they will charge me with
falsehood:"

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! I fear that they will deny me,

S: He said: O my Lord! surely I fear that they will reject me;

026.013
Y: "My breast will be straitened. And my speech may not go (smoothly):
so send unto Aaron."

P: And I shall be embarrassed, and my tongue will not speak plainly,
therefor send for Aaron (to help me).

S: And by breast straitens, and my tongue is not eloquent, therefore
send Thou to Haroun (to help me);

026.014
Y: "And (further), they have a charge of crime against me; and I fear
they may slay me."

P: And they have a crime against me, so I fear that they will kill me.

S: And they have a crime against me, therefore I fear that they may slay
me.

026.015
Y: Allah said: "By no means! proceed then, both of you, with Our Signs;
We are with you, and will listen (to your call)."

P: He said: Nay, verily. So go ye twain with Our tokens. Lo! We shall be
with you, Hearing.

S: He said: By no means, so go you both with Our signs; surely We are
with you, hearing;

026.016
Y: "So go forth, both of you, to Pharaoh, and say: 'We have been sent by
the Lord and Cherisher of the worlds;'"

P: And come together unto Pharaoh and say: Lo! we bear a message of the
Lord of the Worlds,

S: Then come to Firon and say: Surely we are the messengers of the Lord
of the worlds:

026.017
Y: "'Send thou with us the Children of Israel.'"

P: (Saying): Let the Children of Israel go with us.

S: Then send with us the children of Israel.

026.018
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "Did we not cherish thee as a child among us, and
didst thou not stay in our midst many years of thy life?"

P: (Pharaoh) said (unto Moses): Did we not rear thee among us as a
child? And thou didst dwell many years of thy life among us,

S: (Firon) said: Did we not bring you up as a child among us, and you
tarried among us for (many) years of your life?

026.019
Y: "And thou didst a deed of thine which (thou knowest) thou didst, and
thou art an ungrateful (wretch)!"

P: And thou didst that thy deed which thou didst, and thou wast one of
the ingrates.

S: And you did (that) deed of yours which you did, and you are one of
the ungrateful.

026.020
Y: Moses said: "I did it then, when I was in error."

P: He said: I did it then, when I was of those who are astray.

S: He said: I did it then while I was of those unable to see the right
course;

026.021
Y: "So I fled from you (all) when I feared you; but my Lord has (since)
invested me with judgment (and wisdom) and appointed me as one of the
messengers."

P: Then I fled from you when I feared you, and my Lord vouchsafed me a
command and appointed me (of the number) of those sent (by Him).

S: So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the messengers;

026.022
Y: "And this is the favour with which thou dost reproach me,- that thou
hast enslaved the Children of Israel!"

P: And this is the past favour wherewith thou reproachest me: that thou
hast enslaved the Children of Israel.

S: And is it a favor of which you remind me that you have enslaved the
children of Israel?

026.023
Y: Pharaoh said: "And what is the 'Lord and Cherisher of the worlds'?"

P: Pharaoh said: And what is the Lord of the Worlds?

S: Firon said: And what is the Lord of the worlds?

026.024
Y: (Moses) said: "The Lord and Cherisher of the heavens and the earth,
and all between,- if ye want to be quite sure."

P: (Moses) said: Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is
between them, if ye had but sure belief.

S: He said: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between
them, if you would be sure.

026.025
Y: (Pharaoh) said to those around: "Did ye not listen (to what he
says)?"

P: (Pharaoh) said unto those around him: Hear ye not?

S: (Firon) said to those around him: Do you not hear?

026.026
Y: (Moses) said: "Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers from the
beginning!"

P: He said: Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers.

S: He said: Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old.

026.027
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "Truly your messenger who has been sent to you is a
veritable madman!"

P: (Pharaoh) said: Lo! your messenger who hath been sent unto you is
indeed a madman!

S: Said he: Most surely your Messenger who is sent to you is mad.

026.028
Y: (Moses) said: "Lord of the East and the West, and all between! if ye
only had sense!"

P: He said: Lord of the East and the West and all that is between them,
if ye did but understand.

S: He said: The Lord of the east and the west and what is between them,
if you understand.

026.029
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "If thou dost put forward any god other than me, I
will certainly put thee in prison!"

P: (Pharaoh) said: If thou choosest a god other than me, I assuredly
shall place thee among the prisoners.

S: Said he: If you will take a god besides me, I will most certainly
make you one of the imprisoned.

026.030
Y: (Moses) said: "Even if I showed you something clear (and)
convincing?"

P: He said: Even though I show thee something plain?

S: He said: What! even if I bring to you something manifest?

026.031
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "Show it then, if thou tellest the truth!"

P: (Pharaoh) said: Produce it then, if thou art of the truthful!

S: Said he: Bring it then, if you are of the truthful ones.

026.032
Y: So (Moses) threw his rod, and behold, it was a serpent, plain (for
all to see)!

P: Then he flung down his staff and it became a serpent manifest,

S: So he cast down his rod, and lo! it was an obvious serpent,

026.033
Y: And he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to all beholders!

P: And he drew forth his hand and lo! it was white to the beholders.

S: And he drew forth his hand, and lo! it appeared white to the
onlookers.

026.034
Y: (Pharaoh) said to the Chiefs around him: "This is indeed a sorcerer
well-versed:"

P: (Pharaoh) said unto the chiefs about him: Lo! this is verily a
knowing wizard,

S: (Firon) said to the chiefs around him: Most surely this is a skillful
magician,

026.035
Y: "His plan is to get you out of your land by his sorcery; then what is
it ye counsel?"

P: Who would drive you out of your land by his magic. Now what counsel
ye?

S: Who desires to turn you out of your land with his magic; what is it
then that you advise?

026.036
Y: They said: "Keep him and his brother in suspense (for a while), and
dispatch to the Cities heralds to collect-"

P: They said: Put him off, (him) and his brother, and send into the
cities summoners,

S: They said: Give him and his brother respite and send heralds into the
cities;

026.037
Y: "And bring up to thee all (our) sorcerers well-versed."

P: Who shall bring unto thee every knowing wizard.

S: That they should bring to you every skillful magician.

026.038
Y: So the sorcerers were got together for the appointment of a day
well-known,

P: So the wizards were gathered together at a set time on a day
appointed.

S: So the magicians were gathered together at the appointed time on the
fixed day,

026.039
Y: And the people were told: "Are ye (now) assembled?"-

P: And it was said unto the people: Are ye (also) gathering?

S: And it was said to the people: Will you gather together?

026.040
Y: "That we may follow the sorcerers (in religion) if they win?"

P: (They said): Aye, so that we may follow the wizards if they are the
winners.

S: Haply we may follow the magicians, if they are the vanquishers.

026.041
Y: So when the sorcerers arrived, they said to Pharaoh: "Of course -
shall we have a (suitable) reward if we win?"

P: And when the wizards came they said unto Pharaoh: Will there surely
be a reward for us if we are the winners?

S: And when the magicians came, they said to Firon: Shall we get a
reward if we are the vanquishers?

026.042
Y: He said: "Yea, (and more),- for ye shall in that case be (raised to
posts) nearest (to my person)."

P: He said: Aye, and ye will then surely be of those brought near (to
me).

S: He said: Yes, and surely you will then be of those who are made near.

026.043
Y: Moses said to them: "Throw ye - that which ye are about to throw!"

P: Moses said unto them: Throw what ye are going to throw!

S: Musa said to them: Cast what you are going to cast.

026.044
Y: So they threw their ropes and their rods, and said: "By the might of
Pharaoh, it is we who will certainly win!"

P: Then they threw down their cords and their staves and said: By
Pharaoh's might, lo! we verily are the winners.

S: So they cast down their cords and their rods and said: By Firon's
power, we shall most surely be victorious.

026.045
Y: Then Moses threw his rod, when, behold, it straightway swallows up
all the falsehoods which they fake!

P: Then Moses threw his staff and lo! it swallowed that which they did
falsely show.

S: Then Musa cast down his staff and lo! it swallowed up the lies they
told.

026.046
Y: Then did the sorcerers fall down, prostrate in adoration,

P: And the wizards were flung prostrate,

S: And the magicians were thrown down prostrate;

026.047
Y: Saying: "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,"

P: Crying: We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,

S: They said: We believe in the Lord of the worlds:

026.048
Y: "The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

P: The Lord of Moses and Aaron.

S: The Lord of Musa and Haroun.

026.049
Y: Said (Pharaoh): "Believe ye in Him before I give you permission?
surely he is your leader, who has taught you sorcery! but soon shall ye
know!" - "Be sure I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite
sides, and I will cause you all to die on the cross!"

P: (Pharaoh) said: Ye put your faith in him before I give you leave. Lo!
he doubtless is your chief who taught you magic! But verily ye shall
come to know. Verily I will cut off your hands and your feet
alternately, and verily I will crucify you every one.

S: Said he: You believe in him before I give you permission; most surely
he is the chief of you who taught you the magic, so you shall know:
certainly I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides,
and certainly I will crucify you all.

026.050
Y: They said: "No matter! for us, we shall but return to our Lord!"

P: They said: It is no hurt, for lo! unto our Lord we shall return.

S: They said: No harm; surely to our Lord we go back;

026.051
Y: "Only, our desire is that our Lord will forgive us our faults, that
we may become foremost among the believers!"

P: Lo! we ardently hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins because
we are the first of the believers.

S: Surely we hope that our Lord will forgive us our wrongs because we
are the first of the believers.

026.052
Y: By inspiration we told Moses: "Travel by night with my servants; for
surely ye shall be pursued."

P: And We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night, for ye
will be pursued.

S: And We revealed to Musa, saying: Go away with My servants travelling
by night, surely you will be pursued.

026.053
Y: Then Pharaoh sent heralds to (all) the Cities,

P: Then Pharaoh sent into the cities summoners,

S: So Firon sent heralds into the cities;

026.054
Y: (Saying): "These (Israelites) are but a small band,"

P: (Who said): Lo! these indeed are but a little troop,

S: Most surely these are a small company;

026.055
Y: "And they are raging furiously against us;"

P: And lo! they are offenders against us.

S: And most surely they have enraged us;

026.056
Y: "But we are a multitude amply fore-warned."

P: And lo! we are a ready host.

S: And most surely we are a vigilant multitude.

026.057
Y: So We expelled them from gardens, springs,

P: Thus did We take them away from gardens and watersprings,

S: So We turned them out of gardens and springs,

026.058
Y: Treasures, and every kind of honourable position;

P: And treasures and a fair estate.

S: And treasures and goodly dwellings,

026.059
Y: Thus it was, but We made the Children of Israel inheritors of such
things.

P: Thus (were those things taken from them) and We caused the Children
of Israel to inherit them.

S: Even so. And We gave them as a heritage to the children of Israel.

026.060
Y: So they pursued them at sunrise.

P: And they overtook them at sunrise.

S: Then they pursued them at sunrise.

026.061
Y: And when the two bodies saw each other, the people of Moses said:
"We are sure to be overtaken."

P: And when the two hosts saw each other, those with Moses said: Lo! we
are indeed caught.

S: So when the two hosts saw each other, the companions of Musa cried
out: Most surely we are being overtaken.

026.062
Y: (Moses) said: "By no means! my Lord is with me! Soon will He guide
me!"

P: He said: Nay, verily! for lo! my Lord is with me. He will guide me.

S: He said: By no means; surely my Lord is with me: He will show me a
way out.

026.063
Y: Then We told Moses by inspiration: "Strike the sea with thy rod." So
it divided, and each separate part became like the huge, firm mass of a
mountain.

P: Then We inspired Moses, saying: Smite the sea with thy staff. And it
parted, and each part was as a mountain vast.

S: Then We revealed to Musa: Strike the sea with your staff. So it had
cloven asunder, and each part was like a huge mound.

026.064
Y: And We made the other party approach thither.

P: Then brought We near the others to that place.

S: And We brought near, there, the others.

026.065
Y: We delivered Moses and all who were with him;

P: And We saved Moses and those with him, every one;

S: And We saved Musa and those with him, all of them.

026.066
Y: But We drowned the others.

P: And We drowned the others.

S: Then We drowned the others.

026.067
Y: Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.068
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo, thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.069
Y: And rehearse to them (something of) Abraham's story.

P: Recite unto them the story of Abraham:

S: And recite to them the story of Ibrahim.

026.070
Y: Behold, he said to his father and his people: "What worship ye?"

P: When he said unto his father and his folk: What worship ye?

S: When he said to his father and his people: What do you worship?

026.071
Y: They said: "We worship idols, and we remain constantly in attendance
on them."

P: They said: We worship idols, and are ever devoted unto them.

S: They said: We worship idols, so we shall be their votaries.

026.072
Y: He said: "Do they listen to you when ye call (on them),"

P: He said: Do they hear you when ye cry?

S: He said: Do they hear you when you call?

026.073
Y: "Or do you good or harm?"

P: Or do they benefit or harm you?

S: Or do they profit you or cause you harm?

026.074
Y: They said: "Nay, but we found our fathers doing thus (what we do)."

P: They said: Nay, but we found our fathers acting on this wise.

S: They said: Nay, we found our fathers doing so.

026.075
Y: He said: "Do ye then see whom ye have been worshipping,"-

P: He said: See now that which ye worship,

S: He said: Have you then considered what you have been worshipping:

026.076
Y: "Ye and your fathers before you?"-

P: Ye and your forefathers!

S: You and your ancient sires.

026.077
Y: "For they are enemies to me; not so the Lord and Cherisher of the
Worlds;"

P: Lo! they are (all) an enemy unto me, save the Lord of the Worlds,

S: Surely they are enemies to me, but not (so) the Lord of the worlds;

026.078
Y: "Who created me, and it is He Who guides me;"

P: Who created me, and He doth guide me,

S: Who created me, then He has shown me the way:

026.079
Y: "Who gives me food and drink,"

P: And Who feedeth me and watereth me.

S: And He Who gives me to eat and gives me to drink:

026.080
Y: "And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me;"

P: And when I sicken, then He healeth me,

S: And when I am sick, then He restores me to health

026.081
Y: "Who will cause me to die, and then to life (again);"

P: And Who causeth me to die, then giveth me life (again),

S: And He Who will cause me to die, then give me life;

026.082
Y: "And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of Judgment...."

P: And Who, I ardently hope, will forgive me my sin on the Day of
Judgment.

S: And Who, I hope, will forgive me my mistakes on the Day of Judgment.

026.083
Y: "O my Lord! bestow wisdom on me, and join me with the righteous;"

P: My Lord! Vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous.

S: My Lord: Grant me wisdom, and join me with the good

026.084
Y: "Grant me honourable mention on the tongue of truth among the latest
(generations);"

P: And give unto me a good report in later generations.

S: And ordain for me a goodly mention among posterity

026.085
Y: "Make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss;"

P: And place me among the inheritors of the Garden of Delight,

S: And make me of the heirs of the garden of bliss

026.086
Y: "Forgive my father, for that he is among those astray;"

P: And forgive my father. Lo! he is of those who err.

S: And forgive my father, for surely he is of those who have gone
astray;

026.087
Y: "And let me not be in disgrace on the Day when (men) will be raised
up;"-

P: And abase me not on the day when they are raised,

S: And disgrace me not on the day when they are raised

026.088
Y: "The Day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail,"

P: The day when wealth and sons avail not (any man)

S: The day on which property will not avail, nor sons

026.089
Y: "But only he (will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart;"

P: Save him who bringeth unto Allah a whole heart.

S: Except him who comes to Allah with a heart free (from evil).

026.090
Y: "To the righteous, the Garden will be brought near,"

P: And the Garden will be brought nigh for those who ward off (evil).

S: And the garden shall be brought near for those who guard (against
evil),

026.091
Y: "And to those straying in Evil, the Fire will be placed in full view;"

P: And hell will appear plainly to the erring.

S: And the hell shall be made manifest to the erring ones,

026.092
Y: "And it shall be said to them: 'Where are the (gods) ye worshipped-'"

P: And it will be said unto them: Where is (all) that ye used to worship

S: And it shall be said to them: Where are those that you used to
worship;

026.093
Y: "'Besides Allah? Can they help you or help themselves?'"

P: Instead of Allah? Can they help you or help themselves?

S: Besides Allah? Can they help you or yet help themselves?

026.094
Y: "Then they will be thrown headlong into the (Fire),- they and those
straying in Evil,"

P: Then will they be hurled therein, they and the seducers

S: So they shall be thrown down into it, they and the erring ones,

026.095
Y: "And the whole hosts of Iblis together."

P: And the hosts of Iblis, together.

S: And the hosts of the Shaitan, all.

026.096
Y: "They will say there in their mutual bickerings:"

P: And they will say, when they are quarrelling therein:

S: They shall say while they contend therein:

026.097
Y: "'By Allah, we were truly in an error manifest,"

P: By Allah, of a truth we were in error manifest

S: By Allah! we were certainly in manifest error,

026.098
Y: "'When we held you as equals with the Lord of the Worlds;"

P: When we made you equal with the Lord of the Worlds.

S: When we made you equal to the Lord of the worlds;

026.099
Y: "'And our seducers were only those who were steeped in guilt."

P: It was but the guilty who misled us.

S: And none but the guilty led us astray;

026.100
Y: "'Now, then, we have none to intercede (for us),'"

P: Now we have no intercessors

S: So we have no intercessors,

026.101
Y: "'Nor a single friend to feel (for us).'"

P: Nor any loving friend.

S: Nor a true friend;

026.102
Y: "'Now if we only had a chance of return we shall truly be of those
who believe!'"

P: Oh, that we had another turn (on earth), that we might be of the
believers!

S: But if we could but once return, we would be of the believers.

026.103
Y: Verily in this is a Sign but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers!

S: Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.104
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo, thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.105
Y: The people of Noah rejected the messengers.

P: Noah's folk denied the messengers (of Allah),

S: The people of Nuh rejected the messengers.

026.106
Y: Behold, their brother Noah said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?"

P: When their brother Noah said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: When their brother Nuh said to them: Will you not guard (against
evil)?

026.107
Y: "I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust:"

P: Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you,

S: Surely I am a faithful messenger to you;

026.108
Y: "So fear Allah, and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me.

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me

026.109
Y: "No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of
the Worlds:"

P: And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: And I do not ask you any reward for it; my reward is only with the
Lord of the worlds:

026.110
Y: "So fear Allah, and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me.

S: So guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me.

026.111
Y: They said: "Shall we believe in thee when it is the meanest that
follow thee?"

P: They said: Shall we put faith in thee, when the lowest (of the
people) follow thee?

S: They said: Shall we believe in you while the meanest follow you?

026.112
Y: He said: "And what do I know as to what they do?"

P: He said: And what knowledge have I of what they may have been doing
(in the past)?

S: He said: And what knowledge have I of what they do?

026.113
Y: "Their account is only with my Lord, if ye could (but) understand."

P: Lo! their reckoning is my Lord's concern, if ye but knew;

S: Their account is only with my Lord, if you could perceive

026.114
Y: "I am not one to drive away those who believe."

P: And I am not (here) to repulse believers.

S: And I am not going to drive away the believers;

026.115
Y: "I am sent only to warn plainly in public."

P: I am only a plain warner.

S: I am naught but a plain warner.

026.116
Y: They said: "If thou desist not, O Noah! thou shalt be stoned (to
death)."

P: They said: If thou cease not, O Noah, thou wilt surely be among those
stoned (to death).

S: They said: If you desist not, O Nuh, you shall most certainly be of
those stoned to death.

026.117
Y: He said: "O my Lord! truly my people have rejected me."

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! my own folk deny me.

S: He said: My Lord! Surely my people give me the lie!

026.118
Y: "Judge Thou, then, between me and them openly, and deliver me and
those of the Believers who are with me."

P: Therefor judge Thou between us, a (conclusive) judgment, and save me
and those believers who are with me.

S: Therefore judge Thou between me and them with a (just) judgment, and
deliver me and those who are with me of the believers.

026.119
Y: So We delivered him and those with him, in the Ark filled (with all
creatures).

P: And We saved him and those with him in the laden ship.

S: So We delivered him and those with him in the laden ark.

026.120
Y: Thereafter We drowned those who remained behind.

P: Then afterward We drowned the others.

S: Then We drowned the rest afterwards

026.121
Y: Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.122
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo, thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.123
Y: The 'Ad (people) rejected the messengers.

P: (The tribe of) A'ad denied the messengers (of Allah).

S: Ad gave the lie to the messengers.

026.124
Y: Behold, their brother Hud said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?"

P: When their brother Hud said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: When their brother Hud said to them: Will you not guard (against
evil)?

026.125
Y: "I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust:"

P: Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you,

S: Surely I am a faithful messenger to you;

026.126
Y: "So fear Allah and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah and obey me.

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me:

026.127
Y: "No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of
the Worlds."

P: And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: And I do not ask you any reward for it; surely my reward is only with
the Lord of the worlds;

026.128
Y: "Do ye build a landmark on every high place to amuse yourselves?"

P: Build ye on every high place a monument for vain delight?

S: Do you build on every height a monument? Vain is it that you do:

026.129
Y: "And do ye get for yourselves fine buildings in the hope of living
therein (for ever)?"

P: And seek ye out strongholds, that haply ye may last for ever?

S: And you make strong fortresses that perhaps you may

026.130
Y: "And when ye exert your strong hand, do ye do it like men of absolute
power?"

P: And if ye seize by force, seize ye as tyrants?

S: And when you lay hands (on men) you lay hands (like) tyrants;

026.131
Y: "Now fear Allah, and obey me."

P: Rather keep your duty to Allah, and obey me.

S: So guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me

026.132
Y: "Yea, fear Him Who has bestowed on you freely all that ye know."

P: Keep your duty toward Him Who hath aided you with (the good things)
that ye know,

S: And be careful of (your duty to) Him Who has given you abundance of
what you know.

026.133
Y: "Freely has He bestowed on you cattle and sons,"-

P: Hath aided you with cattle and sons.

S: He has given you abundance of cattle and children

026.134
Y: "And Gardens and Springs."

P: And gardens and watersprings.

S: And gardens and fountains;

026.135
Y: "Truly I fear for you the Penalty of a Great Day."

P: Lo! I fear for you the retribution of an awful day.

S: Surely I fear for you the chastisement of a grievous day

026.136
Y: They said: "It is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not
among (our) admonishers!"

P: They said: It is all one to us whether thou preachest or art not of
those who preach;

S: They said: It is the same to us whether you admonish or are not one
of the admonishers;

026.137
Y: "This is no other than a customary device of the ancients,"

P: This is but a fable of the men of old,

S: This is naught but a custom of the ancients;

026.138
Y: "And we are not the ones to receive Pains and Penalties!"

P: And we shall not be doomed.

S: And we are not going to be punished.

026.139
Y: So they rejected him, and We destroyed them. Verily in this is a
Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: And they denied him; therefor We destroyed them. Lo! herein is indeed
a portent, yet most of them are not believers.

S: So they gave him the lie, then We destroyed them. Most surely there
is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.140
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo! thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.141
Y: The Thamud (people) rejected the messengers.

P: (The tribe of) Thamud denied the messengers (of Allah)

S: Samood gave the lie to the messengers

026.142
Y: Behold, their brother Salih said to them: "Will you not fear (Allah)?"

P: When their brother Salih said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: When their brother Salih said to them: Will you not guard (against
evil)?

026.143
Y: "I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust."

P: Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you,

S: Surely I am a faithful messenger to you

026.144
Y: "So fear Allah, and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah and obey me.

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me:

026.145
Y: "No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of
the Worlds."

P: And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: And I do not ask you any reward for it; my reward is only with the
Lord of the worlds:

026.146
Y: "Will ye be left secure, in (the enjoyment of) all that ye have
here?"-

P: Will ye be left secure in that which is here before us,

S: Will you be left secure in what is here;

026.147
Y: "Gardens and Springs,"

P: In gardens and watersprings.

S: In gardens and fountains,

026.148
Y: "And corn-fields and date-palms with spathes near breaking (with the
weight of fruit)?"

P: And tilled fields and heavy-sheathed palm-trees,

S: And cornfields and palm-trees having fine spadices?

026.149
Y: "And ye carve houses out of (rocky) mountains with great skill."

P: Though ye hew out dwellings in the mountain, being skilful?

S: And you hew houses out of the mountains exultingly;

026.150
Y: "But fear Allah and obey me;"

P: Therefor keep your duty to Allah and obey me,

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me;

026.151
Y: "And follow not the bidding of those who are extravagant,"-

P: And obey not the command of the prodigal,

S: And do not obey the bidding of the extravagant,

026.152
Y: "Who make mischief in the land, and mend not (their ways)."

P: Who spread corruption in the earth, and reform not.

S: Who make mischief in the land and do not act aright.

026.153
Y: They said: "Thou art only one of those bewitched!"

P: They said: Thou art but one of the bewitched;

S: They said: You are only of the deluded ones;

026.154
Y: "Thou art no more than a mortal like us: then bring us a Sign, if
thou tellest the truth!"

P: Thou art but a mortal like us. So bring some token if thou art of the
truthful.

S: You are naught but a mortal like ourselves; so bring a sign if you
are one of the truthful.

026.155
Y: He said: "Here is a she-camel: she has a right of watering, and ye
have a right of watering, (severally) on a day appointed."

P: He said: (Behold) this she-camel. She hath the right to drink (at the
well), and ye have the right to drink, (each) on an appointed day.

S: He said: This is a she-camel; she shall have her portion of water,
and you have your portion of water on an appointed time;

026.156
Y: "Touch her not with harm, lest the Penalty of a Great Day seize you."

P: And touch her not with ill lest there come on you the retribution of
an awful day.

S: And do not touch her with evil, lest the punishment of a grievous day
should overtake you.

026.157
Y: But they ham-strung her: then did they become full of regrets.

P: But they hamstrung her, and then were penitent.

S: But they hamstrung her, then regretted;

026.158
Y: But the Penalty seized them. Verily in this is a Sign: but most of
them do not believe.

P: So the retribution came on them. Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet
most of them are not believers.

S: So the punishment overtook them. Most surely there is a sign in this,
but most of them do not believe.

026.159
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.160
Y: The people of Lut rejected the messengers.

P: The folk of Lot denied the messengers (of Allah),

S: The people of Lut gave the lie to the messengers.

026.161
Y: Behold, their brother Lut said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?"

P: When their brother Lot said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: When their brother Lut said to them: Will you not guard (against
evil)?

026.162
Y: "I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust."

P: Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you,

S: Surely I am a faithful messenger to you;

026.163
Y: "So fear Allah and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah and obey me.

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me:

026.164
Y: "No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of
the Worlds."

P: And I ask of you no wage therefor; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: And I do not ask you any reward for it; my reward is only with the
Lord of the worlds;

026.165
Y: "Of all the creatures in the world, will ye approach males,"

P: What! Of all creatures do ye come unto the males,

S: What! do you come to the males from among the creatures

026.166
Y: "And leave those whom Allah has created for you to be your mates?
Nay, ye are a people transgressing (all limits)!"

P: And leave the wives your Lord created for you? Nay, but ye are
froward folk.

S: And leave what your Lord has created for you of your wives? Nay, you
are a people exceeding limits.

026.167
Y: They said: "If thou desist not, O Lut! thou wilt assuredly be cast
out!"

P: They said: If thou cease not, O Lot, thou wilt soon be of the
outcast.

S: They said: If you desist not, O Lut! you shall surely be of those who
are expelled.

026.168
Y: He said: "I do detest your doings."

P: He said: I am in truth of those who hate your conduct.

S: He said: Surely I am of those who utterly abhor your doing;

026.169
Y: "O my Lord! deliver me and my family from such things as they do!"

P: My Lord! Save me and my household from what they do.

S: My Lord! deliver me and my followers from what they do.

026.170
Y: So We delivered him and his family,- all,

P: So We saved him and his household, every one,

S: So We delivered him and his followers all,

026.171
Y: Except an old woman who lingered behind.

P: Save an old woman among those who stayed behind.

S: Except an old woman, among those who remained behind.

026.172
Y: But the rest We destroyed utterly.

P: Then afterward We destroyed the others.

S: Then We utterly destroyed the others.

026.173
Y: We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone): and evil was the
shower on those who were admonished (but heeded not)!

P: And We rained on them a rain. And dreadful is the rain of those who
have been warned.

S: And We rained down upon them a rain, and evil was the rain on those
warned.

026.174
Y: Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent, yet most of them are not believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.175
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might Most Merciful.

P: And lo! thy Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

026.176
Y: The Companions of the Wood rejected the messengers.

P: The dwellers in the wood (of Midian) denied the messengers (of
Allah),

S: The dwellers of the thicket gave the lie to the messengers.

026.177
Y: Behold, Shu'aib said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?"

P: When Shu'eyb said unto them: Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: When Shu'aib said to them: Will you not guard (against evil)?

026.178
Y: "I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust."

P: Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you,

S: Surely I am a faithful messenger to you;

026.179
Y: "So fear Allah and obey me."

P: So keep your duty to Allah and obey me.

S: Therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me:

026.180
Y: "No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of
the Worlds."

P: And I ask of you no wage for it; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: And I do not ask you any reward for it, my reward is only with the
Lord of the worlds;

026.181
Y: "Give just measure, and cause no loss (to others by fraud)."

P: Give full measure, and be not of those who give less (than the due).

S: Give a full measure and be not of those who diminish;

026.182
Y: "And weigh with scales true and upright."

P: And weigh with the true balance.

S: And weigh (things) with a right balance,

026.183
Y: "And withhold not things justly due to men, nor do evil in the land,
working mischief."

P: Wrong not mankind in their goods, and do not evil, making mischief,
in the earth.

S: And do not wrong men of their things, and do not act corruptly in the
earth, making mischief.

026.184
Y: "And fear Him Who created you and (who created) the generations
before (you)."

P: And keep your duty unto Him Who created you and the generations of
the men of old.

S: And guard against (the punishment of) Him who created you and the
former nations.

026.185
Y: They said: "Thou art only one of those bewitched!"

P: They said: Thou art but one of the bewitched;

S: They said: You are only of those deluded;

026.186
Y: "Thou art no more than a mortal like us, and indeed we think thou art
a liar!"

P: Thou art but a mortal like us, and lo! we deem thee of the liars.

S: And you are naught but a mortal like ourselves, and we know you to be
certainly of the liars.

026.187
Y: "Now cause a piece of the sky to fall on us, if thou art truthful!"

P: Then make fragments of the heaven fall upon us, if thou art of the
truthful.

S: Therefore cause a portion of the heaven to come down upon us, if you
are one of the truthful.

026.188
Y: He said: "My Lord knows best what ye do."

P: He said: My Lord is Best Aware of what ye do.

S: He said: My Lord knows best what you do.

026.189
Y: But they rejected him. Then the punishment of a day of overshadowing
gloom seized them, and that was the Penalty of a Great Day.

P: But they denied him, so there came on them the retribution of the day
of gloom. Lo! it was the retribution of an awful day.

S: But they called him a liar, so the punishment of the day of covering
overtook them; surely it was the punishment of a grievous day.

026.190
Y: Verily in that is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

P: Lo! herein is indeed a portent; yet most of them are not believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.

026.191
Y: And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

P: And lo! thy Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And most surely your Lord is Mighty, the Merciful.

026.192
Y: Verily this is a Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds:

P: And lo! it is a revelation of the Lord of the Worlds,

S: And most surely this is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.

026.193
Y: With it came down the spirit of Faith and Truth-

P: Which the True Spirit hath brought down

S: The Faithful Spirit has descended with it,

026.194
Y: To thy heart and mind, that thou mayest admonish.

P: Upon thy heart, that thou mayst be (one) of the warners,

S: Upon your heart that you may be of the warners

026.195
Y: In the perspicuous Arabic tongue.

P: In plain Arabic speech.

S: In plain Arabic language.

026.196
Y: Without doubt it is (announced) in the mystic Books of former
peoples.

P: And lo! it is in the Scriptures of the men of old.

S: And most surely the same is in the scriptures of the ancients.

026.197
Y: Is it not a Sign to them that the Learned of the Children of Israel
knew it (as true)?

P: Is it not a token for them that the doctors of the Children of Israel
know it?

S: Is it not a sign to them that the learned men of the Israelites know
it?

026.198
Y: Had We revealed it to any of the non-Arabs,

P: And if We had revealed it unto one of any other nation than the
Arabs,

S: And if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners

026.199
Y: And had he recited it to them, they would not have believed in it.

P: And he had read it unto them, they would not have believed in it.

S: So that he should have recited it to them, they would not have
believed therein.

026.200
Y: Thus have We caused it to enter the hearts of the sinners.

P: Thus do We make it traverse the hearts of the guilty.

S: Thus have We caused it to enter into the hearts of the guilty.

026.201
Y: They will not believe in it until they see the grievous Penalty;

P: They will not believe in it till they behold the painful doom,

S: They will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment.

026.202
Y: But the (Penalty) will come to them of a sudden, while they perceive
it not;

P: So that it will come upon them suddenly, when they perceive not.

S: And it shall come to them all of a sudden, while they shall not
perceive;

026.203
Y: Then they will say: "Shall we be respited?"

P: Then they will say: Are we to be reprieved?

S: Then they will say: Shall we be respited?

026.204
Y: Do they then ask for Our Penalty to be hastened on?

P: Would they (now) hasten on Our doom?

S: What! do they still seek to hasten on Our punishment?

026.205
Y: Seest thou? If We do let them enjoy (this life) for a few years,

P: Hast thou then seen, if We content them for (long) years,

S: Have you then considered if We let them enjoy themselves for years,

026.206
Y: Yet there comes to them at length the (Punishment) which they were
promised!

P: And then cometh that which they were promised,

S: Then there comes to them that with which they are threatened,

026.207
Y: It will profit them not that they enjoyed (this life)!

P: (How) that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them?

S: That which they were made to enjoy shall not avail them?

026.208
Y: Never did We destroy a population, but had its warners -

P: And We destroyed no township but it had its warners

S: And We did not destroy any town but it had (its) warners,

026.209
Y: By way of reminder; and We never are unjust.

P: For reminder, for We never were oppressors.

S: To remind, and We are never unjust.

026.210
Y: No evil ones have brought down this (Revelation):

P: The devils did not bring it down.

S: And the Shaitans have not come down with it.

026.211
Y: It would neither suit them nor would they be able (to produce it).

P: It is not meet for them, nor is it in their power,

S: And it behoves them not, and they have not the power to do (it).

026.212
Y: Indeed they have been removed far from even (a chance of) hearing it.

P: Lo! verily they are banished from the hearing.

S: Most surely they are far removed from the hearing of it.

026.213
Y: So call not on any other god with Allah, or thou wilt be among those
under the Penalty.

P: Therefor invoke not with Allah another god, lest thou be one of the
doomed.

S: So call not upon another god with Allah, lest you be of those who are
punished.

026.214
Y: And admonish thy nearest kinsmen,

P: And warn thy tribe of near kindred,

S: And warn your nearest relations,

026.215
Y: And lower thy wing to the Believers who follow thee.

P: And lower thy wing (in kindness) unto those believers who follow
thee.

S: And be kind to him who follows you of the believers.

026.216
Y: Then if they disobey thee, say: "I am free (of responsibility) for
what ye do!"

P: And if they (thy kinsfolk) disobey thee, say: Lo! I am innocent of
what they do.

S: But if they disobey you, then say: Surely I am clear of what you do.

026.217
Y: And put thy trust on the Exalted in Might, the Merciful,-

P: And put thy trust in the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: And rely on the Mighty, the Merciful,

026.218
Y: Who seeth thee standing forth (in prayer),

P: Who seeth thee when thou standest up (to pray)

S: Who sees you when you stand up.

026.219
Y: And thy movements among those who prostrate themselves,

P: And (seeth) thine abasement among those who fall prostrate (in
worship).

S: And your turning over and over among those who prostrate themselves
before Allah.

026.220
Y: For it is He Who heareth and knoweth all things.

P: Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: Surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

026.221
Y: Shall I inform you, (O people!), on whom it is that the evil ones
descend?

P: Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend?

S: Shall I inform you (of him) upon whom the Shaitans descend?

026.222
Y: They descend on every lying, wicked person,

P: They descend on every sinful, false one.

S: They descend upon every lying, sinful one,

026.223
Y: (Into whose ears) they pour hearsay vanities, and most of them are
liars.

P: They listen eagerly, but most of them are liars.

S: They incline their ears, and most of them are liars.

026.224
Y: And the Poets,- It is those straying in Evil, who follow them:

P: As for poets, the erring follow them.

S: And as to the poets, those who go astray follow them.

026.225
Y: Seest thou not that they wander distracted in every valley?-

P: Hast thou not seen how they stray in every valley,

S: Do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley?

026.226
Y: And that they say what they practise not?-

P: And how they say that which they do not?

S: And that they say that which they do not do,

026.227
Y: Except those who believe, work righteousness, engage much in the
remembrance of Allah, and defend themselves only after they are
unjustly attacked. And soon will the unjust assailants know what
vicissitudes their affairs will take!

P: Save those who believe and do good works, and remember Allah much,
and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged. Those who do
wrong will come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!

S: Except those who believe and do good and remember Allah much, and
defend themselves after they are oppressed; and they who act unjustly
shall know to what final place of turning they shall turn back.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 27:

                        AL-NAML (THE ANT, THE ANTS)
 Total Verses: 93 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

027.001
Y: These are verses of the Qur'an,-a book that makes (things) clear;

P: Ta. Sin. These are revelations of the Qur'an and a Scripture that
maketh plain;

S: Ta Sin! These are the verses of the Quran and the Book that makes
(things) clear,

027.002
Y: A guide: and glad tidings for the believers,-

P: A guidance and good tidings for believers

S: A guidance and good news for the believers,

027.003
Y: Those who establish regular prayers and give in regular charity, and
also have (full) assurance of the hereafter.

P: Who establish worship and pay the poor-due and are sure of the
Hereafter.

S: Who keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, and of the hereafter, they
are sure.

027.004
Y: As to those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their
deeds pleasing in their eyes; and so they wander about in distraction.

P: Lo! as for those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their
works fairseeming unto them so that they are all astray.

S: As to those who do not believe in the hereafter, We have surely made
their deeds fair-seeming to them, but they blindly wander on.

027.005
Y: Such are they for whom a grievous Penalty is (waiting); and in the
Hereafter theirs will be the greatest loss.

P: Those are they for whom is the worst of punishment, and in the
Hereafter they will be the greatest losers.

S: These are they who shall have an evil punishment, and in the
hereafter they shall be the greatest losers.

027.006
Y: As to thee, the Qur'an is bestowed upon thee from the presence of one
Who is Wise and All-Knowing.

P: Lo! as for thee (Muhammad), thou verily receivest the Qur'an from the
presence of One Wise, Aware.

S: And most surely you are made to receive the Quran from the Wise, the
Knowing Allah.

027.007
Y: Behold! Moses said to his family: "I perceive a fire; soon will I
bring you from there some information, or I will bring you a burning
brand to light our fuel, that ye may warm yourselves."

P: (Remember) when Moses said unto his household: Lo! I spy afar off a
fire; I will bring you tidings thence, or bring to you a borrowed flame
that ye may warm yourselves.

S: When Musa said to his family: Surely I see fire; I will bring to you
from it some news, or I will bring to you therefrom a burning firebrand
so that you may warm yourselves.

027.008
Y: But when he came to the (fire), a voice was heard: "Blessed are those
in the fire and those around: and Glory to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds!"

P: But when he reached it, he was called, saying: Blessed is Whosoever
is in the fire and Whosoever is round about it! And Glorified be Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds!

S: So when he came to it a voice was uttered saying: Blessed is Whoever
is in the fire and whatever is about it; and glory be to Allah, the
Lord of the worlds;

027.009
Y: "O Moses! verily, I am Allah, the Exalted in Might, the Wise!..."

P: O Moses! Lo! it is I, Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

S: O Musa! surely I am Allah, the Mighty, the Wise;

027.010
Y: "Now do thou throw thy rod!" But when he saw it moving (of its own
accord) as if it had been a snake, he turned back in retreat, and
retraced not his steps: "O Moses!" (it was said), "Fear not: truly, in
My presence, those called as messengers have no fear,"-

P: And throw down thy staff! But when he saw it writhing as it were a
demon, he turned to flee headlong; (but it was said unto him): O Moses!
Fear not! the emissaries fear not in My presence,

S: And cast down your staff. So when he saw it in motion as if it were a
serpent, he turned back retreating and did not return: O Musa! fear
not; surely the messengers shall not fear in My presence;

027.011
Y: "But if any have done wrong and have thereafter substituted good to
take the place of evil, truly, I am Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: Save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for
good. And lo! I am Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Neither he who has been unjust, then he does good instead after evil,
for surely I am the Forgiving, the Merciful:

027.012
Y: "Now put thy hand into thy bosom, and it will come forth white
without stain (or harm): (these are) among the nine Signs (thou wilt
take) to Pharaoh and his people: for they are a people rebellious in
transgression."

P: And put thy hand into the bosom of thy robe, it will come forth white
but unhurt. (This will be one) among nine tokens unto Pharaoh and his
people Lo! they were ever evil-living folk.

S: And enter your hand into the opening of your bosom, it shall come
forth white without evil; among nine signs to Firon and his people,
surely they are a transgressing people.

027.013
Y: But when Our Signs came to them, that should have opened their eyes,
they said: "This is sorcery manifest!"

P: But when Our tokens came unto them, plain to see, they said: This is
mere magic,

S: So when Our clear signs came to them, they said: This is clear
enchantment.

027.014
Y: And they rejected those Signs in iniquity and arrogance, though their
souls were convinced thereof: so see what was the end of those who
acted corruptly!

P: And they denied them, though their souls acknowledged them, for spite
and arrogance. Then see the nature of the consequence for the
wrong-doers!

S: And they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been
convinced of them; consider, then how was the end of the
mischief-makers.

027.015
Y: We gave (in the past) knowledge to David and Solomon: And they both
said: "Praise be to Allah, Who has favoured us above many of his
servants who believe!"

P: And We verily gave knowledge unto David and Solomon, and they said:
Praise be to Allah, Who hath preferred us above many of His believing
slaves!

S: And certainly We gave knowledge to Dawood and Sulaiman, and they both
said: Praise be to Allah, Who has made us to excel many of His
believing servants.

027.016
Y: And Solomon was David's heir. He said: "O ye people! We have been
taught the speech of birds, and on us has been bestowed (a little) of
all things: this is indeed Grace manifest (from Allah.)"

P: And Solomon was David's heir. And he said: O mankind! Lo! we have
been taught the language of birds, and have been given (abundance) of
all things. This surely is evident favour.

S: And Sulaiman was Dawood's heir, and he said: O men! we have been
taught the language of birds, and we have been given all things; most
surely this is manifest grace.

027.017
Y: And before Solomon were marshalled his hosts,- of jinns and men and
birds, and they were all kept in order and ranks.

P: And there were gathered together unto Solomon his armies of the jinn
and humankind, and of the birds, and they were set in battle order;

S: And his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to
him, and they were formed into groups.

027.018
Y: At length, when they came to a (lowly) valley of ants, one of the
ants said: "O ye ants, get into your habitations, lest Solomon and his
hosts crush you (under foot) without knowing it."

P: Till, when they reached the Valley of the Ants, an ant exclaimed: O
ants! Enter your dwellings lest Solomon and his armies crush you,
unperceiving.

S: Until when they came to the valley of the Naml, a Namlite said: O
Naml! enter your houses, (that) Sulaiman and his hosts may not crush
you while they do not know.

027.019
Y: So he smiled, amused at her speech; and he said: "O my Lord! so order
me that I may be grateful for Thy favours, which thou hast bestowed on
me and on my parents, and that I may work the righteousness that will
please Thee: And admit me, by Thy Grace, to the ranks of Thy righteous
Servants."

P: And (Solomon) smiled, laughing at her speech, and said: My Lord,
arouse me to be thankful for Thy favour wherewith Thou hast favoured me
and my parents, and to do good that shall be pleasing unto Thee, and
include me in (the number of) Thy righteous slaves.

S: So he smiled, wondering at her word, and said: My Lord! grant me that
I should be grateful for Thy favor which Thou hast bestowed on me and
on my parents, and that I should do good such as Thou art pleased with,
and make me enter, by Thy mercy, into Thy servants, the good ones.

027.020
Y: And he took a muster of the Birds; and he said: "Why is it I see not
the Hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees?"

P: And he sought among the birds and said: How is it that I see not the
hoopoe, or is he among the absent?

S: And he reviewed the birds, then said: How is it I see not the hoopoe
or is it that he is of the absentees?

027.021
Y: "I will certainly punish him with a severe penalty, or execute him,
unless he bring me a clear reason (for absence)."

P: I verily will punish him with hard punishment or I verily will slay
him, or he verily shall bring me a plain excuse.

S: I will most certainly punish him with a severe punishment, or kill
him, or he shall bring to me a clear plea.

027.022
Y: But the Hoopoe tarried not far: he (came up and) said: "I have
compassed (territory) which thou hast not compassed, and I have come to
thee from Saba with tidings true."

P: But he was not long in coming, and he said: I have found out (a
thing) that thou apprehendest not, and I come unto thee from Sheba with
sure tidings.

S: And he tarried not long, then said: I comprehend that which you do
not comprehend and I have brought to you a sure information from Sheba.

027.023
Y: "I found (there) a woman ruling over them and provided with every
requisite; and she has a magnificent throne."

P: Lo! I found a woman ruling over them, and she hath been given
(abundance) of all things, and hers is a mighty throne.

S: Surely I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given
abundance and she has a mighty throne:

027.024
Y: "I found her and her people worshipping the sun besides Allah: Satan
has made their deeds seem pleasing in their eyes, and has kept them
away from the Path,- so they receive no guidance,"-

P: I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of Allah; and
Satan maketh their works fairseeming unto them, and debarreth them from
the way (of Truth), so that they go not aright;

S: I found her and her people adoring the sun instead of Allah, and the
Shaitan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and thus turned them
from the way, so they do not go aright;

027.025
Y: "(Kept them away from the Path), that they should not worship Allah,
Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and
knows what ye hide and what ye reveal."

P: So that they worship not Allah, Who bringeth forth the hidden in the
heavens and the earth, and knoweth what ye hide and what ye proclaim,

S: That they do not make obeisance to Allah, Who brings forth what is
hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you hide and what
you make manifest:

027.026
Y: "Allah!- there is no god but He!- Lord of the Throne Supreme!"

P: Allah; there is no God save Him, the Lord of the Tremendous Throne.

S: Allah, there is no god but He: He is the Lord of mighty power.

027.027
Y: (Solomon) said: "Soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth
or lied!"

P: (Solomon) said: We shall see whether thou speakest truth or whether
thou art of the liars.

S: He said: We will see whether you have told the truth or whether you
are of the liars:

027.028
Y: "Go thou, with this letter of mine, and deliver it to them: then draw
back from them, and (wait to) see what answer they return"...

P: Go with this my letter and throw it down unto them; then turn away
and see what (answer) they return,

S: Take this my letter and hand it over to them, then turn away from
them and see what (answer) they return.

027.029
Y: (The queen) said: "Ye chiefs! here is delivered to me - a letter
worthy of respect."

P: (The Queen of Sheba) said (when she received the letter): O
chieftains! Lo! there hath been thrown unto me a noble letter.

S: She said: O chief! surely an honorable letter has been delivered to
me

027.030
Y: "It is from Solomon, and is (as follows): 'In the name of Allah, Most
Gracious, Most Merciful:'"

P: Lo! it is from Solomon, and lo! it is: In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful;

S: Surely it is from Sulaiman, and surely it is in the name of Allah,
the Beneficent, the Merciful;

027.031
Y: "'Be ye not arrogant against me, but come to me in submission (to the
true Religion).'"

P: Exalt not yourselves against me, but come unto me as those who
surrender.

S: Saying: exalt not yourselves against me and come to me in submission.

027.032
Y: She said: "Ye chiefs! advise me in (this) my affair: no affair have I
decided except in your presence."

P: She said: O chieftains! Pronounce for me in my case. I decide no case
till ye are present with me.

S: She said: O chiefs! give me advice respecting my affair: I never
decide an affair until you are in my presence.

027.033
Y: They said: "We are endued with strength, and given to vehement war:
but the command is with thee; so consider what thou wilt command."

P: They said: We are lords of might and lords of great prowess, but it
is for thee to command; so consider what thou wilt command.

S: They said: We are possessors of strength and possessors of mighty
prowess, and the command is yours, therefore see what you will command.

027.034
Y: She said: "Kings, when they enter a country, despoil it, and make the
noblest of its people its meanest thus do they behave."

P: She said: Lo! kings, when they enter a township, ruin it and make the
honour of its people shame. Thus will they do.

S: She said: Surely the kings, when they enter a town, ruin it and make
the noblest of its people to be low, and thus they (always) do;

027.035
Y: "But I am going to send him a present, and (wait) to see with what
(answer) return (my) ambassadors."

P: But lo! I am going to send a present unto them, and to see with what
(answer) the messengers return.

S: And surely I am going to send a present to them, and shall wait to
see what (answer) do the messengers bring back.

027.036
Y: Now when (the embassy) came to Solomon, he said: "Will ye give me
abundance in wealth? But that which Allah has given me is better than
that which He has given you! Nay it is ye who rejoice in your gift!"

P: So when (the envoy) came unto Solomon, (the King) said: What! Would
ye help me with wealth? But that which Allah hath given me is better
than that which He hath given you. Nay it is ye (and not I) who exult
in your gift.

S: So when he came to Sulaiman, he said: What! will you help me with
wealth? But what Allah has given me is better than what He has given
you. Nay, you are exultant because of your present;

027.037
Y: "Go back to them, and be sure we shall come to them with such hosts
as they will never be able to meet: We shall expel them from there in
disgrace, and they will feel humbled (indeed)."

P: Return unto them. We verily shall come unto them with hosts that they
cannot resist, and we shall drive them out from thence with shame, and
they will be abased.

S: Go back to them, so we will most certainly come to them with hosts
which they shall have no power to oppose, and we will most certainly
expel them therefrom in abasement, and they shall be in a state of
ignominy.

027.038
Y: He said (to his own men): "Ye chiefs! which of you can bring me her
throne before they come to me in submission?"

P: He said: O chiefs! Which of you will bring me her throne before they
come unto me, surrendering?

S: He said: O chiefs! which of you can bring to me her throne before
they come to me in submission?

027.039
Y: Said an 'Ifrit, of the jinns: "I will bring it to thee before thou
rise from thy council: indeed I have full strength for the purpose, and
may be trusted."

P: A stalwart of the jinn said: I will bring it thee before thou canst
rise from thy place. Lo! I verily am strong and trusty for such work.

S: One audacious among the jinn said: I will bring it to you before you
rise up from your place; and most surely I am strong (and) trusty for
it.

027.040
Y: Said one who had knowledge of the Book: "I will bring it to thee
within the twinkling of an eye!" Then when (Solomon) saw it placed
firmly before him, he said: "This is by the Grace of my Lord!- to test
me whether I am grateful or ungrateful! and if any is grateful, truly
his gratitude is (a gain) for his own soul; but if any is ungrateful,
truly my Lord is Free of all Needs, Supreme in Honour !"

P: One with whom was knowledge of the Scripture said: I will bring it
thee before thy gaze returneth unto thee. And when he saw it set in his
presence, (Solomon) said: This is of the bounty of my Lord, that He may
try me whether I give thanks or am ungrateful. Whosoever giveth thanks
he only giveth thanks for (the good of) his own soul; and whosoever is
ungrateful (is ungrateful only to his own soul's hurt). For lo! my Lord
is Absolute in independence, Bountiful.

S: One who had the knowledge of the Book said: I will bring it to you in
the twinkling of an eye. Then when he saw it settled beside him, he
said: This is of the grace of my Lord that He may try me whether I am
grateful or ungrateful; and whoever is grateful, he is grateful only
for his own soul, and whoever is ungrateful, then surely my Lord is
Self-sufficient, Honored.

027.041
Y: He said: "Transform her throne out of all recognition by her: let us
see whether she is guided (to the truth) or is one of those who receive
no guidance."

P: He said: Disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will
go aright or be of those not rightly guided.

S: He said: Alter her throne for her, we will see whether she follows
the right way or is of those who do not go aright.

027.042
Y: So when she arrived, she was asked, "Is this thy throne?" She said,
"It was just like this; and knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of
this, and we have submitted to Allah (in Islam)."

P: So, when she came, it was said (unto her): Is thy throne like this?
She said: (It is) as though it were the very one. And (Solomon said):
We were given the knowledge before her and we had surrendered (to
Allah).

S: So when she came, it was said: Is your throne like this? She said: It
is as it were the same, and we were given the knowledge before it, and
we were submissive.

027.043
Y: And he diverted her from the worship of others besides Allah: for she
was (sprung) of a people that had no faith.

P: And (all) that she was wont to worship instead of Allah hindered her,
for she came of disbelieving folk.

S: And what she worshipped besides Allah prevented her, surely she was
of an unbelieving people.

027.044
Y: She was asked to enter the lofty Palace: but when she saw it, she
thought it was a lake of water, and she (tucked up her skirts),
uncovering her legs. He said: "This is but a palace paved smooth with
slabs of glass." She said: "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul: I
do (now) submit (in Islam), with Solomon, to the Lord of the Worlds."

P: It was said unto her: Enter the hall. And when she saw it she deemed
it a pool and bared her legs. (Solomon) said: Lo! it is a hall, made
smooth, of glass. She said: My Lord! Lo! I have wronged myself, and I
surrender with Solomon unto Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.

S: It was said to her: Enter the palace; but when she saw it she deemed
it to be a great expanse of water, and bared her legs. He said: Surely
it is a palace made smooth with glass. She said: My Lord! surely I have
been unjust to myself, and I submit with Sulaiman to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds.

027.045
Y: We sent (aforetime), to the Thamud, their brother Salih, saying,
"Serve Allah": But behold, they became two factions quarrelling with
each other.

P: And We verily sent unto Thamud their brother Salih, saying: Worship
Allah. And lo! they (then) became two parties quarrelling.

S: And certainly We sent to Samood their brother Salih, saying: Serve
Allah; and lo! they became two sects quarrelling with each other.

027.046
Y: He said: "O my people! why ask ye to hasten on the evil in preference
to the good? If only ye ask Allah for forgiveness, ye may hope to
receive mercy."

P: He said: O my people! Why will ye hasten on the evil rather than the
good? Why will ye not ask pardon of Allah, that ye may receive mercy.

S: He said: O my people! why do you seek to hasten on the evil before
the good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of Allah so that you may be
dealt with mercifully?

027.047
Y: They said: "Ill omen do we augur from thee and those that are with
thee". He said: "Your ill omen is with Allah; yea, ye are a people
under trial."

P: They said: We augur evil of thee and those with thee. He said: Your
evil augury is with Allah. Nay, but ye are folk that are being tested.

S: They said: We have met with ill luck on account of you and on account
of those with you. He said: The cause of your evil fortune is with
Allah; nay, you are a people who are tried.

027.048
Y: There were in the city nine men of a family, who made mischief in the
land, and would not reform.

P: And there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land
and reformed not.

S: And there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land
and did not act aright.

027.049
Y: They said: "Swear a mutual oath by Allah that we shall make a secret
night attack on him and his people, and that we shall then say to his
heir (when he seeks vengeance): 'We were not present at the slaughter
of his people, and we are positively telling the truth.'"

P: They said: Swear one to another by Allah that we verily will attack
him and his household by night, and afterward we will surely say unto
his friend: We witnessed not the destruction of his household. And lo!
we are truthtellers.

S: They said: Swear to each other by Allah that we will certainly make a
sudden attack on him and his family by night, then we will say to his
heir: We did not witness the destruction of his family, and we are most
surely truthful.

027.050
Y: They plotted and planned, but We too planned, even while they
perceived it not.

P: So they plotted a plot: and We plotted a plot, while they perceived
not.

S: And they planned a plan, and We planned a plan while they perceived
not.

027.051
Y: Then see what was the end of their plot!- this, that We destroyed
them and their people, all (of them).

P: Then see the nature of the consequence of their plotting, for lo! We
destroyed them and their people, every one.

S: See, then, how was the end of their plan that We destroyed them and
their people, all (of them).

027.052
Y: Now such were their houses, - in utter ruin, - because they practised
wrong-doing. Verily in this is a Sign for people of knowledge.

P: See, yonder are their dwellings empty and in ruins because they did
wrong. Lo! herein is indeed a portent for a people who have knowledge.

S: So those are their houses fallen down because they were unjust, most
surely there is a sign in this for a people who know.

027.053
Y: And We saved those who believed and practised righteousness.

P: And we saved those who believed and used to ward off (evil).

S: And We delivered those who believed and who guarded (against evil).

027.054
Y: (We also sent) Lut (as a messenger): behold, He said to his people,
"Do ye do what is shameful though ye see (its iniquity)?"

P: And Lot! when he said unto his folk: Will ye commit abomination
knowingly?

S: And (We sent) Lut, when he said to his people: What! do you commit
indecency while you see?

027.055
Y: Would ye really approach men in your lusts rather than women? Nay, ye
are a people (grossly) ignorant!

P: Must ye seek lust after men instead of women? Nay, but ye are folk
who act senselessly.

S: What! do you indeed approach men lustfully rather than women? Nay,
you are a people who act ignorantly.

027.056
Y: But his people gave no other answer but this: they said, "Drive out
the followers of Lut from your city: these are indeed men who want to
be clean and pure!"

P: But the answer of his folk was naught save that they said: Expel the
household of Lot from your township, for they (forsooth) are folk who
would keep clean!

S: But the answer of his people was no other except that they said:
Turn out Lut's followers from your town; surely they are a people who
would keep pure!

027.057
Y: But We saved him and his family, except his wife; her We destined to
