Beebe on Broadway, N.Y. and afterwards in an establishment of his own.
His taste and talent led him into musical connections, and from time to
time, after relinquishing his trade, he was with Horace Waters, Philip
Phillips, W.B. Bradbury, and F.J. Smith, the piano dealer. He was a
choir leader and a good composer.


"BY COOL SILOAM'S SHADY RILL."

This hymn of Bp. Heber inculcates the same lesson as that in the stanzas
of Michael Bruce before noted, with added emphasis for the young on the
briefness of time and opportunity even for them.

    How fair the lily grows,

--is answered by--

    The lily must decay,

--but, owing to the sweetness of the favorite melody, it was never a
saddening hymn for children.


_THE TUNE._

Though George Kingsley's "Heber" has in some books done service for the
Bishop's lines, "Siloam," easy-flowing and finely harmonized, is knit
to the words as no other tune can be. It was composed by Isaac Baker
Woodbury on shipboard during a storm at sea. A stronger illustration of
tranquil thought in terrible tumult was never drawn.

"O Galilee, Sweet Galilee," whose history has been given at the end of
chapter six, was not only often sung in Sunday-schools, but chimed (in
the cities) on steeple-bells--nor is it by any means forgotten today--on
the Sabbath and in social singing assemblies. Like "Precious Jewels," it
has been, in many places, taken up by street boys with a relish, and
often displaced the play-house ditties in the lips of little newsboys
and bootblacks during a leisure hour or a happy mood.


"I AM SO GLAD"

This lively little melody is still a welcome choice to many a lady
teacher of fluttering five-year-olds, when both vocal indulgence and
good gospel are needed for the prattlers in her class. It has been as
widely sung in Scotland as in America. Mr. Philip P. Bliss, hearing one
day the words of the familiar chorus--

    O, how I love Jesus,

--suddenly thought to himself,--

"I have sung long enough of my poor love to Christ, and now I will sing
of His love for me." Under the inspiration of this thought, he wrote--

    I am so glad that our Father in heaven
    Tells of His love in the book He has given
    Wonderful things in the Bible I see,
    This is the dearest--that Jesus loves me.

Both words and music are by Mr. Bliss.

The history of modern Sunday-school hymnody--or much of it--is so nearly
identified with that of the _Gospel Hymns_ that other selections like
the last, which might be appropriate here, may be considered in a later
chapter, where that eventful series of sacred songs receives special
notice.




CHAPTER IX.

PATRIOTIC HYMNS.


The ethnic anthologies growing out of love of country are a mingled
literature of filial and religious piety, ranging from war-like paeans to
lyric prayers. They become the cherished inheritance of a nation, and,
once fixed in the common memory and common heart, the people rarely let
them die. The "Songs of the Fathers" have perennial breath, and in every
generation--

    The green woods of their native land
      Shall whisper in the strain;
    The voices of their household band
      Shall sweetly speak again.
                           --_Felicia Hemans_.


ULTIMA THULE.

American pride has often gloried in Seneca's "Vision of the West," more
than eighteen hundred years ago.

          Venient annis
        Saecula seris, quibus Oceanus
        Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
        Pateat tellus, Typhisque novos
        Detegat orbes, nec sit terris
          Ultima Thule.

    A time will come in future ages far
    When Ocean will his circling bounds unbar.
    And, opening vaster to the Pilot's hand,
    New worlds shall rise, where mightier kingdoms are,
    Nor Thule longer be the utmost land.

This poetic forecast, of which Washington Irving wrote "the predictions
of the ancient oracles were rarely so unequivocal," is part of the
"chorus" at the end of the second act of Seneca's "Medea," written near
the date of St. Paul's first Epistle to the Thessalonians.

Seneca, the celebrated Roman (Stoic) philosopher, was born at or very
near the time of our Saviour's birth. There are legends of his
acquaintance with Paul, at Rome, but though he wrote able and quotable
treatises _On Consolation_, _On Providence_, _On Calmness of Soul_, and
_On the Blessed Life_, there is no direct evidence that the savor of
Christian faith ever qualified his works or his personal principles. He
was a man of grand ideas and inspirations, but he was a time server and
a flatterer of the Emperor Nero, who, nevertheless, caused his death
when he had no further use for him.

His compulsory suicide occurred A.D. 65, the year in which St. Paul is
supposed to have suffered martyrdom.


"THE BREAKING WAVES DASHED HIGH."

Sitting at the tea-table one evening, near a century ago, Mrs. Hemans
read an old account of the "Landing of the Pilgrims," and was inspired
to write this poem, which became a favorite in America--like herself,
and all her other works.

The ballad is inaccurate in details, but presents the spirit of the
scene with true poet insight. Mr. James T. Fields, the noted Boston
publisher, visited the lady in her old age, and received an autograph
copy of the poem, which is seen in Pilgrim Hall, Plymouth, Mass.

    The breaking waves dashed high, on a stern and rock-bound coast,
    And the woods against a stormy sky, their giant branches tossed,
    And the heavy night hung dark, the hills and waters o'er,
    When a band of exiles moored their bark on the wild New England
      shore.

    Not as the conqueror comes, they, the true-hearted, came;
    Not with the roll of stirring drums, and the trumpet that sings
      of fame;
    Not as the flying come, in silence and in fear,--
   _They_ shook the depths of the desert's gloom with their hymns of
      lofty cheer.

    Amidst the storm they sang, and the stars heard, and the sea!
    And the sounding aisles of the dim woods rang to the anthem of the
      free!
    The ocean eagle soared from his nest by the white waves' foam,
    And the rocking pines of the forest roared,--this was their welcome
      home!

    There were men with hoary hair amidst that pilgrim band,--
    Why had _they_ come to wither there, away from their childhood's
      land?
    There was woman's fearless eye, lit by her deep love's truth;
    There was manhood's brow, serenely high, and the fiery heart of
      youth.

    What sought they thus afar? bright jewels of the mine?
    The wealth of seas? the spoils of war?--They sought a faith's pure
      shrine!
    Ay, call it holy ground, the soil where first they trod;
    They left unstained what there they found,--freedom to worship God!

Felicia Dorothea Browne (Mrs. Hemans) was born in Liverpool, Eng., 1766,
and died 1845.


_THE TUNE._

The original tune is not now accessible. It was composed by Mrs. Mary E.
(Browne) Arkwright, Mrs. Hemans' sister, and published in England about
1835. But the words have been sung in this country to "Silver St.," a
choral not entirely forgotten, credited to an English composer, Isaac
Smith, born, in London, about 1735, and died there in 1800.


"WESTWARD THE COURSE OF EMPIRE."

Usually misquoted "Westward the _Star_ of Empire," etc. This poem of
Bishop Berkeley possesses no lyrical quality but, like the ancient
Roman's words, partakes of the prophetic spirit, and has always been
dear to the American heart by reason of the above line. It seems to
formulate the "manifest destiny" of a great colonizing race that has
already absorbed a continent, and extended its sway across the Pacific
ocean.

    Not such as Europe breeds in her decay;
      Such as she bred when fresh and young,
    When heavenly flame did animate her clay,
      By future poets shall be sung.

    Westward the course of empire takes its way;
      The four first acts already past,
    The fifth shall close the drama of the day:
      Time's noblest offspring is the last.

George Berkeley was born March 12, 1684, and educated at Trinity
College, Dublin. A remarkable student, he became a remarkable man, as
priest, prelate, and philosopher. High honors awaited him at home, but
the missionary passion seized him. Inheriting a small fortune, he sailed
to the West, intending to evangelize and educate the Indians of the
"Summer Islands," but the ship lost her course, and landed him at
Newport, R.I., instead of the Bermudas. Here he was warmly welcomed, but
was disappointed in his plans and hopes of founding a native college by
the failure of friends in England to forward funds, and after a
residence of six years he returned home. He died at Cloyne, Ireland,
1753.

The house which Bishop Berkeley built is still shown (or was until very
recently) at Newport after one hundred and seventy-eight years. He wrote
the _Principles of Human Knowledge_, the _Minute Philosopher_, and many
other works of celebrity in their time, and a scholarship in Yale bears
his name; but he is best loved in this country for his _Ode to America_.

Pope in his list of great men ascribes--

    To Berkeley every virtue under heaven.


"SOUND THE LOUD TIMBREL."

One would scarcely guess that this bravura hymn of victory and "Come, ye
disconsolate," were written by the same person, but both are by Thomas
Moore. The song has all the vigor and vivacity of his "Harp That Once
Through Tara's Halls," without its pathos. The Irish poet chose the song
of Miriam instead of the song of Deborah doubtless because the sentiment
and strain of the first of these two great female patriots lent
themselves more musically to his lyric verse--and his poem is certainly
martial enough to convey the spirit of both.

    Sound the loud timbrel o'er Egypt's dark sea!
      Jehovah hath triumphed, His people are free!
    Sing, for the pride of the tyrant is broken;
      His chariots, his horsemen, all splendid and brave--
    How vain was their boasting, the Lord hath but spoken,
      And chariots and horsemen are sunk in the wave.


_THE TUNE._

Of all the different composers to whose music Moore's "sacred songs"
were sung--Beethoven, Mozart, Stevenson, and the rest--Avison seems to
be the only one whose name and tune have clung to the poet's words; and
we have the man and the melody sent to us, as it were, by the lyrist
himself. The tune is now rarely sung except at church festivals and
village entertainments, but the life and clamor of the scene at the Red
Sea are in it, and it is something more than a mere musical curiosity.
Its style, however, is antiquated--with its timbrel beat and its
canorous harmony and "coda fortis"--and modern choirs have little use in
religious service for the sonata written for viols and horns.

It was Moore's splendid hymn that gave it vogue in England and Ireland,
and sent it across the sea to find itself in the house of its friends
with the psalmody of Billings and Swan. Moore was the man of all men to
take a fancy to it and make language to its string-and-trumpet concert.
He was a musician himself, and equally able to adapt a tune and to
create one. As a festival performance, replete with patriotic noise, let
Avison's old "Sound the Timbrel" live.

Charles Avison was born at Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1710. He studied in Italy,
wrote works on music, and composed sonatas and concertos for stringed
orchestras. For many years he was organist of St. Nicholas' Kirk in his
native town.

The tune to "Sound the Loud Timbrel" is a chorus from one of his longer
compositions. He died in 1770.


"THE HARP THAT ONCE THROUGH TARA'S HALLS."

This is the only one of Moore's patriotic "Irish Melodies" that lives
wherever sweet tones are loved and poetic feeling finds answering
hearts. The exquisite sadness of its music and its text is strangely
captivating, and its untold story beckons from its lines.

Tara was the ancient home of the Irish kings. King Dermid, who had
apostatized from the faith of St. Patrick and his followers, in A.D.,
554, violated the Christian right of sanctuary by taking an escaped
prisoner from the altar of refuge in Temple Ruadan (Tipperary) and
putting him to death. The patron priest and his clergy marched to Tara
and solemnly pronounced a curse upon the King. Not long afterwards
Dermid was assassinated, and superstition shunned the place "as a castle
under ban." The last human resident of "Tara's Hall" was the King's
bard, who lingered there, forsaken and ostracized, till he starved to
death. Years later one daring visitor found his skeleton and his broken
harp.

Moore utilized this story of tragic pathos as a figure in his song for
"fallen Erin" lamenting her lost royalty--under a curse that had lasted
thirteen hundred years.

    The harp that once through Tara's halls
      The soul of music shed,
    Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls
      As if that soul were fled.

    So sleeps the pride of former days,
      So glory's thrill is o'er,
    And hearts that once beat high for praise
      Now feel that pulse no more.

No one can read the words without "thinking" the tune. It is supposed
that Moore composed them both.


THE MARSEILLAISE HYMN.

    Ye sons of France, awake to glory!
    Hark! hark! what millions bid you rise!

The "Marseillaise Hymn" so long supposed to be the musical as well as
verbal composition of Roget de Lisle, an army engineer, was proved to be
only his words set to an air in the "Credo" of a German mass, which was
the work of one Holzman in 1726. De Lisle was known to be a poet and
musician as well as a soldier, and, as he is said to have played or sung
at times in the churches and convents, it is probable that he found and
copied the manuscript of Holzman's melody. His haste to rush his fiery
"Hymn" before the public in the fever of the Revolution allowed him no
time to make his own music, and he adapted the German's notes to his
words and launched the song in the streets of Strasburg. It was first
sung in Paris by a band of chanters from Marseilles, and, like the
trumpets blown around Jericho, it shattered the walls of the French
monarchy to their foundations.

The "Marseillaise Hymn" is mentioned here for its patriotic birth and
associations. An attempt to make a religious use of it is recorded in
the Fourth Chapter.


ODE ON SCIENCE.

This is a "patriotic hymn," though a queer production with a queer name,
considering its contents; and its author was no intimate of the Muses.
Liberty is supposed to be somehow the corollary of learning, or vice
versa--whichever the reader thinks.

    The morning sun shines from the East
    And spreads his glories to the West.

       *       *       *       *       *

    So Science spreads her lucid ray
    O'er lands that long in darkness lay;
    She visits fair Columbia,
    And sets her sons among the stars.
    Fair Freedom, her attendant, waits, etc.


_THE TUNE_

Was the really notable part of this old-time "Ode," the favorite of
village assemblies, and the inevitable practice-piece for amateur
violinists. The author of the crude symphony was Deacon Janaziah (or
Jazariah) Summer, of Taunton, Mass., who prepared it--music and probably
words--for the semi-centennial of Simeon Dagget's Academy in 1798. The
"Ode" was subsequently published in Philadelphia, and also in Albany. It
was a song of the people, and sang itself through the country for fifty
or sixty years, always culminating in the swift crescendo chorus and
repeat--

    The British yoke and Gallic chain
    Were urged upon our necks in vain;
    All haughty tyrants we disdain,
    And shout "Long live America!"

The average patriot did not mind it if "Columbi-_ay_" and "Ameri-_kay_"
were not exactly classic orthoepy.


"HAIL COLUMBIA."

This was written (1798) by Judge Joseph Hopkinson, born, in
Philadelphia, 1770, and died there, 1843. He wrote it for a friend in
that city who was a theatre singer, and wanted a song for Independence
Day. The music (to which it is still sung) was "The President's March,"
by a composer named Fyles, near the end of the 18th century.

There is nothing hymn-like in the words, which are largely a
glorification of Gen. Washington, but the tune, a concerted piece better
for band than voices, has the drum-and-anvil chorus quality suitable for
vociferous mass singing--and a zealous Salvation Army corps on field
nights could even fit a processional song to it with gospel words.


OLD "CHESTER."

    Let tyrants shake their iron rod,
      And slavery clank her galling chains:
    We'll fear them not; we trust in God;
      New England's God forever reigns.

Old "Chester," both words and tune the work of William Billings, is
another of the provincial freedom songs of the Revolutionary period, and
of the days when the Republic was young. Billings was a zealous patriot,
and (says a writer in Moore's _Cyclopedia of Music_) "one secret, no
doubt, of the vast popularity his works obtained was the patriotic ardor
they breathed. The words above quoted are an example, and 'Chester,' it
is said, was frequently heard from every fife in the New England ranks.
The spirit of the Revolution was also manifest in his 'Lamentation over
Boston,' his 'Retrospect,' his 'Independence,' his 'Columbia,' and many
other pieces."

William Billings was born, in Boston, Oct. 7, 1746. He was a man of
little education, but his genius for music spurred him to study the
tuneful art, and enabled him to learn all that could be learned without
a master. He began to make tunes and publish them, and his first book,
the _New England Psalm-singer_ was a curiosity of youthful crudity and
confidence, but in considerable numbers it was sold, and sung--and
laughed at. He went on studying and composing, and compiled another
work, which was so much of an improvement that it got the name of
_Billings' Best_. A third singing-book followed, and finally a fourth
entitled the _Psalm Singer's Amusement_, both of which were popular in
their day. His "Majesty" has tremendous capabilities of sound, and its
movement is fully up to the requirements of Nahum Tate's verses,--

    And on the wings of mighty winds
      Came flying all abroad.

William Billings died in 1800, and his remains lie in an unmarked grave
in the old "Granary" Burying Ground in the city of his birth.

National feeling has taken maturer speech and finer melody, but it was
these ruder voices that set the pitch. They were sung with native pride
and affection at fireside vespers and rural feasts with the adopted
songs of Burns and Moore and Mrs. Hemans, and, like the lays of Scotland
and Provence, they breathed the flavor of the country air and soil, and
taught the generation of home-born minstrelsy that gave us the
Hutchinson family, Ossian E. Dodge, Covert with his "Sword of Bunker
Hill," and Philip Phillips, the "Singing Pilgrim."


THE STAR SPANGLED BANNER.

Near the close of the last war with England, Francis Scott Key, of
Baltimore, the author of this splendid national hymn, was detained under
guard on the British flag-ship at the mouth of the Petapsco, where he
had gone under a flag of truce to procure the release of a captured
friend, Dr. William Beanes of Upper Marlboro, Md.

The enemy's fleet was preparing to bombard Fort McHenry, and Mr. Key's
return with his friend was forbidden lest their plans should be
disclosed. Forced to stay and witness the attack on his country's flag,
he walked the deck through the whole night of the bombardment until the
break of day showed the brave standard still flying at full mast over
the fort. Relieved of his patriotic anxiety, he pencilled the exultant
lines and chorus of his song on the back of a letter, and, as soon as he
was released, carried it to the city, where within twenty-four hours it
was printed on flyers, circulated and sung in the streets to the air of
"Anacreon in Heaven"--which has been the "Star Spangled Banner" tune
ever since.

    O say, can you see by the dawn's early light
    What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's last gleaming?
    Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fight
    O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming,
    And the rockets red glare, the bombs bursting in air
    Gave proof through the night that the flag was still there:
      O say, does the star-spangled banner yet wave,
      O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave?

       *       *       *       *       *

      O thus be it ever when freemen shall stand,
      Between their loved homes and the war's desolation;
      Blessed with victory and peace, may the heaven-rescued land
      Praise the Power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
      Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
      And this be our motto, "_In God is our trust_."
      And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall wave,
      O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

The original star-spangled banner that waved over Fort McHenry in sight
of the poet when he wrote the famous hymn was made and presented to the
garrison by a girl of fifteen, afterwards Mrs. Sanderson, and is
still preserved in the Sanderson family at Baltimore.

[Illustration: Samuel F. Smith]

The additional stanza to the "Star-Spangled Banner"--

    When our land is illumined with Liberty's smile, etc.,

--was composed by Dr. O.W. Holmes, in 1861.

The tune "Anacreon in Heaven" was an old English hunting air composed by
John Stafford Smith, born at Gloucester, Eng. 1750. He was composer for
Covent Garden Theater, and conductor of the Academy of Ancient Music.
Died Sep. 20, 1836. The melody was first used in America to Robert Treat
Paine's song, "Adams and Liberty." Paine, born 1778--died 1811, was the
son of Robert Treat Paine, signer of the Declaration of Independence.


"STAND! THE GROUND'S YOUR OWN, MY BRAVES."

Sympathetic admiration for the air, "Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled,"
(or "Bruce's address," as it was commonly called), with the syllables of
Robert Burns' silvery verse, lingered long in the land after the wars
were ended. It spoke in the poem of John Pierpont, who caught its
pibroch thrill, and built the metre of "Warren's Address at the Battle
of Bunker Hill" on the model of "Scots wha hae."

    Stand! the ground's your own, my braves;
    Will ye give it up to slaves?
    Will ye look for greener graves?

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the God of battles trust:
    Die we may, or die we must,
    But O where can dust to dust
      Be consigned so well,

    As where Heaven its dews shall shed,
    On the martyred patriot's bed,
    And the rocks shall raise their head
      Of his deeds to tell?

This poem, written about 1823, held a place many years in school-books,
and was one of the favorite school-boy declamations. Whenever sung on
patriotic occasions, the music was sure to be "Bruce's Address." That
typical Scotch tune was played on the Highland bag-pipes long before
Burns was born, and known as "Hey tuttie taite." "Heard on Fraser's
hautboy, it used to fill my eyes with tears," Burns himself once wrote.

Rev. John Pierpont was born in Litchfield, Ct., April 6, 1785. He was
graduated at Yale, 1804, taught school, studied law, engaged in trade,
and finally took a course in theology and became a Unitarian minister,
holding the pastorate of Hollis St. Church, Boston, thirty-six years. He
travelled in the East, and wrote "Airs of Palestine." His poem, "The
Yankee Boy," has been much quoted. Died in Medford, Mass., Aug. 26,
1866.


"MY COUNTRY, 'TIS OF THEE."

This simple lyric, honored so long with the name "America," and the
title "Our National Hymn," was written by Samuel Francis Smith, while a
theological student at Andover, Feb. 2, 1832. He had before him several
hymn and song tunes which Lowell Mason had received from Germany, and,
knowing young Smith to be a good linguist, had sent to him for
translation. One of the songs, of national character, struck Smith as
adaptable to home use if turned into American words, and he wrote four
stanzas of his own to fit the tune.

Mason printed them with the music, and under his magical management the
hymn made its debut on a public occasion in Park St. Church, Boston,
July 4, 1832. Its very simplicity, with its reverent spirit and
easy-flowing language, was sure to catch the ear of the multitude and
grow into familiar use with any suitable music, but it was the foreign
tune that, under Mason's happy pilotage, winged it for the western world
and launched it on its long flight.

    My country, 'tis of thee,
    Sweet land of liberty,
      Of thee I sing;
    Land where my fathers died,
    Land of the pilgrims' pride,
    From every mountain-side
      Let freedom ring.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let music swell the breeze,
    And ring from all the trees
      Sweet Freedom's song;
    Let mortal tongues awake,
    Let all that breathe partake,
    Let rocks their silence break,
      The sound prolong.

    Our fathers' God, to Thee,
    Author of liberty,
      To Thee we sing;
      Long may our land be bright
    With Freedom's holy light;
    Protect us by Thy might,
      Great God, our King.


_THE TUNE._

Pages, and at least two volumes, have been written to prove the origin
of that cosmopolitan, half-Gregorian descant known here as "America,"
and in England as "God Save the King." William C. Woodbridge of Boston
brought it home with him from Germany. The Germans had been singing it
for years (and are singing it now, more or less) to the words, "Heil Dir
Im Siegel Kranz," and the Swiss to "Rufst Du mein Vaterland." It was
sung in Sweden, also, and till 1833 it was in public use in Russia
commonly enough to give it a national character. Von Weber introduced it
in his "Jubel" overture, and Beethoven, in 1814, copied it in C Major
and wrote piano variations on it. It has been ascribed to Henry Purcell
(1696), to Lulli, a French composer (1670), to Dr. John Bull (1619), and
to Thomas Ravenscroft and an old Scotch carol as old as 1609. One might
fancy that the biography of the famous air resembled Melchizedek's.

The truth appears to be that certain bars of music which might easily
happen to be similar, or even identical, when plain-song was the common
style, were produced at different times and places, and one man finally
harmonized the wandering strains into a complete tune. It is now
generally conceded that the man was Henry Carey, a popular English
composer and dramatist of the first half of the 18th century, who sang
the melody as it now is, in 1740, at a public dinner given in honor of
Admiral Vernon after his capture of Porto Bello (Brazil). This antedates
any authenticated use of the tune _ipsissima forma_ in England or
continental Europe.

The American history of it simply is that Woodbridge gave it to Mason
and Mason gave it to Smith--and Smith gave it "My Country 'Tis of Thee."


"BY THE RUDE BRIDGE."

This genuinely American poem, written by Ralph Waldo Emerson and called
usually the "Concord Hymn," was prepared for the dedication of the
Battle-monument in Concord, April 19, 1836, and sung there to the tune
of "Old Hundred." Apparently no change has been made in the original
except of a single word in the first line.

    By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
      Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
    Here once the embattled farmers stood,
      And fired the shot heard round the world.
