hostile government, or of peculiar danger to the captor; it allows of
all destruction of property, and obstruction of the ways and channels of
traffic, travel, or communication, and of all withholding of sustenance
or means of life from the enemy; of the appropriation of whatever an
enemy's country affords necessary for the subsistence and safety of the
army, and of such deception as does not involve the breaking of good
faith either positively pledged, regarding agreements entered into
during the war, or supposed by the modern law of war to exist."[274]

[Sidenote: 81. Lecky's Standard of Morality.]

But supposing the modern morality does not approve of Mohammad what
hardly "affected his character in Arab estimation," are there no
diversities in moral judgments? The moral unity to be expected in
different ages is not a unity of standard or of facts, but a unity of
tendency.

"That some savage kill their old parents, that infanticide has been
practised without compunction by even civilized nations, that the best
Romans saw nothing wrong in the gladiatorial shows, that political or
revengeful assassinations have been for centuries admitted, that slavery
has been sometimes honoured and sometimes condemned, are unquestionable
proofs, that the same act may be regarded in one age as innocent, and in
another as criminal. Now it is undoubtedly true, that in many cases an
historical examination will reveal special circumstances explaining or
palliating the apparent anomaly. It has been often shown that the
gladiatorial shows were originally a form of human sacrifice adopted
through religious motives; that the rude nomadic life of savages
rendering impossible the preservation of aged and helpless members of
the tribe, the murder of parents was regarded as an act of mercy both by
the murderer and the victim; that before an effective administration of
justice was organized, private vengeance was the sole preservation
against crime, and political assassination against usurpation; that the
insensibility of some savages to the criminality of theft arises from
the fact that they were accustomed to have all things in common; that
the Spartan law legalizing theft arose partly from a desire to foster
military dexterity among the people, but chiefly from a desire to
discourage wealth; that slavery was introduced through motives of mercy
to prevent conquerors from killing their prisoners. All this is true,
but there is another and a more general answer. It is not to be
expected, and it is not maintained, that men in all ages should have
agreed about the application of their moral principles. All that is
contended for is, that these principles are themselves the same. Some of
what appear to us monstrous acts of cruelty were dictated by that very
feeling of humanity, the universal perception of the merit of which they
are cited to disprove; and even when this is not the case, all that can
be inferred is, that the standard of humanity was very low. But still
humanity was recognized as a virtue, and cruelty as a vice."[275]

_The alleged permission to kill the Jews._

[Sidenote: 82. Murder of Ibn Sanina.]

It is related by some of the biographers of Mohammad, eagerly recited by
others of Europe, that, "on the morning after the murder of Kab, Mahomet
gave a general permission to his followers to slay any Jews whom they
might chance to meet,"[276] and that the murder of Ibn Sanina, a Jewish
merchant, by Muheiasa, a Moslem, was the direct consequence of this
order. "When Huweisa upbraided Muheiasa for killing his confederate the
Jew, and appropriating his wealth,--"By the Lord!" replied Muheiasa, "if
he that commanded me to kill him commanded to kill thee also, I would
have done it." "What!" Huweisa cried, "wouldst thou have slain thine own
brother at Mahomet's bidding?"--"Even so," answered the fanatic.
"Strange indeed!" Huweisa responded. "Hath the new religion reached to
this pitch! Verily it is a wonderful Faith." And Huweisa was converted
from that very hour."[277]

Ibn Is-hak says this story was related to him by a freedman of the Bani
Harisa tribe from the daughter of Muheiasa, who had heard it from her
father.[278] (1) Now there is nothing known of this mysterious person,
the freedman of the tribe of Haris, therefore no reliance can be put on
his story. (2) We have no knowledge of the daughter of the murderer
Muheiasa, or Moheisa, as he is called by the biographer, Ibn Hisham. (3)
Muheiasa himself has not that respectable character which can lend even
a shadow of veracity to his narration. (4) And lastly, the story that
Mohammad had given general permission to his followers to slay any Jew
whom they might chance to meet, and consequently Muheiasa killed Ibn
Sanina, and Huweisa became a convert to Islam, is contradicted by
another counter-tradition in Ibn Hisham (pp. 554-555), who has related
from Abu Obeida, who relates from Abu Omar-al-Madani, that, "during the
execution of the Bani Koreiza (_vide_ para. 68), one Kab-bin-Yahooza was
made over to Muheiasa for execution. When the latter executed his
victim, Huweisa, his brother, who was still unbelieving, upbraided
Muheiasa. "If he," responded Muheiasa, "that commanded me to kill him
had commanded me to kill thee also, I would have killed thee." Huweisa
was quite surprised at his brother's reply, and went away astonished.
During the night he used to wake up repeatedly, and wonder at his
brother's staunch devotion to his faith. In the morning, he said, "By
the Lord! This is a wonderful faith," and came to the Prophet to embrace
Islam. These remarks show that the alleged permission to kill the Jews,
and Ibn Sanina's murder, and Huweisa's conversion in consequence
thereof, is all a mere concoction.

[Sidenote: 83. Sir W. Muir quoted.]

Even Sir W. Muir, though very fond of collecting all such apocryphal
traditions reflecting on the character of the Prophet, doubts the
veracity of this one, and declares its improbability and inexpediency.
He writes:--

     "But the order itself is a strange one, and must, one would
     suppose, have been accompanied by some conditions or reservations
     not here apparent. It was surely not expedient for the Prophet's
     cause at this time that the streets of Medina should have flowed
     with blood by the strict execution of this command. Yet such is the
     distinct tenor of the best traditions.

     "The order was not an unlikely one to have issued at a time when
     Mahomet was irritated against the Jews by their treachery; and
     Hishami has a tradition that it was promulgated when Mahomet
     directed the massacre of all the males of the Coreitza, which would
     have been the more likely version, if the other tradition had not
     been so strong and positive."[279]

But the tradition quoted by him is by no means the best or strongest as
I have shown above. Hishamee does not say that the order was promulgated
at the execution of the Bani Koreiza. He simply narrates the story of
Muheiasa and Huweisa to have taken place at that time.

_The expulsion of the Bani Nazeer._

[Sidenote: 84. The Bani Nazeer.]

The expulsion of the Bani Nazeer has been censured by Sir W. Muir, who
says: "The pretext on which the Bani Nadhir were besieged and
expatriated (namely, that Gabriel had revealed their design against the
Prophet's life), was feeble and unworthy of an honest cause."[280]

A whole Sura in the Koran is devoted to the Bani Nazeer, but it does
not hint at the alleged crime of their attempt on the life of the
Prophet or their expulsion for the same cause. The traditions on the
subject are unsupported, _ex parte_, and legendary. Had such a tradition
been current at the time of Mohammad, or what is called Sadr Av-val (the
first or Apostolic Age), we should certainly have had scores of
narrators on the subject.[281] Their crime was treachery,[282] and they
were a dangerous element to Medina, for a combination, at any period,
between the treacherous Jews and the aggressive Koreish, or other
enemies of Islam, would have proved fatal to the safety of Medina. But
their banishment was too mild a punishment.

[Sidenote: 85. Fruit-trees not cut down.]

It is said that Mohammad cut down the surrounding date trees and burned
the choicest of them during the siege of the Bani Nazeer, and justified
himself by publishing the verses of the LIX Sura of the Koran.[283] But
the date trees cut down were neither bearing fruit, nor did they supply
any staple article of food to the Bani Nazeer, or the public in general.
The _Leena_ mentioned in the verse referred to above is a tree without
fruit. Thus no fruit trees were destroyed. (Zoorkanee Vol. II, page 98.)
Trees not bearing fruits were only cut, which is also justified under
the Law of Moses. (See Deuteronomy XX, 20.)

_Females and the Treaty of Hodeibia._

[Sidenote: 86. Females and the treaty of Hodeibia.]

Females were not included in the truce of Hodeibia. The stipulation for
the surrender of deserters referred only to the male sex. All women who
were to come over to Medina from Mecca during the period of the peace
were, by the dictates of Sura LX, 10, to be tried, and if their
profession was found sincere, they were to be retained. They were
prohibited from marrying the unbelievers. The guardians of such
believing females were to receive from the Moslem commonwealth what they
had spent upon their charges. Sir W. Muir understands from Sura LX,
verse 10, that the women referred to therein were the wives of the
Meccans, and says:--"The unbelief of their husbands dissolved the
previous marriage; they now might legally contract fresh nuptials with
believers, provided only that restitution were made of any sums expended
by their former husbands as dower upon them."[284] But there is nothing
either to show that the women had their husbands at Mecca, or to prove,
that, on account of their husbands' unbelief, their marriages were
annulled. As marriage with women with husbands is forbidden in Sura IV,
verse 28, and the verse LX, 10, under discussion, does not designate
them as married women, I fairly conclude that this verse treats only of
such as were not married. It is not the Law of the Koran that the
unbelief of either party dissolves their previous marriage. It only
enjoins neither to marry idolatresses, nor to wed Moslem daughters with
idolaters until they believe.--(Sura II, 220.)

[Sidenote: 87. Stanley defended.]

Sir William Muir, after quoting Sura LX, 10-12, says, "Stanley on
Corinthians (1 Cor. VII, 1-40) quotes the above passage, and says that
the rule it contains "resembles that of the Apostle," Vol. I, page 145.
But there is really no analogy between them; the Gospel rule differs
_toto coelo_ from that of Mahomet:--"If any brother hath a wife that
believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her
away.--And similarly the case of a believing wife with an unbelieving
husband. (1 Cor. VII, 12-16.) Whereas Mahomet declares the marriage bond
_de facto_ annulled by the unbelief of either party, which indeed was
only to be expected from his loose ideas regarding the marriage
contract."[285] I think Stanley is quite correct, and the Gospel and the
Koranic rule resemble each other in this respect. Because the order,
"they (the believing women) are not lawful for them (unbelievers), nor
are the unbelievers lawful for these (believing women)," does not relate
to the women already married; and the words, "do not retain any right in
the infidel woman ... if any of your wives escape from you to the
infidels ..." are to the same purport as 1 Cor. VII, 15, "But if the
unbelieving depart let them depart. A brother or a sister is not under
bondage in such cases."[286]

[Sidenote 88. Marriage a strict bond of union.]

Mohammad had no loose ideas regarding the marriage tie. He had made the
marriage contract more firm and irrevocable, except under very
exceptional circumstances, than it was under the Arab society; and
called it "a strict bond of union."[287] Mohammad's own daughter,
Zeinab, was the wife of an unbelieving husband and had fled to her
father at Medina under the persecution at Mecca after the Hegira.[288]
Her marriage with her unbelieving partner was not cancelled by Mohammad,
and on the conversion of the son-in-law, when he came after a period of
six years after his wife had come to Medina, Mohammad rejoined them
together under their previous marriage. Theirs was neither a fresh
marriage nor a fresh dowry. (_Vide_ Ibn Abbas' tradition in the
collections of Ahmed, Ibn Abi Daood, Ibn Maja and Trimizee.)
Safwan-bin-Omayya and Ikrama-bin Abi Jahl had believing wives at the
time of the conquest of Mecca, and their marriages were not dissolved by
Mohammad. (_Vide_ Ibn Shahab's tradition in _Movatta_ by Malik, and in
the _Tabakat_ of Ibn Sad Katib Wakidi.) Similarly Ibn Sofian and
Hakeem-bin-Hizam had their unbelieving wives retained by them after they
had themselves been converted to Islam, and their former connubial
connection was not severed by Mohammad. (_Vide_ the several traditions
in Baihakee to the above effect.) It was only the legists and
juris-consults of a later age who wrongly construed the passage in Sura
LX, 10, to mean that the unbelief of either party dissolved the marriage
tie.

[Footnote 257: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV. p. 13.]

[Footnote 258: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 19.

In the collections of Bokharee the story is traced to Ans. But Ans could
not be a witness to Mohammad's command for mutilation, as Ans did not
come until the expedition to Khyber; and the execution of those robbers
took place before that. The story from Jabir in Ibn Mardaveih's
collections to the same effect is not authentic, as Jabir, who says he
was sent by Mohammad in pursuit of the robbers, and committed the act,
was not a convert at that time. Koostalanee, the author of _Mooahib_,
has declared the tradition of Ibn Jarir Tabari on the subject as an
apocryphal, _i.e._, "Zaeef." _Vide_ Zoorkanee on Movahib, Vol. II, p.
211.]

[Footnote 259: Ibn Hisham (p. 463) relates from Ibn Is-hak that Omar
asked permission to mutilate Sohail, but Mohammad replied, "I would not
mutilate him; if I do, God will mutilate me, though I be a Prophet."]

[Footnote 260: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 19.]

[Footnote 261: This subject has been fully and judiciously discussed by
the Honorable Syed Ahmed Khan Bahadur, C.S.I., in his "Commentary of the
Koran;" Sura. iv. pp. 198-204.]

[Footnote 262: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 68.]

[Footnote 263: _Vide_ Mishkat Book of Retaliation, pp. 243-244.]

[Footnote 264: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 131, foot-note.]

[Footnote 265: Introduction to Lane's Selections from the Kur-an, by
Stanley Lane Poole, p. lxvii. London: Trubner and Co., 1879.]

[Footnote 266: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 308.]

[Footnote 267: _Ibid_, p. 35.]

[Footnote 268: _Vide_ Zoorkanee on _Movahib_, Vol. II, page 244; also
_Zad-ul-Maad_, by Ibn-al-Kyyim, Vol. I, page 376, Cawnpore, 1298 A.H.;
and _Seerat-ul-Mohammadiya_, by Mohammad Karamat-ul-Ali of Delhi, in
loco. The Life is compiled from _Seerat Halabi_ and _Seerat Shamee_ and
was lithographed in Bombay.]

[Footnote 269: Hishamee, page 681; Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III,
page 266.]

[Footnote 270: _Seerat Halabi_, or _Insan-al-Oyoon_, Vol II, page 79.]

[Footnote 271: History of _Mohammad's Campaigns_, by Wackidi, pp.
368-369: Edited by Von Kremer, Calcutta, 1856.]

[Footnote 272: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 282.]

[Footnote 273: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pages 308-309.]

[Footnote 274: Lieber's Miscellaneous Writings, Vol. II, page 250.]

[Footnote 275: History of European Morals, from Augustus to Charlemagne.
By William Edward Hartpole Lecky, M.A., Vol. I, pp. 101-102.]

[Footnote 276: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 148.]

[Footnote 277: _Ibid_, p. 149.]

[Footnote 278: Ibn Hisham, p. 554.]

[Footnote 279: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, pp. 148 & 149,
_foot-note_.]

[Footnote 280: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, page 308.]

[Footnote 281: The tradition that Mohammad had gone to Bani Nazeer
asking their aid in defraying a certain price of blood, and they
attempted upon his life (Muir, III, 208-209) as related by Ibn Is-hak
(in Ibn Hisham, page 652) is a _Mursal_ (_vide_ Zoorkanee, Part II, page
95), and consequently was not current in the Apostolic Age.]

[Footnote 282: Ibn Ockba, an earliest biographer of Mohammad, died 140,
says,--the cause of the expedition against the Bani Nazeer was this:
that they had instigated the Koreish to fight against Mohammad, and had
reconnoitred the weak points of Medina. Ibn Mardaveih Abd-bin-Hameed,
and Abdu Razzak have related traditions to the effect that, after the
event of Badr, the Koreish had written to the Jews of Medina to make war
upon Mohammad, and the Bani Nazeer had resolved to break the compact.
_Vide_ Zoorkanee, Part II, pp, 96-97.]

[Footnote 283: Compare Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, pp. 213 and
302, _foot-note_.]

[Footnote 284: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 44.]

[Footnote 285: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 46, foot-note.]

[Footnote 286: The verses of the Koran are given below:

10. "O Believers! when believing women come over to you as refugees,
then make trial of them. God best knoweth their faith; but if ye have
also ascertained their faith, let them not go back to the infidels; they
are not lawful for them, nor are the unbelievers lawful for these women.
But give them back what they have spent. No crime shall it be in you to
marry them, provided you give them their dowers. Do not retain a right
in the infidel women, and demand back what you have spent and let them
demand back what they have spent. This is the ordinance of God which He
ordaineth among you: and God is Knowing, Wise."

11. "And if any of your wives escape from you to the infidels from whom
you afterwards take any spoil, then give to those whose wives shall have
fled away, the like of what they shall have spent; and fear God in whom
ye believe."--Sura LX.]

[Footnote 287: Sura IV, 25. Rodwell's translation.

How Mohammad discouraged divorce and took several steps in the Koran to
prohibit the facility of divorce prevailing in the Arab society has been
fully discussed by me in my book "The Proposed Political, Legal, and
Social Reforms under Moslem Rule," pp. 129-143, Bombay Education Society
Press, 1883.]

[Footnote 288: "Some of the baser sort from amongst the Coreish, hearing
of her departure, went in pursuit, determined to bring her back. The
first that appeared was Habbar, who struck the camel with his spear, and
so affrighted Zeinab as to cause her a miscarriage."--Muir's Life of
Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 7.]


_The Popular Jihad or Crusade; According to the Mohammadan Common Law._

[Sidenote 89. The Koran enjoined only defensive wars.]

Almost all the common Mohammadan and European writers think that a
religious war of aggression is one of the tenets of Islam, and
prescribed by the Koran for the purpose of proselytizing or exacting
tribute. But I do not find any such doctrine enjoined in the Koran, or
taught, or preached by Mohammad. His mission was not to wage wars, or to
make converts at the point of the sword, or to exact tribute or
exterminate those who did not believe his religion. His sole mission was
to enlighten the Arabs to the true worship of the one God, to recommend
virtue and denounce vice, which he truly fulfilled. That he and his
followers were persecuted, that they were expelled from their houses and
were invaded upon and warred against; that to repel incursions and to
gain the liberty of conscience and the security of his followers' lives
and the freedom of their religion, he and they waged defensive wars,
encountered superior numbers, made defensive treaties, securing the main
object of the war, _i.e._, the freedom of their living unmolested at
Mecca and Medina, and of having a free intercourse to the Sacred Mosque,
and a free exercise of their religion: all these are questions quite
separate and irrelevant, and have nothing to do with the subject in
hand, _i.e._, the popular _Jihad_, or the crusade for the purpose of
proselytizing, exacting tribute, and exterminating the idolaters, said
to be one of the tenets of Islam. All the defensive wars, and the verses
of the Koran relating to the same, were strictly temporary and
transitory in their nature. They cannot be made an example of, or be
construed into a tenet or injunction for aggressive wars, nor were they
intended so to be. Even they cannot be an example or instruction for a
defensive war to be waged by the Mohammadan community or commonwealth,
because all the circumstances under which Mohammad waged his defensive
wars were local and temporary. But almost all European writers do not
understand that the Koran does not teach a war of aggression, but had
only, under the adverse circumstances, to enjoin a war of defence,
clearly setting forth the grounds in its justification and strictly
prohibiting offensive measures.

[Sidenote 90. The Common Law and Jihad.]

All the fighting injunctions in the Koran are, in the first place, only
in self-defence, and none of them has any reference to make warfare
offensively. In the second place, it is to be particularly noted that
they were transitory in their nature, and are not to be considered
positive injunctions for future observance or religious precepts for
coming generations.[289] They were only temporary measures to meet the
emergency of the aggressive circumstances. The Mohammadan Common Law is
wrong on this point, where it allows unbelievers to be attacked without
provocation. But this it places under the category of a non-positive
injunction. A positive injunction is that which is incumbent on every
believer. But attacking unbelievers without any provocation, or
offensively, is not incumbent on every believer. The Hedaya has:--"The
sacred injunction concerning war is sufficiently observed when it is
carried on by any one _party_ or _tribe_ of _Mussulmans_; and it is then
no longer of any force with respect to the rest."[290]

[Sidenote 91. Jihad when positive.]

The Mohammadan Common Law makes the fighting only a positive injunction
"where there is a _general summons_, (that is, where the infidels invade
a _Mussulman_ territory, and the _Imam_ for the time being issues a
general proclamation, requiring all persons to stand forth to fight,)
for in this case war becomes a positive injunction with respect to the
whole of the inhabitants,"[291]--this is sanctioned by the Law of
Nations and the Law of Nature.

[Sidenote: 92. The Hedaya quoted and refuted.]

The Hedaya, or a Commentary of the Mohammadan Common Law by Nuraddin Ali
of Murghinan (died in 593, A.H.) has:--

"The destruction of the sword[292] is incurred by the infidels, although
they be not the first aggressors, as appears from the various passages
in the sacred writings which are generally received to this
effect."[293]

This assertion is not borne out by the sacred injunction of the Koran,
and, on the contrary, is in direct contradiction to the same. There are
several passages in the Koran already quoted in pages 16-25, which
expressly forbid the taking of offensive measures, and enjoin only
defensive wars. There are some other passages which are not so
expressive as the several others referred to above, or in other words,
are not conditional. But the law of interpretation, the general scope
and tenor of the Koran, and the context of the verses and parallel
passages, all show that those few verses which are not conditional
should be construed as conditional in conformity with other passages
more clear, expressive, and conditional, and with the general laws of
scriptural interpretation. Now, the author of the Hedaya and other
writers on the Common Law quote only those few passages from the Koran
which are absolute or unconditional, and shut their eyes against those
many conditional verses, and general scope and tenor of the Koran.

  Limited, or _Conditional_.       |General, or _Absolute_.
  ---------------------------------+---------------------------------------
                                   |
  Sura XXII, 39-42.                |Sura II, 245, (read together with 247.)
  Sura II, 186-189.                |Sura IX, 124.
  "     "  212.                    |
  "     "  214.                    |The context, parallel passages
  Sura IV, 76, 77, 78, 86.         |and their history, show them
