_Nativity_: S. Luke ii. 11.  Circumcision: S. Luke ii. 21.

_Baptism_: S. Matth. iii. 16.

_Fasting and Temptation_: S. Luke iv. 1, 2.

_Agony and Bloody Sweat_: S. Luke xxii. 44.

_Cross and Passion_: S. Matth. xxvii. 41-46; Heb. v. 7.

_Death and Burial_: S. Mark xv. 44, 45.

_Resurrection_: S. Matth. xxviii. 5-7.

_Ascension_: Acts i. 9; 1 Tim. iii. 16.

_The Coming of the Holy Ghost_: Acts ii. 32, 33.

9. _Tribulation, Wealth, Death, Judgment_ are the four times of special
need.

Tribulation is derived from threshing, or crushing.

{165}

Wealth is well-doing, or welfare.  Prosperity and Adversity are both
times of temptation.


Intercessions.  (Prayer for others.)

10. _Universal_ is equivalent to Catholic.

11. _Governor_ refers to the relation of the Sovereign to the Church.

12. _faith, fear, and love_, an ascending order of submission to God.
_affiance_=trust.

11, 14. The names of the Sovereign, and of the Royal Family, vary in
these petitions.  A Prayer Book of 1682 has King Charles, Queen
Catherine, and James Duke of York.  In 1801, King George, Queen
Charlotte, George Prince of Wales, and the Princess of Wales.  In 1850,
Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and Albert Prince of Wales.  The date of
a Prayer Book is sometimes omitted from a title page, but may be learnt
from these petitions more accurately than from the Table of Moveable
Feasts.  It is, I believe, left to the Sovereign to say who is to be
mentioned, and by what titles.

15. _Bishops_: successors of the Apostles as Overseers of the Churches
(1 Tim. i. 3; 2 Tim. ii. 2; Tit. i. 5, ii. 15).  The word _epirkopos_(=
overseer) is contracted into Bishop in many languages, with slight
differences, e.g. Old English, Dutch, German, Swedish, Cornish.  In
Spanish it becomes Obispo; in Italian, Vescovo; in French, Eveque.

_Priests_: successors of the Elders, or Presbyters, who ministered in
congregations (Acts xx. 17).  As the Bishop has the Oversight of many
congregations with their Priests and Deacons, so the Priest {166} has
the Oversight of one congregation, or Parish.  In this sense he might
be called Overseer, or Bishop, of that Parish, and S. Paul's use of
this word in 1 Tim. iii. has suggested that, while the Apostles lived,
the word Bishop was used as much in this sense as in the other.  When
the word Bishop was required for the Apostolic office, the word Priest
remained for the second Order of the ministry.  Priest is contracted
from Presbyter, and appears with slight variations in many languages.

_Deacons_.  The Seven appointed in Acts vi. are not there called
deacons, but they are assumed to be the first who were appointed to
that office, or order of the Ministry.  In some ancient churches they
retained the practice of having seven deacons.

The word means Minister, and has come from the Greek into many
languages with slight variations.  Like the word Bishop, it is used in
the N.T. of other orders of the Ministry (S. Paul, 1 Cor. iii. 5; 2
Cor. iii. 6; Eph. iii. 7, &c.: Epaphras, Col. i. 7: Tychicus, Eph. vi.
21: Timothy, 1 Tim. iv. 6: Archippus, Col. iv. 17).  Although in 1 Tim.
iv. 6 the word is used of Timothy, who was receiving commandment as
overseer of all the Clergy at Ephesus, we find in 1 Tim. iii. 8-10 that
Deacons were already Church Ministers, with official duties (1 Tim.
iii. 10)[6].

{167}

shew it _accordingly_: i.e. shew it in accordance with their preaching.
The "teaching" and "living" must agree together.

16. The Council of the King of England had, from of old, the duty of
making, or approving, the choice of the King, and advising him on
matters of state, and of law.  Many of its duties have been deputed to
Committees, to Judges, and to Parliament.  The Cabinet of Chief
Ministers of State may be regarded as a Committee of the King's Council.

In the reign of Charles II., when the Prayer Book was last revised, the
Council was still the body whose advice guided the King, although it
was growing too large for the secrecy which is often necessary in such
weighty matters.  It is still a very great honour to be made a Privy
Councillor, but the Privy Council very seldom, or never, meets for
business except by its Committees, which are not chosen by the Council.

When therefore we use this petition, we may think rather of the members
of the Cabinet than of those whom the King has honoured with the title
of Privy Councillor.  A petition for the House of Commons might with
advantage be introduced into the Litany.

17. _to execute justice_, in the case which is being tried, is the
first duty of a magistrate; _to maintain truth_ is also his duty, for
he must have regard to other cases which will come before the Court.

18. This concludes the petitions for our own nation.  We now go on to
things which affect all nations alike.

19. _Unity, peace, and concord_.  The general meaning of these words is
the same, but there may {168} be unity without peace, and peace without
concord: therefore we pray for all the three; and concord is placed
last as being the inward temper which gives reality to unity and peace.

20. Here the order is reversed--proceeding from love which is the
highest kind of bond, to _dread_ which should keep us from
disobedience, and coming finally to the outward result viz. _a diligent
life of obedience to the commandments_.

21. Takes up the last thought of the previous suffrage.

The life of obedience is here traced from hearing to receiving, and so,
_to the fruits of the Spirit_ (see Gal. V. 22-24).

22. _Erred_ is when the fault is in ourselves only; _deceived_ is when
we give way to the evil guidance of others.

23. Those who _stand_ need strength: those who are _weak-hearted_ need
comfort and help: those who _fall_, restoration.

24. See p. 161.

25. Emigration has become more common since this petition was prepared:
those who settle in foreign lands should here be remembered.
_Captives_ are war-prisoners.

26. We may mentally supply the thought of _motherless_ children.
Widows may be supposed to include widowers.  Both sexes are described
as widows in some parts of England.  All kinds of bereavement are of
course included in _desolate and oppressed_.

27. Just as 19 concluded a section of petitions {169} for our own
nation, so 27 concludes a section about the people of all nations.  28
adds a petition which the Lord particularly enjoined (S. Matth. v. 44).

28. _enemies, persecutors_, and _slanderers_--in ascending order of
malignity.  Similarly in the Commandments, where the worst sin of each
sort is the one mentioned, we find false witness, or slander, named, in
the Commandment which forbids all falsehood.

_and to turn their hearts_--a nobler prayer even than asking God to
forgive them: for when we have asked Him for their forgiveness, we may
still long to overcome their hostility, rather than to see it
withdrawn.  As Christ's disciples we here desire to forego our triumph,
and to rejoice over their conversion from evil.

29. Kindly fruits of the earth.  'Kindly' means 'natural'; from an Old
English word 'cynd' or 'gecynd,' meaning _nature, kind, manner,
condition_.  (Cf. Gen. i. 11, 12, 21, 24, 25.)[7]

30. Although forgiveness is granted through the death of our Lord,
repentance is that condition of our souls wherein the forgiveness
cleanses them.  _Repentance_ is therefore asked for first, then
_Forgiveness, Grace_, and _Amendment_.

_Sins, negligences, and ignorances_: cf. General Confession, 'left
undone'=negligence; 'done'=sins; 'no health in us' supplying the other
defects, which are here set down to ignorance.  We are called to a holy
life, and therefore faults due to ignorance need {170} amendment and
pardon, as well as faults which come of conscious disobedience to God's
commands.

At the close of these petitions, the cry becomes more urgent.  Our Lord
warned us against vain repetitions--repetitions without meaning.  The
repetitions here are not vain--they express deep feelings, and anxious
entreaty.


Section ii. Our cry to the Father in Heaven.

The couplet

  _O Lord, deal not with us_, &c.
  _Neither reward us_, &c.

belongs to the _Prayer of the Contrite Heart_, and is a summary of it.
It is taken from Psalm ciii. 10.  It offers no excuse but owns that we
have sinned and are in wretched plight, as does the prayer which
follows.  This prayer was taken from the Sarum Missal, where it stands
in a Mass for Tribulation of heart.

Ps. li. 17 supplies the thought of, that _despisest not--the contrite
heart_, which is interwoven with, _sorrowful sighing_, from Psalm
lxxix. 12.

We base our claim upon our forlorn condition, and appeal to God's mercy.
Note the repetition _merciful--mercifully--graciously--goodness_.  The
temper of the prayer is of kin to Psalm lxix. which--especially in verses
13 to 21, and in its final thankfulness, as sure of God's help--may have
inspired its words and thoughts.

_Psalm xliv_.  _1st and last verses_.  Doubtless an abbreviation of the
whole psalm, which stood at the beginning of the 3rd Rogation Litany.

{171}

If it be thought that the Gloria Patri occurs as a surprise in the
midst of these entreaties, we may notice (1) that all entreaties are
more real when they recognise truly the Majesty of God; and (2) that S.
Augustine's processional Litany when he came to Canterbury (A.D. 596)
concluded with Alleluia.  "We beseech thee, O Lord, in all Thy mercy,
that Thy wrath and Thine anger may be removed from this city and from
Thy holy house, for we have sinned.  Alleluia."  (Taken from the 2nd
Rogation Litany), (3) the _Gloria Patri_ is always said after a Psalm
in the Services, and sometimes after parts of a Psalm.


Section iii.  Appeal for help.

The eight versicles which follow next are addressed to Christ, and in
most editions of the Prayer Book are separated by a small space from
the Verse and Respond,

  _Priest_.  O Lord, let thy mercy, &c.
  _Answer_.  As we do put, &c.


These eight versicles were, even in 1544, distinguished from those two,
although they were then all marked to be said responsorially.  In 1549
the direction for responsorial use was omitted for the eight verses,
and retained for the couplet which anticipates the next collect.  We
may infer from this that it is intended that the eight verses should be
said, or sung, antiphonally.  In the Sarum Use (3rd Litany for S.
Mark's Day), they were all to be said, first by the Minister, and
repeated by the People.

The eight versicles form a section by themselves, and have a different
setting from the sections which {172} precede and follow them.  It was,
no doubt, intended to make this 3rd Section a very solemn appeal to
Christ, for help in all those difficulties and anxieties which have
been recited in Section i.; and to make this appeal more earnest,
_because_ of the evil plight which is acknowledged in Section ii.

The phrases are freely translated from the Latin of the Sarum Use,
suggested by a thorough knowledge of the Psalms, but not, we believe,
to be regarded as quotations therefrom.  _O Son of David_ was
substituted for _Fili Dei vivi_, in making the translation.  There is
not sufficient ground for supposing that it was done by accident.  In
the appeal for a merciful hearing, it is right to ground it first upon
His Human Nature as Son of Man, and then upon His Divine Nature as
Christ, and Lord.


Section iv. The pressing anxieties of the moment.

The _Collect of Complete Confidence_, with its Verse and Respond, is
placed here to strike the keynote of the Section: and the Section is
filled up from the Occasional Prayers, or from the Collects after the
Communion Service.

This is obviously the place where other prayers may be introduced, when
urgent needs require them.

The _Verse and Respond_: Psalm xxxiii. 22.  The first half of the
Collect was formerly a complete prayer, separated from the other half,
in the Litany of 1544, by _O God whose nature_, &c., the prayer _for
{173} Clergy and People_, and another prayer.  The Verse contains the
thought of the first half, the Respond has the thought of the second
half.

Since the special prayers which are used in this Section are only
occasional, and rarely more than one or two at a time, they were all
placed (1662) in a chapter by themselves, after the end of the Litany.


Section v. _The final commendation of our prayers to Christ, who makes
them acceptable_: See Morning and Evening Prayer.



[1] Lightfoot, _Apost. Fathers_, Pt. II. vol. 1. p. 446.

[2] This date is variously stated.  Hotham in _Dict. Chr. Ant._ vol.
11. says 477; Scudamore in the same vol. 452; Hooker 'about 450';
Burbidge 450; Maclear (S.P.C.K.) and Prayer Book Interleaved 460;
Proctor 'about 460'; Daniel, J. H. Blunt, and Barry 467.  The dates
_known_ of Mamertus are between 463 and 474.  (Professor Collins tells
me no others are known.)

[3] In some Churches this day was the Festival of Augustine, Bp of
Hippo.  The Calendar of Le Bec, however, sets it down to our Augustine,
as our own Calendar does.  I do not know whether this agreement between
them was after, or before, that famous Abbey sent us Lanfranc and
Anselm to be successors of Augustine at Canterbury.

[4] Fald-stool.  Faudestola (whence French, fauteuil) is said by
Martene to be adopted into Latin; and by Brachet is traced to a German
origin, Falt-stuol.  The idea of these derivations is, that the
Prie-dieu, or kneeling-desk, was able to fold up and be made, perhaps,
a chair.  But the connection with Rogations suggests (A.S.) Feald-stol,
or Feld-stol (German Feld-stuhl), i.e. a moveable seat (cf. camp-stool).

[5] See George Herbert's poem, "A wreath."

[6] The settlement of words of general meaning, into titles of office,
is frequent enough to supply ample illustration of the process briefly
indicated above.  Pastor, General, Major, Mayor, and many other words,
including Rector, Vicar, Curate, may be traced through changes which
are often singularly similar to those of Bishop, Priest, and Deacon.
It is a natural process--so natural as to be almost invariable.

[7] The Greek Translation of our Prayer Book has _oraious_, timely or
seasonable: the German has "lieben," dear, beloved, or kindly in the
other sense, which, though as old as Chaucer's time, is not the meaning
here.




APPENDIX C.

ON THE LESSONS IN THE DAY HOURS, (p. 55.)

The Preface to the Prayer Book _Concerning the Service of the Church_
states that, prior to 1549, the old order, for reading the greatest
part of the Bible through every year, had been "so altered, broken, and
neglected, that commonly when any book of the Bible was begun, after
three or four chapters were read out, all the rest were unread."

There was a First Lesson from the Old Testament, a Second Lesson from a
Commentary, and a Third Lesson from the New Testament.

{174}

On certain days, each Lesson consisted of three parts; and the second
