
The Irish Druids made their wands of divination from the yew-tree; and,
like the ancient priests of Egypt, Greece, and Rome, are believed to
have controlled spirits, fairies, daemons, elementals, and ghosts while
making such divinations. It will help us to understand how closely the
ancient symbols have affected our own life and age--though we have
forgotten their relation with the Otherworld--by offering a few
examples, beginning with the ancient Irish bards who were associated
with the Druids. A wand in the form of a symbolic branch, like a little
spike or crescent with gently tinkling bells upon it, was borne by them;
and in the piece called _Mesca Ulad_ or 'Inebriety of the
Ultonians'[334] it is said of the chief bard of Ulster, Sencha, that in
the midst of a bloody fray he 'waved the peaceful branch of Sencha, and
all the men of Ulster were silent, quiet'. In _Agallamh an da Shuadh_ or
the 'Dialogue of the two Sages',[335] the mystic symbol used by gods,
fairies, magicians, and by all initiates who know the mystery of life
and death, is thus described as a Druid symbol:--'Neidhe' (a young bard
who aspired to succeed his father as chief poet of Ulster), 'made his
journey with a silver branch over him. The _Anradhs_, or poets of the
second order, carried a silver branch, but the _Ollamhs_, or chief
poets, carried a branch of gold; all other poets bore a branch of
bronze.'[336] Modern and ancient parallels are world-wide, among the
most civilized as among the least civilized peoples, and in civil or
religious life among ourselves. Thus, it was with a magic rod that Moses
struck the rock and pure water gushed forth, and he raised the same rod
and the Red Sea opened; kings hold their sceptres no less than Neptune
his trident; popes and bishops have their croziers; in the Roman Church
there are little wand-like objects used to perform benedictions; high
civil officials have their mace of office; and all the world over there
are the wands of magicians and of medicine-men.


THE SICK-BED OF CUCHULAINN

We turn now to the story of the _Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn_.[337] And this
is how the great hero of Ulster was fairy-struck. Manannan Mac Lir,
tiring of his wife Fand, had deserted her, and so she, wishing to marry
Cuchulainn, went to Ireland with her sister Liban. Taking the form of
two birds bound together by a chain of red gold, Fand and Liban rested
on a lake in Ulster where Cuchulainn should see them as he was hunting.
To capture the two birds, Cuchulainn cast a javelin at them, but they
escaped, though injured. Disappointed at a failure like this, which for
him was most unusual, Cuchulainn went away to a menhir where he sat down
and fell asleep. Then he saw two women, one in a green and one in a
crimson cloak; and the woman in green coming up to him laughed and
struck him with a whip-like object. The woman in crimson did likewise,
and alternately the two women kept striking him till they left him
almost dead. And straightway the mighty hero of the Red Branch Knights
took to his bed with a strange malady, which no Druid or doctor in all
Ireland could cure.

Till the end of a year Cuchulainn lay on his sick-bed at Emain-Macha
without speaking to any one. Then--the day before _Samain_ (November
Eve)--there came to him an unknown messenger who sang to him a wonderful
song, promising to cure him of his malady if he would only accept the
invitation of the daughters of Aed Abrat to visit them in the
Otherworld. When the song was ended, the messenger departed, 'and they
knew not whence he came nor whither he went.' Thereupon Cuchulainn went
to the place where the malady had been put on him, and there appeared to
him again the woman in the green cloak. She let it be known to
Cuchulainn that she was Liban, and that she was longing for him to go
with her to the Plain of Delight to fight against Labraid's enemies.
And she promised Cuchulainn as a reward that he would get Fand to wife.
But Cuchulainn would not accept the invitation without knowing to what
country he was called. So he sent his charioteer Laeg to bring back from
there a report. Laeg went with the fairy woman in a boat of bronze, and
returned; and when Cuchulainn heard from him the wonderful glories of
that Otherworld of the _Sidhe_ he willingly set out for it.

After Cuchulainn had overthrown Labraid's enemies and had been in the
Otherworld a month with the fairy woman Fand, he returned to Ireland
alone; though afterwards in a place agreed upon, Fand joined him. Emer,
the wife of Cuchulainn, was overcome with jealousy and schemed to kill
Fand, so that Fand returned to her husband the god Manannan and he
received her back again. When she was gone Cuchulainn could not be
consoled; but Emer obtained from the Druids a magic drink for
Cuchulainn, which made him forget all about the Otherworld and the fairy
woman Fand. And another drink the Druids gave to Emer so that she forgot
all her jealousy; and then Manannan Mac Lir himself came and shook his
mantle between Cuchulainn and Fand to prevent the two ever meeting
again. And thus it was that the _Sidhe_-women failed to steal away the
great Cuchulainn. The magic of the Druids and the power of the Tuatha De
Danann king triumphed; and the Champion of Ulster did not go to the
Otherworld until he met a natural death in that last great fight.[338]


OSSIAN'S RETURN FROM FAIRYLAND[339]

Ossian too, like Cuchulainn, was enticed into Fairyland by a fairy
woman:--She carries him away on a white horse, across the Western Ocean;
and as they are moving over the sea-waves they behold a fair maid on a
brown horse, and she holding in her right hand a golden apple. After the
hero had married his fairy abductress and lived in the Otherworld for
three hundred years, an overpowering desire to return to Ireland and
join again in the councils of his dearly beloved Fenian Brotherhood took
possession of him, and he set out on the same white horse on which he
travelled thence with the fairy princess, for such was his wife. And
she, as he went, thrice warned him not to lay his 'foot on level
ground', and he heard from her the startling announcement that the
Fenians were all gone and Ireland quite changed.

Safe in Ireland, Ossian seeks the Brotherhood, and though he goes from
one place to another where his old companions were wont to meet, not one
of them can he find. And how changed is all the land! He realizes at
last how long he must have been away. The words of his fairy wife are
too sadly true.

While Ossian wanders disconsolately over Ireland, he comes to a
multitude of men trying to move an enormous slab of marble, under which
some other men are lying. 'Ossian's assistance is asked, and he
generously gives it. But in leaning over his horse, to take up the stone
with one hand, the girth breaks, and he falls. Straightway the white
horse fled away on his way home, and Ossian became aged, decrepit, and
blind.'[340]


THE GOING OF LANVAL TO AVALON

The fairy romances which were recorded during the mediaeval period in
continental Europe report a surprisingly large number of heroes who,
like Cuchulainn and Ossian, fell under the power of fairy women or
_fees_, and followed one of them to the Apple-Land or Avalon. Besides
Arthur, they include Sir Lancelot, Sir Gawayne, Ogier, Guingemor and
Lanval (see pp. 325-6). The story of Lanval is told by Marie de France
in one of her _Lais_, and is so famous a one that we shall briefly
outline it:--

Lanval was a mediaeval knight who lived during the time of King Arthur
in Brittany. He was young and very beautiful, so that one of the fairy
damsels fell in love with him; and in the true Irish fashion--himself
and his fairy sweetheart mounted on the same fairy horse--the two went
riding off to Fairyland:--

  On the horse behind her
  With full rush Lanval jumped.
  With her he goes away into Avalon,
  According to what the Briton tells us,
  Into an isle, which is very beautiful.[341]


THE VOYAGE OF TEIGUE, SON OF CIAN

There is another type of _imram_ in which through adventure rather than
through invitation from one of the fairy beings, men enter the
Otherworld; as illustrated by the _Voyage of Mael-Duin_,[342] and by the
still more beautiful _Voyage of Teigue, Son of Cian_. This last old
Irish story summarizes many of the Otherworld elements we have so far
considered, and (though it shows Christian influences) gives us a very
clear picture of the Land of Youth amid the Western Ocean--a land such
as Ponce De Leon and so many brave navigators sought in America:--

Teigue, son of Cian, and heir to the kingship of West Munster, with his
followers set out from Ireland to recover his wife and brethren who had
been stolen by Cathmann and his band of sea-rovers from Fresen, a land
near Spain. It was the time of the spring tide, when the sea was rough,
and storms coming on the voyagers they lost their way. After about nine
weeks they came to a land fairer than any land they had ever beheld--it
was the Happy Otherworld. In it were many 'red-laden apple-trees, with
leafy oaks too in it, and hazels yellow with nuts in their clusters';
and 'a wide smooth plain clad in flowering clover all bedewed with
honey'. In the midst of this plain Teigue and his companions descried
three hills, and on each of them an impregnable place of strength. At
the first stronghold, which had a rampart of white marble, Teigue was
welcomed by 'a white-bodied lady, fairest of the whole world's women';
and she told him that the stronghold is the abode 'of Ireland's kings:
from Heremon son of Milesius to Conn of the Hundred Battles, who was the
last to pass into it'. Teigue with his people moved on till they gained
the middle _dun_, the _dun_ with a rampart of gold. There also 'they
found a queen of gracious form, and she draped in vesture of a golden
fabric', who tells them that they are in the Earth's fourth paradise.

At the third _dun_, the _dun_ with a silver rampart, Teigue and his
party met Connla, the son of Conn of the Hundred Battles. 'In his hand
he held a fragrant apple having the hue of gold; a third part of it he
would eat, and still, for all he consumed, never a whit would it be
diminished.' And at his side sat a young woman of many charms, who spake
thus to Teigue:--'I had bestowed on him (i. e. felt for him) true
affection's love, and therefore wrought to have him come to me in this
land; where our delight, both of us, is to continue in looking at and in
perpetual contemplation of one another: above and beyond which we pass
not, to commit impurity or fleshly sin whatsoever.' Both Connla and his
friend were clad in vestments of green--like the fairy-folk; and their
step was so light that hardly did the beautiful clover-heads bend
beneath it. And the apple 'it was that supported the pair of them and,
when once they had partaken of it, nor age nor dimness could affect
them'. When Teigue asked who occupied the _dun_ with the silver rampart
the maiden with Connla made this reply:--'In that one there is not any
one. For behoof of the righteous kings that after acceptance of the
Faith shall rule Ireland it is that yonder _dun_ stands ready; and we
are they who, until such those virtuous princes shall enter into it,
keep the same: in the which, Teigue my soul, thou too shalt have an
appointed place.' 'Obliquely across the most capacious palace Teigue
looked away' (as he was observing the beauty of the yet uninhabited
_dun_), 'and marked a thickly furnished wide-spreading apple-tree that
bare blossoms and ripe fruit both. "What is that apple-tree beyond?" he
asked [of the maiden], and she made answer:--"That apple-tree's fruit it
is that for meat shall serve the congregation which is to be in this
mansion, _and a single apple of the same it was that brought (coaxed
away) Connla to me_."'

Then the party rested, and there came towards them a whole array of
feminine beauty, among which was a lovely damsel of refined form who
foretold to Teigue the manner and time of his death, and as a token she
gave him 'a fair cup of emerald hue, in which are inherent many virtues:
for [among other things] though it were but water poured into it,
incontinently it would be wine'. And this was her farewell message to
Teigue:--'From that (the cup), let not thine hand part; but have it for
a token: when it shall escape from thee, then in a short time after
shalt thou die; and where thou shalt meet thy death is in the glen that
is on Boyne's side: there the earth shall grow into a great hill, and
the name that it shall bear will be _croidhe eisse_; there too (when
thou shalt first have been wounded by a roving wild hart, after which
Allmarachs will slay thee) I will bury thy body; but thy soul shall come
with me hither, where till the Judgement's Day thou shalt assume a body
light and ethereal.'

As the party led by Teigue were going down to the seashore to depart,
the girl who had been escorting them asked 'how long they had been in
the country'. 'In our estimation,' they replied, 'we are in it but one
single day.' She, however, said: 'For an entire twelvemonth ye are in
it; during which time ye have had neither meat nor drink, nor, how long
soever ye should be here, would cold or thirst or hunger assail you.'
And when Teigue and his party had entered their _currach_ they looked
astern, but 'they saw not the land from which they came, for
incontinently an obscuring magic veil was drawn over it'.[343]


THE ADVENTURES OF ART, SON OF CONN

This interesting _imram_ combines, in a way, the type of tale wherein a
fairy woman comes from the Otherworld to our world--though in this tale
she is banished from there--and the type of tale wherein the Otherworld
is found through adventure:--

Becuma Cneisgel, a woman of the Tuatha De Danann, because of a
transgression she had committed in the Otherworld with Gaidiar,
Manannan's son, was banished thence. She came to Conn, high king of
Ireland, and she bound him to do her will; and her judgement was that
Art, the son of Conn, should not come to Tara until a year was past.
During the year, Conn and Becuma were together in Tara, 'and there was
neither corn nor milk in Ireland during that time.' The Tuatha De Danann
sent this dreadful famine; for they, as agricultural gods, thus showed
their displeasure at the unholy life of Ireland's high king with the
evil woman whom they had banished. The Druids of all Ireland being
called together, declared that to appease the Tuatha De Danann 'the son
of a sinless couple should be brought to Ireland and slain before Tara,
and his blood mingled with the soil of Tara' (cf. p. 436). It was Conn
himself who set out for the Otherworld and found there the sinless boy,
the son of the queen of that world, and he brought him back to Tara. A
strange event saves the youth:--'Just then they (the assembly of people
and Druids, with Conn, Art, and Finn) heard the lowing of a cow, and a
woman wailing continually behind it. And they saw the cow and the woman
making for the assembly.' The woman had come from the Otherworld to save
Segda; and the cow was accepted as a sacrifice in place of Segda, owing
to the wonders it disclosed; for its two bags when opened contained two
birds--one with one leg and one with twelve legs, and 'the one-legged
bird prevailed over the bird with twelve legs'. Then rising up and
calling Conn aside, the woman declared to him that until he put aside
the evil woman Becuma 'a third of its corn, and its milk, and its mast'
should be lacking to Ireland. 'And she took leave of them then and went
off with her son, even Segda. And jewels and treasures were offered to
them, but they refused them.'

In the second part of this complex tale, Becuma and Art are together
playing a game. Art finally loses, because the men of the _sidh_ (like
invisible spirits) began to steal the pieces with which he and the woman
play; and, as a result, Becuma put on him this taboo:--'Thou shalt not
eat food in Ireland until thou bring with thee Delbchaem, the daughter
of Morgan.' 'Where is she?' asked Art. 'In an isle amid the sea, and
that is all the information that thou wilt get.' 'And he put forth the
coracle, and travelled the sea from one isle to another until he came to
a fair, strange island,' the Otherworld. The blooming women of that land
entertain the prince of Ireland during six weeks, and instruct him in
all the dangers he must face and the conquests he must make.

Having successfully met all the ordeals, Art secures Delbchaem, daughter
of Morgan the king of the 'Land of Wonders', and returns to Ireland.
'She had a green cloak of one hue about her, with a gold pin in it over
her breast, and long, fair, very golden hair. She had dark-black
eye-brows, and flashing grey eyes in her head, and a snowy-white body.'
And upon seeing the chaste and noble Delbchaem with Art, Becuma, the
banished woman of the Tuatha De Danann, lamenting, departs from Tara for
ever.[344]


OTHERWORLD QUESTS OF CUCHULAINN AND OF ARTHUR

There is yet the distinct class of tales about journeys to a fairy world
which is a Hades world beneath the earth, or in some land of death,
rather than amid the waves of the Western Ocean. Thus there is a curious
poem in the _Book of the Dun Cow_ describing an expedition led by
Cuchulainn to the stronghold of Scath in the land of Scath, or, as the
name means, land of Shades, where the hero gains the king's
cauldron.[345] And the poem suggests why so few who invaded that Hades
world ever returned--perhaps why, mystically speaking, so few men could
escape either through initiation or re-birth the natural confusion and
forgetfulness arising out of death.

In the _Book of Taliessin_ a weird poem, _Preiddeu Annwfn_, or the
'Spoils of Annwn', describes, in language not always clear, how the
Brythonic Arthur made a similar journey to the Welsh Hades world named
Annwn, where he, like Cuchulainn in Scath, gained possession of a magic
cauldron--a pagan Celtic type of the Holy Grail--which furnishes
inexhaustible food though 'it will not boil the food of a coward'. But
in stanzas iii and iv of _Preiddeu Annwfn_, Annwn, or Uffern as it is
otherwise called, is not an underground realm, but some world to be
reached like the Gaelic Land of Promise by sea. Annwn is also called
Caer Sidi, which in another poem of the _Book of Taliessin_ (No. XIV) is
thought of as an island of immortal youth amid 'the streams of the
ocean' where there is a food-giving fountain.[346]


LITERARY EVOLUTION OF THE HAPPY OTHERWORLD IDEA

We have now noticed two chief classes of Otherworld legends. In one
there is the beautiful and peaceful _Tir Innambeo_ or 'Land of the
Living' under Manannan's rule across the seas, and its fairy inhabitants
are principally women who lure away noble men and youths through love
for them; in the other there is a Hades world--often confused with the
former--in which great heroes go on some mysterious quest. Sometimes
this Hades world is inseparable from the underground palaces or world of
the Tuatha De Danann. Again, it may be an underlake fairy-realm like
that entered by Laeghaire and his fifty companions (see p. 302); or, as
in _Gilla Decair_,[347] of late composition, it is an under-well land
wherein Dermot has adventures. And, in a similar tale, Murough, on the
invitation of a mysterious stranger who comes out of a lake and then
disappears 'like the mist of a winter fog or the whiff of a March wind',
dives beneath the lake's waters, and is escorted to the palace of King
Under-Wave, wherein he sees the stranger as the water-king himself
sitting on a golden throne (cf. pp. 63-4). In continual feasting there
Murough passes a day and a year, thinking the time only a few days.[348]

As a rule the Hades world, or underground and under-wave world, is
unlike Manannan's peaceful ocean realm, being often described as a place
of much strife; and mortals are usually induced to enter it to aid in
settling the troubles of its fairy inhabitants.

All the numerous variations of Otherworld tales now extant in Celtic
literature show a common pre-Christian origin, though almost all of them
have been coloured by Christian ideas about heaven, hell, and purgatory.
From the earliest tales of the over-sea Otherworld type, like those of
Bran, Maelduin, and Connla, all of which may go back to the early eighth
century as compositions, the christianizing influence is already clearly
begun; and in the _Voyage of Snedgus and of Mac Riagla_, of the late
ninth century, this influence predominates.[349] Purely Christian texts
of about the same period or later describe the Christian heaven as
though it were the pagan Otherworld. Some of these, like the Latin
version of the tale of _St. Brandan's Voyage_, greatly influenced
European literature, and probably contributed to the discovery of the
New World.[349]

The combination of Christian and pagan Celtic ideas is well shown in the
_Voyage of the Hui Corra_[350]:--'Thereafter a wondrous island was
shown to them. A psalm-singing venerable old man, with fair, builded
churches and beautiful bright altars. Beautiful green grass therein. A
dew of honey on its grass. Little ever-lovely bees and fair,
purple-headed birds a-chanting music therein, so that [merely] to listen
to them was enough of delight.' But in another passage the Christian
scribe describes Otherworld birds as souls, some of them in hell:--'"Of
the land of Erin am I," quoth the bird, "and I am the soul of a woman,
and I am a monkess unto thee," she saith to the elder.... "Come ye to
another place," saith the bird, "to hearken to yon birds. The birds that
ye see are the souls that come on Sunday out of hell."' Still other
islands are definitely made into Christian hells full of fire, wherein
wailing and shrieking men are being mangled by the beaks and talons of
birds.

But sometimes, like the legends about the Tuatha De Danann, the legends
about the Otherworld were taken literally and most seriously by some
early Irish-Christian saints. Professor J. Loth records a very
interesting episode, how St. Malo and his teacher Brandan actually set
out on an ocean voyage to find the Heaven-world of the pagan
Celts:--'Saint Malo, when a youth, embarks with his teacher Brandan in a
boat, in search of that mysterious country; after some days, the waves
drive him back rebuffed and discouraged upon the seashore. An angel
opens his eyes: the land of eternal peace and of eternal youth is that
which Christianity promises to its elect.'[351]

Not only was the Celtic Otherworld gradually changed into a Christian
Heaven, or Hell, from the eighth century onward, but its divine
inhabitants soon came to suffer the rationalization commonly applied to
their race; and the transcribers began to set them down as actual
personages of Irish history. As we have already observed, the Tuatha De
Danann were shorn of their immortality, and were given in exchange all
the passions and shortcomings of men, and made subject to disease and
death. This perhaps was a natural anthropomorphic process such as is
met with in all mythologies. Celtic myth and mysticism, wherein may yet
be read the deepest secrets of life and death, supplied names and
legends to fill out a christianized scheme of Irish chronology, which
was made to begin some six thousand years ago with Adam.

A few of the pagan legends, however, met very fair treatment at the
hands of poetical and patriotic Christian transcribers. Thus in
_Adamnan's Vision_,[352] though the Celtic Otherworld has become 'the
Land of the Saints', its primal character is clearly discernible: to
reach it a sea voyage is necessary; and it is a land where there is no
pride, falsehood, envy, disease or death, 'wherein is delight of every
goodness.' In it there are singing birds, and for sustenance while there
the voyagers need only to hear its music and 'sate themselves with the
odour which is in the Land'.

Again, in the _Book of Leinster_, and in later MSS., there is a
_dinnshenchas_ of almost primal pagan purity. It alludes to _Clidna's
Wave_, that of Tuag Inbir:--To Tuag, daughter of Conall, Manannan the
sea-god sent a messenger, a Druid of the Tuatha De Danann in the shape
of a woman. The Druid chanted a sleep spell over the girl, and while he
left her on the seashore to look for a boat in which to embark for the
'Land of Everliving Women', a wave of the flood tide came and drowned
her. But the Oxford version of the same tale doubts whether the maiden
was drowned, for it suggests, 'Or maybe it (the wave) was Manannan
himself that was carrying her off.'[353] Thus the scribe understood that
to go to Manannan's world literally meant entering a sleep or trance
state, or, what is equivalent in the case of the maiden whom Manannan
summoned, the passage through death from the physical body. And still,
to-day, the Irish peasant believes that the 'good people' take to their
invisible world all young men or maidens who meet death; or that one
under a fairy spell may go to their world for a short time, and come
back to our world again.

We have frequently emphasized how truly the modern Celtic peasant in
certain non-commercialized localities has kept to the faith of his pagan
ancestors, while the learned Christian scribes have often departed
widely from it. The story of the voyage of Fionn to the Otherworld,[354]
which Campbell found living among Scotch peasants as late as the last
century, adds a striking proof of this assertion. So does Michael
Comyn's peasant version of Ossian in the 'Land of Youth' (as outlined
above, p. 346), which, though dating from about 1749, has all the
natural character of the best ancient tales, like those about Bran and
Cormac. We are inclined, therefore, to attach a value even higher than
we have already done to the testimony of the living Fairy-Faith which
confirms in so many parallel ways, as has been shown, the Fairy-Faith of
the remote past. Mr. W. B. Yeats, the Irish poet, adequately sums up
this matter by saying, 'But the Irish peasant believes that the utmost
he can dream was once or still is a reality by his own door. He will
point to some mountain and tell you that some famous hero or beauty
lived and sorrowed there, or he will tell you that Tir-na-nog, the
Country of the Young, the old Celtic paradise--the Land of the Living
Heart, as it used to be called--is all about him.'[355]

At the end of his long and careful study of the Celtic Otherworld,
Alfred Nutt arrived at the tentative conclusion which coincides with our
own, that 'The vision of a Happy Otherworld found in Irish mythic
romances of the eighth and following centuries is substantially
pre-Christian', that its closest analogues are in Hellenic myth, and
that with these 'it forms the most archaic Aryan presentation of the
divine and happy land we possess'.[356]




SECTION II

THE RECORDED FAIRY-FAITH




CHAPTER VII

THE CELTIC DOCTRINE OF RE-BIRTH[357]

     'It seems as if Ossian's was a premature return. To-day he might
     find comrades come back from Tir-na-nog for the uplifting of their
     race. Perhaps to many a young spirit standing up among us Cailte
     might speak as to Mongan, saying: "I was with thee, with
     Finn."'--A. E.

     Re-birth and Otherworld--As a Christian doctrine--General
     historical survey--According to the Barddas MSS.; according to
     ancient and modern authorities--Reincarnation of the Tuatha De
     Danann--King Mongan's re-birth--Etain's birth--Dermot's
     pre-existence--Tuan's re-birth--Re-birth among Brythons--Arthur as
     a reincarnate hero--Non-Celtic parallels--Re-birth among modern
     Celts: in Ireland; in Scotland; in the Isle of Man; in Wales; in
     Cornwall; in Brittany--Origin and evolution of Celtic Re-birth
     Doctrine.


RELATION WITH THE OTHERWORLD

However much the conception of the Otherworld among the ancient Greeks
may have differed from that among the Celts, it was to both peoples
alike inseparably connected with their belief in re-birth. Alfred Nutt,
who studied this intimate relation more carefully perhaps than any other
Celtic folk-lorist, has said of it:--'In Greek mythology as in Irish,
the conception of re-birth proves to be a dominant factor of the same
religious system in which Elysium is likewise an essential feature.'
Death, as many initiates have proclaimed in their mystical writings, is
but a going to that Otherworld from this world, and Birth a coming back
again;[358] and Buddha announced it as his mission to teach men the way
to be delivered out of this eternal Circle of Existence.


HISTORICAL SURVEY OF THE RE-BIRTH DOCTRINE

Among ourselves the doctrine may seem a strange one, though among the
great nations of antiquity--the Egyptians, Indians, Greeks, and
Celts--it was taught in the Mysteries and Priest-Schools, and formed the
corner-stone of the most important philosophical systems like those of
Buddha, Pythagoras, Plato, the Neo-Platonists, and the Druids. The
Alexandrian Jews, also, were familiar with the doctrine, as implied in
the _Wisdom of Solomon_ (viii. 19, 20), and in the writings of Philo. It
was one of the teachings in the Schools of Alexandria, and thus directly
shaped the thoughts of some of the early Church Fathers--for example,
Tertullian of Carthage (circa A. D. 160-240), and Origen of Alexandria
(circa A. D. 185-254). It is of considerable historical importance for
us at this point to consider at some length if Christians in the first
centuries held or were greatly influenced by the re-birth doctrine,
because, as we shall presently observe, the probable influence of
Christian on pagan Celtic beliefs may have been at a certain period very
deep and even the most important reshaping influence.

As an examination of Origen's _De Principiis_ proves, Origen himself
believed in the doctrine.[359] But the theologians who created the Greek
canons of the Fifth Council disagreed with Origen's views, and
condemned Origen for believing, among other things called by them
heresies, that Jesus Christ will be reincarnated and suffer on earth a
second time to save the daemons,[360] an order of spiritual beings
regarded by some ancient philosophers as destined to evolve into human
souls. Tertullian, contemporary with Origen, in his _De Anima_ considers
whether or not the doctrine of re-birth can be regarded as Christian in
view of the declaration by Jesus Christ that John the Baptist was Elias
(or Elijah), the old Jewish prophet, come again:--'And if ye are willing
to receive it (or him), this (John the Baptist) is Elijah, which is to
come. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.'[361] Tertullian
concludes, and modern Christian theologians frequently echo him (upon
comparing Malachi iv. 5), that all the New Testament writers mean to
convey is that John the Baptist possessed or acted in 'the spirit and
power' of Elias, but was not actually a reincarnation of Elias, since he
did not possess 'the soul and body' of Elias.[362] Had Tertullian been a
mystic and not merely a theologian with a personal bias against the
mystery teachings, which bias he shows throughout his _De Anima_, it is
quite evident that he would have been on this doctrinal matter in
agreement with Origen, who was both a mystic and a theologian,[363] and,
then, probably with such an agreement of these two eminent Church
Fathers on record before the time when Christian councils met to
determine canonical and orthodox beliefs, the doctrine of re-birth would
never have been expurgated from Christianity.[364]

In the _Pistis Sophia_,[365] an ancient Gnostic-Christian work, which
contains what are alleged to be some of Jesus Christ's esoteric
teachings to his disciples, it is clearly stated (contrary to
Tertullian's argument, but in accord with what we may assume Origen's
view would have been) that John the Baptist was the reincarnation of
Elias.[366] The same work further expounds the doctrine of re-birth as
a teaching of Jesus Christ which applies not to particular personages
only, like Elias, but as a universal law governing the lives of all
mankind.[367]

As our discussion has made evident, during the first centuries the
re-birth doctrine was undoubtedly well known to Alexandrian Christians.
Among other early Christian theologians and philosophers who held some
form of a re-birth doctrine, were Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais (circa
375-414), Boethius, a Roman (circa 475-525), and Psellus, a native of
Andros (second half of ninth century). In addition to the many
Gnostic-Christian sects, the Manichaeans, who comprised more than
seventy sects connected with the primitive Church, also promulgated the
re-birth doctrine.[368] Along with the condemnation of the Gnostics and
Manichaeans as heretical, the doctrine of re-birth was likewise
condemned by various ecclesiastical bodies and councils. This was the
declaration by the Council of Constantinople in 553:--'Whosoever shall
support the mythical doctrine of the pre-existence of the Soul, and the
consequent wonderful opinion of its return, let him be anathema.' And
so, after centuries of controversy, the ancient doctrine ceased to be
regarded as Christian.[369] It is very likely, however, as will be
shown in due order, that a few of the early Celtic missionaries, always
famous for their Celtic independence even in questions touching
Christian theology and government, did not feel themselves bound by the
decisions of continental Church Councils with respect to this particular
doctrine.

During the mediaeval period in Europe, the re-birth doctrine continued
to live on in secret among many of the alchemists and mystical
philosophers, and among such Druids as survived religious persecution;
and it has come down from that period to this through Orders like the
Rosicrucian Order--an Order which seems to have had an unbroken
existence from the Middle Ages or earlier--and likewise through the
unbroken traditions of modern Druidism. In our own times there is what
may be called a renaissance of the ancient doctrine in Europe and
America--especially in England, Germany, France, and the United
States--through various philosophical or religious societies; some of
them founding their teachings and literature on the ancient and
mediaeval mystical philosophers, while others stand as the
representatives in the West of the mystical schools of modern India,
which, like modern Druidism, claim to have existed from what we call
prehistoric times.[370] To-day in the Roman Church eminent theologians
have called the doctrine of Purgatory the Christian counterpart of the
philosophical doctrine of re-birth;[371] and the real significance of
this opinion will appear in our later study of St. Patrick's Purgatory
which, as we hold, is connected more or less definitely with the
pagan-Irish doctrines of the underworld of the _Sidhe_-folk and spirits,
as well as shades of the dead, and with the Celtic-Druidic Doctrine of
Reincarnation.

Scientifically speaking, as shown in the Welsh Triads of Bardism, the
ancient Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth represented for the priestly and
bardic initiates an exposition of the complete cycle of human evolution;
that is to say, it included what we now call Darwinism--which explains
only the purely physical evolution of the body which man inhabits as an
inheritance from the brute kingdom--and also besides Darwinism, a
comprehensive theory of man's own evolution as a spiritual being both
apart from and in a physical body, on his road to the perfection which
comes from knowing completely the earth-plane of existence. And in time,
judging from the rapid advance of the present age, our own science
through psychical research may work back to the old mystery teachings
and declare them scientific. (See chap. xii.)


ACCORDING TO THE BARDDAS MSS.

With this preliminary survey of the subject we may now proceed to show
how in the Celtic scheme of evolution the Otherworld with all its gods,
fairies, and invisible beings, and this world with all its visible
beings, form the two poles of life or conscious existence. Let us begin
with purely philosophical conceptions, going first to the Welsh
_Barddas_,[372] where it is said 'There are three circles of existence:
the circle of Ceugant (the circle of Infinity), where there is neither
animate nor inanimate save God, and God only can traverse it; the circle
of Abred (the circle of Re-birth), where the dead is stronger than the
living, and where every principal existence is derived from the dead,
and man has traversed it; and the circle of Gwynvyd (the circle of the
white, i. e. the circle of Perfection), where the living is stronger
than the dead, and where every principal existence is derived from the
living and life, that is, from God, and man shall traverse it; nor will
man attain to perfect knowledge, until he shall have fully traversed the
circle of Gwynvyd, for no absolute knowledge can be obtained but by the
experience of the senses, from having borne and suffered every condition
and incident'.[373] ... 'The three stabilities of knowledge: to have
traversed every state of life; to remember every state and its
incidents; and to be able to traverse every state, as one would wish,
for the sake of experience and judgement; and this will be obtained in
the circle of Gwynvyd.'[374]

Thus _Barddas_ expounds the complete Bardic scheme of evolution as one
in which the monad or soul, as a knowledge of physical existence is
gradually unfolded to it, passes through every phase of material
embodiment before it enters the human kingdom, where, for the first time
exercising freewill in a physical body, it becomes responsible for all
its acts. The Bardic doctrine as otherwise stated is 'that the soul
commenced its course in the lowest water-animalcule, and passed at death
to other bodies of a superior order, successively, and in regular
gradation, until it entered that of man. Humanity is a state of liberty,
where man can attach himself to either good or evil, as he
pleases'.[375] Once in the human kingdom the soul begins a second period
of growth altogether different from that preceding--a period of growth
toward divinity; and with this, in our study, we are chiefly concerned.
It seems clear that the circle of Gwynvyd finds its parallel in the
Nirvana of Buddhism, being, like it, a state of absolute knowledge and
felicity in which man becomes a divine being, a veritable god.[376] We
see in all this the intimate relation which there was thought to be
between what we call the state of life and the state of death, between
the world of men and the world of gods, fairies, demons, spirits, and
shades. Our next step must be to show, first, what some other
authorities have had to say about this relation, and then, second, and
fundamentally, that gods or fairy-folk like the _Sidhe_ or Tuatha De
Danann could come to this world not only as we have been seeing them
come as fairy women, fairy men, and gods, at will visible or invisible
to mortals, but also through submitting to human birth.


ACCORDING TO ANCIENT AND MODERN AUTHORITIES

First, therefore, for opinions; and we may go to the ancients and then
to the moderns. Here are a few from Julius Caesar:--'In particular they
(the Druids) wish to inculcate this idea, that souls do not die, but
pass from one body to another.'[377] 'The Gauls declare that they have
all sprung from their father Dis (or Pluto), and this they say was
delivered to them by the Druids.'[377] And the testimony of Caesar is
confirmed by Diodorus Siculus,[378] and by Pomponius Mela.[379] Lucan,
in the _Pharsalia_,[380] addressing the Druids on their doctrine of
re-birth says:--'If you know what you sing, death is the centre of a
long life.' And again in the same passage he observes:--'Happy the folk
upon whom the Bear looks down, happy in this error, whom of fears the
greatest moves not, the dread of death. Hence their warrior's heart
hurls them against the steel, hence their ready welcome of death, and
the thought that it were a coward's part to grudge a life sure of its
return.'[381] Dr. Douglas Hyde, in his _Literary History of Ireland_ (p.
95), speaking for the Irish people, says of the re-birth doctrine:--'...
the idea of re-birth which forms part of half a dozen existing Irish
sagas, was perfectly familiar to the Irish Gael....' According to
another modern Celtic authority, D'Arbois de Jubainville, two chief
Celtic doctrines or beliefs were the return of the ghosts of the dead
and the re-birth of the same individuality in a new human body here on
this planet.[382]


REINCARNATION OF THE TUATHA DE DANANN

We proceed now directly to show that there was also a belief, probably
widespread, among the ancient Irish that divine personages, national
heroes who are members of the Tuatha De Danann or _Sidhe_ race, and
great men, can be reincarnated, that is to say, can descend to this
plane of existence and be as mortals more than once. This aspect of the
Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth has been clearly set forth by the
publications of such eminent Celtic folk-lorists as Alfred Nutt and Miss
Eleanor Hull. Miss Hull, in her study of _Old Irish Tabus, or
Gesa_,[383] referring to the Cuchulainn Cycle of Irish literature and
mythology, writes thus:--'There is no doubt that all the chief
personages of this cycle were regarded as the direct descendants, or it
would be more correct to say, as avatars or reincarnations of the early
gods. Not only are their pedigrees traced up to the Tuatha De Danann,
but there are indications in the birth-stories of nearly all the
principal personages that they are looked upon simply as divine beings
reborn on the human plane of life. These indications are mysterious,
and most of the tales which deal with them show signs of having been
altered, perhaps intentionally, by the Christian transcribers. The
doctrine of re-birth was naturally not one acceptable to them.... The
goddess Etain becomes the mortal wife of a king of Ireland....
Conchobhar, moreover, is spoken of as a terrestrial god;[384] and
Dechtire, his sister, and the mother of Cuchulainn, is called a
goddess.[385] In the case of Cuchulainn himself, it is distinctly noted
that he is the avatar of Lugh lamhfada (long-hand), the sun-deity[386]
of the earliest cycle. Lugh appears to Dechtire, the mother of
Cuchulainn, and tells her that he himself is her little child, i. e.
that the child is a reincarnation of himself; and Cuchulainn, when
inquired of as to his birth, points proudly to his descent from Lugh.
When, too, it is proposed to find a wife for the hero, the reason
assigned is, that they knew "that his re-birth would be of himself" (i.
e. that only from himself could another such as he have origin).'[387]
We have in this last a clue to the popular Irish belief regarding the
re-birth of beings of a god-like nature. D'Arbois de Jubainville has
shown,[388] also, that the grandfather of Cuchulainn, son of Sualtaim,
was from the country of the _Sidhe_, and so was Ethne Ingube, the sister
of Sualtaim. And Dechtire, the mother of Cuchulainn, was the daughter of
the Druid Cathba and the brother of King Conchobhar. Thus the ancestry
of the great hero of the Red Branch Knights of Ulster is both royal and
divine. And Conall Cernach, Cuchulainn's comrade and avenger, apparently
from a tale in the _Coir Anmann_ (Fitness of Names), composed probably
during the twelfth century, was also a reincarnated Tuatha De Danann
hero.[389]

Practically all the extant manuscripts dealing with the ancient
literature and mythology of the Gaels were written by Christian scribes
or else copied by them from older manuscripts, so that, as Miss Hull
points out, what few Irish re-birth stories have come down to us--and
they are probably but remnants of an extensive re-birth literature like
that of India--have been more or less altered. Yet to these scholarly
scribes of the early monastic schools, who kept alive the sacred fire of
learning while their own country was being plundered by foreign invaders
and the rest of mediaeval Europe plunged in warfare, the world owes a
debt of gratitude; for to their efforts alone, in spite of a reshaping
of matter naturally to be expected, is due almost everything recorded on
parchments concerning pagan Ireland.


THE RE-BIRTH STORY CONCERNING KING MONGAN

We have preserved to us a remarkable re-birth story in which the
characters are known to be historical.[390] It concerns a quarrel
between the king of Ulster, Mongan, son of Fiachna--who, according to
the _Annals of Ireland by the Four Masters_ (i. 245), was killed in A.
D. 620 by Arthur, son of Bicor--and Forgoll, the poet of Mongan.[391]
The dispute between them was as to the place of the death of Fothad
Airgdech, a king of Ireland who was killed by Cailte, one of the
warriors of Find, in a battle whose date is fixed by the _Four Masters_
in A. D. 285.[392] Forgoll pretended that Fothad had been killed at
Duffry, in Leinster, and Mongan asserted that it was on the river Larne
(anciently Ollarba) in County Antrim. Enraged at being contradicted,
even though it were by the king, Forgoll threatened Mongan with terrible
