not believe he was a mere mortal. But where is the Jesus to correspond
to this rhetorical language? He is not in the anonymous gospels. There
we find only a fragmentary character patched or pieced together, as it
were, by various contributors--a character made up of the most
contradictory elements, as we have tried to show in the preceding
pages. The Jesus of Adler is not in history, he is not even in
mythology. There is no one of that name and answering that description
in the four gospels.

That a loose way of speaking grows upon one if one is not careful, and
that sounding phrases and honest historical criticism are not the same
thing, will be seen by Prof. Adler's lavish praise of John Calvin. He
speaks of him in terms almost as glowing as he does of Jesus. He calls
Calvin "that mighty and noble man."

That Calvin ruled Geneva like a Russian autocrat; that he was "mighty"
in a community in which Jacques Gruet was beheaded because he had
"danced," and also because he had committed the grave offense of
saying that "Moses was only a man and no one knows what God said to
him," and in which Michael Servetus was burned alive for holding
opinions contrary to those which the Genevan pope was interested
in,--is readily conceded. But was Calvin "mighty" in a beneficent
sense? Did his power save people from the Protestant inquisition?
Was not the Geneva of his day called _the Protestant Rome?_ And if
he did not use his powerful influence to further religious tolerance
and intellectual honesty; if he did not use his position to save men
from the grip of superstition and the fear of hell, how can Prof. Adler
refer to him as "that mighty and noble man--John Calvin?"

It is not our purpose to grudge Calvin any compliments which Felix
Adler wishes to pay him. What we grieve to see is, that he should,
indirectly at least, recommend to the admiration of his readers a man
who, if he existed today and acted as he did in the Geneva of the
sixteenth century, would be regarded by every morally and
intellectually awakened man, as a criminal. Has not Felix Adler
examined the evidence which incriminates Calvin and proves him beyond
doubt as the murderer of Servetus? "If he (Servetus) comes to Geneva,
I shall see that he does not escape alive," wrote John Calvin to
Theodore Beza. And he carried out his fearful menace; Servetus was put
to death by the most horrible punishment ever invented--he was burned
alive in a smoking fire. What did this mighty and noble man do to save
a stranger and a scholar from so atrocious a fate? Let his eulogist,
Prof. Adler, answer. It will not do to say that those were different
times. A thousand voices were raised against the wanton and cruel
murder of Servetus, but Calvin's was not among them. In fact, when
Calvin himself was a fugitive and a wanderer, he had written in favor
of religious tolerance, but no sooner did he become the Protestant
pope of Geneva, than he developed into an exterminator of heresy by
fire. Such is the "mighty and noble man" held up for our admiration.
"Mighty" he was, but we ask again, was he mighty in a noble sense?

Had Calvin been considered a "mighty and noble man" by the reformers
who preceded Prof. Adler, there would have been no Ethical Culture
societies in America today. Prof. Adler is indebted for the liberties
which he enjoys in New York to the Voltaires and the Condorcets, who
regarded Calvin and his "isms" as pernicious to the intellectual life
of Europe, and did all they could to lead the people away from them.
Think of the leader of the Ethical Societies exalting a persecutor, to
say nothing of his abominable theology, or of his five _aliases,_
as "that mighty and noble man;--John Calvin!" We feel grateful to
Prof. Adler for organizing the Ethical Societies in American, but we
would be pleased to have him explain in what sense a man of Calvin's
small sympathies and terrible deeds could be called both "noble and
mighty." [Footnote: See "The Kingdom of God in Geneva Under Calvin."--M.
M. Mangasarian.]

It was predicted some years ago that the founder of the Ethical
Societies will before long return to the Jewish faith of his fathers.
However this may be, we have seen, in his estimate of Jesus and John
Calvin, evidences of his estrangement from rationalism, of which in
his younger days he was so able a champion. In his criticism of the
Russian scientist, Metchnikoff, of the Pasteur Institute in Paris,
Prof. Adler, endorsing the popular estimate of Jesus, accepts also the
popular attitude toward science. He appears to prefer the doctrine of
special creation to the theory of evolution. We would not have
believed this of Felix Adler if we did not have the evidence before
us. We speak of this to show the relation between an exaggerated
praise of a popular idol, and a denial of the conclusions of modern
science. It is the popular view which Prof. Adler champions in both
instances. In his criticism of Metchnikoff's able book, _The Nature
of Man,_ Prof. Adler writes:

And to account for the reason in man, this divine spark that has been
set ablaze in him, it is not sufficient to point to an ape as our
ancestor. If we are descended from an anthropoid ape on the physical
side, we are not descended from him in any strict sense of the word on
our rational side; for as life is born of life, so reason is born of
reason, and if the anthropoid ape does not possess reason as we
possess it, it cannot be said that on our rational side we are his
progeny.

If the above had been written fifty years ago, when the doctrine of
evolution was a heresy, or by an orthodox clergyman of today, we would
have taken no note of it. But coming as it does from the worthy
founder of the Ethical Movement in America, it deserves attention.
"If," says Dr. Adler, "we are descended from an anthropoid ape on the
physical side, we are not descended from him in any strict sense of
the word on our rational side." He is not sure, evidently, that even
physically man is the successor of the anthropoid ape, but he is sure
that "we are not descended from him...on our rational side." Is Dr.
Adler, then, a dualist? Does he believe that there are two eternal
sources, from one of which we get our bodies, and from the other our
"rational side?" And why cannot Dr. Adler be a monist? He answers,
"for as life is born of life, so reason is born of reason, and if the
anthropoid ape does not possess reason as we possess it, it cannot be
said that on our rational side we are his progeny." Not so, good
doctor! There is no life without reason. Do we mean to say that the
jelly-fish, the creeping worm, or the bud on the tree has reason? Yes;
not as much reason as a horse or a dog, and certainly not as much as a
Metchnikoff or an Adler, but these lower forms of life could not have
survived but for the element of rationality in them. We may call this
instinct, sensation, promptings of nature, but what's in a name? The
difference between a pump and a watch is only a difference of
mechanism. The stone and the soul represent different stages of
progression, not different substances. If a charcoal can be
transformed into a diamond, why may not nature, with the resources of
infinity at her command, refine a stone into a soul? Let us not marvel
at this; it is not less thinkable than the proposition of two
independent sources of life, the one physical, the other rational. If
"life is born of life," where did the first life come from? Let us
have an answer to that question. And if, as the professor says,
"reason is born of reason," how did the first reason come? Is it not
very much simpler to think in monistic terms, than to separate life
from reason, and mind from matter, as Prof. Adler does in the words
quoted above? Why cannot mind be a state of matter? What objection is
there to thinking that matter, refined, elevated, ripened, cultured,
becomes both sentient and rational? If matter can feel, can see, can
hear, can it not also think? Does not the horse see, hear and think?
There is no lowering of the dignity of man to say that he tastes with
his palate, sees with his eyes, hears with his ears, and thinks with
the gray matter in his brain. Remove his optic nerve and he becomes
blind, destroy the ganglia in his brain, and he becomes mindless. Gold
is as much matter as the dust, but it is very much more precious; so
is mind infinitely more precious than the matter which can only feel,
see, taste or hear. "If the anthropoid ape does not possess reason as
we possess it, it cannot be said that on our rational side we are his
progeny," says Dr. Adler: But, suppose we were to say that if our
remote African or Australian savage ancestors did not possess reason
as we possess it, "it cannot be said that on our rational side we are
their progeny," The child in the cradle does not possess reason "as we
do," any more than does the anthropoid ape, but the beginnings of
reason are in both. Let the worm climb and he will overtake man. This
is a most hopeful, a most beautiful gospel. Its spirit is not one of
isolation and exclusiveness from the rest of nature, but one of
fellowship and sympathy. We are all--plants, trees, birds, bugs,
animals--all members of one family, children at various ages and
stages of growth of the same great mother,--Nature. We quote again:

"When I ask him (Metchnikoff) whence do I come, he points to the
simian stage which we have left behind; but I would look beyond that
stage to some ultimate fount of being, to which all that is highest in
me and in the world around me can be traced, a source of things equal
to the best that I can conceive."

But if there is "some ultimate fount of being," to which our "highest"
nature "can be traced," whence did our lower nature come? Is Prof.
Adler trying to say God? We do not object to the word, we only ask
that he give the word a more intelligible meaning than has yet been
given. If God is the "ultimate fount of being to which all that is
highest in us can be traced," who or what is the ultimate fount to
which all that is lowest in us can be traced? Let us have the names of
the two ultimate founts of being, and also to what still more ultimate
founts _these_ founts may be traced.

In our opinion Dr. Adler has failed to do justice to Prof.
Metchnikoff. It is no answer to the Darwinian Theory, which the
Russian scientist accepts in earnest, and in all its fullness,--not
fractionally, as Adler seems to do--to say that it does not explain
everything. No one claims that it does. Not all the mystery of life
has been cleared. Evolution has offered us only a new key, so to
speak, with which to attempt the doors which have not yielded to
metaphysics. And if the key has not opened all the doors, it has
opened many. Prof. Adler seems to think that the doctrine of evolution
explains only the physical descent of man; for the genesis of the
spiritual man, he looks for some supernatural "fount" in the skies.
Well, that is not science; that is theology, and Adler's estimate of
Jesus is just as theological as his criticism of evolution.




APPENDIX



The argument in this volume will be better understood if we give to
our readers the comments and criticisms which our little pamphlet,
_Jesus a Myth,_ and _The Mangasarian-Crapsey Debate on the Historicity
of Jesus, _[Footnote: Price, 25c. Independent Religious Society,
Orchestra Hall, Chicago.] called forth from orthodox and liberal
clergymen. We shall present these together with our reply as they
appeared on the Sunday Programs of the Independent Religious Society.

Criticism is welcome. If the criticism is just, it prevents us from
making the same mistake twice; if it is unjust, it gives us an
opportunity to correct the error our critic has fallen into. No one's
knowledge is perfect. But the question is, does a teacher suppress the
facts? Does he insist on remaining ignorant of the facts?




FROM THE SUNDAY PROGRAMS

I


Now that the debate on one of the most vital questions of modern
religious thought--The Historicity of Jesus--is in print, a few
further reflections on some minor points in Dr. Crapsey's argument may
add to the value of the published copy.

REV. DR. CRAPSEY: "Now, I say this is the great law of religious
variation, that in almost every instance, indeed, I think, in every
single instance in history, all such movements begin with a _single_
personality." (P. 5, _Mangasarian-Crapsey Debate._)

ANSWER: The only way this question can be settled is by appealing to
history. Mithraism is a variant religion, which at one time spread
over the Roman Empire and came near outclassing Christianity. Yet,
Mithra, represented as a young man, and worshiped as a god, is a myth.
How, then, did Mithraism arise?

Religions, as well as their variations, appear as new branches do upon
an old tree. The new branch is quite as much the product of the soil
and climate as the parent tree. Like Brahmanism, Judaism, Shinto and
the Babylonian and Egyptian Cults, which had no _single_ founders,
Christianity is a _deposit_ to which Hellenic, Judaic and Latin
tendencies have each contributed its quota.

But the popular imagination craves a Maker for the Universe, a founder
for Rome, a first man for the human race, and a great chief as the
starter of the tribe. In the same way it fancies a divine, or semi-
divine being as the author of its _credo._

Because Mohammed is historical, it does not follow that Moses is also
historical. That argument would prove too much.

REV. DR. CRAPSEY: "We would be in the same position that the
astronomers were when they discovered the great planet Uranus--from
their knowledge of the movements of these bodies they were convinced
that these perturbations could be occasioned by nothing less than a
great planet lying outside of the then view of mankind."(P. 6,
_Ibid._)

ANSWER: But the astronomers did not rest until they converted the
_probability_ of a near-by planet into _demonstration._ Jesus is still
a probability.

REV. DR. CRAPSEY: "We have of Jesus a very distinctly outlined
history. There is nothing vague about him." (P. 12, _Ibid_.)

ANSWER: But in the same sentence the doctor takes all this back by
adding: "There are a great many things in his history that are not
historical." If so, then we do not possess "a very distinctly outlined
history," but at best a mixture of fact and fiction.

REV. DR. CRAPSEY: "We can follow Jesus' history from the time that he
entered upon his public career until the time that career closed, just
as easily as we can follow Caesar, etc." (P. 12, _Ibid_.)

ANSWER: How long was "the time from the opening of Jesus' public
career until the time that it closed?"--One year!--according to the
three gospels. It sounds quite a period to speak of "following his
public career" from beginning to end, especially when compared with
Caesar's, until it is remembered that the entire public career of
Jesus covers the space of only one year. This is a most decisive
argument against the historicity of Jesus. With the exception of one
year, his whole life is hid in impenetrable darkness. We know nothing
of his childhood, nothing of his old age, if he lived to be old, and
of his youth, we know just enough to fill up a year. Under the
circumstances, there is no comparison between the public career of a
Caesar or a Socrates covering from fifty to seventy years of time, and
that of a Jesus of whose life only one brief year is thrown upon the
canvas.

An historical Jesus who lived only a year!

REV. DR. CRAPSEY: The Christ I admit to be purely mythological....the
word Christ, you know, means the anointed one....they (the Hebrews)
expected the coming of that Christ....But that is purely a mythical
title. (_The Debate_--P. 35.)

ANSWER: Did the Hebrews then expect the coming of a _title?_ Were
they looking forward to seeing the ancient throne of David restored by
a _title?_ By Messiah or Christ the Jews did not mean a _name,_ but a
man--a real flesh and bone savior, anointed or appointed by heaven.

But if the 'Christ' which the Hebrews expected was "purely mythical,"
what makes the same 'Christ' in the supposed Tacitus passage
historical? The New Testament Jesus is Jesus Christ, and the apostle
John speaks of those "who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh"--mark his words--not Christ, but _Jesus Christ._ The apostle
does not separate the two names. There were those, then, in the early
church who denied the historicity, not of a _title_,--for what meaning
would there be in denying that a _title_ "is come in the flesh,"--but
of a person, known as _Jesus Christ._

And what could the doctor mean when he speaks of a _title_ being
"mythological?" There are no mythological titles. Titles are words,
and we do not speak of the historicity or the non-historicity of
words. We cannot say of words as we do of men, that some are
historical and others are mythical. William Tell is a myth--not the
name, but the man the name stands for. _William_ is the name of
many real people, and so is _Tell._ There were many anointed kings,
who are historical, and the question is, Is Jesus Christ--or
Jesus the Anointed--also historical? To answer that Jesus is
historical, but The Anointed is not, is to evade the question.

When Mosheim declares that "The prevalent opinion among early
Christians was that Christ existed in appearance only," he could not
have meant by 'Christ' only a title. There is no meaning in saying
that a man's title "existed in appearance only?"

