
One afternoon her friend came to pay her a visit: she was going out a
little way into the country to see a relation who had a very fine
nursery-garden, and she begged Mrs. Newton to let little Fanny go with
her own daughter. Mrs. Newton was very glad to do so for she thought it
would be a nice amusement for Fanny.

The nurseryman was very kind to her; and when she was going away gave
her a fine bunch of flowers. Fanny was in great delight, for she loved
flowers and knew her dear grandmother loved them too. But as she was
coming back, and just as she was entering the streets, she met a lady
and a little boy of about three years old, who directly held out his
hands and began to beg for the flowers. His mamma stopped, and as Fanny
was very poorly dressed, she thought it probable that she would sell
her nosegay, and so she said,

"Will you give that bunch of flowers to my little boy, and I will pay
you for it?"

"Please, ma'am, they are for grandmother," said Fanny blushing, and
thinking she ought to give the flowers directly, and without money to
any one who wished for them.

"But perhaps your grand-mother would rather have this sixpence?" said
the lady. And Mrs. Newton's friend, who had just come up, said,

"Well, my dear, take the lady's sixpence, and let her have the flowers
if she wishes for them."

So Fanny held the flowers to the lady, who took them and put the
sixpence in her hand. Fanny wished much to ask for one rose, but she
thought it would not be right to do so, when the lady had bought them
all: and she looked at them so very longingly that the lady asked if
she were sorry to part with them.

"Oh! no, ma'am," cried her friend, "she is not at all sorry--come now,
don't be a fool, child," she whispered, and led Fanny on.

"That is a good bargain for you," she added as she went on; "that
spoiled little master has his own way, I think; it would be well for
you, and your grandmother too, if you could sell sixpenny worth of
flowers every day."

"Do you think I could, ma'am?" said Fanny, opening her hand and looking
at her sixpence, "this will buy something to do poor granny good; do
you think Mr. Simpson would give me a nosegay every day?"

"If you were to pay him for it, he would," said her friend; "suppose
you were to go every morning about five o'clock, as many others do, and
buy some flowers, and then sell them at the market; you might earn
something, and that would be better than being idle, when poor Mrs.
Newton is not able to do for herself and you."

So when Fanny got back, she gave her dear grandmother the sixpence.

"The Lord be praised!" said Mrs. Newton, "for I scarcely knew how I was
to get a loaf of bread for thee or myself to-morrow."

And then Fanny told her the plan she had formed about the flowers.

Mrs. Newton was very sorry to think her dear child should be obliged to
stand in a market place, or in the public streets, to offer anything
for sale; but she said, "Surely it is Providence has opened this means
of gaining a little bread, while I am laid here unable to do anything;
and shall I not trust that Providence with the care of my darling
child?"

So from this time forth little Fanny set off every morning before five
o'clock, to the nursery garden; and the nursery-man was very kind to
her, and always gave her the nicest flowers; and instead of sitting
down with the great girls, who went there also for flowers or
vegetables, and tying them up in bunches, Fanny put them altogether in
her little basket, and went away to her grandmother's room, and spread
them out on the little table that poor Mrs. Newton might see them,
while the sweet dew was yet sparkling on their bright leaves.

Then she would tell how beautiful the garden looked at that sweet early
hour; and Mrs. Newton would listen with pleasure, for she loved a
garden. She used to say, that God placed man in a garden when he was
happy and holy; and when he was sinful and sorrowful, it was in a
garden that the blessed Saviour wept and prayed for the sin of the
world; and when his death had made atonement for that sin, it was in a
garden his blessed body was laid.

Mrs. Newton taught Fanny many things from flowers; she was not a bad
teacher, in her own simple way, but Jesus Christ, who was the best
teacher the world ever had, instructed his disciples from vines and
lilies, corn and fruit, and birds, and all natural things around them.

And while Fanny tied up her bunches of flowers, she would repeat some
verses from the Holy Scriptures, such as this, "O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of
thy riches." And afterwards she would repeat such pretty lines as
these:--

  "Not worlds on worlds, in varied form,
     Need we, to tell a God is here;
   The daisy, saved from winter's storm,
     Speaks of his hand in lines as clear.

  "For who but He who formed the skies,
     And poured the day-spring's living flood,
   Wondrous alike in all He tries,
     Could rear the daisy's simple bud!

  "Mould its green cup, its wiry stem,
     Its fringed border nicely spin;
   And cut the gold-embossed gem,
     That, shrined in silver, shines within;

  "And fling it, unrestrained and free,
     O'er hill, and dale, and desert sod,
   That man, where'er he walks, may see,
     In every step the trace of God."


"And I, too, have had my daisy given to me," poor Mrs. Newton would
say, with tearful eyes, as she gazed on her little flower-girl; "I too
have my daisy, and though it may be little cared for in the world, or
trodden under foot of men, yet will it ever bear, I trust, the trace of
God."

But it happened the very morning that the gentleman had given Fanny the
half-sovereign in mistake, Mrs. Newton's money was quite spent; and she
was much troubled, thinking the child must go the next morning to the
garden without money to pay for her flowers, for she did not think it
likely she would sell enough to buy what they required, and pay for
them also; so she told Fanny she must ask Mr. Simpson to let her owe
him for a day or two until she got a little money she expected.

Fanny went therefore, and said this to the kind man at the garden; and
he put his hand on her head, and said, "My pretty little girl, you may
owe me as long as you please, for you are a good child, and God will
prosper you."

So Fanny went back in great delight, and told this to Mrs. Newton; and
to cheer her still more, she chose for her morning verse, the advice
that our Lord gave to all those who were careful and troubled about the
things of this life "Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow;
they toil not, neither do they spin; and yet I say unto you that
Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore,
if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow
is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, oh ye of
little faith?"

And then she repeated some verses which both she and Mrs. Newton liked
very much.

  "Lo! the lilies of the field,
  How their leaves instruction yield!
  Hark to nature's lesson, given
  By the blessed birds of heaven.

  "Say with richer crimson glows,
  The kingly mantle than the rose;
  Say are kings more richly dressed,
  Than the lily's glowing vest!

"Grandmother I forget the next verse," said Fanny, interrupting
herself; "I know it is something about lilies not spinning; but then
comes this verse--

  "Barns, nor hoarded store have we"--

"It is not the lilies, grandmother, but the blessed birds that are
speaking now--

  "Barns, nor hoarded store have we,
  Yet we carol joyously;
  Mortals, fly from doubt and sorrow,
  God provideth for the morrow."

Poor Mrs. Newton clasped her thin hands, and looked up, and prayed like
the disciples, "Lord, increase our faith!"

"Eh!" said she, afterwards, "is it not strange that we can trust our
Lord and Saviour with the care of our souls for eternity, and we cannot
trust Him with that of our bodies for a day."

Well! this was poor Mrs. Newton's state on that day, when the gentleman
gave Fanny the half-sovereign instead of sixpence, for her flowers.

When the little flower-girl came back from her race with her two
sixpences, she found the old vegetable-seller had got her three or four
pennies more, by merely showing her basket, and telling why it was left
at his stall; and so every one left a penny for the honest child, and
hoped the gentleman would reward her well. The old man at the stall
said it was very shabby of him only to give her sixpence; but when she
went home with three sixpences and told Mrs. Newton this story, she
kissed her little girl very fondly, but said the gentleman was good to
give her sixpence, for he had no right to give her anything, she had
only done her duty.

"But, grandmother," said Fanny, "when I saw that pretty half-sovereign
dropping down to his purse, I could not help wishing he would give it
to me."

"And what commandment did you break then, my child?"

"Not the eighth--if I had kept the half-sovereign I should have broken
it," said Fanny, "for that says, thou shalt not steal--what commandment
did I break, grandmother; for I did not steal?"

"When we desire to have what is not ours Fanny, what do we do? we
covet; do we not?"

"Oh! yes--thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods," cried Fanny,
"that is the tenth commandment; and that half-sovereign was my
neighbor's goods, and that fat gentleman was my neighbor. But,
grandmother, it is very easy to break the tenth commandment."

"Very easy indeed, my dear," said Mrs. Newton, with first a faint
smile, and then a deep sigh, "therefore," she added, "we ought always
to pray like David, 'Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity.'"

There is a very common saying, that when things are at the worst they
mend. It is hard to say when matters are at the worst; poor Mrs. Newton
knew they might yet be worse with her; but certainly, they were very
bad; and a few days after this, as Fanny was tying up her flowers as
usual, she lay on her bed thinking what she was to do, and praying that
God would direct her to some way of providing for the poor child.

While she was thinking and praying, tears stole down her face; Fanny
saw them, and stopped her work, and looked sorrowfully at her--

"Now you are crying again, grandmother, she said," and that's what
makes me break the tenth commandment, for I can't help wishing the
gentleman had given me that half-sovereign. But I will say the verses
again to-day about the lilies and birds; for you know I said that
morning--

  'Mortals fly from doubt and sorrow,
  God provideth for the morrow,'

and when I came back with my three sixpences, you said God _had_
provided for the morrow, for you had only two or three pennies in the
house when I went out."

"And how many pennies, pray, have you in the house to-day?" said a
rather gruff voice at the door.

Mrs. Newton and Fanny started; but there, standing at the door, Fanny
saw the fat gentleman who had given her the half-sovereign.

"So you have been wishing for my gold, you little rogue," he said,
looking as if he meant to frighten her. "Never mind," he added,
smiling, "you are a good child, and did what was right; and I always
meant to bring it back to you, but I have been kept rather busy these
few days past. There it is for you, and try not to break the tenth
commandment again." Then turning to Mrs. Newton, he said, "We should
not expect rewards, ma'am, for doing our duty, but if children do not
meet with approbation when they do right, they may be discouraged, and
perhaps think there is no use in being good: for they are silly little
creatures, you know, and do not always recollect that God will reward
the just one day if men do not."

"Oh! sir!" said poor Mrs. Newton, but the tears streamed down, and she
could not say a word more. And there Fanny sat gazing on the
half-sovereign, as if she was half stupefied.

"Well, take up that bit of gold, and do what you like with it," said
the fat gentleman; "and then run off to sell your flowers, for we must
not be idle because we have got enough for to-day. But do what you like
with that money."

Fanny rose up from her seat, and looking very much as if she was moving
in her sleep, with her wondering eyes fixed on the shining piece that
lay in her hand, she walked slowly over to Mrs. Newton, and putting it
into hers, said,--

"May I go to the grocer's now, grandmother, and get you the tea for
your breakfast?"

"Yes, my love," said Mrs. Newton, kissing her, "and take care of this,
and bring back the change carefully." Then turning to the gentleman,
she said, "I am not young, sir, and I am very, very poorly; I find it
hard to go without my tea, but it is a luxury I have been obliged
latterly to forego."

"But could you not get tea on credit, from the grocer?" said the
gentleman.

"Oh! yes, I believe so; but there would be no use in getting credit;"
said Mrs. Newton, "for I am not certain of being better able to pay
next week than I am this week; and when I have not the money to pay for
what I wish to get, it is better to do without it, than to add to one's
anxieties by running in debt. Do you not think so, sir?"

"Ma'am," said the old gentleman, sitting down, and resting his large
silver-topped stick between his knees, "it is of very little
consequence what I think; but if you wish to know this, I will tell you
that I think very well both of you and your little girl, who, as I have
heard, for I have made inquiries about you both, is a dependant on your
bounty. You have trained her up well, though I wouldn't praise the
child to her face; and so take as much tea as you like till you hear
from me again, and your grocer need be in no trouble about his bill."

So after the fat gentleman had made this rather bluff, but
honest-hearted speech, and poor Mrs. Newton had wept, and thanked him
in language that sounded more polite, the good old gentleman told her
his whole history.

He began the world very poor, and without relations able to assist him;
he was at last taken into the employment of a young merchant in the
city; he had a turn for business, and having been able to render some
important services to this young man, he was finally, to his own
surprise, and that of every one else, taken into partnership.

"During all this time," said he, "I was attached from my boyhood to the
daughter of the poor schoolmaster who first taught me to read; I would
not marry her while I was poor, for I thought that would be to make her
wretched instead of happy; but when I was taken into partnership I
thought my way was clear; I went off to Bethnal Green, and told Mary,
and our wedding-day was settled at once. Well, we were glad enough, to
be sure; but a very few days after, my partner called me into the
private room, and said he wanted to consult me. He seemed in high
spirits, and he told me he had just heard of a famous speculation, by
which we could both make our fortunes at once. He explained what it
was, and I saw with shame and regret, that no really honest man could
join in it: I told him so; I told him plainly I would have nothing to
do with it. You may think what followed; the deeds of partnership were
not yet signed, and in short, in two or three days more I found myself
poor Jack Walton again--indeed, poorer than I was before I was made one
of the firm of Charters and Walton, for I had lost my employment.

"Often and often I used to think that David said, he had never seen the
righteous forsaken; yet I was suffering while the unrighteous were
prospering. It was a sinful, and a self-righteous thought, and I was
obliged to renounce it; when, after some time of trial, a gentleman
sent for me--a man of wealth, and told me his son was going into
business on his own account; that he had heard of my character, and of
the cause of my leaving Mr. Charters; that he thought I would be just
such a steady person as he wished his son to be with. In short, I began
with him on a handsome salary; was soon made his partner; married Mary,
and had my snug house in the country. Mr. Charters succeeded in that
speculation; entered into several others, some of which were of a more
fraudulent nature, failed, and was ruined. He ran off to America, and
no one knows what became of him. I have left business some years. I
purchased a nice property in the country, built a Church upon it, and
have ever thanked God, who never forsakes those who wish to act
righteously.

"It pleased God to take all my sweet children from me--every state has
its trials--the youngest was just like your little flower-girl."

Mrs. Newton was much pleased with this story; she then told her own,
and little Fanny's. The fat gentleman's eyes were full of tears when
she ended; when he was going away he put another half-sovereign into
her hand, and saying, "The first was for the child," walked out of the
house.

A short time afterwards, a clergyman came to see Mrs. Newton--she was
surprised; he sat and talked with her some time, and seemed greatly
pleased with her sentiments, and all she told him of herself and Fanny.
He then told her that he was the clergyman whom Mr. Walton, on the
recommendation of the bishop of the diocese, had appointed to the
church he had built; that Mr. Walton had sent him to see her, and had
