Draupadi's person. And there arose then a deep uproar of many many
voices. And the kings present in that assembly beholding that most
extraordinary of all sights in the world, began to applaud Draupadi and
censure the son of Dhritarashtra. And Bhima then, squeezing his hands,
with lips quivering in rage, swore in the midst of all those kings a
terrible oath in a loud voice.

"And Bhima said,--'Hear these words of mine, ye Kshatriyas of the
world. Words such as these were never before uttered by other men, nor
will anybody in the future ever utter them. Ye lords of earth, if
having spoken these words I do not accomplish them hereafter, let me
not obtain the region of my deceased ancestors. Tearing open in battle,
by sheer force, the breast of this wretch, this wicked-minded scoundrel
of the Bharata race, if I do not drink his life-blood, let me not
obtain the region of my ancestors.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these terrible words of Bhima that
made the down of the auditors to stand on end, everybody present there
applauded him and censured the son of Dhritarashtra. And when a mass of
clothes had been gathered in that assembly, all dragged from the person
of Draupadi, Dussasana, tired and ashamed, sat down. And beholding the
sons of Kunti in that state, the persons--those gods among men--that
were in that assembly all uttered the word 'Fie!' (on the son of
Dhritarashtra). And the united voices of all became so loud that they
made the down of anybody who heard them stand on end. And all the
honest men that were in that assembly began to say,--'Alas! the
Kauravas answer not the question that hath been put to them by
Draupadi.' And all censuring Dhritarashtra together, made a loud
clamour. Then Vidura, that master of the science of morality, waving
his hands and silencing every one, spake these words;--'Ye that are in
this assembly, Draupadi having put her question is weeping helplessly.
Ye are not answering her. Virtue and morality are being persecuted by
such conduct. An afflicted person approacheth an assembly of good men,
like one that is being consumed by fire. They that are in the assembly
quench that fire and cool him by means of truth and morality. The
afflicted person asketh the assembly about his rights, as sanctioned by
morality. They that are in the assembly should, unmoved by interest and
anger, answer the question. Ye kings, Vikarna hath answered the
question, according to his own knowledge and judgment. Ye should also
answer it as ye think proper. Knowing the rules of morality, and having
attended an assembly, he that doth not answer a query that is put,
incurreth half the demerit that attacheth to a lie. He, on the other
hand, who, knowing the rules of morality and having joined an assembly
answereth falsely, assuredly incurreth the sin of a lie. The learned
quote as an example in this connection the old history of Prahlada and
the son of Angirasa.

"'There was of old a chief of the Daityas of the name Prahlada. He had
a son named Virochana. And Virochana, for the sake of obtaining a
bride, quarrelled with Sudhanwan, the son of Angiras. It hath been
heard by us that they mutually wagered their lives, saying--"I am
superior,"--"I am superior,"--for the sake of obtaining a bride. And
after they had thus quarrelled with each other, they both made Prahlada
the arbitrator to decide between them. And they asked him,
saying;--"Who amongst us is superior (to the other)? Answer this
question. Speak not falsely." Frightened at this quarrel, Prahlada cast
his eyes upon Sudhanwan. And Sudhanwan in rage, burning like unto the
mace of Yama, told him,--"If thou answerest falsely, or dost not answer
at all thy head will then be split into a hundred pieces by the wielder
of the thunderbolt with that bolt of his."--Thus addressed by
Sudhanwan, the Daitya, trembling like a leaf of the fig tree, went to
Kasyapa of great energy, for taking counsel with him. And Prahlada
said,--"Thou art, O illustrious and exalted one, fully conversant with
the rules of morality that should guide both the gods and the Asuras
and the Brahmanas as well. Here, however, is a situation of great
difficulty in respect of duty. Tell me, I ask thee, what regions are
obtainable by them who upon being asked a question, answer it not, or
answer it falsely." Kasyapa thus asked answered.--"He that knoweth, but
answereth not a question from temptation, anger or fear, casteth upon
himself a thousand nooses of Varuna. And the person who, cited as a
witness with respect to any matter of ocular or auricular knowledge,
speaketh carelessly, casteth a thousand nooses of Varuna upon his own
person. On the completion of one full year, one such noose is loosened.
Therefore, he that knoweth, should speak the truth without concealment.
If virtue, pierced by sin, repaireth to an assembly (for aid), it is
the duty of every body in the assembly to take off the dart, otherwise
they themselves would be pierced with it. In an assembly where a truly
censurable act is not rebuked, half the demerit of that act attacheth
to the head of that assembly, a fourth to the person acting censurably
and a fourth unto those others that are there. In that assembly, on the
other hand, when he that deserveth censure is rebuked, the head of the
assembly becometh freed from all sins, and the other members also incur
none. It is only the perpetrator himself of the act that becometh
responsible for it. O Prahlada, they who answer falsely those that ask
them about morality destroy the meritorious acts of their seven upper
and seven lower generations. The grief of one who hath lost all his
wealth, of one who hath lost a son, of one who is in debt, of one who
is separated from his companions, of a woman who hath lost her husband,
of one that hath lost his all in consequence of the king's demand, of a
woman who is sterile, of one who hath been devoured by a tiger (during
his last struggles in the tiger's claws), of one who is a co-wife, and
of one who hath been deprived of his property by false witnesses, have
been said by the gods to be uniform in degree. These different sorts of
grief are his who speaketh false. A person becometh a witness in
consequence of his having seen, heard, and understood a thing.
Therefore, a witness should always tell the truth. A truth-telling
witness never loseth his religious merits and earthly possessions
also." Hearing these words of Kasyapa, Prahlada told his son,
"Sudhanwan is superior to thee, as indeed, (his father) Angiras is
superior to me. The mother also of Sudhanwan is superior to thy mother.
Therefore, O Virochana, this Sudhanwan is now the lord of the life." At
these words of Prahlada, Sudhanwan said, "Since unmoved by affection
for thy child, thou hast adhered to virtue, I command, let this son of
thine live for a hundred years."'

"Vidura continued,--'Let all the persons, therefore, present in this
assembly hearing these high truths of morality, reflect upon what
should be the answer to the question asked by Draupadi.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"The kings that were there hearing these words
of Vidura, answered not a word, yet Karna alone spoke unto Dussasana,
telling him. Take away this serving-woman Krishna into the inner
apartments. And thereupon Dussasana began to drag before all the
spectators the helpless and modest Draupadi, trembling and crying
piteously unto the Pandavas her lords.


SECTION LXVIII

"Draupadi said,--'Wait a little, thou worst of men, thou wicked-minded
Dussasana. I have an act to perform--a high duty that hath not been
performed by me yet. Dragged forcibly by this wretch's strong arms, I
was deprived of my senses. I salute these reverend seniors in this
assembly of the Kurus. That I could not do this before cannot be my
fault.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Dragged with greater force than before, the
afflicted and helpless Draupadi, undeserving of such treatment, falling
down upon the ground, thus wept in that assembly of the Kurus,--

"'Alas, only once before, on the occasion of the Swayamvara, I was
beheld by the assembled kings in the amphitheatre, and never even once
beheld afterwards. I am to-day brought before this assembly. She whom
even the winds and the sun had seen never before in her palace is
to-day before this assembly and exposed to the gaze of the crowd. Alas,
she whom the sons of Pandu could not, while in her palace, suffer to be
touched even by the wind, is to-day suffered by the Pandavas to be
seized and dragged by this wretch. Alas, these Kauravas also suffer
their daughter-in-law, so unworthy of such treatment, to be thus
afflicted before them. It seemeth that the times are out of joint. What
can be more distressing to me, than that though high-born and chaste, I
should yet be compelled to enter this public court? Where is that
virtue for which these kings were noted? It hath been heard that the
kings of ancient days never brought their wedded wives into the public
court. Alas, that eternal usage hath disappeared from among the
Kauravas. Else, how is it that the chaste wife of the Pandavas, the
sister of Prishata's son, the friend of Vasudeva, is brought before
this assembly? Ye Kauravas, I am the wedded wife of king Yudhishthira
the just, hailing from the same dynasty to which the King belonged.
Tell me now if I am a serving-maid or otherwise. I will cheerfully
accept your answer. This mean wretch, this destroyer of the name of the
Kurus, is afflicting me hard. Ye Kauravas, I cannot bear it any longer.
Ye kings, I desire ye to answer whether ye regard me as won or unwon. I
will accept your verdict whatever it be.'

"Hearing these words, Bhishma answered, 'I have already said, O blessed
one that the course of morality is subtle. Even the illustrious wise in
this world fail to understand it always. What in this world a strong
man calls morality is regarded as such by others, however otherwise it
may really be; but what a weak man calls morality is scarcely regarded
as such even if it be the highest morality. From the importance of the
issue involved, from its intricacy and subtlety, I am unable to answer
with certitude the question thou hast asked. However, it is certain
that as all the Kurus have become the slaves of covetousness and folly,
the destruction of this our race will happen on no distant date. O
blessed one, the family into which thou hast been admitted as a
daughter-in-law, is such that those who are born in it, however much
they might be afflicted by calamities, never deviate from the paths of
virtue and morality. O Princess of Panchala, this conduct of thine
also, viz. that though sunk in distress, thou still easiest thy eyes on
virtue and morality, is assuredly worthy of thee. These persons, Drona
and others, of mature years and conversant with morality, sit heads
downwards like men that are dead, with bodies from which life hath
departed. It seemeth to me, however, that Yudhishthira is an authority
on this question. It behoveth him to declare whether thou art won or
not won.'"


SECTION LXIX

Vaisampayana said,--"The kings present in that assembly, from fear of
Duryodhana, uttered not a word, good or ill, although they beheld
Draupadi crying piteously in affliction like a female osprey, and
repeatedly appealing to them. And the son of Dhritarashtra beholding
those kings and sons and grand sons of kings all remaining silent,
smiled a little, and addressing the daughter of the king of Panchala,
said,--'O Yajnaseni, the question thou hast put dependeth on thy
husbands--on Bhima of mighty strength, on Arjuna, on Nakula, on
Sahadeva. Let them answer thy question. O Panchali, let them for thy
sake declare in the midst of these respectable men that Yudhishthira is
not their lord, let them thereby make king Yudhishthira the just a
liar. Thou shalt then be freed from the condition of slavery. Let the
illustrious son of Dharma, always adhering to virtue, who is even like
Indra, himself declare whether he is not thy lord. At his words, accept
thou the Pandavas or ourselves without delay. Indeed, all the Kauravas
present in this assembly are floating in the ocean of thy distress.
Endued with magnanimity, they are unable to answer thy question,
looking at thy unfortunate husbands.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of the Kuru king, all who
were present in the assembly loudly applauded them. And shouting
approvingly, they made signs unto one another by motions of their eyes
and lips. And amongst some that were there, sounds of distress such as
'O!' and 'Alas!' were heard. And at these words of Duryodhana, so
delightful (to his partisans), the Kauravas present in that assembly
became exceedingly glad. And the kings, with faces turned sideways,
looked upon Yudhishthira conversant with the rules of morality, curious
to hear what he would say. And every one present in that assembly
became curious to hear what Arjuna, the son of Pandu never defeated in
battle, and what Bhimasena, and what the twins also would say. And when
that busy hum of many voices became still, Bhimasena, waving his strong
and well-formed arms smeared with sandalpaste spake these words,--'If
this high-souled king Yudhishthira the just, who is our eldest brother,
had not been our lord, we would never have forgiven the Kuru race (for
all this). He is the lord of all our religious and ascetic merits, the
lord of even our lives. If he regardeth himself as won, we too have all
been won. If this were not so, who is there amongst creatures touching
the earth with their feet and mortal, that would escape from me with
his life after having touched those locks of the princess of Panchala?
Behold these mighty, well-formed arms of mine, even like maces of iron.
Having once come within them, even he of a hundred sacrifices is
incapable of effecting an escape. Bound by the ties of virtue and the
reverence that is due to our eldest brother, and repeatedly urged by
Arjuna to remain silent, I am not doing anything terrible. If however,
I am once commanded by king Yudhishthira the just, I would slay these
wretched sons of Dhritarashtra, making slaps do the work of swords,
like a lion slaying a number of little animals.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Unto Bhima who had spoken these words Bhishma
and Drona and Vidura said, 'Forbear, O Bhima. Everything is possible
with thee.'


SECTION LXX

"Karna said,--'Of all the persons in the assembly, three, viz.,
Bhishma, Vidura, and the preceptor of the Kurus (Drona) appear to be
independent; for they always speak of their master as wicked, always
censure him, and never wish for his prosperity. O excellent one, the
slave, the son, and the wife are always dependent. They cannot earn
wealth, for whatever they earn belongeth to their master. Thou art the
wife of a slave incapable of possessing anything on his own account.
Repair now to the inner apartments of king Dhritarashtra and serve the
king's relatives. We direct that that is now thy proper business. And,
O princess, all the sons of Dhritarashtra and not the sons of Pritha
are now thy masters. O handsome one, select thou another husband
now,--one who will not make thee a slave by gambling. It is well-known
that women, especially that are slaves, are not censurable if they
proceed with freedom in electing husbands. Therefore let it be done by
thee. Nakula hath been won, as also Bhimasena, and Yudhishthira also,
and Sahadeva, and Arjuna. And, O Yajnaseni, thou art now a slave. Thy
husbands that are slaves cannot continue to be thy lords any longer.
Alas, doth not the son of Pritha regards life, prowess and manhood as
of no use that he offereth this daughter of Drupada, the king of
Panchala, in the presence of all this assembly, as a stake at dice?'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, the wrathful Bhima
breathed hard, a very picture of woe. Obedient to the king and bound by
the tie of virtue and duty, burning everything with his eyes inflamed
by anger, he said,--'O king, I cannot be angry at these words of this
son of a Suta, for we have truly entered the state of servitude. But O
king, could our enemies have said so unto me, it thou hadst not played
staking this princess?'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Bhimasena king
Duryodhana addressed Yudhishthira who was silent and deprived of his
senses, saying,--'O king, both Bhima and Arjuna, and the twins also,
are under thy sway. Answer thou the question (that hath been asked by
Draupadi). Say, whether thou regardest Krishna as unwon.' And having
spoken thus unto the son of Kunti, Duryodhana desirous of encouraging
the son of Radha and insulting Bhima, quickly uncovered his left thigh
that was like unto the stem of a plantain tree or the trunk of an
elephant and which was graced with every auspicious sign and endued
with the strength of thunder, and showed it to Draupadi in her very
sight. And beholding this, Bhimasena expanding his red eyes, said unto
Duryodhana in the midst of all those kings and as if piercing them
(with his dart-like words),--'Let not Vrikodara attain to the regions,
obtained by his ancestors, if he doth not break that thigh of thine in
the great conflict.' And sparkles of fire began to be emitted from
every organ of sense of Bhima filled with wrath, like those that come
out of every crack and orifice in the body of a blazing tree.

"Vidura then, addressing everybody, said,--'Ye kings of Pratipa's race,
behold the great danger that ariseth from Bhimasena. Know ye for
certain that this great calamity that threatens to overtake the
Bharatas hath been sent by Destiny itself. The sons of Dhritarashtra
have, indeed, gambled disregarding every proper consideration. They are
even now disputing in this assembly about a lady (of the royal
household). The prosperity of our kingdom is at an end. Alas, the
Kauravas are even now engaged in sinful consultations. Ye Kauravas,
take to your heart this high precept that I declare. If virtue is
persecuted, the whole assembly becometh polluted. If Yudhishthira had
staked her before he was himself won, he would certainly have been
regarded as her master. If, however a person staketh anything at a time
when he himself is incapable of holding any wealth, to win it is very
like obtaining wealth in a dream. Listening to the words of the king of
Gandhara, fall ye not off from this undoubted truth.'

"Duryodhana, hearing Vidura thus speak, said,--'I am willing to abide
by the words of Bhima, of Arjuna and of the twins. Let them say that
Yudhishthira is not their master. Yajnaseni will then be freed from her
state of bondage.'

"Arjuna at this, said,--'This illustrious son of Kunti, king
Yudhishthira the just, was certainly our master before he began to
play. But having lost himself, let all the Kauravas judge whose master
he could be after that.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Just then, a jackal began to cry loudly in
the homa-chamber of king Dhritarashtra's palace. And, O king, unto the
jackal that howled so, the asses began to bray responsively. And
terrible birds also, from all sides, began to answer with their cries.
And Vidura conversant with everything and the daughter of Suvala, both
understood the meaning of those terrible sounds. And Bhishma and Drona
and the learned Gautama loudly cried,--Swashti! Swashti! [Footnote 1]
Then Gandhari and the learned Vidura beholding that frightful omen,
represented everything, in great affliction, unto the king. And the
king (Dhritarashtra) thereupon said,--

[Footnote 1. A word of benediction, similar to 'Amen.']

"'Thou wicked-minded Duryodhana, thou wretch, destruction hath all
ready overtaken thee when thou insultest in language such as this the
wife of these bulls among the Kurus, especially their wedded wife
Draupadi.' And having spoken those words, the wise Dhritarashtra endued
with knowledge, reflecting with the aid of his wisdom and desirous of
saving his relatives and friends from destruction, began to console
Krishna, the princess of Panchala, and addressing her, the monarch
said,--'Ask of me any boon, O princess of Panchala, that thou desirest.
Chaste and devoted to virtue, thou art the first of all my
daughters-in-law.'

"Draupadi said,--'O bull of the Bharata race, if thou will grant me a
boon, I ask the handsome Yudhishthira, obedient to every duty, be freed
from slavery. Let not unthinking children call my child Prativindhya
endued with great energy of mind as the son of a slave. Having been a
prince, so superior to all men, and nurtured by kings it is not proper
that he should be called the child of a slave.'

"Dhritarashtra said unto her,--'O auspicious one, let it be as thou
sayest. O excellent one, ask thou another boon, for I will give it. My
heart inclineth to give thee a second boon. Thou dost not deserve only
one boon.'

"Draupadi said,--'I ask, O king, that Bhimasena and Dhananjaya and the
twins also, with their cars and bows, freed from bondage, regain their
liberty.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'O blessed daughter, let it be as thou desirest.
Ask thou a third boon, for thou hast not been sufficiently honoured
with two boons. Virtuous in thy behaviour, thou art the foremost of all
my daughters-in-law.'

"Draupadi said,--'O best of kings, O illustrious one, covetousness
always bringeth about loss of virtue. I do not deserve a third boon.
Therefore I dare not ask any. O king of kings, it hath been said that a
Vaisya may ask one boon; a Kshatriya lady, two boons; a Kshatriya male,
three, and a Brahmana, a hundred. O king, these my husbands freed from
the wretched state of bondage, will be able to achieve prosperity by
their own virtuous acts!'


SECTION LXXI

"Karna said,--'We have never heard of such an act (as this one of
Draupadi), performed by any of the women noted in this world for their
beauty. When the sons of both Pandu and Dhritarashtra were excited with
wrath, this Draupadi became unto the sons of Pandu as their salvation.
Indeed the princess of Panchala, becoming as a boat unto the sons of
Pandu who were sinking in a boatless ocean of distress, hath brought
them in safety to the shore.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Karna in the midst of
the Kurus,--viz., that the sons of Pandu were saved by their wife,--the
angry Bhimasena in great affliction said (unto Arjuna),--'O Dhananjaya,
it hath been said by Devala three lights reside in every person, viz.,
offspring, acts and learning, for from these three hath sprung
creation. When life becometh extinct and the body becometh impure and
is cast off by relatives, these three become of service to every
