Himself says, "Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be 
required;" implying that to whom little is given, of him will little be 
required.  God's ways are not unequal.  He has one equal, fair, and just 
rule for every human being; and that is perfect understanding, perfect 
sympathy, perfect good will, and therefore perfect justice and perfect 
love.

And if any one of you answers in his heart--these are good words, and all 
very well:  but they come too late.  I am too far gone.  I ate the sour 
grapes in my youth, and my teeth must be on edge for ever and ever.  I 
have been a bad man, or I have been a foolish woman too many years to 
mend now.  I am down, and down I must be.  I have made my bed, and I must 
lie on it, and die on it too.  Oh my dear brother or sister in Christ, 
whoever you are who says that, unsay it again for it is not true.  
Ezekiel tells you that it is not true, and one greater than Ezekiel, 
Jesus Christ, your Saviour, your Lord, your God, tells you it is not 
true.

For what happens, by God's eternal and unchangeable laws of retribution, 
to a whole nation, or a whole family, may happen to you--to each 
individual man.  They fall by sin; they rise again by repentance and 
amendment.  They may rise punished by their sins, and punished for a long 
time, heavily weighted by the consequences of their own folly, and 
heavily weighted for a long time.  But they rise--they enter into their 
new life weak and wounded, from their own fault.  But they enter in.  And 
from that day things begin to mend--the weather begins to clear, the soil 
begins to yield again--punishment gradually ceases when it has done its 
work, the weight lightens, the wounds heal, the weakness strengthens, and 
by God's grace within them, and by God's providence outside them, they 
are made men of again, and saved.  So you will surely find it in the 
experience of life.

No doubt in general, in most cases,


The child is father of the man


for good and evil.  A pious and virtuous youth helps, by sure laws of 
God, towards a pious and virtuous old age.  And on the other hand, an 
ungodly and profligate youth leads, by the same laws, toward an ungodly 
and profligate old age.  That is the law.  But there is another law which 
may stop that law--just as the stone falls to the ground by the natural 
law of weight, and yet you may stop that law by using the law of bodily 
strength, and holding it up in your hand.  And what is the gracious law 
which will save you from the terrible law which will make you go on from 
worse to worse?

It is this,--"when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that 
he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall 
save his soul alive."  It is not said that his soul shall come in a 
moment to perfect health and strength.  No.  There are old bad habits to 
be got rid of, old ties to be broken, old debts (often worse debts than 
any money debts) to be paid.  But he shall save his soul alive.  His soul 
shall not die of its disease.  It shall be saved.  It shall come to life, 
and gradually mend and be cured, and grow from strength to strength, as a 
sick man mends day by day after a deadly illness, slowly it may be, but 
surely:--for how can you fail of being cured if your physician is none 
other than Jesus Christ your Lord and your God?

Oh, recollect that last word.  If you will but recollect that, you will 
never despair.  How dare any man say--Bad I am, and bad I must remain--
while the God who made heaven and earth offers to make you good?  Who 
dare say,--I cannot amend--when God Himself offers to amend you?  Who 
dare say,--I have no strength to amend--when God offers to give you 
strength, strength of His strength, and life of His life, even His Holy 
Spirit?  Who dare say,--God has given me up; He has a grudge against me 
which He will not lay by, an anger against me which cannot be appeased, a 
score against me which will never be wiped out of His book?  Oh foolish 
and faint-hearted soul.  Look, look at Christ hanging on His cross, and 
see there what God's grudge, God's anger, God's score of your sins is 
like.  Like love unspeakable, and nothing else.  To wash out your sins, 
He spared not His only begotten Son, but freely gave Him for you, to shew 
you that God, so far from hating you, has loved you; that so far from 
being your enemy, He was your father; that so far from willing the death 
of a sinner, He willed that you and every sinner should turn from his 
wickedness and live.  For that, Jesus the only begotten Son of God, came 
down and preached, and sorrowed, and suffered, and died upon the cross.  
He died that you may live; He suffered that you may be saved; He paid the 
debt, because you could never pay it; He bore your sins upon the cross, 
that you might not have to bear them for ever and for ever in eternal 
death.  Now, even if you suffer somewhat in this life for your sins, that 
suffering is not punishment, but wholesome chastisement, as when a father 
chastens the son in whom he delighteth.  All He asks of you is to long 
and try to give up your sins, for He will help you to give them up.  All 
He asks of you is to long and try to lead a new life, for He will give 
you power to lead a new life.  Oh, say not--I cannot--when Christ who 
died for you says you can.  Say not--I dare not--when Christ bids you 
dare come boldly to His throne of grace.  Say not--I must be as I am--
when Christ died that you should NOT be as you are.  Say not--there is no 
hope--when Christ died and rose again, and reigns for ever, to give hope 
to you and all mankind, that when the wicked man turns away from his 
wickedness that he has committed, and doeth that which is lawful and 
right, he shall save his soul alive, and all his transgressions shall not 
be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness that he hath done shall 
he live.



SERMON XXVII.  AGREE WITH THINE ADVERSARY



Eversley, 1861.  Windsor Castle, 1867.

St. Matthew v. 25, 26.  "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou 
art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to 
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast 
into prison.  Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out 
thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing."

This parable our Lord seems to have spoken at least twice, as He did 
several others.  For we find it also in the 12th chapter of St. Luke.  
But it is there part of quite a different discourse.  I think that by 
seeing what it means there, we shall see more clearly what it means here.

Our Lord there is speaking of the sins of the whole Jewish nation.  Here 
He is speaking rather of each man's private sins.  But He applies the 
same parable to both.  He gives the same warning to both.  Not to go too 
far on the wrong road, lest they come to a point where they cannot turn 
back, but must go on to just punishment, if not to utter destruction.

That is what He warned the Jews all through the latter part of the 12th 
chapter of Luke.  He will come again, He says, at an hour they do not 
think of, and then if their elders, the Scribes and Pharisees, are going 
on as they are now, beating the man-servants and maid-servants, and 
eating and drinking with the drunken, oppressing the people, and living 
in luxury and profligacy, He will cut them asunder, and appoint them 
their portion with the unbelievers.

In this, and in many other parables, He had been warning them that their 
ruin was near; and, at last, turning to the whole crowd, He appeals to 
them, to their common sense.  "When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, 
straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is.  And when ye see 
the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to pass.  
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but 
how is it that ye do not discern this time?"  If God can give you common 
sense about one thing, why not about another?  Why can you not open your 
eyes and of yourselves judge what is right?  "Agree with thine adversary 
quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the 
adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the 
officer, and thou be cast into prison.  Verily I say unto thee, Thou 
shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost 
farthing."

So He spoke; and they did not fully understand what He meant.  They 
thought that by their adversary He meant the Roman governor.  For they 
immediately began to talk to Him about some Galileans whose blood Pilate, 
the Roman governor, had mingled with their sacrifices (I suppose in some 
of those wars which were continually breaking out in Judea).  I think He 
meant more than that.  "Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners 
above all the Galilaeans?  Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise 
perish."  As much as to say, though ye did not rebel against the Romans 
like these Galilaeans, you have your sins, which will ruin YOU.  As long 
as you are hypocrites, with your mouths full of the cant of religion, and 
your hearts full of all mean and spiteful passions; as long as you cannot 
of yourselves discern what is right, and have lost conscience, and the 
everlasting distinction between right and wrong, so long are you walking 
blindfold to ruin.  There is an adversary against you, who will surely 
deliver you to the judge some day, and then it will be too late to cry 
for mercy.  And who was that adversary?  Who but the everlasting law of 
God, which says, Thou shalt do justly?--and you Jews are utterly unjust, 
false, covetous, and unrighteous.  Thou shalt love all men; and you are 
cruel and spiteful, hating each other, and making all mankind hate you.  
Thou shalt walk humbly with thy God; and you Jews are walking proudly 
with God; fancying that God belongs only to you; that because you are His 
chosen people, He will let you commit every sin you choose, as long as 
you keep His name on your lips, and keep up an empty worship of Him in 
the temple.  That is your adversary, the everlasting moral law of God.  
And who is the Judge but God Himself, who is set on His throne judging 
right, while you are doing wrong?  And who is the officer, to whom that 
judge will deliver you?  There indeed the Jews were right.  It was the 
Romans whom God appointed to punish them for their sins.  All which our 
Lord had foretold, as all the world knows, came true forty years after in 
that horrible siege of Jerusalem, which the Jews brought on themselves 
entirely by their own folly, and pride, and wicked lawlessness.  In that 
siege, by famine and pestilence, by the Romans' swords, by crucifixion, 
and by each other's hands (for the different factions were murdering each 
other wholesale up to the very day Jerusalem was taken), thousands of 
Jews perished horribly, and the rest were sold as slaves over the face of 
the whole earth, and led away into a captivity from which they could not 
escape till they had paid the uttermost farthing.

Now let us look at this same parable in the 5th chapter of St Matthew.  
Remember first that it is part of the sermon on the Mount, which is all 
about not doctrine, but morality, the law of right and wrong, the law of 
justice and mercy.  You will see then that our Lord is preaching against 
the same sins as in the 12th chapter of St. Luke.  Against a hypocritical 
religion, joined with a cruel and unjust heart.  Those of old time, the 
Scribes and Pharisees, said merely, Thou shalt not kill.  And as long as 
thou dost not kill thy brother, thou mayest hate him in thy heart and 
speak evil of him with thy lips.  But our Lord says, Not so.  Whosoever 
is angry with his brother without a cause is in danger of the judgment.  
Whosoever shall say to him Raca, or worthless fellow, shall speak 
insolently, brutally, cruelly, scornfully to him, is in danger of the 
council.  But whosoever shall say unto him, Thou fool, is in danger of 
hell fire.  For using that word to the Jews, so says the Talmudic 
tradition, Moses and Aaron were shut out of the land of promise, for it 
means an infidel, an atheist, a godless man, or rebel against God, as it 
is written, "The fool hath said in his heart there is no God."  Whosoever 
shall curse his brother, who is trying to be a good Christian man to the 
best of his light and power, because he does not happen to agree with him 
in all things, and call him a heretic, and an infidel, and an atheist, 
and an enemy of God--he is in danger of hell fire.  Let him agree with 
his adversary quickly, whiles he is in the way with him, lest he be 
delivered to God the judge, and to the just punishment of him who has not 
done justly, not loved mercy, not walked humbly with his God.

But who is the adversary of that man, and who is the judge, and who is 
the officer?  Our adversary in every case, whenever we do wrong, 
knowingly or unknowingly, is the Law of God, the everlasting laws, by 
which God has ordered every thing in heaven and earth; and as often as we 
break one of these laws, let us agree with it again as quickly as we can, 
lest it hale us before God, the judge of all, and He deliver us over to 
His officer--to those powers of nature and powers of spirit, which He has 
appointed as ministers of His vengeance, and they cast us into some 
prison of necessary and unavoidable misery, from which we shall never 
escape till we have paid the uttermost farthing.

Do you not understand me?  Then I will give you an example.  Suppose the 
case of a man hurting his health by self-indulgence of any kind.  Then 
his adversaries are the laws of health.  Let him agree with them quickly, 
while he has the power of conquering his bad habits, by recovering his 
health, lest the time come when his own sins deliver him up to God his 
judge; and God to His terrible officers of punishment, the laws of 
Disease; and they cast him into a prison of shame and misery from which 
there is no escape--shame and misery, most common perhaps among the lower 
classes:  but not altogether confined to them--the weakened body, the 
bleared eye, the stupified brain, the premature death, the children 
unhealthy from their parents' sins, despising their parents, and perhaps 
copying their vices at the same time.  Many a man have I seen in that 
prison, fast bound with misery though not with iron, and how he was to 
pay his debt and escape out of it I know not, though I hope that God does 
know.

Are any of you, again, in the habit of cheating your neighbours, or 
dealing unfairly by them?  Your adversary is the everlasting law of 
justice, which says, Do as you would be done by, for with what measure 
you mete to others, it shall be measured to you again.

This may show you how a bodily sin, like self-indulgence punishes itself 
by bringing a man into bondage of bodily misery, from which he cannot 
escape; and in the same way a spiritual sin, like want of charity, will 
bring a man into spiritual bondage from which he cannot escape.  And 
this, as in bodily sins, it will do by virtue of that mysterious and 
terrible officer of God, which we call Habit.  Habit, by which, we cannot 
tell how, our having done a thing once becomes a reason for our doing it 
again, and again after that, till, if the habit be once formed, we cannot 
help doing that thing, and become enslaved to it, and fast bound by it, 
in a prison from which there is no escape.  Look for instance at the case 
of the untruthful man.  Let him beware in time.  Who is his adversary?  
Facts are his adversary.  He says one thing, and Fact says another, and a 
very stubborn and terrible adversary Fact is.  The day will come, most 
probably in this life, when Facts will bring that untruthful man before 
God and before men likewise--and cry,--Judge between us which of us is 
right; and there will come to that false man exposure and shame, and a 
worse punishment still, perhaps, if he have let the habit grow too strong 
on him, and have not agreed with his adversary in time.

For have you not seen (alas, you have too surely seen) men who had 
contracted such a habit of falsehood that they could not shake it off--
who had played with their sense of truth so long that they had almost 
forgotten what truth meant; men who could not speak without mystery, 
concealment, prevarication, half-statements; who were afraid of the plain 
truth, not because there was any present prospect of its hurting them, 
but simply because it was the plain truth--children of darkness, who, 
from long habit, hated the light--and who, though they had been found out 
and exposed, could not amend--could not become simple, honest, and 
truthful--could not escape from the prison of their own bad habits, and 
the net of lies which they had spread round their own path, till they had 
paid the uttermost penalty for their deceit?

Look, again, at the case of the uncharitable man, in the habit of forming 
harsh and cruel judgments of his neighbours.  Then his adversary is the 
everlasting law of Love, which will surely at last punish him, by the 
most terrible of all punishments--loss of love to man, and therefore to 
God.  Are we not (I am, I know, may God forgive me for it) apt to be 
angry with our brethren without a cause, out of mere peevishness?  Let us 
beware in time.  Are we not apt to say to them "Raca"--to speak cruelly, 
contemptuously, fiercely of them, if they thwart us?  Let us beware in 
time still more.  Are we not worst of all, tempted (as I too often am) to 
say to them "Thou fool;" to call better men, more useful men more pure 
men, more pious men than ourselves, hard and cruel names, names from 
which they would shrink with horror because they cannot see Christian 
truth in just exactly the same light that we do?  Oh! let us beware then.  
Beware lest the everlasting laws of justice and fairness between man and 
man, of love and charity between man and man, which we have broken, 
should some day deliver us up, as they delivered those bigoted Jews of 
old to God our Judge, and He deliver our souls to His most terrible 
officers, who are called envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness; 
and they thrust us into that blackest of all prisons, on the gate of 
which is written, Hardness of heart, and Contempt of God's Word and 
commandments, and within which is the outer darkness into which if a man 
falls, he cannot see the difference between right and wrong:  but calls 
evil good, and good evil, like his companions in the outer darkness--
namely, the devil and his angels.  Oh! let us who are coming to lay our 
gift upon God's altar at this approaching Christmas tide, consider 
whether our brother hath aught against us in any of these matters, and, 
if so, let us leave our gift upon the altar, and be first reconciled to 
our brother, in heart at least, and with inward shame, and confession, 
and contrition, and resolution to amend.  But we can only do that by 
recollecting what gift we are to leave on Christ's altar,--that it is the 
gift of SELF, the sacrifice of ourselves, with all our selfishness, 
pride, conceit, spite, cruelty.  Ourselves, with all our sins, we are to 
lay upon Christ's altar, that our sins may be nailed to His cross, and 
washed clean in His blood, everlastingly consumed in the fire of His 
Spirit, the pure spirit of love, which is the Charity of God, that so, 
self being purged out of us, we may become holy and lively sacrifices to 
God, parts and parcels of that perfect sacrifice which Christ offered up 
for the sins of the whole world--even the sacrifice of Himself.



SERMON XXVIII.  ST JOHN THE BAPTIST



Chester Cathedral. 1872.

St Luke iii. 2, 3, 7, 9-14.  "The Word of God came unto John the son of 
Zacharias in the wilderness.  And he came into all the country about 
Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. . 
. . Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, 
O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to 
come?  Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance. . . .  And now 
also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees:  every tree therefore 
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.  
And the people asked him saying, What shall we do then?  He answereth and 
saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath 
none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.  Then came also 
publicans to be baptized unto them, and said unto him, Master, what shall 
we do?  And he said, Exact no more than that which is appointed you.  And 
the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?  And 
he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and 
be content with your wages."

This is St John Baptist's day.  Let me say a very few words--where many 
might be said--about one of the noblest personages who ever has appeared 
on this earth.

Our blessed Lord said, "Among them that are born of women there hath not 
risen a greater than John the Baptist, notwithstanding, he that is least 
in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he."  These are serious words; 
for which of us dare to say that we are greater than John the Baptist?

But let us at least think a while what John the Baptist was like.  So we 
shall gain at least the sight of an ideal man.  It is not the highest 
ideal.  Our Lord tells us that plainly; and we, as Christians, should 
know that it is not.  The ideal man is our Lord Christ Himself, and none 
other.  Still, he that has not mounted the lower step of the heavenly 
stair, has certainly not mounted the higher; and therefore, if we have 
