worlds with their mobile and immobile beings. It is thou again that
swallowest everything at the end of the Yuga. Thou art incapable of
being known by the gods themselves, far less by me. O sinless one, the
gods with Brahma at their head are all displayed in thee. Thou art all,
the Creator himself and the Ordainer of the worlds. It is by thy grace
that all the gods sport without anxiety or fear.' And adoring Mahadeva
thus the Rishi also said, 'O god of gods, grant me thy grace, so that my
asceticism may not diminish.' Then that god of cheerful soul answered
the regenerate Rishi,--saying, 'Let thy asceticism, O Brahmana, increase
a thousandfold through my grace. And, O great Muni, I shall dwell with
thee in this thy asylum. Bathing in _Saptasaraswata_, they that will
worship me, shall be able to attain everything here and hereafter. And,
without doubt, they shall all attain to the _Saraswata_ region in the
end.' Having said this, Mahadeva disappeared then and there. After
visiting _Saraswata_, one should proceed to _Ausanasa_ celebrated over
the three worlds. There, O Bharata, the gods with Brahma at their head,
and Rishis endued with wealth of asceticism, and the illustrious
Kartikeya, were ever present during two twilights and the mid-day,
impelled by the desire of doing good to Bhargava. There in that _tirtha_
is another called _Kapalamochana_, which cleanseth from every sin. O
tiger among men, bathing there one is cleansed from every sin. One
should then proceed to the _tirtha_ called _Agni_. Bathing there, O bull
among men, one obtaineth the regions of _agni_ and raiseth his own race
(from lower regions). There in that _tirtha_ is another, O chief of the
Bharatas, that belongeth to Viswamitra. Bathing there, O best of men,
one obtaineth the status of a Brahmana. Proceeding next to Brahmayoni in
purity of body and with subdued soul, one obtaineth, O tiger among men,
by bathing there, the abode of Brahma, and sanctifieth, without doubt,
his own race to the seventh generation up and down. One should next
proceed, O king, to the _tirtha_ celebrated over the three worlds, which
is called _Prithudaka_, belonging to Kartikeya. One should bathe there
and occupy oneself in the worship of the Pitris and the gods. Whatever
evil hath been committed, knowingly or unknowingly, by man or woman,
impelled by human motives, is all destroyed, O Bharata, by a bath in
that _tirtha_. Bathing there one obtaineth, too, the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and heaven also. The learned have said that
_Kurukshetra_ is holy; that holier than _Kurukshetra_ is the
_Saraswati_; that holier than the Saraswati are all the _tirthas_
together, and that holier than all the _tirthas_ together is
_Prithudaka_. He that engaged in the recitation of prayers casteth off
his body at Prithudaka, which is the best of all _tirthas_, becometh an
immortal. It hath been sung by Sanatkumara and by the high-souled Vyasa,
and it is in the Vedas also, that one should, O king, go to Prithudaka,
with subdued soul. O son of Kuru race, there is no _tirtha_ which is
superior to Prithudaka. Without doubt, that _tirtha_ is purifying, holy
and sin-destroying. O best of men, it hath been said by learned persons
that men, however sinful, by bathing in Prithudaka, go to heaven. O best
of the Bharatas, there in that _tirtha_ is another called _Madhusrava_.
Bathing there, O king, one obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand
kine. One should then proceed, O king, to that celebrated and sacred
_tirtha_ where the Saraswati uniteth with the Aruna. One that batheth
there, having fasted for three nights, is cleansed of even the sin of
slaying a Brahmana, and obtaineth also merit that is superior to that of
either the _Agnishtoma_ or _Atiratra_ sacrifice, and rescueth his race
to the seventh generation up and down. There in that _tirtha_ is
another, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, that is called Ardhakila. From
compassion for the Brahmanas, that _tirtha_ was made by Darbhi in days
of old. Without doubt, by vows, by investiture of the sacred, by fasts,
by rites and by _Mantras_, one becometh a Brahmana. O bull among men, it
hath been seen, however, by learned persons of old that even one
destitute of rites and _Mantras_, by only bathing in that _tirtha_
becometh learned and endued with the merit of vows. Darbhi had also
brought hither the four oceans. O best of men, one that batheth here,
never meeteth with distress hereafter and obtaineth also the merit of
giving away four thousand kine. One should next repair, O virtuous one,
to the _tirtha_ called _Satasahasraka_. Near to this is another called
_Sahasraka_. Both are celebrated, and one that batheth in them,
obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Fasts and gifts
there multiply a thousandfold. One should next proceed, O king, to the
excellent _tirtha_ called _Renuka_. One should bathe there and worship
the _Pitris_ and the gods. By this, cleansed from every sin, he
obtaineth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. Bathing next in the
_tirtha_ called _Vimochana_ with passions and senses under control, one
is cleansed from all the sins generated by the acceptance of gifts. With
senses under control and practising the Brahmacharya mode of life, one
should next repair to the woods of Panchavati. By a sojourn thither, one
earneth much virtue and becometh adored in the regions of the virtuous.
One should next go to the _tirtha_ of _Varuna_ called _Taijasa_, blazing
in effulgence of its own. There in that _tirtha_ is the lord of Yoga,
Sthanu himself, having for his vehicle the bull. He that sojourneth
there, obtaineth success by worshipping the god of gods. It was there
that the gods with Brahma at their head and Rishis endued with wealth of
asceticism, installed Guha as the generalissimo of the celestials. To
the east of that _tirtha_ is another, O perpetuator of Kuru race, that
is called Kuru _tirtha_. With senses under control and leading a
Brahmacharya mode of life, he that bathes in _Kuru-tirtha_, becometh
cleansed of all his sins and obtaineth the region of Brahma. With
subdued senses and regulated diet one should next proceed to
_Svargadwara_. Sojourning thither, one obtaineth the merit of the
_Agnishtoma_ sacrifice and goeth to the abode of Brahma. The pilgrim
should then, O king, proceed to the _tirtha_ called _Anaraka_. Bathing
there, O king, one never meeteth with distress hereafter. There, O king,
Brahma himself with the other gods having Narayana at their head, is
ever present, O tiger among men! And, O royal son of the Kuru race, the
wife also of Rudra is present there. Beholding the goddess, one never
meeteth with distress hereafter. There in that _tirtha_ O king, is also
(an image of) _Visweswara_, the lord of Uma. Beholding the god of gods
there, one is cleansed of all his sins. Beholding also (the image of)
_Narayana_ from whose navel had sprung the lotus, one blazeth forth, O
royal represser of all foes, and goeth to the abode of Vishnu. O bull
among men, he that batheth in the _tirthas_ of all the gods, is exempted
from every sorrow and blazeth forth like the Moon. The pilgrim should
next proceed, O king, to _Swastipura_. By walking around that place, one
obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Arriving next at the
_tirtha_ called _Pavana_, one should offer oblations to the _Pitris_ and
the gods. By this, he obtaineth, O Bharata, the merit of the
_Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. Near to that is _Ganga-hrada_, and another, O
Bharata, called _Kupa_. Thirty millions of _tirthas_, O king, are
present in that Kupa. Bathing there, O king, a person obtaineth heaven.
Bathing also in the _Ganga-hrada_ and adoring Maheswara, one obtaineth
the status of _Ganapatya_ and rescueth his own race. One should next
proceed to _Sthanuvata_, celebrated over the three worlds. Bathing
there, O king, one obtaineth heaven. One should then proceed to
_Vadanpachana_, the asylum of _Vasishtha_. Having fasted there for three
nights, one should eat jujubes. He that liveth on jujubes for twelve
years, and he that fasteth at the _tirtha_ for three nights, acquireth
merit that is eternal. Arriving then at _Indramarga_, O king, and
fasting there for a day and night the pilgrim becometh adored in the
abode of Indra. Arriving next at the _tirtha_ called _Ekaratra_, a
person that stayeth there for one night, with regulated vows and
refraining from untruth, becometh adored in the abode of Brahma. One
should next go, O king, to the asylum of _Aditya_--that illustrious god
who is a mass of effulgence. Bathing in that tirtha celebrated over
three worlds, and worshipping the god of light, one goeth to the region
of Aditya and rescueth his own race. The pilgrim then, O king, bathing
in the _tirtha_ of _Soma_, obtaineth, without doubt, the region of Soma.
One should next proceed, O virtuous one, to the most sacred _tirtha_ of
the illustrious _Dadhicha_, that sanctifying _tirtha_ which is
celebrated over the whole world. It was here that Angiras, that ocean of
ascetic austerities belonging to the Saraswata race, was born. Bathing
in that _tirtha_, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and
without doubt, gaineth also residence in the region of Saraswati. With
subdued senses and leading a Brahmacharya mode of life, one should next
proceed to _Kanyasrama_. Residing there for three nights, O king, with
subdued senses and regulated diet, one obtaineth a hundred celestial
damsels and goeth also to the abode of Brahma. One should next, O
virtuous one, proceed to the _tirtha_ called _Sannihati_. Sojourning
thither the gods with Brahma at their head and Rishis endued with wealth
of asceticism earn much virtue. Bathing in the Saraswati during a solar
eclipse, one obtaineth the merit of a hundred horse-sacrifices, and any
sacrifice that one may perform there produceth merit that is eternal.
Whatever _tirthas_ exist on earth or in the firmament, all the rivers,
lakes, smaller lakes, springs, tanks, large and small, and spots sacred
to particular gods, without doubt, all come, O tiger among men, month
after month, and mingle with _Sannihati_, O king of men! And it is
because that all other _tirthas_ are united together here, that this
_tirtha_ is so called. Bathing there and drinking of its water, one
becometh adored in heaven. Listen now, O king, to the merit acquired by
that mortal who performeth a _Sraddha_ on the day of the new moon during
a solar eclipse. The person that performeth a _Sraddha_ there, after
having bathed in that _tirtha_, obtaineth the merit that one earneth by
properly celebrating a thousand horse-sacrifices. Whatever sins a man or
woman committeth, are, without doubt, all destroyed as soon as one
batheth in that _tirtha_. Bathing there one also ascendeth to the abode
of Brahma on the lotus-coloured car. Bathing next in _Koti-tirtha_,
after having worshipped the Yaksha doorkeeper, Machakruka, one obtaineth
the merit of giving away gold in abundance. Near to this, O best of the
Bharatas, is a _tirtha_ called _Ganga-hrada_. One should bathe there, O
virtuous one, with subdued soul and leading a Brahmacharya mode of life.
By this, one obtaineth merit that is greater than that of a Rajasuya and
horse-sacrifices. The _tirtha_ called _Naimisha_ is productive of good
on earth. _Pushkara_ is productive of good in the regions of the
firmament; _Kurukshetra_, however, is productive of good in respect of
all the three worlds. Even the dust of Kurukshetra, carried by the wind,
leadeth sinful men to a highly blessed state. They that reside in
Kurukshetra, which lieth to the north of the Drishadwati and the south
of the Saraswati, really reside in heaven. '_I will go to Kurukshetra,'
'I will dwell in Kurukshetra_,' he that uttereth those words even once,
becometh cleansed of all sins. The sacred _Kurukshetra_ which is
worshipped by Brahmarshis, is regarded as the sacrificial altar of the
celestials. Those mortals that dwell there, have nothing to grieve for
at any time. That which lieth between Tarantuka and Arantuka and the
lakes of Rama and Machakruka is Kurukshetra. It is also called
_Samantapanchaka_ and is said to be the northern sacrificial altar of
the Grandsire."'"


SECTION LXXXIV

"'Pulastya said, "Then, O great king, one should proceed to the
excellent _tirtha_ of _Dharma_, where the illustrious god of justice had
practised highly meritorious austerities. And it is for this that he
made the spot a sacred _tirtha_ and rendered it celebrated by his own
name. Bathing there, O king, a virtuous man with concentrated soul
certainly sanctifieth his family to the seventh generation. One should
then repair, O king, to the excellent _Jnanapavana_. Sojourning thither,
one obtaineth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice, and goeth to the
region of the Munis. Then, O monarch, a man should repair to the
_Saugandhika-vana_. There dwell the celestials with Brahma at their
head, Rishis endued with wealth of asceticism, the Siddhas, the
Charanas, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras and the serpents. As soon as one
entereth these woods, he is cleansed of all his sins. Then, O king,
should one repair to the sacred goddess Saraswati, known there as the
goddess Plaksha, that best of streams and foremost of rivers. There
should one bathe in the water issuing from an ant-hill. (Bathing there
and) worshipping the Pitris and the gods, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice. There existeth a rare _tirtha_ called _Isanadhyushita_,
lying from the ant-hill at the distance of six throws of a heavy stick.
As seen in the Puranas, O tiger among men, bathing there a man obtaineth
the merit of giving away a thousand Kapila kine and of the
horse-sacrifice. Journeying next, O foremost of men, to _Sugandha_, and
_Satakumbha_ and _Pancha-yaksha_, a man becometh adored in heaven.
Repairing to another _tirtha_ there called _Trisulakhata_, one should
bathe and set himself to worship the Pitris and the gods. Doing so,
without doubt, one obtaineth, after death, the status of _Ganapatya_.
One should next proceed, O king, to the excellent spot of the Goddess
celebrated over the three worlds by the name of _Sakamvari_. There, for
the space of a thousand celestial years, she of excellent vows, month
after month, had subsisted upon herbs, O king of men! And attracted by
their reverence for the Goddess, many Rishis with wealth of asceticism,
came thither, O Bharata, and were entertained by her with herbs. And it
is for this that they bestowed on her the name of _Sakamvari_. O
Bharata, the man who arriveth at _Sakamvari_, with rapt attention and
leading a Brahmacharya mode of life and passeth three nights there in
purity and subsisting on herbs alone, obtaineth, at the will of the
goddess, the merit of him that liveth upon herbs for twelve years. Then
should one proceed to the _tirtha_ called _Suvarna_, famed through the
three worlds. There in days of old, Vishnu had paid his adorations to
Rudra, for his grace, and obtaineth also many boons difficult of
acquisition even by the gods. And, O Bharata, the gratified destroyer of
Tripura said, 'O Krishna, thou shalt, without doubt, be much beloved in
the world, and the foremost of everything in the universe.' Repairing
thither, O king, and worshipping the deity having the bull for his mark,
one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice as also the status of
_Ganapatya_. One should next proceed to the _tirtha_ of _Dhumavati_.
Fasting there for three nights, one obtaineth, without doubt, all the
wishes cherished by him. To the southern half of this spot of the
Goddess, there is, O king, a _tirtha_ called _Rathavarta_. One should, O
virtuous one, go up to that place, with devout heart, and having his
senses under control. By this, through the grace of Mahadeva, one
attaineth to an exalted state. After walking round the place, one
should, O bull of the Bharata race, proceed to the _tirtha_ named
_Dhara_, which, O thou of great wisdom, washeth off all sins. Bathing
there, O tiger among men, a man is freed from every sorrow. One should
then repair, O virtuous one, after bowing to the great mountain
(Himavat), to the source of the Ganges, which is, without doubt, like
the gate of heaven. There should one, with concentrated soul, bathe in
the _tirtha_ called _Koti_. By this, one obtaineth the merit of the
Pundarika sacrifice, and delivereth his race. Residing one night there,
one acquireth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. By offering
oblations of water duly to the gods and the Pitris, at _Saptaganga_,
_Triganga_ and _Sakravarta_, (which are all there), becometh adored in
the regions of the virtuous. Bathing next at _Kanakhala_, and fasting
there for three nights, a person reapeth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and goeth to heaven. Then O lord of men, the pilgrim
should repair to _Kapilavata_. Fasting for one night there, he obtaineth
the merit of giving away a thousand kine. O king, there is a _tirtha_ of
the illustrious Kapila, king of the Nagas, that is celebrated, O thou
best of Kurus, over all the worlds. Bathing there at the _Nagatirtha_
one obtaineth, O king, the merit of giving away a thousand Kapila kine.
One should next repair to the excellent _tirtha_ of _Santanu_, called
_Lalitika_. Bathing there, O king, one never sinketh into distress
(hereafter). The man that bathes at the confluence of the Ganga and the
Yamuna, obtains the merit of ten horse-sacrifices, and also rescues his
race. One should next, O king, go to _Sugandha_, celebrated over the
world. By this, cleansed of every sin, he becometh adored in the abode
of Brahma. Then, O lord of men, the pilgrim should repair to
_Rudravarta_. Bathing there, one ascendeth to heaven. Bathing at the
confluence of the Ganga and the Saraswati, a person obtaineth the merit
of the horse-sacrifice and also ascendeth to heaven. Proceeding next to
_Bhadrakarneswara_ and worshipping the gods duly, one, without sinking
into distress, becometh adored in heaven. Then, O lord of men, the
pilgrim should proceed to the _tirtha_ called _Kuvjamraka_. By this he
obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand kine, and heaven also.
Then, O king, the pilgrim should go to the _Arundhativata_. Proceeding
thither with concentrated soul and practising the Brahmacharya vows, one
that batheth in _Samudraka_ and fasteth for three nights, obtaineth the
merit of the horse-sacrifice and of giving away a thousand kine, and
also rescueth his race. One should next proceed to _Brahmavarta_, with
concentrated soul and practising the Brahmacharya vows. By this, one
obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and goeth to the region of
Soma. The man that proceedeth to the _Yamuna-prabhava_, (the source of
the Yamuna) and batheth there, obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and is worshipped in heaven. Arriving at
_Darvisankramana_, that _tirtha_ which is worshipped of the three
worlds, a person obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and goeth to
heaven. Repairing next to _Sindhu-prabhava_ (the source of the Indus)
which is worshipped by Siddhas and Gandharvas, and staying there for
five nights, one obtaineth the merit of giving away gold in abundance.
Proceeding next to the inaccessible _tirtha_ called _Vedi_, one
obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and ascendeth to heaven.
Then, O Bharata, should one proceed to _Rishikulya_ and _Vasishtha_. By
visiting the latter, all orders attain to Brahmanhood. Repairing to
_Rishikulya_ and bathing there, and living a month upon herbs, and
worshipping the gods and Pitris, one is cleansed of all his sins, and
obtaineth the region of the Rishis. Proceeding next to _Bhrigutunga_ a
person acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Repairing then to
_Vipramoksha_, one is freed from every sin. Proceeding then to the
_tirtha_ of _Krittika_ and _Magha_, one, O Bharata, obtaineth the merit
superior to that of the _Agnishtoma_ and _Atiratha_ sacrifices. The man
who, repairing to the excellent _tirtha_ called _Vidya_, batheth there
in the evening, obtaineth proficiency in every kind of knowledge. One
should next reside for one night at _Mahasrama_ capable of destroying
every sin, taking a single meal. By this, one obtains many auspicious
regions, and delivers ten preceding and ten succeeding generations of
his race. Dwelling next for a month of Mahalaya, and fasting there for
three nights, one's soul is cleansed of all sins and one acquires the
merit of giving away gold in abundance. Proceeding next to _Vetasika_
worshipped by the Grandsire, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and the state of Usanas. Going next to the _tirtha_
called _Sundarika_, worshipped by the Siddhas, one obtaineth personal
beauty as witnessed by the ancients. Proceeding next to Brahmani with
subdued senses and observing the Brahmacharya vow, a person ascendeth to
the region of Brahma on a lotus-hued car. One should repair next to the
sacred Naimisha, worshipped by the Siddhas. There dwelleth for aye
Brahma with the gods. By only purposing to go to Naimisha, half one's
sins are destroyed; by entering it, one is cleansed of all his sins. The
pilgrim of subdued senses should stay at Naimisha for a month; for, O
Bharata, all the _tirthas_ of the earth are at Naimisha. Bathing there,
with restrained senses and regulated fare, one obtains, O Bharata, the
merit of the cow-sacrifice, and also sanctifies, O best of the Bharatas,
his race for seven generations both upwards and downwards. He who
renounceth his life at Naimisha by fasting, enjoyeth happiness in the
heavenly regions. Even this is the opinion of the wise. O foremost of
kings, Naimisha is ever sacred and holy. Proceeding next to
_Gangod-bheda_ and fasting there for three nights, a man obtaineth the
merit of the _Vajapeya_ sacrifice, and becometh like unto Brahma
himself. Journeying to the Saraswati, one should offer oblations unto
the gods and the Pitris. By this, one certainly enjoyeth bliss in the
regions called Saraswata. Then should one wend to _Vahuda_, with subdued
soul and observing the Brahmacharya vow. Residing there for one night,
one becometh adored in heaven, and obtaineth also, O Kaurava, the merit
of the _Devasatra_ sacrifice. Then should one repair to the holy
_Kshiravati_, frequented by holier men. By worshipping the gods and the
Pitris there, one obtains the merit of the _Vajapeya sacrifice_.
Proceeding next to _Vimalasoka_, with subdued soul and observing the
Brahmacharya vow, and residing there for one night, one is adored in
heaven. One should next proceed to the excellent _Gopratra_ in the
Sarayu, whence Rama, O king, with all his attendants and animals,
renouncing his body, ascended to heaven in consequence of the efficacy
of the _tirtha_ alone. Bathing in that _tirtha_, O Bharata, one's soul,
through Rama's grace, and by virtue of his own deeds, being cleansed of
all sins, one becometh adored in heaven. O Bharata! Proceeding next, O
son of the Kuru race, to the _Rama-tirtha_ on the Gomati, and bathing
there, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and sanctifieth
also his own race. There, O bull of the Bharata race, is another
_tirtha_ called _Satasahasrika_. Bathing there, with restrained senses
and regulated diet, a person reapeth, O bull of Bharata race, the merit
of giving away a thousand kine. Then should one, O king, go to the
unrivalled _tirtha_ called _Bhartristhana_. By this, a person obtaineth
the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Bathing next in the _tirtha_ called
_Koti_, and worshipping Kartikeya, a man reapeth, O king, the merit of
giving away a thousand kine, and acquireth great energy. Proceeding next
to _Varanasi_, and worshipping the god having the bull for his mark,
after a bath in the _Kapilahrada_, one obtaineth the merit of the
Rajasuya sacrifice. Repairing then, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, to
the _tirtha_ called _Avimukta_, and beholding there the god of gods, the
pilgrim, from such sight alone, is immediately cleansed of even the sin
of slaying a Brahmana. By renouncing one's life there, one obtaineth
deliverance. Arriving next, O king, at the rare _tirtha_ called
_Markandeya_ celebrated over the world and situated at the confluence of
the Ganges, a person obtaineth the merit of _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice, and
delivereth his race. Sojourning next to _Gaya_, with subdued senses and
observing the Brahmacharya vow, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and also rescueth his race. There in that _tirtha_ is
the _Akshaya-vata_, celebrated over the three worlds. Whatever is
offered there to the Pitris is said to become inexhaustible. Bathing
there at the _Mahanadi_, and offering oblations to the gods and the
Pitris, a man acquireth eternal regions, and also rescueth his race.
Proceeding then to _Brahma-sara_ that is adorned by the woods of Dharma,
and passing one night there, a man attaineth to the region of Brahma. In
that lake, Brahma had raised a sacrificial pillar. By walking round this
pillar, a person acquireth the merit of the _Vajapeya_ sacrifice. One
should next, O mighty monarch, go to _Denuka_ celebrated over the world.
Staying there for one night and giving away sesame and kine, one's soul
being cleansed from every sin, one ascendeth, without doubt to the
region of Soma. There, O king, on the mountains, the cow called Kapila
used to range with her calf. There is little doubt of this, O Bharata,
the hoof-marks of that cow and her calf are seen there to this day. By
bathing in those hoof-prints, O foremost of monarchs, whatever sin a man
may have incurred is, O Bharata, washed away. Then should one go to
_Gridhravata_, the spot consecrated to the trident-bearing god.
Approaching the deity having the bull for his mark one should rub
himself with ashes. If a Brahmana, he obtains the merit of observing the
twelve year's vow and if belonging to any of the other orders, he is
freed from all his sins. One should next proceed to the _Udyanta_
mountains, resounding with melodious notes. There, O bull of the Bharata
race, is still seen the foot-print of Savitri. The Brahmana of rigid
vows, who sayeth his morning, noon and evening prayers there, obtaineth
the merit of performing that service for twelve years. There, O bull of
the Bharata race, is the famous _Yonidwara_. Repairing thither, a person
becometh exempted from the pain of rebirth. The person that stayeth at
Gaya during both the dark and lighted fortnights, certainly sanctifieth,
O king, his own race up and down to the seventh generation. One should
wish for many sons so that even one may go to Gaya, or celebrate the
horse-sacrifice, or offer a _nila_ bull. Then, O king, the pilgrim
should proceed to _Phalgu_. By this, he obtains the merit of
horse-sacrifice, and acquires great success. O king, one should repair
then, with subdued soul, to _Dharmaprishta_. There, O foremost of
warriors, dwelleth Dharma for aye. Drinking of the water of a well which
is there, and purifying one's self by a bath, he that offereth oblations
to the gods and the Pitris is cleansed of all his sins and ascendeth to
heaven. There in that _tirtha_ is the hermitage of the great Rishi
Matanga of soul under complete control. By entering that beautiful
asylum capable of soothing fatigue and sorrow, one earneth the merit of
the _Gacayana_ sacrifice, and by touching (the image of) Dharma which is
there, one obtaineth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. One should next
go, O king, to the excellent _tirtha_ called _Brahmasthana_. Approaching
Brahma, that bull among male beings, who is there, one acquireth, O
mighty monarch, the merit of the Rajasuya and horse-sacrifices. The
pilgrim should then repair to _Rajasuya_, O king of men! Bathing there,
one liveth (in heaven) as happily as (the Rishi) Kakshiyan. After
purifying himself, one should partake there of the offerings daily made
unto the Yakshini. By this, one is freed from the sin of even slaying a
Brahmana, through the Yakshini's grace. Proceeding next to _Maninaga_,
one obtains the merit of giving away a thousand kine. O Bharata, he that
eateth anything relating to the _tirtha_ of _Maninaga_, if bitten by a
venomous snake, doth not succumb to its poison. Residing there for one
night, one is cleansed of one's sins. Then should one proceed to the
favourite wood of the Brahmarshi Gautama. There bathing in the lake of
_Ahalya_, one attaineth to an exalted state. Beholding next the image of
Sree, one acquireth great prosperity. There in that _tirtha_ is a well
celebrated over the three worlds. Bathing in it, one obtaineth the merit
of the horse-sacrifice. There also existeth a well sacred to the royal
Rishi Janaka, which is worshipped by the gods. Bathing in the well, one
ascendeth to the region of Vishnu. Then should one repair to Vinasana
that destroys every sin. By a sojourn thither, one obtaineth the merit
of the _Vajapeya_ sacrifice, and goeth also to the region of Soma.
Proceeding next to _Gandaki_ which is produced by the waters of every
_tirtha_, a person acquireth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice, and
ascendeth also to the solar region. Proceeding next to the _Visala_,
that river celebrated over the three worlds, one obtaineth the merit of
the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice and ascendeth also to heaven. Repairing then,
O virtuous one, to the woody seat of ascetics that is called
_Adhivanga_, one obtains, without doubt, great happiness amongst the
Guhyakas. Proceeding next to the river _Kampana_, visited by the
Siddhas, one obtaineth the merit of the _Pundarika_ sacrifice, and
ascendeth also to heaven. Arriving then, O lord of earth, at the stream
called _Maheswari_, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and
also rescueth his own race. Repairing next to the tank of the
celestials, one earneth immunity from misfortune, and also the merit of
the horse-sacrifice. One should next go to _Somapada_, with subdued soul
and leading a Brahmacharya mode of life. Bathing in _Maheswarapada_ that
is there, one reapeth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. There in that
_tirtha_, O bull of the Bharata race, it is well known that ten millions
of _tirthas_ exist together. A wicked Asura in the shape of a tortoise
had, O foremost of monarchs, been carrying it away when the powerful
Vishnu recovered it from him. There in that _tirtha_ should one perform
his ablutions, for by this he acquireth the merit of the _Pundarika_
sacrifice and ascendeth also to the region of Vishnu. Then, O best of
kings, should one proceed to the place of Narayana, where, O Bharata,
Narayana is ever present and dwelleth for aye. There the gods with
Brahma at their head, Rishis endued with wealth of asceticism, the
Adityas, the Vasus, and the Rudras, all adore Janardana, in that
_tirtha_, and Vishnu of wonderful deeds hath become known as
_Salagrama_. Approaching the eternal Vishnu, that lord of the three
worlds, that giver of boons, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice, and goeth to the region of Vishnu. There in that place,
O virtuous one, is a well, capable of destroying every sin. The four
seas are ever present in that well. He that bathes in it, O king, will
have immunity from misfortune. Beholding (the image of) the boon-giving,
eternal, and fierce Mahadeva who is there, one shineth, O king, like the
moon emerged from the cloud. Bathing then in _Jatismara_, with pure mind
and subdued senses, one acquireth, without doubt, the recollections of
his former life. Proceeding then to _Maheswarapura_, and worshipping the
god having the bull for his mark, fasting the while, one obtaineth,
without doubt, the fruition of all his desires. Repairing then to
_Vamana_ that destroys every sin, and beholding the god Hari, one
acquireth exemption from every misfortune. One should next go to the
asylum of _Kusika_ that is capable of removing every sin. Repairing then
to the river _Kausika_ that cleanseth from even great sins, one should
bathe in it. By this one obtaineth the merit of Rajasuya sacrifice. One
should next, O foremost of kings, proceed to the excellent woods of
_Champaka_. By spending there one night, one acquireth the merit of
giving away a thousand kine. Arriving next at _Jyeshthila_, that
_tirtha_ of rare worth, and passing one night there, one reapeth the
fruit of the gift of a thousand kine. Beholding there (the image of)
Visweswara of great splendour, with his consort the goddess, a person
obtaineth, O bull among men, the region of Mitra-Varuna. By fasting
there for three nights, a man acquireth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_
