so satisfied that their lives were wholly controlled by the consciousness
of a risen Jesus. Sacrifice, suffering, torture, and violent death were
yielded to gladly for His sake.

A new morning broke that morning, the morning of a new day, a new sort of
day. That resurrection day became a new day to them and to all Jesus'
followers. The old Sabbath day was a _rest_-day. God Sabbathed from His
work of creation. This new day is more, it is a _victory_-day. Every new
coming of it spells out Jesus' victory over sin and death and our victory
in Him. The old Hebrew rest-day came at the week's close. The new
victory-day comes at the week's beginning. With the fine tingle of
victory in our spirits we are ever at the beginning of a new life and new
victory and great things to come.

Did Jesus rise? Or, was He raised? Both are said of Him. Both are true. He
was raised by the power of the Father. Every bit of His human life was
under the direction and control of His Father. Every act of His from first
to last was in the strength of the Father. This last act was so. The
Father's vindication of His Son was seen in the power that raised Him up
from out of the domain of death. He was raised.

_Jesus rose_ from the dead. The action was in accord with the law of His
life. He rose at will by the moral gravity of His character. He had gone
down, now He lets Himself rebound up. The language used of His death is
very striking. No one of the four descriptions of the death upon the cross
says that He _died_. The words commonly used to describe the death of
others are not used of Jesus. Very different language is used. Matthew
says, "He dismissed His spirit." Mark and Luke each say, "He breathed out"
His life. John says, "He delivered up His spirit."

His dying was voluntary. Not only the time of it and the manner of it, but
the fact of it was of His own choosing. The record never suggests that
death overcame Him. He yielded to it of His own strong accord. He was not
overcome by death. He could not be, for sin having no hold within His
being, death could have none. Physical death is one of the logical results
of the sin within. Jesus yielded up His spirit. It was a free, voluntary
act. He had explained months before that so it would be. "I lay down My
life that I may take it again. No man taketh it from Me, but I lay it down
of Myself. I have the power to lay it down, and I have the power to take
it again. This commandment I received from My Father." This being so, the
return to life followed the same voluntary course. Having accomplished the
purpose in dying, He now recalled His spirit into the body and rises by
His own choice.

Man's true gravity is toward a center upward. Sin's gravity is toward a
center downward. When an ordinary man, a sinful man, dies, he is overcome
by the logical result of the sin in himself. He is overcome by the moral
gravity downward of His sin. He has no choice. His own moral gravity apart
from sin is upward. But that is overbalanced by the downward pull of the
sin ingrained in his very being. And this quite apart from his attitude
toward the sin.

In Jesus there was no sin. Being free of it, He rose at will. "It was not
possible that He should be held by death," for it had no hold upon Him.
His gravity was upward. For a purpose, a great strong purpose, He yielded
to death's embrace. Now that purpose being achieved, He quietly lets
Himself up toward the natural center of gravity of His life.



<u>The Life Side of Death.</u>


Clearly Jesus' body had undergone changes through death and resurrection.
It is the same to outer appearance, so far as _personal identity_ is
concerned. The doubting, questioning disciples handle His person, they
know His face, they recognize His voice. He eats with them and talks with
them and moves in their midst as before. Even the doubter, stubborn in his
demand for tangible, physical evidence, is convinced by the feel of his
hands that this is indeed Jesus back again. Further, He moves about among
them unrecognized till He chooses to be known. Yet this may have been His
power over them rather than any changed quality in His person.

But mark that the limitations of space and of material obstructions are
gone after the resurrection. He no longer needs to get that body through
space by physical strength or management, but seems to go where He will by
choosing to be there. He is no longer affected in His movements by the
walls of a building or other such material obstruction, but comes and goes
at will. The arrangement of the linen cloths in the tomb, as marked so
keenly by Peter and John, is significant. They are found lying as they
were when enfolding that body, as though He had in rising risen up through
them.

Clearly the body is the same so far as personal identity is concerned. But
the limitations are gone. The control of spirit over body seems full,
without any limitations. As one of us can, _in spirit,_ be in a place far
removed as quick as thought, so He seems to have been able to be
_actually_, bodily, where He wanted to be as quickly. All the old powers
remain. All the old limitations are gone, never to return. Jesus had moved
over to the life side of death. He had gone down into death's domain,
given it a death blow, and then risen up into a new Eden life, where
neither sin nor death had power to touch. Those forty days were sample
days of the new Eden life on earth.

Jesus has become the leader of a new sort of life lived on the earth,
mingling in its activities, but free of its power, _controlled from
above_. He asks every one who will to come along after Him. We can, for He
has. It is possible, because of Him. We may, for He asks us to. It is our
privilege. Let us go.




The Ascension: Back Home Again Until----



<u>Tarry Ye--Go Ye.</u>


One day the disciples and followers of Jesus had met in Jerusalem, when
Jesus Himself came again in their midst and talked with them quite a bit.
He said particularly that they were not to leave Jerusalem, but wait
there. In a few days the Holy Spirit would come upon them, and they were
to wait until He came. Then He asked them to go with Him for a walk. And
they walk together along those old Jerusalem streets, out the gate and off
past Gethsemane toward the top of Olives over against Bethany. On the way
they ask Him if it was His plan to set up the kingdom then. He turns their
thought away from Palestine toward the world, away from times and seasons
toward telling a race about Himself.

And now they are standing together on the Mount of Olives. There is Peter,
the new man of rock, and John and James, the sons of thunder, and little
Scotch Andrew, and the man in whom is no guile, and the others. But one's
eyes quickly go by these to the Man in the center of the group. These men
stand gazing on that face, listening for His words. There is a
consciousness that the goodbye word is about to be spoken. Yonder they can
see the bit of a depression and the tops of some old trees. That is
Gethsemane. And over beyond that is the city wall and the little knoll
near by outside. That is Calvary. With memories such as these suggest they
listen with eyes as well as ears. "Ye shall receive power," the Master is
saying, "and ye shall be _My witnesses_ here in Jerusalem and in all
Judea, your brothers, and in Samaria, the nearby people you don't like,
and unto the uttermost part of the earth, everybody else." They are held
by the words and by that face. Then He lifts up His hands in blessing upon
them. And as they gaze they notice He is rising, His feet are off the
earth, then higher and higher. Then a shining glory cloud sweeps down out
of the blue, and now they see Him no more.



<u>Coming Again.</u>


They continue gazing, held spellbound by the sight, thinking maybe they
may get another look. Then two men in white apparel are in their midst and
speak to them: "Men of Galilee, why do you stand gazing up into the
heavens? This Jesus who was received up into heaven shall so come in like
manner as ye beheld Him going into heaven." That word at once sends them
back to the waiting-place of which the Master had spoken. From that time
they never lost the upward glance, but they were ever absorbed in obeying
the Master's command.

Jesus' ascension was a continuation of the resurrection movement. The
resurrection was the beginning of the ascension. Having finished the task
involved in dying, Jesus responded to the natural upward movement of His
life. On His way up from the tomb to His Father's home and throne, He
tarried awhile on the earth for the sake of these disciples and leaders,
then yielded again to the upward movement. The two men in white apparel
give the key to the ascension. Jesus will remain above until the next
great step in the kingdom plan. Then He will return to carry out in full
the Father's great love-plan for man and for the earth.

His last act with these men was conducting them to the Mount of Olives.
That is ever to be the point of outlook for His follower. Yonder in full
view is Gethsemane and Calvary. Following the line of His eyes and
pointing finger, as the last word is spoken, leads us ever to the man
nearest by, to the uttermost parts of the earth, and to all between.
Following His disappearing figure keeps us ever looking upward to Himself
and forward to His return.




Study Notes



Analysis and References


The spirit-key to an understanding of God's Word is surrender of will and
life to His mastery. "He that is willing to do His will will know of the
teaching." The mental-key to a grasp of the contents of that Book is
_habitual broad reading_. It cannot be too insistently insisted upon that
wide reading from end to end of the Book, and from end to end of the year,
is _the_ simple essential to a clear understanding and a firm grasp of the
Bible. It is the only possible salvation from the piece-meal, microscopic
study of sentences and verses that has been in common use _clear out of
all proportion_. Such disproportionate study steals away very largely the
historical setting, and the simple meaning in the mind of speaker and
writer. Wide reading habitually indulged in should come first, and out of
that will naturally grow the closer study. This is the true order. In
giving references it is needful to mark particular verses. Yet this is to
be regretted because of our inveterate habit of reading only the marked
verses instead of getting the sweep of their connection. The connection is
a very large part of the interpretation of any passage. The references
here are meant to be indices to the whole passage in connection. They are
not meant to be full, but simply to start one going. They should be
supplemented by others suggested by one's own reading, by marginal
references (those of the American Revision are specially well selected),
and by concordance and topical text-book. What a student digs out for
himself is in a peculiar sense his own. It is woven into his fibre. It
helps make him the man he comes to be. Those who may want a course to
follow rigidly without independent study will find these notes
disappointing. For those who want a daily scheme of study the allotment
for the day can be by certain designated pages of reading with the
corresponding paragraphs in the Study Notes. The paragraphing will be
found to be in some measure, though not wholly, a sub-analysis. The
American Revision is used here.




I. The Purpose of Jesus.



1. The Purpose in the Coming of Jesus.


_God Spelling Himself out in Jesus_: change in the original
language--bother in spelling Jesus out--sticklers for the old
forms--Jesus' new spelling of old words.

_Jesus is God following us up_: God heart-broken--man's native air--bad
choice affected man's will--the wrong lane--God following us up.

_The Early Eden Picture_, Genesis 1:26-31. 2:7-25: unfallen
man--like God--the breath of God in man--a spirit, infinite,
eternal--love--holy--wise--sovereign over creation, Psalm 8:5-8--in his
own will--summary--God's thought for man.

_Man's Bad Break_, Genesis 3. the climax of opportunity--the tree of
choice--the temptation--blended lies--the tempter's strategy--the choice
made--the immediate result--safety in shame--the danger of staying in
Eden--guarding man's home--the return, Rev. 2:7. 22:14, 2. John 10:10.

_Outside the Eden Gate_: a costly meal--result in the man himself--ears
and eyes affected--looking without seeing--a personal test--Isaiah's
famous passage, Isaiah 6:9-10, see Isaiah 42:18, 20, 23. 43:8. 29:10.
Jeremiah 5:21. 6:10. 7:26. Ezekiel 12:2. Psalm 69:23. Micah 3:6. Acts
7:51.--Jesus' use of parables--Jesus' irony--Matthew 13:10-15. Mark
4:10-12. Luke 8:9-10. See John 12:40. Acts 28:26, 27. Romans 11:8. John
9:39-41--tongue affected--the tongue man's index--effect of seeing
God--whole mental process affected--sense of dread--- Paul's seven steps
down in mental process, Ephesians 4:17-19--Jesus the music of God, the
face of God.

_Sin's Brood_: result in the growth of sin--three stages, flood, Moses,
Paul--Paul's Summary, Romans I:18-32, see Matthew 15:19. Galatians
5:19-21. 2 Timothy 3:2-5.--Paul's Outlook--a summary of to-day--the
conventional cloak--four great paragraphs--man still a king, Genesis 9:6.
1 Corinthians 11:7. James 3:9.--a composite picture--analysis of sin--the
root of sin.

_God's Treatment of Sin_: "gave them up," Romans 1:24, 26, 28. see Job
8:4. 1 Kings 14:16. Psalms 81:12. Acts 7:42, Romans 9:22 (endured).--the
worst thing and the best--sin's gait--Jesus is God letting sin do its
worst upon Himself.

_A Bright Gleam of Light_: the non-Christian world--God has no
favorites--all know God directly, Romans 1:20, 32. John 1:9--believing on
Jesus--the outside majority--Peter's statement, Acts 10:34, 35.--Paul's
statement, Romans 2:7.--persistent climbers--trusting the unknown
Jesus--the Master's command--to help our brothers--Jesus is God
sacrificing His best.

_The Broken Tryst_, Genesis 3:8-9: God keeping tryst--man not there--God's
search--a lonely God--still calling--Jesus is God calling man back to the
broken tryst.

_God's Wooing_: direct revelation to all--the inner light, John 1:9. Acts
17:26-28. Job 12:10. Psalms 139:1-16.--through nature, Psalms 19:1-6.--in
the daily weave of life, Acts 17:28.--"The Lord's at the loom"--a special
revelation, Romans 3:2. Deuteronomy 4:8.--in Jesus, Heb. 1:1-3.--the
Book--the mission of the Book, John 20:31.--summary--chiefly Jesus.



2. The Plan for the Coming of Jesus.


_God's Darling_, Psalms 8:5-8.--the plan for the new man--the Hebrew
picture by itself--difference between God's plan and actual events--one
purpose through breaking plans--the original plan--a starting
point--getting inside.

_Fastening a Tether inside_: the longest way around--the pedigree--the
start.

_First Touches on the Canvas_: the first touch, Genesis 3:15.--three
groups of prediction--first group: to Abraham, Genesis 12:1-3; to Isaac,
Genesis 26:1-5; to Jacob, Genesis 28:10-15; through Jacob, Genesis
49:9-11. through Balaam, Numbers 24:17-19; through Moses, Deuteronomy
18:15-19, see Matthew 21:11. John 1:21. 6:14. Acts 3:22. 7:37.--second
group: David, 2 Samuel 7:16, 18, 19. 23:3-5. Psalms 2nd, 110th. Solomon in
72nd Psalm. Forty-fifth Psalm.

_A Full Length Picture in Colors_: third group in prophetic books--one
continuous subject--"day of the Lord," 134 times,--Somebody coming--His
Person; _divine_, Isaiah 7:14. 9:6. 33:22. Micah 4:7. 5:2. Haggai 2:9.
_human_, Isaiah 32:2. Daniel 7:13. _manner of birth_, Isaiah 7:14. _of
native stock_, Isaiah 9:6. Ezekiel 29:21. _of David's line,_ _ Isaiah 9:7.
11:1. 16:5. Jeremiah 23:5. 33:15, 17, 21, 26. Amos 9:11. Zechariah 3:8.
6:12. _a branch of Jehovah, _ Isaiah 4:2. _a King_, Isaiah 9:6. 32:1.
33:17. Jeremiah 23:5. Zechariah 6:13. 9:9. _called David_, Jeremiah 30:9.
Ezekiel 37:24, 25. Hosea 3:5. _a priest-king,_ Zechariah 6:13. _a
preacher_, Isaiah 61:1-3. _a teacher_, Isaiah 9:6 (counsellor).--the
kingdom, Daniel 2:34,44. Obadiah:21 (Jehovah's).--the capital, Isaiah 2:3.
4:5. 33:20,21. 59:20. 65:18, 19. Joel 3:16, 17, 20, 21. Micah 4:7, 8.--the
presence of God, Ezekiel 37:27. Joel 3:21. Zechariah 2:10, 11. Zephaniah
3:17.--visibly present, Isaiah 4:5, 6.--characteristics, vengeance, Isaiah
61:2. 63:1-6. Zephaniah 3:19.--great victory, Zechariah 9:9.--- but
without force, Isaiah 11:4. Zechariah 9:10.--peace, Isaiah 2:4. 9:6,
7.--established in loving kindness, Isaiah 16:5.--justice and right,
Isaiah 9:7. 16:5. 32:1. Jeremiah 23:5. 33:15.--the poor and meek, Isaiah
11:4, 5.--broken-hearted, poor and imprisoned, Isaiah 61:1-3.--protection
from all ills, Isaiah 32:2.--impartiality in judging even the most weak
and obnoxious, Isaiah 42:3, 4.--gradual increase, Isaiah 9:7. 42:4. a
great crisis, Zephaniah 4:1. Habakkuk 3:1-15. with unexpected suddenness,
Malachi 3:1--effect upon Israel _nationally_; Spirit-baptized, Isaiah
44:2. Ezekiel 37:9-14. 39:29.--never withdrawn, Isaiah 59:21.--judgments
removed, Zephaniah 3:14, 15.--impurity cleansed, Isaiah 4:4. Malachi 3:2,
3.--possession of land, Zephaniah 2:7.--capital holy, Joel 3:17.--weakness
gone, Micah 4:6, 7. freedom from enemies, Isaiah 33:18, 19.--Jeremiah
30:8-10. Joel 3:17. Zechariah 14:11. Micah 5:6.--at peace, Isaiah 33:20.
Micah 5:5.--leadership, Isaiah 2:2. Micah 4:1, 3. 5:8.--spiritual
leadership, Joel 2:28, 29.--supremacy, etc., Isaiah 60:1-22. 11:10. 2:2.
Micah 4:1, 3. 5:8. Zechariah 2:10.--Jerusalem center, Isaiah 60:10-14.
Zechariah 14:16. effect upon Israel _personally_; made over new, Ezekiel
11:17-20. 36:25-27. Jeremiah 31:31-34. Isaiah 4:3.--devotion and
open-mindedness, Isaiah 32:3-4. 44:5.--sickness absent, Isaiah
33:24.--longer lives, Isaiah 65:20.--increase in numbers, Jeremiah 33:22.
Ezekiel 37:26. Isaiah 44:4.--no disappointed plans, Isaiah 65:21-23. Amos
9:14.--fear gone, Micah 4:4.--thrilled hearts, Isaiah 60:5. effect upon
_other nations_; to come back to God, Micah 5:3 (see John 10:16).--Spirit
upon all, Joel 2:28.--voluntary coming to Israel for instruction, Isaiah
2:3. Micah 4:2.--earth filled with knowledge, Isaiah 11:9.--her influence
as the dew, Micah 5:7.--the only medium, Isaiah 60:12. wondrous blessings
shared with all, Isaiah 42:1, 6, 7. 49:6. 51:4. 61:1.--universal peace,
Micah 4:3-4. Zechariah 9:10. changes in nature; at Jerusalem, Isaiah
33:21. Joel 3:18 l.c. Zechariah 14:8. Ezekiel 47:1-5. Zechariah
14:4.--increased light, Isaiah 30:26.--overshadowed by presence of God,
Isaiah 60:19 (Presence cloud, Exodus; as sun, Matthew 17:2 with parallels;
above sun Acts 26:13).--renewed fertility, Ezekiel 36:29, 30. Hosea 2:21.
Joel 3:18. Amos 9:13. Zechariah 14:10. Isaiah 4:2.--removal of curse upon
earth, Zechariah 14:11. Isaiah 65:17.--the animal creation, Isaiah 11:6-9.
65:25. Hosea 2:18 (see Romans 8:20-22).--without limit, Isaiah 2:2. 9:7.
Daniel 2:44. 7:14. Micah 4:1. 5:4. Zephaniah 3:20. Zechariah 9:10. Joel
3:20.--a return to original conditions--characteristics of the coming
One--mental equipment, Isaiah 11:2. 42:1. 61:1.--personal beauty and
dignity, Isaiah 4:2. 33:17. Daniel 7:14. Micah 5:14.--unpretentious,
Zechariah 9:9.--direct touch with God, Isaiah 49:1-3. 50:4.--backed by
power of God, etc., Isaiah 42:1, 6. 49:3. 52:13. 53:11. 59:20. Zechariah
3:8. Malachi 3:1.--the poor cared for righteously, Isaiah 11:3-5.--divine
insight, Isaiah 11:3.

_Back to Eden_: a wild dream--the Hebrew Book's conception--Simeon and
Anna, Luke 2:25-38.

_Strange Dark Shadowings_: weird forebodings--acted out, Joseph and
David--Psalms 22. 69:20, 21. Isaiah 50:6, 7. 52:13-53:12. Daniel 9:24-26.
Zechariah 11:4-14. 12:10. 13:7. a valley-road to the throne.



3. The Tragic Break in the Plan.


