for the purpose of retaining their legends, poems, and incantations.  It
is unnecessary to say that the picture-writing of Mexico and the
hieroglyphics of ancient Egypt are derived from the same savage
processes.  I must observe that the hasty indications of the figure used
in picture-writing are by no means to be regarded as measures of the Red
Men's skill in art.  They can draw much better than the artist who
recorded the Manabozhian legend, when they please.

In addition to picture-writing, Religion has fostered savage
representative art.  If a man worships a lizard or a bear, he finds it
convenient to have an amulet or idol representing a bear or a lizard.  If
one adores a lizard or a bear, one is likely to think that prayer and
acts of worship addressed to an image of the animal will please the
animal himself, and make him propitious.  Thus the art of making little
portable figures of various worshipful beings is fostered, and the craft
of working in wood or ivory is born.  As a rule, the savage is satisfied
with excessively rude representations of his gods.  Objects of this
kind--rude hewn blocks of stone and wood--were the most sacred effigies
of the gods in Greece, and were kept in the dimmest recesses of the
temple.  No Demeter wrought by the craft of Phidias would have appeared
so holy to the Phigalians as the strange old figure of the goddess with
the head of a mare.  The earliest Greek sacred sculptures that remain are
scarcely, if at all, more advanced in art than the idols of the naked
Admiralty Islanders.  But this is anticipating; in the meantime it may be
said that among the sources of savage representative art are the need of
something like writing, and ideas suggested by nascent religion.

[Fig. 9.  Bushman Wall-Painting: 295.jpg]

The singular wall-picture (Fig. 9) from a cave in South Africa, which we
copy from the 'Cape Monthly Magazine,' probably represents a magical
ceremony.  Bushmen are tempting a great water animal--a rhinoceros, or
something of that sort--to run across the land, for the purpose of
producing rain.  The connection of ideas is scarcely apparent to
civilised minds, but it is not more indistinct than the connection
between carrying a bit of the rope with which a man has been hanged and
success at cards--a common French superstition.  The Bushman
cave-pictures, like those of Australia, are painted in black, red, and
white.  Savages, like the Assyrians and the early Greeks, and like
children, draw animals much better than the human figure.  The Bushman
dog in our little engraving (Fig. 7) is all alive--almost as full of life
as the dog which accompanies the centaur Chiron, in that beautiful vase
in the British Museum which represents the fostering of Achilles.  The
Bushman wall-paintings, like those of Australia, seem to prove that
savage art is capable of considerable freedom, when supplied with fitting
materials.  Men seem to draw better when they have pigments and a flat
surface of rock to work upon, than when they are scratching on hard wood
with a sharp edge of a broken shell.  Though the thing has little to do
with art, it may be worth mentioning, as a matter of curiosity, that the
labyrinthine Australian caves are decorated, here and there, with the
mark of a red hand.  The same mysterious, or at least unexplained, red
hand is impressed on the walls of the ruined palaces and temples of
Yucatan--the work of a vanished people.

[Fig. 10.  Palaelithic art: 297.jpg]

There is one singular fact in the history of savage art which reminds us
that savages, like civilised men, have various degrees of culture and
various artistic capacities.  The oldest inhabitants of Europe who have
left any traces of their lives and handiwork must have been savages.
Their tools and weapons were not even formed of polished stone, but of
rough-hewn flint.  The people who used tools of this sort must
necessarily have enjoyed but a scanty mechanical equipment, and the life
they lived in caves from which they had to drive the cave-bear, and among
snows where they stalked the reindeer and the mammoth, must have been
very rough.  These earliest known Europeans, 'palaeolithic men,' as they
called, from their use of the ancient unpolished stone weapons, appear to
have inhabited the countries now known as France and England, before the
great Age of Ice.  This makes their date one of incalculable antiquity;
they are removed from us by a 'dark backward and abysm of time.'  The
whole Age of Ice, the dateless period of the polishers of stone weapons,
the arrival of men using weapons of bronze, the time which sufficed to
change the climate and fauna and flora of Western Europe, lie between us
and palaeolithic man.  Yet in him we must recognise a skill more akin to
the spirit of modern art than is found in any other savage race.
Palaeolithic man, like other savages, decorated his weapons; but, as I
have already said, he did not usually decorate them in the common savage
manner with ornamental patterns.  He scratched on bits of bone spirited
representations of all the animals whose remains are found mixed with his
own.  He designed the large-headed horse of that period, and science
inclines to believe that he drew the breed correctly.  His sketches of
the mammoth, the reindeer, the bear, and of many fishes, may be seen in
the British Museum, or engraved in such works as Professor Boyd Dawkins's
'Early Man in Britain.'  The object from which our next illustration
(Fig. 12) was engraved represents a deer, and was a knife-handle.  Eyes
at all trained in art can readily observe the wonderful spirit and
freedom of these ancient sketches.  They are the rapid characteristic
work of true artists who know instinctively what to select and what to
sacrifice.

[Fig 12.  Palaeolithic art - a knife-handle: 299.jpg]

Some learned men, Mr. Boyd Dawkins among them, believe that the Eskimo,
that stunted hunting and fishing race of the Western Arctic circle, are
descendants of the palaeolithic sketchers, and retain their artistic
qualities.  Other inquirers, with Mr. Geikie and Dr. Wilson, do not
believe in this pedigree of the Eskimo.  I speak not with authority, but
the submission of ignorance, and as one who has no right to an opinion
about these deep matters of geology and ethnology.  But to me, Mr.
Geikie's arguments appear distinctly the more convincing, and I cannot
think it demonstrated that the Eskimo are descended from our old
palaeolithic artists.  But if Mr. Boyd Dawkins is right, if the Eskimo
derive their lineage from the artists of the Dordogne, then the Eskimo
are sadly degenerated.  In Mr. Dawkins's 'Early Man' is an Eskimo drawing
of a reindeer hunt, and a palaeolithic sketch of a reindeer; these (by
permission of the author and Messrs. Macmillan) we reproduce.  Look at
the vigour and life of the ancient drawing--the feathering hair on the
deer's breast, his head, his horns, the very grasses at his feet, are
touched with the graver of a true artist (Fig. 14).  The design is like a
hasty memorandum of Leech's.  Then compare the stiff formality of the
modern Eskimo drawing (Fig. 13).  It is rather like a record, a piece of
picture-writing, than a free sketch, a rapid representation of what is
most characteristic in nature.  Clearly, if the Eskimo come from
palaeolithic man, they are a degenerate race as far as art is concerned.
Yet, as may be seen in Dr. Rink's books, the Eskimo show considerable
skill when they have become acquainted with European methods and models,
and they have at any rate a greater natural gift for design than the Red
Indians, of whose sacred art the Thunderbird brooding over page 298 is a
fair example.  The Red Men believe in big birds which produce thunder.
Quahteaht, the Adam of Vancouver's Island, married one, and this (Fig.
11) is she.

[Fig. 11.  Red Indian art - the Thunderbird: 298.jpg]

[Fig. 13.  Eskimo Drawing - A Reindeer hunt: 300.jpg]

[Fig. 14.  Palaeolithic sketch - a reindeer: 301.jpg]

We have tried to show how savage decorative art supplied the first ideas
of patterns which were developed in various ways by the decorative art of
advancing civilisation.  The same progress might be detected in
representative art.  Books, like the guide-book to ancient Greece which
Pausanias wrote before the glory had quite departed, prove that the Greek
temples were museums in which the development of art might be clearly
traced.  Furthest back in the series of images of gods came things like
that large stone which was given to Cronus when he wished to swallow his
infant child Zeus, and which he afterwards vomited up with his living
progeny.  This fetich-stone was preserved at Delphi.  Next came wild
bulks of beast-headed gods, like the horse-headed Demeter of Phigalia,
and it seems possible enough that there was an Artemis with the head of a
she-bear.  Gradually the bestial characteristics dropped, and there
appeared such rude anthropomorphic images of Apollo--more like South Sea
idols than the archer prince--as are now preserved in Athens.  Next we
have the stage of semi-savage realism, which is represented by the
metopes of Selinus in Sicily, now in the British Museum, and by not a few
gems and pieces of gold work.  Greek temples have fallen, and the statues
of the gods exist only in scattered fragments.  But in the representative
collection of casts belonging to the Cambridge Archaeological Museum, one
may trace the career of Greek art backwards from Phidias to the rude
idol.

'Savage realism' is the result of a desire to represent an object as it
is known to be, and not as it appears.  Thus Catlin, among the Red
Indians, found that the people refused to be drawn in profile.  They knew
they had two eyes, and in profile they seemed only to have one.  Look at
the Selinus marbles, and you will observe that figures, of which the body
is seen in profile, have the full face turned to the spectator.  Again,
the savage knows that an animal has two sides; both, he thinks, should be
represented, but he cannot foreshorten, and he finds the profile view
easiest to draw.  To satisfy his need of realism he draws a beast's head
full-face, and gives to the one head two bodies drawn in profile.
Examples of this are frequent in very archaic Greek gems and gold work,
and Mr. A. S. Murray suggests (as I understand him) that the attitude of
the two famous lions, which guarded vainly Agamemnon's gate at Mycenae,
is derived from the archaic double-bodied and single-headed beast of
savage realism.  Very good examples of these oddities may be found in the
'Journal of the Hellenic Society,' 1881, pl. xv.  Here are double-bodied
and single headed birds, monsters, and sphinxes.  We engrave (Fig. 15)
three Greek gems from the islands as examples of savagery in early Greek
art.  In the oblong gem the archers are rather below the Red Indian
standard of design.  The hunter figured in the first gem is almost up to
the Bushman mark.  In his dress ethnologists will recognise an
arrangement now common among the natives of New Caledonia.  In the third
gem the woman between two swans may be Leda, or she may represent Leto in
Delos.  Observe the amazing rudeness of the design, and note the modern
waist and crinoline.  The artists who engraved these gems on hard stone
had, of necessity, much better tools than any savages possess, but their
art was truly savage.  To discover how Greek art climbed in a couple of
centuries from this coarse and childish work to the grace of the AEgina
marbles, and thence to the absolute freedom and perfect unapproachable
beauty of the work of Phidias, is one of the most singular problems in
the history of art.  Greece learned something, no doubt, from her early
knowledge of the arts the priests of Assyria and Egypt had elaborated in
the valleys of the Euphrates and the Nile.  That might account for a
swift progress from savage to formal and hieratic art; but whence sprang
the inspiration which led her so swiftly on to art that is perfectly
free, natural, and god-like?  It is a mystery of race, and of a divine
gift.  'The heavenly gods have given it to mortals.'

[Fig. 15.  Archaic Greek Gems: 303.jpg]




Footnotes:


{3a}  Compare De Cara: Essame Critico, xx. i.

{3b}  Revue de l'Hist. des Rel. ii. 136.

{4}  Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte, p. 431.

{5}  Prim. Cult. i. 394.

{11a}  A study of the contemporary stone age in Scotland will be found in
Mitchell's Past and Present.

{11b}  About twenty years ago, the widow of an Irish farmer, in Derry,
killed her deceased husband's horse.  When remonstrated with by her
landlord, she said, 'Would you have my man go about on foot in the next
world?'  She was quite in the savage intellectual stage.

{12}  At the solemn festival suppers, ordained for the honour of the
gods, they forget not to serve up certain dishes of young whelp's flesh.
(Pliny, H. N. xxix. 4.)

{15}  Nov. 1880.

{18}  'Ah, once again may I plant the great fan on her corn-heap, while
she stands smiling by, Demeter of the threshing floor, with sheaves and
poppies in her hands' (Theocritus, vii. 155-157).

{20}  Odyssey, xi. 32.

{28}  Rev. de l'Hist. des Rel., vol. ii.

{33}  Pausanias, iii. 15.  When the boys were being cruelly scourged, the
priestess of Artemis Orthia held an ancient barbaric wooden image of the
goddess in her hands.  If the boys were spared, the image grew heavy; the
more they were tortured, the lighter grew the image.  In Samoa the image
(shark's teeth) of the god Taema is consulted before battle.  'If it felt
heavy, that was a bad omen; if light, the sign was good'--the god was
pleased (Turner's Samoa, p. 55).

[Bull-roarer: 35.jpg]

{34}  Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 268.

{35}  Fison, Journal Anthrop. Soc., Nov. 1883.

{36a}  Taylor's New Zealand, p. 181.

{36b}  This is not the view of le Pere Lafitau, a learned Jesuit
missionary in North America, who wrote (1724) a work on savage manners,
compared with the manners of heathen antiquity.  Lafitau, who was greatly
struck with the resemblances between Greek and Iroquois or Carib
initiations, takes Servius's other explanation of the mystica vannus, 'an
osier vessel containing rural offerings of first fruits.'  This exactly
answers, says Lafitau, to the Carib Matoutou, on which they offer sacred
cassava cakes.

{37}  The Century Magazine, May 1883.

{39}  [Greek].  Lobeck, Aglaophamus (i. p. 700).

{40a}  De Corona, p. 313.

{40b}  Savage Africa.  Captain Smith, the lover of Pocahontas, mentions
the custom in his work on Virginia, pp. 245-248.

{40c}  Brough Smyth, i. 60, using evidence of Howitt, Taplin, Thomas, and
Wilhelmi.

{41a}  Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 214.

{41b}  [Greek], c. 15.

{42}  Cape Monthly Magazine, July 1874.

{44}  Wallace, Travels on the Amazon, p. 349.

{46a}  New Zealand, Taylor, pp. 119-121.  Die heilige Sage der
Polynesier, Bastian, pp. 36-39.

{46b}  A crowd of similar myths, in one of which a serpent severs Heaven
and Earth, are printed in Turner's Samoa.

{48}  The translation used is Jowett's.

{49a}  Theog., 166.

{49b}  Apollodorus, i. 15.

{50a}  Primitive Culture, i. 325.

{50b}  Pauthier, Livres sacres de l'Orient, p. 19.

{50c}  Muir's Sanskrit Texts, v. 23.  Aitareya Brahmana.

{52a}  Hesiod, Theog., 497.

{52b}  Paus. x. 24.

{54a}  Bleek, Bushman Folklore, pp. 6-8.

{54b}  Theal, Kaffir Folklore, pp. 161-167.

{54c}  Brough Smith, i. 432-433.

{55a}  i. 338.

{55b}  Rel. de la Nouvelle-France (1636), p. 114.

{56}  Codrington, in Journal Anthrop. Inst. Feb. 1881.  There is a Breton
Marchen of a land where people had to 'bring the Dawn' daily with carts
and horses.  A boy, whose sole property was a cock, sold it to the people
of this country for a large sum, and now the cock brings the dawn, with a
great saving of trouble and expense.  The Marchen is a survival of the
state of mind of the Solomon Islanders.

{58a}  Selected Essays, i. 460.

{58b}  Ibid. i. 311.

{59}  Ueber Entwicklungsstufen der Mythenbildung (1874), p. 148.

{60a}  ii. 127.

{60b}  G. D. M., ii. 127, 129.

{61a}  Gr. My., i. 144.

{61b}  De Abst., ii. 202, 197.

{61c}  Rel. und Myth., ii. 3.

{61d}  Ursprung der Myth., pp. 133, 135, 139, 149.

{62a}  Contemporary Review, Sept. 1883.

{62b}  Rev. de l'Hist. rel. i. 179.

{65}  That Pururavas is regarded as a mortal man, in relations with some
sort of spiritual mistress, appears from the poem itself (v. 8, 9, 18).
The human character of Pururavas also appears in R. V. i. 31, 4.

{66a}  Selected Essays, i. 408.

{66b}  The Apsaras is an ideally beautiful fairy woman, something
'between the high gods and the lower grotesque beings,' with 'lotus eyes'
and other agreeable characteristics.  A list of Apsaras known by name is
given in Meyer's Gandharven-Kentauren, p. 28.  They are often regarded as
cloud-maidens by mythologists.

{68}  Selected Essays, i. p. 405.

{69a}  Cf. ruber, rufus, O. H. G. rot, rudhira, [Greek]; also Sanskrit,
ravi, sun.

{69b}  Myth. Ar. Nat., ii. 81.

{69c}  R. V. iii. 29, 3.

{69d}  The passage alluded to in Homer does not mean that dawn 'ends' the
day, but 'when the fair-tressed Dawn brought the full light of the third
day' (Od., v. 390).

{70a}  Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, 241) is reminded by Pururavas (in
Roth's sense of der Bruller) of loud-thundering Zeus, [Greek].

{70b}  Herabkunft des Fetters, p. 86-89.

{71}  Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, p. 241) notices the reference to the
'custom of women.'  But he thinks the clause a mere makeshift, introduced
late to account for a prohibition of which the real meaning had been
forgotten.  The improbability of this view is indicated by the frequency
of similar prohibitions in actual custom.

{72}  Astley, Collection of Voyages, ii. 24.  This is given by Bluet and
Moore on the evidence of one Job Ben Solomon, a native of Bunda in Futa.
'Though Job had a daughter by his last wife, yet he never saw her without
her veil, as having been married to her only two years.'  Excellently as
this prohibition suits my theory, yet I confess I do not like Job's
security.

{73a}  Brough Smyth, i. 423.

{73b}  Bowen, Central Africa, p. 303.

{73c}  Lafitau, i. 576.

{73d}  Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation (1875), p. 75.

{74a}  Chansons Pop. Bulg., p. 172.

{74b}  Lectures on Language, Second Series, p. 41.

{75a}  J. A. Farrer, Primitive Manners, p. 202, quoting Seemann.

{75b}  Sebillot, Contes Pop. de la Haute-Bretagne, p. 183.

{76a}  Gervase of Tilbury.

{76b}  Kuhn, Herabkunft, p. 92.

{77}  Chips, ii. 251.

{80a}  Kitchi Gami, p. 105.

{80b}  The sun-frog occurs seven times in Sir G. W: Cox's Mythology of
the Aryan Peoples, and is used as an example to prove that animals in
myth are usually the sun, like Bheki, 'the sun-frog.'

{81a}  Dalton's Ethnol. of Bengal, pp. 165, 166.
