
[839] Curtin, _Tales of the Fairies_, 72; _Folk-Lore_, vii. 178-179.

[840] Mitchell, _Past in the Present_, 275.

[841] Mitchell, _op. cit._ 271 f.

[842] Cook, _Folk-Lore_, xvii. 332.

[843] Mitchell, _loc. cit._ 147. The corruption of "Maelrubha" to
"Maree" may have been aided by confusing the name with _mo_ or _mhor
righ_.

[844] Mitchell, _loc. cit._; Moore, 92, 145; Rh[^y]s, _CFL_ i. 305;
Worth, _Hist. of Devonshire_, 339; Dalyell, _passim_.

[845] Livy, xxiii. 24.

[846] Sebillot, ii. 166-167; _L'Anthrop._ xv. 729.

[847] Carmichael, _Carm. Gad._ i. 163.

[848] Martin, 28. A scribe called "Sonid," which might be the equivalent
of "Shony," is mentioned in the Stowe missal (_Folk-Lore_, 1895).

[849] Campbell, _Superstitions_, 184 f; _Waifs and Strays of Celtic
Trad._ ii. 455.

[850] Aelian, xvii. 19.

[851] Tacitus, _Ann._ xiv. 30; Dio Cass. lxii. 6.

[852] Appian, _Celtica_, 8; Livy, xxi. 28, xxxviii. 17, x. 26.

[853] Livy, v. 38, vii. 23; Polybius, ii. 29. Cf. Watteville, _Le cri de
guerre chez les differents peuples_, Paris, 1889.

[854] Livy, v. 38.

[855] Appian, vi. 53; Muret et Chabouillet, _Catalogue des monnaies
gauloises_, 6033 f., 6941 f.

[856] Diod. v. 31; Justin, xxvi. 2, 4; Cicero, _de Div._ ii. 36, 76;
Tac. _Ann._ xiv. 30; Strabo, iii. 3. 6.

[857] Dio Cass. lxii. 6.

[858] Reinach, _Catal. Sommaire_, 31; Pseudo-Plutarch, _de Fluviis_, vi.
4; _Mirab. Auscult._ 86.

[859] Strabo, iv. 4. 6.

[860] Justin, xxiv, 4; Cicero, _de Div._ i. 15. 26. (Cf. the two magic
crows which announced the coming of Cuchulainn to the other world
(D'Arbois, v. 203); Irish _Nennius_, 145; O'Curry, _MC_ ii. 224; cf. for
a Welsh instance, Skene, i. 433.)

[861] Joyce, _SH_ i. 229; O'Curry, _MC_ ii. 224, _MS Mat._ 284.

[862] _IT_ i. 129; Livy, v. 34; Loth, _RC_ xvi. 314. The Irish for
consulting a lot is _crann-chur_, "the act of casting wood."

[863] Caesar, vi. 14.

[864] O'Curry, _MC_ ii. 46, 224; Stokes, _Three Irish Homilies_, 103.

[865] Cormac, 94. Fionn's divination by chewing his thumb is called
_Imbas Forosnai_ (_RC_ xxv. 347).

[866] _Antient Laws of Ireland_, i. 45.

[867] Hyde, _Lit. Hist. of Ireland_, 241.

[868] Justin, xliii. 5.

[869] O'Grady, ii. 362; Giraldus, _Descr. Camb._ i. 11.

[870] Pennant, _Tour in Scotland_, i. 311; Martin, 111.

[871] Richardson, _Folly of Pilgrimages_, 70.

[872] Tertullian, _de Anima_, 57; _Coll. de Reb. Hib._ iii. 334.

[873] Campbell, _Superstitions_, 263; Curtin, _Tales_, 84.

[874] Lucan, ed. Usener, 33.

[875] See examples in O'Curry, _MS Mat._ 383 f.

[876] Miss Hull, 19, 20, 23.

[877] _LU_ 55.

[878] _RC_ xii. 98, xxi. 156, xxii. 61.

[879] _RC_ xv. 432; _Annals of the Four Masters_, A.M. 2530; Campbell,
_WHT_ iv. 298.

[880] See "Adamnan's Second Vision." _RC_ xii. 441.




CHAPTER XVII.

TABU.


The Irish _geis_, pl. _geasa_, which may be rendered by Tabu, had two
senses. It meant something which must not be done for fear of disastrous
consequences, and also an obligation to do something commanded by
another.

As a tabu the _geis_ had a large place in Irish life, and was probably
known to other branches of the Celts.[881] It followed the general
course of tabu wherever found. Sometimes it was imposed before birth, or
it was hereditary, or connected with totemism. Legends, however, often
arose giving a different explanation to _geasa_, long after the customs
in which they originated had been forgotten. It was one of Diarmaid's
_geasa_ not to hunt the boar of Ben Gulban, and this was probably
totemic in origin. But legend told how his father killed a child, the
corpse being changed into a boar by the child's father, who said its
span of life would be the same as Diarmaid's, and that he would be slain
by it. Oengus put _geasa_ on Diarmaid not to hunt it, but at Fionn's
desire he broke these, and was killed.[882] Other _geasa_--those of
Cuchulainn not to eat dog's flesh, and of Conaire never to chase
birds--also point to totemism.

In some cases _geasa_ were based on ideas of right and wrong, honour or
dishonour, or were intended to cause avoidance of unlucky days. Others
are unintelligible to us. The largest number of _geasa_ concerned kings
and chiefs, and are described, along with their corresponding
privileges, in the _Book of Rights_. Some of the _geasa_ of the king of
Connaught were not to go to an assembly of women at Leaghair, not to sit
in autumn on the sepulchral mound of the wife of Maine, not to go in a
grey-speckled garment on a grey-speckled horse to the heath of Cruachan,
and the like.[883] The meaning of these is obscure, but other examples
are more obvious and show that all alike corresponded to the tabus
applying to kings in primitive societies, who are often magicians,
priests, or even divine representatives. On them the welfare of the
tribe and the making of rain or sunshine, and the processes of growth
depend. They must therefore be careful of their actions, and hence they
are hedged about with tabus which, however unmeaning, have a direct
connection with their powers. Out of such conceptions the Irish kingly
_geasa_ arose. Their observance made the earth fruitful, produced
abundance and prosperity, and kept both the king and his land from
misfortune. In later times these were supposed to be dependent on the
"goodness" or the reverse of the king, but this was a departure from the
older idea, which is clearly stated in the _Book of Rights_.[884] The
kings were divinities on whom depended fruitfulness and plenty, and who
must therefore submit to obey their _geasa_. Some of their prerogatives
seem also to be connected with this state of things. Thus they might eat
of certain foods or go to certain places on particular days.[885] In
primitive societies kings and priests often prohibit ordinary mortals
from eating things which they desire for themselves by making them
_tabu_, and in other cases the fruits of the earth can only be eaten
after king or priest has partaken of them ceremonially. This may have
been the case in Ireland. The privilege relating to places may have
meant that these were sacred and only to be entered by the king at
certain times and in his sacred capacity.

As a reflection from this state of things, the heroes of the sagas,
Cuchulainn and Fionn, had numerous _geasa_ applicable to themselves,
some of them religious, some magical, others based on primitive ideas of
honour, others perhaps the invention of the narrators.[886]

_Geasa_, whether in the sense of tabus or of obligations, could be
imposed by any one, and must be obeyed, for disobedience produced
disastrous effects. Probably the obligation was framed as an incantation
or spell, and the power of the spell being fully believed in, obedience
would follow as a matter of course.[887] Examples of such _geasa_ are
numerous in Irish literature. Cuchulainn's father-in-law put _geasa_ on
him that he should know no rest until he found out the cause of the
exile of the sons of Doel. And Grainne put _geasa_ on Diarmaid that he
should elope with her, and this he did, though the act was repugnant to
him.

Among savages the punishment which is supposed to follow tabu-breaking
is often produced through auto-suggestion when a tabu has been
unconsciously infringed and this has afterwards been discovered. Fear
produces the result which is feared. The result is believed, however, to
be the working of divine vengeance. In the case of Irish _geasa_,
destruction and death usually followed their infringement, as in the
case of Diarmaid and Cuchulainn. But the best instance is found in the
tale of _The Destruction of Da Derga's Hostel_, in which the _sid_-folk
avenge themselves for Eochaid's action by causing the destruction of his
descendant Conaire, who is forced to break his _geasa_. These are first
minutely detailed; then it is shown how, almost in spite of himself,
Conaire was led on to break them, and how, in the sequel, his tragic
death occurred.[888] Viewed in this light as the working of divine
vengeance to a remote descendant of the offender by forcing him to break
his tabus, the story is one of the most terrible in the whole range of
Irish literature.

FOOTNOTES:

[881] The religious interdictions mentioned by Caesar (vi. 13) may be
regarded as tabus, while the spoils of war placed in a consecrated place
(vi. 18), and certain animals among the Britons (v. 12), were clearly
under tabu.

[882] Joyce, _OCR_ 332 f.

[883] _Book of Rights_, ed. O'Donovan, 5.

[884] _Book of Rights_, 7.

[885] Ibid. 3 f.

[886] _LL_ 107; O'Grady, ii. 175.

[887] In Highland tales _geasa_ is translated "spells."

[888] _RC_ xxii. 27 f. The story of _Da Choca's Hostel_ has for its
subject the destruction of Cormac through breaking his _geasa_ (_RC_
xxi. 149 f.).




CHAPTER XVIII.

FESTIVALS.


The Celtic year was not at first regulated by the solstices and
equinoxes, but by some method connected with agriculture or with the
seasons. Later, the year was a lunar one, and there is some evidence of
attempts at synchronising solar and lunar time. But time was mainly
measured by the moon, while in all calculations night preceded day.[889]
Thus _oidhche Samhain_ was the night preceding Samhain (November 1st),
not the following night. The usage survives in our "sennight" and
"fortnight." In early times the year had two, possibly three divisions,
marking periods in pastoral or agricultural life, but it was afterwards
divided into four periods, while the year began with the winter
division, opening at Samhain. A twofold, subdivided into a fourfold
division is found in Irish texts,[890] and may be tabulated as
follows:--

                       1st quarter, _Geimredh_, beginning with the
_A_. Geimredh          festival of _Samhain_, November 1st.
     (winter half)
                       2nd quarter, _Earrach_, beginning February
                       1st (sometimes called _Oimelc_).


                       3rd quarter, _Samradh_, beginning with the
_B_. Samhradh          festival of _Beltane_, May 1st (called also
     (summer half)     _Cet-soman_ or _Cet-samain_, 1st day of
                       _Samono-s_; cf. Welsh _Cyntefyn_).

                       4th quarter, _Foghamhar_, beginning with
                       the festival of _Lugnasadh_, August 1st
                       (sometimes called _Brontroghain_).

These divisions began with festivals, and clear traces of three of them
occur over the whole Celtic area, but the fourth has now been merged in
S. Brigit's day. Beltane and Samhain marked the beginning of the two
great divisions, and were perhaps at first movable festivals, according
as the signs of summer or winter appeared earlier or later. With the
adoption of the Roman calendar some of the festivals were displaced,
e.g. in Gaul, where the Calends of January took the place of Samhain,
the ritual being also transferred.

None of the four festivals is connected with the times of equinox and
solstice. This points to the fact that originally the Celtic year was
independent of these. But Midsummer day was also observed not only by
the Celts, but by most European folk, the ritual resembling that of
Beltane. It has been held, and an old tradition in Ireland gives some
support to the theory, that under Christian influences the old pagan
feast of Beltane was merged in that of S. John Baptist on Midsummer
day.[891] But, though there are Christian elements in the Midsummer
ritual, denoting a desire to bring it under Church influence, the pagan
elements in folk-custom are strongly marked, and the festival is deeply
rooted in an earlier paganism all over Europe. Without much acquaintance
with astronomy, men must have noted the period of the sun's longest
course from early times, and it would probably be observed ritually. The
festivals of Beltane and Midsummer may have arisen independently, and
entered into competition with each other. Or Beltane may have been an
early pastoral festival marking the beginning of summer when the herds
went out to pasture, and Midsummer a more purely agricultural festival.
And since their ritual aspect and purpose as seen in folk-custom are
similar, they may eventually have borrowed each from the other. Or they
may be later separate fixed dates of an earlier movable summer festival.
For our purpose we may here consider them as twin halves of such a
festival. Where Midsummer was already observed, the influence of the
Roman calendar would confirm that observance. The festivals of the
Christian year also affected the older observances. Some of the ritual
was transferred to saints' days within the range of the pagan festival
days, thus the Samhain ritual is found observed on S. Martin's day. In
other cases, holy days took the place of the old festivals--All Saints'
and All Souls' that of Samhain, S. Brigit's day that of February 1st, S.
John Baptist's day that of Midsummer, Lammas that of Lugnasad, and some
attempt was made to hallow, if not to oust, the older ritual.

The Celtic festivals being primarily connected with agricultural and
pastoral life, we find in their ritual survivals traces not only of a
religious but of a magical view of things, of acts designed to assist
the powers of life and growth. The proof of this will be found in a
detailed examination of the surviving customs connected with them.


SAMHAIN.


Samhain,[892] beginning the Celtic year, was an important social and
religious occasion. The powers of blight were beginning their
ascendancy, yet the future triumph of the powers of growth was not
forgotten. Probably Samhain had gathered up into itself other feasts
occurring earlier or later. Thus it bears traces of being a harvest
festival, the ritual of the earlier harvest feast being transferred to
the winter feast, as the Celts found themselves in lands where harvest
is not gathered before late autumn. The harvest rites may, however, have
been associated with threshing rather than ingathering. Samhain also
contains in its ritual some of the old pastoral cults, while as a New
Year feast its ritual is in great part that of all festivals of
beginnings.

New fire was brought into each house at Samhain from the sacred
bonfire,[893] itself probably kindled from the need-fire by the friction
of pieces of wood. This preserved its purity, the purity necessary to a
festival of beginnings.[894] The putting away of the old fires was
probably connected with various rites for the expulsion of evils, which
usually occur among many peoples at the New Year festival. By that
process of dislocation which scattered the Samhain ritual over a wider
period and gave some of it to Christmas, the kindling of the Yule log
may have been originally connected with this festival.

Divination and forecasting the fate of the inquirer for the coming year
also took place. Sometimes these were connected with the bonfire, stones
placed in it showing by their appearance the fortune or misfortune
awaiting their owners.[895] Others, like those described by Burns in his
"Hallowe'en," were unconnected with the bonfire and were of an erotic
nature.[896]

The slaughter of animals for winter consumption which took place at
Samhain, or, as now, at Martinmas, though connected with economic
reasons, had a distinctly religious aspect, as it had among the Teutons.
In recent times in Ireland one of the animals was offered to S. Martin,
who may have taken the place of a god, and ill-luck followed the
non-observance of the custom.[897] The slaughter was followed by general
feasting. This later slaughter may be traced back to the pastoral stage,
in which the animals were regarded as divine, and one was slain annually
and eaten sacramentally. Or, if the slaughter was more general, the
animals would be propitiated. But when the animals ceased to be
worshipped, the slaughter would certainly be more general, though still
preserving traces of its original character. The pastoral sacrament may
also have been connected with the slaying and eating of an animal
representing the corn-spirit at harvest time. In one legend S. Martin is
associated with the animal slain at Martinmas, and is said to have been
cut up and eaten in the form of an ox,[898] as if a former divine animal
had become an anthropomorphic divinity, the latter being merged in the
personality of a Christian saint.

Other rites, connected with the Calends of January as a result of
dislocation, point also in this direction. In Gaul and Germany riotous
processions took place with men dressed in the heads and skins of
animals.[899] This rite is said by Tille to have been introduced from
Italy, but it is more likely to have been a native custom.[900] As the
people ate the flesh of the slain animals sacramentally, so they clothed
themselves in the skins to promote further contact with their divinity.
Perambulating the township sunwise dressed in the skin of a cow took
place until recently in the Hebrides at New Year, in order to keep off
misfortune, a piece of the hide being burned and the smoke inhaled by
each person and animal in the township.[901] Similar customs have been
found in other Celtic districts, and these animal disguises can hardly
be separated from the sacramental slaughter at Samhain.[902]

Evils having been or being about to be cast off in the New Year ritual,
a few more added to the number can make little difference. Hence among
primitive peoples New Year is often characterised by orgiastic rites.
These took place at the Calends in Gaul, and were denounced by councils
and preachers.[903] In Ireland the merriment at Samhain is often
mentioned in the texts,[904] and similar orgiastic rites lurk behind the
Hallowe'en customs in Scotland and in the licence still permitted to
youths in the quietest townships of the West Highlands at Samhain eve.

Samhain, as has been seen, was also a festival of the dead, whose ghosts
were fed at this time.[905]

As the powers of growth were in danger and in eclipse in winter, men
thought it necessary to assist them. As a magical aid the Samhain
bonfire was chief, and it is still lit in the Highlands. Brands were
carried round, and from it the new fire was lit in each house. In North
Wales people jumped through the fire, and when it was extinct, rushed
away to escape the "black sow" who would take the hindmost.[906] The
bonfire represented the sun, and was intended to strengthen it. But
representing the sun, it had all the sun's force, hence those who jumped
through it were strengthened and purified. The Welsh reference to the
hindmost and to the black sow may point to a former human sacrifice,
perhaps of any one who stumbled in jumping through the fire. Keating
speaks of a Druidic sacrifice in the bonfire, whether of man or beast is
not specified.[907] Probably the victim, like the scapegoat, was laden
with the accumulated evils of the year, as in similar New Year customs
elsewhere. Later belief regarded the sacrifice, if sacrifice there was,
as offered to the powers of evil--the black sow, unless this animal is a
reminiscence of the corn-spirit in its harmful aspect. Earlier powers,
whether of growth or of blight, came to be associated with Samhain as
demoniac beings--the "malignant bird flocks" which blighted crops and
killed animals, the _samhanach_ which steals children, and Mongfind the
banshee, to whom "women and the rabble" make petitions on Samhain
eve.[908] Witches, evil-intentioned fairies, and the dead were
particularly active then.

Though the sacrificial victim had come to be regarded as an offering to
the powers of blight, he may once have represented a divinity of growth
or, in earlier times, the corn-spirit. Such a victim was slain at
harvest, and harvest is often late in northern Celtic regions, while the
slaying was sometimes connected not with the harvest field, but with the
later threshing. This would bring it near the Samhain festival. The
slaying of the corn-spirit was derived from the earlier slaying of a
tree or vegetation-spirit embodied in a tree and also in a human or
animal victim. The corn-spirit was embodied in the last sheaf cut as
well as in an animal or human being.[909] This human victim may have
been regarded as a king, since in late popular custom a mock king is
chosen at winter festivals.[910] In other cases the effigy of a saint is
hung up and carried round the different houses, part of the dress being
left at each. The saint has probably succeeded to the traditional ritual
of the divine victim.[911] The primitive period in which the corn-spirit
was regarded as female, with a woman as her human representative, is
also recalled in folk-custom. The last sheaf is called the Maiden or the
Mother, while, as in Northamptonshire, girls choose a queen on S.
Catharine's day, November 26th, and in some Christmas pageants "Yule's
wife," as well as Yule, is present, corresponding to the May queen of
the summer festival.[912] Men also masqueraded as women at the Calends.
The dates of these survivals may be explained by that dislocation of the
Samhain festival already pointed out. This view of the Samhain human
sacrifices is supported by the Irish offerings to the Fomorians--gods of
growth, later regarded as gods of blight, and to Cromm Cruaich, in both
cases at Samhain.[913] With the evolution of religious thought, the
slain victim came to be regarded as an offering to evil powers.

This aspect of Samhain, as a festival to promote and assist festivity,
is further seen in the belief in the increased activity of fairies at
that time. In Ireland, fairies are connected with the Tuatha De Danann,
the divinities of growth, and in many folk-tales they are associated
with agricultural processes. The use of evergreens at Christmas is
perhaps also connected with the carrying of them round the fields in
older times, as an evidence that the life of nature was not
extinct.[914]

Samhain may thus be regarded as, in origin, an old pastoral and
agricultural festival, which in time came to be looked upon as affording
assistance to the powers of growth in their conflict with the powers of
blight. Perhaps some myth describing this combat may lurk behind the
story of the battle of Mag-tured fought on Samhain between the Tuatha De
Danann and the Fomorians. While the powers of blight are triumphant in
winter, the Tuatha Dea are represented as the victors, though they
suffer loss and death. Perhaps this enshrines the belief in the
continual triumph of life and growth over blight and decay, or it may
arise from the fact that Samhain was both a time of rejoicing for the
ingathered harvest, and of wailing for the coming supremacy of winter
and the reign of the powers of blight.


BELTANE.


In Cormac's _Glossary_ and other texts, "Beltane" is derived from
_bel-tene_, "a goodly fire," or from _bel-dine_, because newly-born
(_dine_) cattle were offered to Bel, an idol-god.[915] The latter is
followed by those who believe in a Celtic Belus, connected with Baal. No
such god is known, however, and the god Belenos is in no way connected
with the Semitic divinity. M. D'Arbois assumes an unknown god of death,
Beltene (from _beltu_, "to die"), whose festival Beltane was.[916] But
Beltane was a festival of life, of the sun shining in his strength. Dr.
Stokes gives a more acceptable explanation of the word. Its primitive
form was _belo-te_[_p_]_nia_, from _belo-s_, "clear," "shining," the
root of the names Belenos and Belisama, and _te_[_p_]_nos_, "fire." Thus
the word would mean something like "bright fire," perhaps the sun or the
bonfire, or both.[917]

The folk-survivals of the Beltane and Midsummer festivals show that both
were intended to promote fertility.

One of the chief ritual acts at Beltane was the kindling of bonfires,
often on hills. The house-fires in the district were often extinguished,
the bonfire being lit by friction from a rotating wheel--the German
"need-fire."[918] The fire kept off disease and evil, hence cattle were
driven through it, or, according to Cormac, between two fires lit by
Druids, in order to keep them in health during the year.[919] Sometimes
the fire was lit beneath a sacred tree, or a pole covered with greenery
was surrounded by the fuel, or a tree was burned in the fire.[920] These
trees survive in the Maypole of later custom, and they represented the
vegetation-spirit, to whom also the worshippers assimilated themselves
by dressing in leaves. They danced sunwise round the fire or ran through
the fields with blazing branches or wisps of straw, imitating the course
of the sun, and thus benefiting the fields.[921] For the same reason the
tree itself was probably borne through the fields. Houses were decked
with boughs and thus protected by the spirit of vegetation.[922]

An animal representing the spirit of vegetation may have been slain. In
late survivals of Beltane at Dublin, a horse's skull and bones were
thrown into the fire,[923] the attenuated form of an earlier sacrifice
or slaying of a divine victim, by whom strength was transferred to all
the animals which passed through the fire. In some cases a human victim
may have been slain. This is suggested by customs surviving in
Perthshire in the eighteenth century, when a cake was broken up and
distributed, and the person who received a certain blackened portion was
called the "Beltane carline" or "devoted." A pretence was made of
throwing him into the fire, or he had to leap three times through it,
and during the festival he was spoken of as "dead."[924] Martin says
that malefactors were burned in the fire,[925] and though he cites no
authority, this agrees with the Celtic use of criminals as victims.
Perhaps the victim was at one time a human representative of the
vegetation-spirit.

Beltane cakes or bannocks, perhaps made of the grain of the sacred last
sheaf from the previous harvest, and therefore sacramental in character,
were also used in different ways in folk-survivals. They were rolled
down a slope--a magical imitative act, symbolising and aiding the course
of the sun. The cake had also a divinatory character. If it broke on
reaching the foot of the slope this indicated the approaching death of
its owner. In another custom in Perthshire, part of a cake was thrown
over the shoulder with the words, "This I give to thee, preserve thou my
horses; this to thee, preserve thou my sheep; this to thee, O fox,
preserve thou my lambs; this to thee, O hooded crow; this to thee, O
eagle." Here there is an appeal to beneficial and noxious powers,
whether this was the original intention of the rite.[926] But if the
cakes were made of the last sheaf, they were probably at one time eaten
sacramentally, their sacrificial use emerging later.

The bonfire was a sun-charm, representing and assisting the sun.
Rain-charms were also used at Beltane. Sacred wells were visited and the
ceremony performed with their waters, these perhaps being sprinkled over
the tree or the fields to promote a copious rainfall for the benefit of
vegetation. The use of such rites at Beltane and at other festivals may
have given rise to the belief that wells were especially efficacious
then for purposes of healing. The custom of rolling in the grass to
benefit by May dew was probably connected with magical rites in which
moisture played an important part.[927]

The idea that the powers of growth had successfully combated those of
blight may have been ritually represented. This is suggested by the
mimic combats of Summer and Winter at this time, to which reference has
already been made. Again, the May king and queen represent earlier
personages who were regarded as embodying the spirits of vegetation and
