with the wicked every day." Would he be angry, if all which is done
was pleasing in his sight?

God is holy. Sin is opposition to his nature, forbidden by his law,
and declared to be his abhorrence. To suppose that he should hate and
forbid sin, yet approve of it and be pleased with it, is absurdity and
folly.

God permits sin; but neither wills nor approves it. "Christ pleased
not himself." * Much is permitted under his administration, which he
doth not order, but forbids and abhors. Yea, God orders some things,
as moral governor (in consequence of other things done contrary to his
directions) which are not pleasing to him, considered in themselves.
"He doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men"--But
finds it necessary to afflict. Grief and sorrow are known under the
divine administration, and ordered out to mortals by providential
dispensation. But these natural evils are always in consequence of
moral evil, which is not the effect of divine influence, but ariseth
from another source and hath another author. It ariseth from the abuse
of powers which were given for better purposes. Where sin hath gone
before, sorrows follow after; but they are not pleasing to the Supreme
Governor.

* Rom. xv. 3.

The wickedness of the old world occasioned the deluge; but it is
impossible to read the Mosaic account of those events, and suspect
that they were pleasing to Deity.

We may make the same remark respecting the declensions of Israel and
Judah and the judgments which followed. "O thou son of man, speak
unto the house of Israel, Thus ye speak, saying, if our transgressions
and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then
live? Say unto them, as I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and
live; turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye die, 0
house of Israel?" * By another prophet we find God mourning over them
--"How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee,
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah, and set thee as Zeboim? Mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together."

* Ezekial xxxiii. 10.

That people continued in their sins and perished in them: But will
any who read these messages, sent them of God, conceive their crimes,
and the desolations which followed, when they had filled up the
measure of their iniquity, to be pleasing to God, or the effect of
divine order and influence?

Will those who read our Savior's lamentations over Jerusalem, and the
destruction soon after brought upon that city and nation, because
"they did not know the time of their visitation," consider those
events as pleasing to him? His predictions were verified--"their
enemies cast a trench about them, compassed them round and kept them
in on every side--laid their city even with the ground, and her
children within her; not leaving one stone upon another--Zion was
ploughed like a field"--vast numbers perished in the siege--many were
crucified after the city was taken--the residue scattered among all
nations, and the sword drawn out after them! The compassionate
Redeemer called those sinners to repentance--warned them of the evils
which they would bring on themselves, by refusing the grace which
he offered them, and wept over them when filling up the measure of
their guilt! But when they had been tried the appointed time, and
continued obstinate, till the divine patience was exhausted, he
entered into judgment with them and gave them according to their
works.

Similar will be the event of persevering obstinacy in others. Man is
placed here for trial--endowed with powers sufficient to render him a
probationer; which implies capacity to use, or abuse his powers. The
abuse is sin. The way of duty is made known, needed assistance
conferred, the reasonableness of obedience shewn, and the injunction,
"occupy; till I come," subjoined, but no compulsion is used. Thus
circumstanced, it is referred to man to choose for himself.

God operates indeed on man; but only as on a free moral agent. Divine
influences coincide with human liberty. Those who are willing and
obedient find mercy. Over such the Savior rejoices, and their faith
and love are rewarded with the rewards of grace. But those who neglect
so great salvation, are left to perish in their sins.

That God can confidently do other than leave them to perish, is to us
unknown. It may be impossible to renew them by repentance--beyond the
power of Omnipotence to save them!

The conditions of salvation are fixed: No change can be made in them.
"The impenitent heart treasureth up wrath. He that believeth not
shall be damned. If we do not believe, yet God abideth faithful; he
cannot deny himself." The terms of acceptance with God are laid before
us; the event depends on the choice we make. SUCH we conceive to be
man's situation here: Such the ground of the applications made to him
in the gospel, and the promises and threatening annexed to the
proposals therein contained. On another, supposition do they appear
rational. On no other can we account for our Savior's declaration that
Sodom, had she enjoyed Capernaum's advantages, would have remained
till his day. *

* Matthew xi. 23.

Divine benevolence is great; but it will not secure salvation to
gospel despisers: They "will wonder and perish." As the first
covenant had conditions annexed to it, so hath the new covenant. To
pretend that there are none--that man hath no concern to secure the
divine favor, is to charge folly on God, in all the overtures which
are made to man in the gospel.

Life and death are now set before us. We may be saved, or we may
perish. Which will be our portion depends on the effect which the
proposals of grace have upon us. Today if ye will hear God's voice
harden not your hearts. Behold now is the accepted time; behold now is
the day of salvation. Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou knowest
not what a day may bring forth. Beware lest you * destroy a soul for
which Christ died; and lest you have occasion at last to take up that
lamentation--"The harvest is past, the summer is ended and we are not
saved."

* Romans xiv. 15.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XVIII.

Balak's inquiries relative to the service of God, and Balaam's answer,
briefly considered.

Micah vi. 6, 7, 8.

"Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the
high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of
a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with, thousands of rams, or with
ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my first born for my
transgression; the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?--He hath
shewed thee, 0 man, what is good: And what doth the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God?"


As mankind are endowed with reason, and profess to be governed by it,
their revolts from God are practical criminations of him: Therefore
his expostulations with his people of old, when they forsook him and
followed other gods--"What iniquity have your fathers found in me? O
my people what have I done unto thee? And wherein have I wearied thee?
Testify against me." *

* Jeremiah ii. 5. Micah vi. 3.

Israel as a people were going away from God, and he condescended to
reason with them, and show them their ingratitude and baseness. To
this end, he reminded them of his past care of them, and kindness to
them, as a nation, from the time of their deliverance from bondage in
Egypt--"I brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee
from the house of servants"--After just glancing at that deliverance,
he passes over the wonders wrought for them at the red sea, and in the
wilderness, and their numerous rebellions, while he was leading them
as a flock, and supplying their wants by a series of miracles, and
enlarges on an event which took place on the borders of Canaan, the
attempts made by Balak, the king of Moab, to prevail with him to leave
his people and go over to him, and help him against them, and his
faithfulness to Israel on that occasion--"O my people, remember now
what Balak, king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam, the son of Beor
answered him from Shittim to Gilgal; that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lord." *

* Numbers xxii. &c.

 Balak's consultations, or inquiries, are contained in the two last
verses of our text: Balaam's answer in the third. In Balak's inquiries
we see the ideas which he entertained of God, and of the service which
he supposed would be acceptable to Him, and engage, him to forsake his
people, and deliver him from his fears on their account. Balaam's
answer corrects Balak's mistakes, and discovers surprizingly just
apprehensions of the true God, and true religion, though
depravity prevailed, and caused him to counteract his convictions, by
advising Balak to measures directly opposed to his sense of duty.

To open and explain this subject is the design of the following
discourse.

It may be proper to premise that Israel did not make war either on
Moab or Ammon. Those nations were descended from Lot, and Moses was
forbidden to molest them in possession of the lands which God had
given them. Moab might have had peace, and the friendship of Israel,
but refused it, and joined the confederacy against them. When the
tribes of Israel reached the borders of Moab, which lay in their way
to Canaan, Balak and his people were intimidated by their numbers, and
by their martial appearance. They did not therefore, sue for peace,
but resolved to neglect no measures to subdue and conquer them.

It was an ancient custom among the heathen at their entrance on a war,
to devote the enemy to destruction, and solicit their gods to forsake
them. Balak thought this a matter of importance before he entered into
a war with Israel. This ceremony was commonly performed by the
priests, or ministers of religion. How this had been to Moab we are
not informed; but on occasion before us, the affrighted sovereign of
that people, sent to some distance for Balaam, a famous soothsayer or
diviner, of whose prevalence with the powers above he had a high
opinion, to be the agent in this business.

Balaam was really a remarkable person; few more so occur in history.
Few others had more knowledge of the true God, or juster ideas of the
service which he requires of mankind. But his character will be
developed in the sequel.

This renowned soothsayer refused at first to listen to the invitation
of the king of Moab, assigning a sufficient reason for his refusal
--"The Lord refuseth to give me leave"--but when a second embassy
arrived, more numerous and move honorable, and with the proffer of
great honors and rewards, his ambition and covetousness were inflamed,
and he resolved from that moment to secure them. The first seems to
have been only a common embassy, and to have carried only the usual
rewards of divination. We know what followed. Balaam sinned in asking
a second time for liberty to go and curse Israel, when God had once
refused him, and told him that they were blessed. He asked, however,
and was in judgment permitted to go, but only to act agreeably to
divine direction which would be given on the spot; but he went,
determined to secure the wages of unrighteousness. Seeing his design,
God met him in the way, and by a strange and miraculous communication
and warning, made him afraid to curse his people, and even compelled
him to bless them altogether. But to come to our subject,

I. We are to consider Balak's inquiries.--_Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord_?

Balak had so deep a sense of the danger which threatened him, that he
was ready to bring the most costly sacrifices, if they would avail to
render propitious the God who had wrought such wonders in Egypt and in
the wilderness for the salvation of his people. He would offer all the
cattle, and all the oil of his kingdom, _thousands of ram, and ten
thousands of rivers of oil_! Yea, he would even offer his _first
born_, the heir of his crown! Would not refute the dearest of his
offspring to atone for his sin, and bring over the God of Israel to be
his God, in the time of his distress!

Such were his proposals. We may observe in them several mistakes
respecting the service of God, or the homage which is acceptable to
him; mistakes not uncommon among men. As,

First a supposition that sins may be atoned and mankind allowed to
continue in them, if they will come up to the price. The country of
Moab abounded with flocks, particularly with sheep; * it abounded also
with oil; and Balak supposed that the divine favor might be obtained
by sacrifices of this kind--by a profusion of them--_thousands of
ram, and ten thousands of rivers of oil_. He knew himself a sinner--he
knew that he had taken part against the God of Israel; had served
other gods, who were his rivals. But now he saw his need of the divine
favor and he wished to purchase it--at any price, to purchase it. He
was ready to pay for his sins; only waited to know the price, and he
would make the payment!

* 2 Kings iii. 4.

Not a word do we hear of his parting with his sins and returning back
by repentance.

Few left to the light of nature seem to have conceived the necessity
of repentance, in order to obtain the divine favor. For their sins,
they must somehow, make atonement, and they would then be forgiven,
though they continued to commit them! Mankind have entertained
different ideas of what was necessary to make atonement. The more
common idea hath been, that it was to be done by sacrifice; however
they came by that idea. It probably derived by tradition from the
first family of our race. But there seems to have been a general
mistake respecting the design of sacrifice. By those devoid of
revelation, it hath not been considered as pointing to a divine
sacrifice, but as having in _itself_ an atoning virtue. So it seems to
have been viewed by this Moabitish prince.

Another mistake respecting sacrifices, which hath been common in the
world, is this--That their value depends on their cost to the offerer.
This was a mistake of Balak. If common offerings, and the usual number
of victims would not procure the divine favor and atone for his sins,
he would offer more, and more costly ones--_thousands of rams, and ten
thousands of rivers of oil_! Such a profusion of sacrifices, of the
same kind, or partly so, with those offered by Israel, so many more
they were able, coming out of the wilderness, to offer, he hoped would
prevail to detach from them their God, and buy him so to be his
friend!

But if not, if these were too little, he would sacrifice his
offspring! _Give his first born for his transgression--the fruit of
his body for the sin of his soul_! A sacrifice much more costly, much
more painful, than that of all earthly treasure! Surely such an
offering must prevail!

Similar conclusions have not been very uncommon! The homage offered up
to God hath been estimated by its cost to the offerer! A circumstance
which adds nothing to its value. The value of what is done for God
depends on its conformity to his orders. That its cost to the offerer
enhances its value, in the divine estimation, supposes him to be
pleased with the sufferings of his creatures, and delighted with their
sorrows, than which, nothing is farther from truth. "God grieveth not
willingly--Judgment is his strange work." Were it otherwise, the more
reluctant the offerer, the more acceptable would be the offering: But
God loves a cheerful giver; yea, he is so pleased with this
disposition, that he accepts and rewards it, where ability is wanting
to carry it into action. "If there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted." *

* 2 Corinthians viii. 12.

The sacrifices of old derived all their value from the sacrifice of
Christ, to which they pointed. God had determined, when and how they
would be offered. Additions to the number, or cost, added nothing to
their value, but had a contrary effect, spoiled and rendered them
unavailing. Human victims, the most costly, and therefore supposed by
the heathen, to be the most efficacious, were so far from having power
with God to draw down his blessing, that they most certainly drew his
curse on all who offered them. This was one of the sins of the
Canaanites, which above all others, availed to bring the divine
judgments upon them. And when Israel fell into the same sin, it
kindled the wrath of God against them to their destruction. This was
the sin of Manasseh, "which God would not pardon."

Balak first proposed other sacrifices--a profusion of them; but if
they were not sufficient to atone for his sins and procure the
friendship of Jehovah, seems to have thought that the sacrifice of his
first born must avail!

Such were his blunders respecting the nature of that religion which
would render him acceptable to the true God. He seems not once to have
thought of repentance; or if he did, he made no offer of it--did not
once propose "crucifying the flesh with its affections and lusts." He
chose rather to sacrifice all the treasures of his kingdom, and all
the members of his family, than part with his sins and become holy in
heart and life.

Such is the temper of depravity. The servants of sin are sooner
persuaded to make any other sacrifice than that of their lusts and
corruptions. And many foolishly flatter themselves that other
sacrifices will avail to procure the divine favor--that holiness of
heart and life are not indispensibly requisite, but that something
beside may be substituted in its stead. Countless examples of this
folly meet us in history, and even in the history only catholic church
of Christ!

Thus did Balak mistake the nature of true religion, and consider it as
consisting in that which was foreign, yea, repugnant to its nature.
Such were his proposals which he spread before Balaam, and of which he
required his opinion. Let us hear then the answer of the Sage.

Balaam was better instructed: He appears to have understood the nature
of true religion, and clearly points it out to Balak, though he
neglected himself to conform to it. _He hath shewed thee, 0 man, what
is good: And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and
to love mercy, and to walk humbly, with thy God_?

There is scarcely a better definition of true religion to be found in
the bible.

He _hath shewed thee, 0 man, what is good_.--From Balak's inquiry we
should be ready to conclude that he was ignorant of God and religion
--that he supposed that God preferred sacrifice to justice and mercy
--that sacrifice would supply their place and render them of no
account. Balaam tells him that he had been better instructed;
though we know not where, or how. _He hath shewed thee, what is good_;
and he appeals to Balak whether this was not the case--_What doth the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy_, &c.

To _do justly_--There is no true religion where justice is not
received as a foundation principle. "I the Lord love judgment; I hate
robbery for burnt offerings; and I will direct their work in truth." *
Fraudulent people may pretend to religion; may make many and long
prayer, but their religion is of no avail; their sacrifices are an
abomination. + Witness the scribes and pharisees, who received
