likely to tell the great news to Jesus' mother, now his own. Peter plods
slowly along, thinking hard. It was still early morning, the air so
still and fragrant with the dew. Maybe down by some big trees he is
walking, absorbed, when all at once, _some One is by his side_. It's the
Master. The appointment has been kept with Peter. But we must leave
them alone together. Peter has some things to straighten out. That's a
sacred interview meant only for him.

That afternoon two disciples walking out to a little village a few miles
away are joined by a Stranger whose talk makes their hearts burn like
the Master's used to. And as they gather about the evening meal with
Him, and He gives thanks and breaks the loaf, all at once their eyes
_see_. It is _Jesus Himself_ who has been with them all the time. Again
the appointment is kept.

At once they hasten back to town, and are just telling the news in
joyously broken speech to the disciples gathered in an upper room with
locked doors when again, all at once, Jesus appears in their midst, and
eats some bread and fish, and tells them to know by the feel that it is
really Himself with them. He has kept His sacred appointment with the
Twelve. Then a week later He comes in like manner among them again for
the sake of one man, Thomas. So He keeps the appointment with Thomas,
also.



Our Guarantee of His Promises.


Two things stand out sharply. The resurrection was not expected. It was
the most tremendous surprise. The news was received at first by those
most interested with utter stubborn unbelief. Then the evidence was so
clear and repeated, and incontestable that these same men staked their
lives on it. They suffered to the extreme for their witness that Jesus
had indeed risen.

Jesus rose from the dead. His body was re-inhabited by His spirit. The
spirit didn't die. Spirits neither sleep nor die. The body died. Then
life came into it again. It was a real body that could eat and be
touched. It was recognized as the same one they had known. But it was
changed. The old limitations were gone. New powers had come.

Jesus keeps His appointments. His pledged word never fails. Not a word
He has spoken can ever be broken. Some day He is coming back. It is an
appointment.[135] Then we, too, who have slipped the tether of life and
left our bodies temporarily in the dust, shall rise up again to meet
Him. It is a sacred appointment He has made with us.

And some of us who live in that day shall be changed instead of dying,
and shall be caught up to meet Him and our own loved ones in the air.
That's His true tryst with us up in the blue, some day. And He will keep
it.

And meanwhile everything He has promised us in the Book is sure, as
being His plighted word. His resurrection is our bond, our guarantee. As
surely as He rose on that third morning He will keep His word regarding
every matter to you and me.

His appointments never fail, whether of guidance, of bodily health and
strength, of supplies for every sort of need, of peace, of power, of
victory. The power that raised Jesus up from out the dead is pledged to
us for every promise of this Book for to-day's life. He will do an act
of creation before He will let His Word fail. He will leave no power
unused to keep the appointment of His Word with us.

Let us trust His Word to us fully. And let us _live_ our trust.




VII

Another Tryst

     _A Story of Fishing, of Guests at Breakfast, and of a Walk and Talk
     by the Edge of Blue Galilee_




     "I come unto you."--_John xiv. 18._

     "Lo, I am with you all the days."--_Matthew xxviii. 20_.




VII

Another Tryst

(John xxi.)



Jesus Unrecognised.


John's story is done. And it is well done. With the skill of a tried
jurist he has drawn up a clear full line of evidence and presented it in
a vigorous straightforward way. And he plainly states his case. His
whole purpose is that those who read his little book shall come into
warm personal touch of life with the Lord Jesus. That ties the knot on
tight at the end of chapter twenty. John's case has gone to the jury of
his readers.

But now John reaches for his pen again. The guiding Spirit has put
another bit into his heart to write down. This time it is a special bit,
not for all to whom the book is sent, but for a selected class of his
readers, namely, for those of them who have given John a favourable
verdict on the evidence presented. It grows out of chapter xx. 31 as
rose out of bud, and fruit out of blossom. It is for those who "believe
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God," and so "have life in His
Name."

And a very tender precious bit it is, more wondrous in its sheer
simplicity than any of us seem to suspect. It is simply this: _this
Jesus is with us all the time_. This same Jesus who was so swayed by the
need of the crowd, who burned His life out day by day warmly responding
to their sore need--_He is here._

This Jesus who fed the hungry, healed the sick of every sort, and freed
men from devilish power, who convicted men so tremendously of their
wrong, restrained their evil power to hurt, wooed the hearts of all so
irresistibly, and led them into changed lives; this Jesus who died and
then did the stupendously mighty thing of rising up out of death,--_this
Jesus is with us now_ by your side and mine.

And He is just the same Jesus in His warm love and resistless power. The
_words_ are rather familiar. The _fact_--no one of us seems to have
gotten hold of it yet. This is the thing that makes John eagerly reach
for his pen again before his little book-messenger goes out on its
errand.

The thing isn't new in _information_, but in actual living _experience_
it seems to be so new as to be an unknown thing to some of us. The
Master had spoken of this that betrayal-night around the supper board.
It was really a continuation of that trysting appointment He had made
with them that evening, a wonderful continuation.

Clearly they didn't understand Him that night. But during those
after-Pentecost days they were given a continuous graphic unforgetable
illustration of its meaning. We to-day seem able to explain the part
they didn't understand, the teaching that betrayal-night. We don't seem
to get hold of the part they did understand and experience, the real
presence of the risen Jesus in the midst actively at work.

That night Jesus said: "I will make request of the Father, and He will
send you another unfailing powerful Friend to be always at your side."
Then He added: "He abides _with_ you now (in My presence) and shall be
_in_ you (after I send Him)." Then He said, "_I_ come unto you. Yet a
little while and the world _seeth_ Me no more but ye _see_ Me."

And again, "He that hath My commandments and keepeth them he it is that
(in that sheweth that he) loveth Me and ... I will _manifest_ or _shew_
Myself unto him." Here is the simple teaching: He would send the Holy
Spirit; in the Holy Spirit's coming Jesus Himself, the new risen exalted
empowered enthroned Jesus, He came; _and_ He would let them see Himself
with them.

Now this added chapter of John's is _the illustration in advance_ to
these men of what these words mean. _The great standing illustration_ is
that Book of Acts which, will you notice, doesn't end. It only breaks
off, abruptly, without even a punctuation point. It wasn't meant to end.
We are supposed to be living in it yet. But these men haven't come to
the experience of the Pentecostal Acts yet. This is an illustration in
advance to them. And it remains an illustration to us of what we seem a
bit slow in taking in.

But let us get at the simple bit of story itself. There's a little
group of the inner circle, seven including the leaders. These men
haven't found their feet yet. The stupendous events of those days,
coming in such startling succession, have left them dazed. The
crucifixion left them stupidly dazed; the resurrection left them joyous,
but still dazed. They don't know just where they are, nor what to do.

So Peter proposes fishing; an ideal proposition, when you want to get
off and think things through and out. Any fisherman knows that. And the
others readily join in. They see the good sense of it. But the fish
don't catch. And the morning finds them tired in body and more tired in
the spiritless uncertainty that hangs over them like a clinging damp
fog.

Yonder is some One standing on the beach. But that's nothing unusual.
They barely notice Him. And now this Stranger calls out to them a cheery
common question, "Caught anything?" And now He gives a--no, it can
hardly be called a _command_, so quietly is it said. Yet they are subtly
conscious of a something in the word that makes them obey, though it's
the last sort of thing to do.

And now at once the net-ropes pull _so hard;_ astonishing this! Then
John's keen spirit detects _Who_ it is. Is he thinking of the other big
unexpected haul in those same waters![136] And Peter's over the side of
the boat shoreward. Fishing has lost all attraction for him.

And when they all got ashore with their haul, tired, wet, chilled to
the marrow, hungry, what's this? A blazing fire of coals burning
cheerfully on the sands. And some fish dexterously poised, doing to a
brown turn, and some bread. And the Stranger, no, _Jesus_, He's no
longer a stranger, Jesus says quietly, "Boys, better bring the haul up
on the beach."

And the old fishing habit still strong on them counts the fish. It's
such an unusual haul, they must know how many. John must be thinking
again about that earlier haul. The net couldn't stand the strain then.
But now it's different. Ah! _every_thing's blessedly different now. "The
net was not rent."

Then the gracious call to breakfast by their Host. Was ever fish done to
such a fine turn? Did ever any fish have such an exquisite flavour? or
taste so good? Did ever men eat so gladly and yet quietly with a
distinct touch of awe in their spirits? For they _know_ it is the
Master, though no word of that has been spoken. Words were needless.

Now they're walking along the beach, Jesus and Peter in the lead but the
others quite near. And there's the bit of talk between the two. Very
gently Jesus says, "Do you love Me, Peter?" And Peter feels he hardly
dare use the sacred word for "love" that the Master has used. He had
made such an awful break at just that point. And with breaking voice he
says, "Yea, Lord, Thou knowest I have the highest regard for Thee."

And again the question, and the answer, with Peter still humbly
clinging to his more modest word. And now Jesus says, "Do you really
love Me even as you yourself say?" And Peter with his heart in his face
says passionately, "Lord, Thou knowest better than I can tell Thee."

And because he loves, Peter is given the full privilege of shepherding
the whole flock, from feeding little lambkins on to feeding all, and
guiding, through the hard places, even the wayward ones. And more yet
and higher, because Peter loves, he will be privileged to suffer, even
as his Master had suffered. The fellowship would extend even to that.

And Peter's eye falls on John. And apparently he is thinking of the
contrast between John's faithfulness and his own break that
betrayal-night. If poor faulty Peter may be so privileged how John would
be rewarded. But Jesus quietly turns Peter, and all Peter's numerous
kinsfolk of this sort, away from human comparisons. And instead He seeks
to turn their hearts to this: He is coming back in person some day for
an advance step in the kingdom program. And there they are, walking and
talking, along the beach by the blue Galilean waters.



The Same Jesus Here Now.


An unrecognized Stranger who turns out to be Jesus; an unusual haul of
fish gotten in a very unusual way; a warm fire and tasty breakfast for
cold hungry men; a tender talk about love and service and sacrifice,
and about Jesus' return;--all this is a moving-picture illustration of
the meaning of a word, one word.

It is a word Jesus used in that last long quiet talk. It's the key-word
to this added chapter, occurring three times. In the old version it is
the word "_shew_"; in the revision "manifest." "After these things Jesus
_manifested_ Himself again ... and He _manifested_ Himself on this
wise." "This is now the third time that Jesus was _manifested_ to the
disciples after that He was risen from the dead."[137]

The word used underneath literally means "to make manifest or _visible_
or know, what has been hidden or unknown."[138] Then each time it is
used it gets its local colouring from its connection. The simple
tremendous meaning here clearly is this: Jesus let Himself _be seen_ and
known. _He did not come_. He was there.

But their eyes couldn't see Him. In effect He was hidden, not seeable.
Now the change that comes is this: _He is seen_. And He is seen in His
true native character; so certain results follow. He had said, "I will
_manifest_ Myself."[139] And this was now the third time that He did it,
to the disciples, after that He was risen.

This is _the advance illustration of the Book of Acts_. This is the
tremendous thing He is burning into their hearts through eyes and
ears:--_He is always present_. He, whose power they had felt so
stupendously, and whose warm sympathy so tenderly, _He is always with
them_. The coming of the Holy Spirit meant just this. The Spirit would
be as Jesus' other self, as Jesus Himself. The one thing the Spirit
would do would be to manifest, to _shew openly_, the power of Jesus.

Then four pictures pass before their eyes to illustrate the meaning, a
fishing picture and a breakfast picture _in action_; then _in words_, a
love-service-suffering picture, and a picture of Jesus returning in
person seen by all to take an advance-step.

The fishing picture clearly meant this: great numbers of people,
surprisingly great numbers, coming, drawn not by any human skill, but by
the supernatural power of Jesus manifesting Himself in that way. The
breakfast picture meant this: that this wondrous Jesus would take tender
personal care of those in this blessed gathering ministry, even to their
bodily needs and strength.

And the love-service-suffering word-picture said so plainly this: true
service grows out of love. The chief thing is the loyal tender
attachment to the person of Jesus. Then out of this will naturally come
service, and willingness to suffer. The touchstone won't be service but
personal love. The service will simply be an expression of the love.

And the Jesus-return word-picture fills their vision with this same
Jesus coming in open glory before all eyes to carry out the kingdom
plan. As these men learned to live always in the presence of a Jesus
whom their outer eyes saw not, these pictures would become living
pictures seen in open daily life.

So this is a further bit of the tryst appointment. This is the fuller
tryst, the greater, the yet more wondrous tryst. Not only would He rise
up out of death, and appear to them in person seen by the outer eyes,
but He would be with them continually manifesting Himself in rarest
power of action, in tenderest personal care, in talking and walking with
them.

They would see the power plainly at work; then they would say with a
soft hush, "_He_ is here." They would find new bodily strength, new
guidance in perplexity, new peace in the midst of confusion, and they
would say to each other in awed tones, "_He is here: it's the Master's
touch_."

And so it would come to be a habit to _anticipate_ His presence. They
would figure Him in, and figure Him in big, as big as He is, in all
sorts of circumstances and planning and meeting of difficulties.

It is most striking that John closes his Gospel so differently from the
others. They close with the Master rising up and disappearing on a cloud
into the upper blue. John closes with Jesus walking along the beach,
talking with the little group of trusted ones. Jesus did ascend up into
the blue whence He shall some day descend. But the Holy Spirit sends
John back to his pen to give us this as the last picture, impressed on
the sensitive plate of the eyes of our heart. _This_: Jesus present with
us all the while walking along the shore of our common round of life,
clothed with matchless power, and devoting Himself to us as we to Him.

Along about the middle of the eighteenth century there came to England a
young French-Swiss, named De la Flechere, hungry hearted for the truth.
He was so helped by John Wesley that he cast in his lot with the new
Methodist movement and John Williams Fletcher became one of Wesley's
most faithful co-labourers. Late in life he married a woman of unusual
mental and spiritual attainment.

I ran across a simple story over there of this Mrs. John Fletcher which
interested and helped me much. This saintly gifted woman told of a dream
which came to her with such vividness as to seem to her mature mind more
than a common passing vagary of sleep. In her dream she was engaged in
an intense struggle with an evil spirit. She was having a most difficult
fight.

She noticed some one standing a little bit to one side watching the
fight but taking no active part in it. The fighting became so intense
and her strength so sorely strained that she was on the point of giving
up. Then this one came over near and touched her gently and said, "Be
strong." Instantly a wondrous strength came to her and she held on.

Again the evil one attacked her viciously. She wondered why this helping
friend did not come to her assistance in the fight. Then she was moved
to say to her enemy, "Depart, _in Jesus' Name_." And instantly he fled.
And she was free and victorious. That was her dream. As she awoke there
came to her the most real sense of the presence of her Lord.

This is only one simple illustration from life. I have run across many
