Sacrament

The Voice of the Disciple

Trusting in Thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, I draw near,
the sick to the Healer, the hungering and thirsting to the
Fountain of life, the poverty-stricken to the King of heaven, the
servant to the Lord, the creature to the Creator, the desolate to
my own gentle Comforter.  But whence is this unto me, that Thou
comest unto me?  Who am I that Thou shouldest offer me Thyself?
How doth a sinner dare to appear before Thee?  And how dost thou
vouchsafe to come to the sinner?  Thou knowest Thy servant, and
Thou knowest that he hath in him no good thing for which Thou
shouldest grant him this grace.  I confess therefore mine own
vileness, I acknowledge Thy goodness, I praise Thy tenderness,
and I give Thee thanks for Thine exceeding great love.  For Thou
doest this for Thine own sake, not for my merits, that Thy
goodness may be more manifest unto me, Thy charity more
abundantly poured out upon me, and Thy humility more perfectly
commended unto me.  Therefore because this pleaseth Thee and Thou
hast commanded that thus it shall be, Thy condescension pleaseth
me also; and oh that mine iniquity hinder it not.

2. O most sweet and tender Jesus, what reverence, what giving of
thanks is due to Thee with perpetual praise for the receiving of
Thy sacred Body and Blood, the dignity whereof no man is found
able to express.  But what shall I think upon in this Communion
in approaching my Lord, whom I am not able worthily to honour,
and nevertheless whom I long devoutly to receive?  What shall be
better and more healthful meditation for me, than utter
humiliation of myself before Thee, and exaltation of Thine
infinite goodness towards me?  I praise Thee, O my God, and exalt
Thee for evermore.  I despise myself, and cast myself down before
Thee into the deep of my vileness.

3. Behold, Thou art the Saint of saints and I the refuse of
sinners; behold, Thou stoopest unto me who am not worthy to look
upon Thee; behold, Thou comest unto me, Thou willest to be with
me, Thou invitest me to Thy feast.  Thou willest to give me the
heavenly food and bread of angels to eat; none other, in truth,
than Thyself, The living bread, which didst descend from heaven;
and givest life to the world.(1)

4. Behold, whence this love proceedeth! what manner of
condescension shineth forth herein.  What great giving of thanks
and praise is due unto Thee for these benefits!  Oh how salutary
and profitable Thy purpose when Thou didst ordain this!  How
sweet and pleasant the feast when Thou didst give Thyself for
food!  Oh how admirable is thy working, O Lord, how mighty Thy
power, how unspeakable Thy truth!  For Thou didst speak the word,
and all things were made; and this is done which Thou hast
commanded.

5. A thing wonderful, and worthy of faith, and surpassing all the
understanding of man, that Thou, O Lord my God, very God and very
man, givest Thyself altogether to us in a little bread and wine,
and art so our inexhaustible food.  Thou, O Lord of all, who hast
need of nothing, hast willed to dwell in us through Thy
Sacrament.  Preserve my heart and my body undefiled, that with a
joyful and pure conscience I may be able very often to
[celebrate, and](2) receive to my perpetual health.  Thy
mysteries, which Thou hast consecrated and instituted both for
Thine own honour, and for a perpetual memorial.

6. Rejoice, O my soul, and give thanks unto God for so great a
gift and precious consolation, left unto thee in this vale of
tears.  For so oft as thou callest this mystery to mind and
receivest the body of Christ, so often dost thou celebrate the
work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits
of Christ.  For the charity of Christ never groweth less, and the
greatness of His propitiation is never exhausted.  Therefore, by
continual renewal of thy spirit, thou oughtest to dispose thyself
hereunto and to weigh the great mystery of salvation with
attentive consideration.  So great, new, and joyful ought it to
appear to thee when thou comest to communion, as if on this
self-same day Christ for the first time were descending into the
Virgin's womb and becoming man, or hanging on the cross,
suffering and dying for the salvation of mankind.

(1) John vi. 51.
(2) The words in brackets are only suitable for a priest.


CHAPTER III

That it is profitable to Communicate often

The Voice of the Disciple

Behold I come unto Thee, O Lord, that I may be blessed through
Thy gift, and be made joyful in Thy holy feast which Thou, O God,
of Thy goodness hast prepared for the poor.(1)  Behold in Thee is
all that I can and ought to desire, Thou art my salvation and
redemption, my hope and strength, my honour and glory.  Therefore
rejoice the soul of Thy servant this day, for unto Thee, O Lord
Jesus, do I lift up my soul.(2)  I long now to receive Thee
devoutly and reverently, I desire to bring Thee into my house, so
that with Zacchaeus I may be counted worthy to be blessed by Thee
and numbered among the children of Abraham.  My soul hath an
earnest desire for Thy Body, my heart longeth to be united with
Thee.

2. Give me Thyself and it sufficeth, for besides Thee no
consolation availeth.  Without Thee I cannot be, and without Thy
visitation I have no power to live.  And therefore I must needs
draw nigh unto Thee often, and receive Thee for the healing of my
soul, lest haply I faint by the way if I be deprived of heavenly
food.  For so Thou, most merciful Jesus, preaching to the people
and healing many sick, didst once say, I will not send them away
fasting to their own homes, lest they faint by the way.(3)  Deal
therefore now to me in like manner, for Thou left Thyself for the
consolation of the faithful in the Sacrament.  For Thou art the
sweet refreshment of the soul, and he who shall eat Thee worthily
shall be partaker and inheritor of the eternal glory.  Necessary
indeed it is for me, who so often slide backwards and sin, so
quickly wax cold and faint, to renew, cleanse, enkindle myself by
frequent prayers and penitences and receiving of Thy sacred Body
and Blood lest haply by too long abstinence, I fall short of my
holy resolutions.

3. For the imaginations of man's heart are evil from his
youth,(4) and except divine medicine succour him, man slideth
away continually unto the worse.  The Holy Communion therefore
draweth us back from evil, and strengtheneth us for good.  For if
I now be so negligent and lukewarm when I communicate [or
celebrate], how should it be with me, if I receive not this
medicine, and sought not so great a help?  [And though I am not
every day fit nor well prepared to celebrate, I will nevertheless
give diligent heed at due season, to receive the divine
mysteries, and to become partaker of so great grace].  For this
is the one principal consolation of a faithful soul, so long as
it is absent from Thee in mortal body, that being continually
mindful of its God, it receiveth its Beloved with devout spirit.

4. Oh wonderful condescension of Thy pity surrounding us, that
Thou, O Lord God, Creator and Quickener of all spirits, deignest
to come unto a soul so poor and weak, and to appease its hunger
with Thy whole Deity and Humanity.  Oh happy mind and blessed
soul, to which is granted devoutly to receive Thee its Lord God,
and in so receiving Thee to be filled with all spiritual joy!  Oh
how great a Lord doth it entertain, how beloved a Guest doth it
bring in, how delightful a Companion doth it receive, how
faithful a Friend doth it welcome, how beautiful and exalted a
Spouse, above every other Beloved, doth it embrace, One to be
loved above all things that can be desired!  Oh my most sweet
Beloved, let heaven and earth and all the glory of them, be
silent in Thy presence; seeing whatsoever praise and beauty they
have it is of Thy gracious bounty; and they shall never reach
unto the loveliness of Thy Name, Whose Wisdom is infinite.(5)

(1) Psalm lxviii. 10.   (2) Psalm lxxxvi. 4.
(3) Matthew xv. 32.   (4) Genesis viii. 21.
(5) Psalm cxlvii. 5.


CHAPTER IV

That many good gifts are bestowed upon those who Communicate
devoutly

The Voice of the Disciple

O Lord my God, prevent Thou Thy servant with the blessings of Thy
sweetness, that I may be enabled to draw near worthily and
devoutly to Thy glorious Sacrament.  Awaken my heart towards
Thee, and deliver me from heavy slumber.  Visit me with Thy
salvation that I may in spirit taste Thy sweetness, which
plentifully lieth hid in this Sacrament as in a fountain.
Lighten also mine eyes to behold this so great mystery, and
strengthen me that I may believe it with undoubting faith.  For
it is Thy word, not human power; it is Thy holy institution, not
the invention of man.  For no man is found fit in himself to
receive and to understand these things, which transcend even the
wisdom of the Angels.  What portion then shall I, unworthy
sinner, who am but dust and ashes, be able to search into and
comprehend of so deep a Sacrament?

2. O Lord, in the simplicity of my heart, in good and firm faith,
and according to Thy will, I draw nigh unto Thee with hope and
reverence, and truly believe that Thou art here present in the
Sacrament, God and man.  Thou willest therefore that I receive
Thee and unite myself to Thee in charity.  Wherefore I beseech
Thy mercy, and implore Thee to give me Thy special grace, to this
end, that I may be wholly dissolved and overflow with love
towards Thee, and no more suffer any other consolation to enter
into me.  For this most high and most glorious Sacrament is the
health of the soul and the body, the medicine of all spiritual
sickness, whereby I am healed of my sins, my passions are
bridled, temptations are conquered or weakened, more grace is
poured into me, virtue begun is increased, faith is made firm,
hope is strengthened, and charity is enkindled and enlarged.

3. For in this Sacrament Thou hast bestowed many good things and
still bestowest them continually on Thine elect who communicate
devoutly, O my God, Lifter up of my soul, Repairer of human
infirmity, and Giver of all inward consolation.  For Thou pourest
into them much consolation against all sorts of tribulation, and
out of the deep of their own misery Thou liftest them up to the
hope of Thy protection, and with ever new grace, dost inwardly
refresh and enlighten them; so that they who felt themselves to
be anxious and without affection before Communion, afterwards
being refreshed with heavenly food and drink, find themselves
changed for the better.  And even in such wise Thou dealest
severally with Thine elect, that they may truly acknowledge and
clearly make proof that they have nothing whatsoever of their
own, and what goodness and grace come to them from Thee; because
being in themselves cold, hard of heart, indevout, through Thee
they become fervent, zealous, and devout.  For who is there
coming humbly to the fountain of sweetness, carrieth not away
thence at the least some little of that sweetness?  Or who
standing by a large fire, feeleth not from thence a little of its
heat?  And Thou art ever a full and overflowing fountain, a fire
continually burning, and never going out.

4. Wherefore if it is not suffered to me to draw from the fulness
of the fountain, nor to drink unto satisfying, yet will I set my
lips to the mouth of the heavenly conduit, that at least I may
receive a small drop to quench my thirst, that I dry not up
within my heart.  And if I am not yet able to be altogether
heavenly and so enkindled as the Cherubim and Seraphim, yet will
I endeavour to give myself unto devotion, and to prepare my
heart, that I may gain if it be but a little flame of the divine
fire, through the humble receiving of the life-giving Sacrament.
But whatsoever is wanting unto me, O merciful Jesus, Most Holy
Saviour, do Thou of Thy kindness and grace supply, who hast
vouchsafed to call all unto Thee, saying, Come unto me, all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

5. I indeed labour in the sweat of my face, I am tormented with
sorrow of heart, I am burdened with sins, I am disquieted with
temptations, I am entangled and oppressed with many passions, and
there is none to help me, there is none to deliver and ease me,
but Thou, O Lord God, my Saviour, to whom I commit myself and all
things that are mine, that Thou mayest preserve me and lead me
unto life eternal.

   Receive me unto the praise and glory of Thy name, who hast
prepared Thy Body and Blood to be my meat and drink.  Grant, O
Lord God my Saviour, that with coming often to Thy mysteries the
zeal of my devotion may increase.


CHAPTER V

Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and of the office of the priest

The Voice of the Beloved

If thou hadst angelic purity and the holiness of holy John the
Baptist, thou wouldest not be worthy to receive or to minister
this Sacrament.  For this is not deserved by merit of man that a
man should consecrate and minister the Sacrament of Christ, and
take for food the bread of Angels.  Vast is the mystery, and
great is the dignity of the priests, to whom is given what is not
granted to Angels.  For priests only, rightly ordained in the
church, have the power of consecrating and celebrating the Body
of Christ.  The priest indeed is the minister of God, using the
Word of God by God's command and institution; nevertheless God is
there the principal Author and invisible Worker, that to whom all
that He willeth is subject, and all He commandeth is obedient.

2. Therefore thou must believe God Almighty in this most
excellent Sacrament, more than thine own sense or any visible
sign at all.  And therefore with fear and reverence is this work
to be approached.  Take heed therefore and see what it is of
which the ministry is committed to thee by the laying on of the
Bishop's hand.  Behold thou art made a priest and art consecrated
to celebrate.  See now that thou do it before God faithfully and
devoutly at due time, and shew thyself without blame.  Thou hast
not lightened thy burden, but art now bound with a straiter bond
of discipline, and art pledged to a higher degree of holiness.  A
priest ought to be adorned with all virtues and to afford to
others an example of good life.  His conversation must not be
with the popular and common ways of men, but with Angels in
Heaven or with perfect men on earth.

3. A priest clad in holy garments taketh Christ's place that he
may pray unto God with all supplication and humility for himself
and for the whole people.  He must always remember the Passion of
Christ.  He must diligently look upon Christ's footsteps and
fervently endeavour himself to follow them.  He must bear meekly
for God whatsoever ills are brought upon him by others.  He must
mourn for his own sins, and for the sins committed by others, and
may not grow careless of prayer and holy oblation, until he
prevail to obtain grace and mercy.  When the priest celebrateth,
he honoureth God, giveth joy to the Angels, buildeth up the
Church, helpeth the living, hath communion with the departed, and
maketh himself a partaker of all good things.


CHAPTER VI

An inquiry concerning preparation for Communion

The Voice of the Disciple

When I consider Thy dignity, O Lord, and mine own vileness, I
tremble very exceedingly, and am confounded within myself.  For
if I approach not, I fly from life; and if I intrude myself
unworthily, I run into Thy displeasure.  What then shall I do, O
my God, Thou helper and Counsellor in necessities.

2. Teach Thou me the right way; propound unto me some short
exercise befitting Holy Communion.  For it is profitable to know
how I ought to prepare my heart devoutly and reverently for Thee,
to the intent that I may receive Thy Sacrament to my soul's
health [or it may be also for the celebrating this so great and
divine mystery].


CHAPTER VII

Of the examination of conscience, and purpose of amendment

The Voice of the Beloved

Above all things the priest of God must draw nigh, with all
humility of heart and supplicating reverence, with full faith and
pious desire for the honour of God, to celebrate, minister, and
receive this Sacrament.  Diligently examine thy conscience and
with all thy might with true contrition and humble confession
cleanse and purify it, so that thou mayest feel no burden, nor
know anything which bringeth thee remorse and impedeth thy free
approach.  Have displeasure against all thy sins in general, and
specially sorrow and mourn because of thy daily transgressions.
And if thou have time, confess unto God in the secret of thine
heart, all miseries of thine own passion.

2. Lament grievously and be sorry, because thou art still so
carnal and worldly, so unmortified from thy passions, so full of
the motion of concupiscence, so unguarded in thine outward
senses, so often entangled in many vain fancies, so much inclined
to outward things, so negligent of internal; so ready to laughter
and dissoluteness, so unready to weeping and contrition; so prone
to ease and indulgence of the flesh, so dull to zeal and fervour;
so curious to hear novelties and behold beauties, so loth to
embrace things humble and despised; so desirous to have many
things, so grudging in giving, so close in keeping; so
inconsiderate in speaking, so reluctant to keep silence; so
disorderly in manners, so inconsiderate in actions; so eager
after food, so deaf towards the Word of God; so eager after rest,
so slow to labour; so watchful after tales, so sleepy towards
holy watchings; so eager for the end of them, so wandering in
attention to them; so negligent in observing the hours of prayer,
so lukewarm in celebrating, so unfruitful in communicating; so
quickly distracted, so seldom quite collected with thyself; so
quickly moved to anger, so ready for displeasure at others; so
prone to judging, so severe at reproving; so joyful in
prosperity, so weak in adversity; so often making many good
resolutions and bringing them to so little effect.

3. When thou hast confessed and bewailed these and thy other
shortcomings, with sorrow and sore displeasure at thine own
infirmity, make then a firm resolution of continual amendment of
life and of progress in all that is good.  Then moreover with
full resignation and entire will offer thyself to the honour of
