be of those who lagged behind.

P: Then We saved him and his household save his wife; We destined her to
be of those who stayed behind.

S: But We delivered him and his followers except his wife; We ordained
her to be of those who remained behind.

027.058
Y: And We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone): and evil was the
shower on those who were admonished (but heeded not)!

P: And We rained a rain upon them. Dreadful is the rain of those who
have been warned.

S: And We rained on them a rain, and evil was the rain of those who had
been warned.

027.059
Y: Say: Praise be to Allah, and Peace on his servants whom He has chosen
(for his Message). (Who) is better?- Allah or the false gods they
associate (with Him)?

P: Say (O Muhammad): Praise be to Allah, and peace be on His slaves whom
He hath chosen! Is Allah best, or (all) that ye ascribe as partners
(unto Him)?

S: Say: Praise be to Allah and peace on His servants whom He has chosen:
is Allah better, or what they associate (with Him)?

027.060
Y: Or, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and Who sends you down
rain from the sky? Yea, with it We cause to grow well-planted orchards
full of beauty of delight: it is not in your power to cause the growth
of the trees in them. (Can there be another) god besides Allah? Nay,
they are a people who swerve from justice.

P: Is not He (best) Who created the heavens and the earth, and sendeth
down for you water from the sky wherewith We cause to spring forth
joyous orchards, whose trees it never hath been yours to cause to grow.
Is there any Allah beside Allah? Nay, but they are folk who ascribe
equals (unto Him)!

S: Nay, He Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down for you
water from the cloud; then We cause to grow thereby beautiful gardens;
it is not possible for you that you should make the trees thereof to
grow. Is there a god with Allah? Nay! they are people who deviate.

027.061
Y: Or, Who has made the earth firm to live in; made rivers in its midst;
set thereon mountains immovable; and made a separating bar between the
two bodies of flowing water? (can there be another) god besides Allah?
Nay, most of them know not.

P: Is not He (best) Who made the earth a fixed abode, and placed rivers
in the folds thereof, and placed firm hills therein, and hath set a
barrier between the two seas? Is there any Allah beside Allah? Nay, but
most of them know not!

S: Or, Who made the earth a restingplace, and made in it rivers, and
raised on it mountains and placed between the two seas a barrier. Is
there a god with Allah? Nay! most of them do not know!

027.062
Y: Or, Who listens to the (soul) distressed when it calls on Him, and
Who relieves its suffering, and makes you (mankind) inheritors of the
earth? (Can there be another) god besides Allah? Little it is that ye
heed!

P: Is not He (best) Who answereth the wronged one when he crieth unto
Him and removeth the evil, and hath made you viceroys of the earth? Is
there any God beside Allah? Little do they reflect!

S: Or, Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him and removes
the evil, and He will make you successors in the earth. Is there a god
with Allah? Little is it that you mind!

027.063
Y: Or, Who guides you through the depths of darkness on land and sea,
and Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His
Mercy? (Can there be another) god besides Allah?- High is Allah above
what they associate with Him!

P: Is not He (best) Who guideth you in the darkness of the land and the
sea, He Who sendeth the winds as heralds of His mercy? Is there any
God beside Allah? High Exalted be Allah from all that they ascribe as
partner (unto Him)!

S: Or, Who guides you in utter darkness of the land and the sea, and Who
sends the winds as good news before His mercy. Is there a god with
Allah? Exalted by Allah above what they associate (with Him).

027.064
Y: Or, Who originates creation, then repeats it, and who gives you
sustenance from heaven and earth? (Can there be another) god besides
Allah? Say, "Bring forth your argument, if ye are telling the truth!"

P: Is not He (best) Who produceth creation, then reproduceth it, and Who
provideth for you from the heaven and the earth? Is there any God
beside Allah? Say: Bring your proof, if ye are truthful!

S: Or, Who originates the creation, then reproduces it and Who gives you
sustenance from the heaven and the earth. Is there a god With Allah?
Say: Bring your proof if you are truthful.

027.065
Y: Say: None in the heavens or on earth, except Allah, knows what is
hidden: nor can they perceive when they shall be raised up (for
Judgment).

P: Say (O Muhammad): None in the heavens and the earth knoweth the
Unseen save Allah; and they know not when they will be raised (again).

S: Say: No one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen but Allah;
and they do not know when they shall be raised.

027.066
Y: Still less can their knowledge comprehend the Hereafter: Nay, they
are in doubt and uncertainty thereanent; nay, they are blind thereunto!

P: Nay, but doth their knowledge reach to the Hereafter? Nay, for they
are in doubt concerning it. Nay, for they cannot see it.

S: Nay, their knowledge respecting the hereafter is slight and hasty;
nay, they are in doubt about it; nay, they are quite blind to it.

027.067
Y: The Unbelievers say: "What! when we become dust,- we and our
fathers,- shall we really be raised (from the dead)?"

P: Yet those who disbelieve say: When we have become dust like our
fathers, shall we verily be brought forth (again)?

S: And those who disbelieve say: What! when we have become dust and our
fathers (too), shall we certainly be brought forth?

027.068
Y: "It is true we were promised this,- we and our fathers before (us):
these are nothing but tales of the ancients."

P: We were promised this, forsooth, we and our fathers. (All) this is
naught but fables of the men of old.

S: We have certainly been promised this, we and our fathers before;
these are naught but stories of the ancients.

027.069
Y: Say: "Go ye through the earth and see what has been the end of those
guilty (of sin)."

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see the nature of
the sequel for the guilty!

S: Say: Travel in the earth, then see how was the end of the guilty.

027.070
Y: But grieve not over them, nor distress thyself because of their
plots.

P: And grieve thou not for them, nor be in distress because of what they
plot (against thee).

S: And grieve not for them and be not distressed because of what they
plan.

027.071
Y: They also say: "When will this promise (come to pass)? (Say) if ye
are truthful."

P: And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are
truthful?

S: And they say: When will this threat come to pass, if you are
truthful?

027.072
Y: Say: "It may be that some of the events which ye wish to hasten on
may be (close) in your pursuit!"

P: Say: It may be that a part of that which ye would hasten on is close
behind you.

S: Say: Maybe there may have drawn near to you somewhat of that which
you seek to hasten on.

027.073
Y: But verily thy Lord is full of grace to mankind: Yet most of them are
ungrateful.

P: Lo! thy Lord is full of bounty for mankind, but most of them do not
give thanks.

S: And surely your Lord is the Lord of grace to men, but most of them
are not grateful.

027.074
Y: And verily thy Lord knoweth all that their hearts do hide. As well as
all that they reveal.

P: Lo! thy Lord knoweth surely all that their bosoms hide, and all that
they proclaim.

S: And most surely your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what
they manifest.

027.075
Y: Nor is there aught of the unseen, in heaven or earth, but is
(recorded) in a clear record.

P: And there is nothing hidden in the heaven or the earth but it is in a
clear Record.

S: And there is nothing concealed in the heaven and the earth but it is
in a clear book.

027.076
Y: Verily this Qur'an doth explain to the Children of Israel most of the
matters in which they disagree.

P: Lo! this Qur'an narrateth unto the Children of Israel most of that
concerning which they differ.

S: Surely this Quran declares to the children of Israel most of what
they differ in.

027.077
Y: And it certainly is a Guide and a Mercy to those who believe.

P: And lo! it is a guidance and a mercy for believers.

S: And most surely it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers.

027.078
Y: Verily thy Lord will decide between them by His Decree: and He is
Exalted in Might, All-Knowing.

P: Lo! thy Lord will judge between them of His wisdom, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

S: Surely your Lord will judge between them by his judgment, and He is
the Mighty, the Knowing.

027.079
Y: So put thy trust in Allah: for thou art on (the path of) manifest
Truth.

P: Therefor (O Muhammad) put thy trust in Allah, for thou (standest) on
the plain Truth.

S: Therefore rely on Allah; surely you are on the clear truth.

027.080
Y: Truly thou canst not cause the dead to listen, nor canst thou cause
the deaf to hear the call, (especially) when they turn back in retreat.

P: Lo! thou canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou make the
deaf to hear the call when they have turned to flee;

S: Surely you do not make the dead to hear, and you do not make the deaf
to hear the call when they go back retreating.

027.081
Y: Nor canst thou be a guide to the blind, (to prevent them) from
straying: only those wilt thou get to listen who believe in Our Signs,
and they will bow in Islam.

P: Nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error. Thou canst make
none to hear, save those who believe Our revelations and who have
surrendered.

S: Nor can you be a guide to the blind out of their error; you cannot
make to bear (any one) except those who believe in Our communications,
so they submit.

027.082
Y: And when the Word is fulfilled against them (the unjust), we shall
produce from the earth a beast to (face) them: He will speak to them,
for that mankind did not believe with assurance in Our Signs.

P: And when the word is fulfilled concerning them, We shall bring forth
a beast of the earth to speak unto them because mankind had not faith
in Our revelations.

S: And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall wound them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.

027.083
Y: One day We shall gather together from every people a troop of those
who reject our Signs, and they shall be kept in ranks,-

P: And (remind them of) the Day when We shall gather out of every nation
a host of those who denied Our revelations, and they will be set in
array;

S: And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.

027.084
Y: Until, when they come (before the Judgment-seat), (Allah) will say:
"Did ye reject My Signs, though ye comprehended them not in knowledge,
or what was it ye did?"

P: Till, when they come (before their Lord), He will say: Did ye deny My
revelations when ye could not compass them in knowledge, or what was it
that ye did?

S: Until when they come, He will say: Did you reject My communications
while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them? Or what was it that
you did?

027.085
Y: And the Word will be fulfilled against them, because of their
wrong-doing, and they will be unable to speak (in plea).

P: And the Word will be fulfilled concerning them because they have done
wrong, and they will not speak.

S: And the word shall come to pass against them because they were
unjust, so they shall not speak.

027.086
Y: See they not that We have made the Night for them to rest in and the
Day to give them light? Verily in this are Signs for any people that
believe!

P: Have they not seen how We have appointed the night that they may rest
therein, and the day sight-giving? Lo! therein verily are portents for
a people who believe.

S: Do they not consider that We have made the night that they may rest
therein, and the day to give light? Most surely there are signs in this
for a people who believe.

027.087
Y: And the Day that the Trumpet will be sounded - then will be smitten
with terror those who are in the heavens, and those who are on earth,
except such as Allah will please (to exempt): and all shall come to His
(Presence) as beings conscious of their lowliness.

P: And (remind them of) the Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and all
who are in the heavens and the earth will start in fear, save him whom
Allah willeth. And all come unto Him, humbled.

S: And on the day when the trumpet shall be blown, then those who are in
the heavens and those who are in the earth shall be terrified except
such as Allah please, and all shall come to him abased.

027.088
Y: Thou seest the mountains and thinkest them firmly fixed: but they
shall pass away as the clouds pass away: (such is) the artistry of
Allah, who disposes of all things in perfect order: for he is well
acquainted with all that ye do.

P: And thou seest the hills thou deemest solid flying with the flight of
clouds: the doing of Allah Who perfecteth all things. Lo! He is
Informed of what ye do.

S: And you see the mountains, you think them to be solid, and they shall
pass away as the passing away of the cloud-- the handiwork of Allah Who
has made every thing thoroughly; surely He is Aware of what you do.

027.089
Y: If any do good, good will (accrue) to them therefrom; and they will
be secure from terror that Day.

P: Whoso bringeth a good deed will have better than its worth; and such
are safe from fear that Day.

S: Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it; and they shall be
secure from terror on the day.

027.090
Y: And if any do evil, their faces will be thrown headlong into the
Fire: "Do ye receive a reward other than that which ye have earned by
your deeds?"

P: And whoso bringeth an ill-deed, such will be flung down on their
faces in the Fire. Are ye rewarded aught save what ye did?

S: And whoever brings evil, these shall be thrown down on their faces
into the fire; shall you be rewarded (for) aught except what you did?

027.091
Y: For me, I have been commanded to serve the Lord of this city, Him Who
has sanctified it and to Whom (belong) all things: and I am commanded
to be of those who bow in Islam to Allah's Will,-

P: (Say): I (Muhammad) am commanded only to serve the Lord of this land
which He hath hallowed, and unto Whom all things belong. And I am
commanded to be of those who surrender (unto Him),

S: I am commanded only that I should serve the Lord of this city, Who
has made it sacred, and His are all things; and I am commanded that I
should be of these who submit;

027.092
Y: And to rehearse the Qur'an: and if any accept guidance, they do it
for the good of their own souls, and if any stray, say: "I am only a
Warner".

P: And to recite the Qur'an. And whoso goeth right, goeth right only for
(the good of) his own soul; and as for him who goeth astray - (Unto
him) say: Lo! I am only a warner.

S: And that I should recite the Quran. Therefore whoever goes aright, he
goes aright for his own soul, and whoever goes astray, then say: I am
only one of the warners.

027.093
Y: And say: "Praise be to Allah, Who will soon show you His Signs, so
that ye shall know them"; and thy Lord is not unmindful of all that ye
do.

P: And say: Praise be to Allah Who will show you His portents so that ye
shall know them. And thy Lord is not unaware of what ye (mortals) do.

S: And say: Praise be to Allah, He will show you His signs so that you
shall recognize them; nor is your Lord heedless of what you do.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 28:

                       AL-QASAS (THE STORY, STORIES)
 Total Verses: 88 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

028.001
Y: Ta. Sin. Mim.

P: Ta. Sin. Mim.

S: Ta sin Mim.

028.002
Y: These are Verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

P: These are revelations of the Scripture that maketh plain.

S: These are the verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

028.003
Y: We rehearse to thee some of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in Truth,
for people who believe.

P: We narrate unto thee (somewhat) of the story of Moses and Pharaoh
with truth, for folk who believe.

S: We recite to you from the account of Musa and Firon with truth for
people who believe.

028.004
Y: Truly Pharaoh elated himself in the land and broke up its people into
sections, depressing a small group among them: their sons he slew, but
he kept alive their females: for he was indeed a maker of mischief.

P: Lo! Pharaoh exalted himself in the earth and made its people castes.
A tribe among them he oppressed, killing their sons and sparing their
women. Lo! he was of those who work corruption.

S: Surely Firon exalted himself in the land and made its people into
parties, weakening one party from among them; he slaughtered their sons
and let their women live; surely he was one of the mischiefmakers.

028.005
Y: And We wished to be Gracious to those who were being depressed in the
land, to make them leaders (in Faith) and make them heirs,

P: And We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the
earth, and to make them examples and to make them the inheritors,

S: And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs,

028.006
Y: To establish a firm place for them in the land, and to show Pharaoh,
Haman, and their hosts, at their hands, the very things against which
they were taking precautions.

P: And to establish them in the earth, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and
their hosts that which they feared from them.

S: And to grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and
their hosts see from them what they feared.

028.007
Y: So We sent this inspiration to the mother of Moses: "Suckle (thy
child), but when thou hast fears about him, cast him into the river,
but fear not nor grieve: for We shall restore him to thee, and We shall
make him one of Our messengers."

P: And We inspired the mother of Moses, saying: Suckle him and, when
thou fearest for him, then cast him into the river and fear not nor
grieve. Lo! We shall bring him back unto thee and shall make him (one)
of Our messengers.

S: And We revealed to Musa's mothers, saying: Give him suck, then when
you fear for him, cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve;
surely We will bring him back to you and make him one of the
messengers.

028.008
Y: Then the people of Pharaoh picked him up (from the river): (It was
intended) that (Moses) should be to them an adversary and a cause of
sorrow: for Pharaoh and Haman and (all) their hosts were men of sin.

P: And the family of Pharaoh took him up, that he might become for them
an enemy and a sorrow, Lo! Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were ever
sinning.

S: And Firon's family took him up that he might be an enemy and a grief
for them; surely Firon and Haman and their hosts were wrongdoers.

028.009
Y: The wife of Pharaoh said: "(Here is) joy of the eye, for me and for
thee: slay him not. It may be that he will be use to us, or we may
adopt him as a son." And they perceived not (what they were doing)!

P: And the wife of Pharaoh said: (He will be) a consolation for me and
for thee. Kill him not. Peradventure he may be of use to us, or we may
choose him for a son. And they perceived not.

S: And Firon's wife said: A refreshment of the eye to me and to you; do
not slay him; maybe he will be useful to us, or we may take him for a
son; and they did not perceive.

028.010
Y: But there came to be a void in the heart of the mother of Moses: She
was going almost to disclose his (case), had We not strengthened her
heart (with faith), so that she might remain a (firm) believer.

P: And the heart of the mother of Moses became void, and she would have
betrayed him if We had not fortified her heart, that she might be of
the believers.

S: And the heart of Musa's mother was free (from anxiety) she would have
almost disclosed it had We not strengthened her heart so that she might
be of the believers.

028.011
Y: And she said to the sister of (Moses), "Follow him" so she (the
sister) watched him in the character of a stranger. And they knew not.

P: And she said unto his sister: Trace him. So she observed him from
afar, and they perceived not.

S: And she said to his sister: Follow him up. So she watched him from a
distance while they did not perceive,

028.012
Y: And we ordained that he refused suck at first, until (His sister came
up and) said: "Shall I point out to you the people of a house that will
nourish and bring him up for you and be sincerely attached to him?"...

P: And We had before forbidden foster-mothers for him, so she said:
Shall I show you a household who will rear him for you and take care of
him?

S: And We ordained that he refused to suck any foster mother before, so
she said: Shall I point out to you the people of a house who will take
care of him for you, and they will be benevolent to him?

028.013
Y: Thus did We restore him to his mother, that her eye might be
comforted, that she might not grieve, and that she might know that the
promise of Allah is true: but most of them do not understand.

P: So We restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not
grieve, and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. But
most of them know not.

S: So We gave him back to his mother that her eye might be refreshed,
and that she might no grieve, and that she might know that the promise
of Allah is true, but most of them do not know.

028.014
Y: When he reached full age, and was firmly established (in life), We
bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge: for thus do We reward those who
do good.

P: And when he reached his full strength and was ripe, We gave him
wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We reward the good.

S: And when he attained his maturity and became full grown, We granted
him wisdom and knowledge; and thus do We reward those who do good (to
others).

028.015
Y: And he entered the city at a time when its people were not watching:
and he found there two men fighting,- one of his own religion, and the
other, of his foes. Now the man of his own religion appealed to him
against his foe, and Moses struck him with his fist and made an end of
him. He said: "This is a work of Evil (Satan): for he is an enemy that
manifestly misleads!"

P: And he entered the city at a time of carelessness of its folk, and he
found therein two men fighting, one of his own caste, and the other of
his enemies; and he who was of his caste asked him for help against him
who was of his enemies. So Moses struck him with his fist and killed
him. He said: This is of the devil's doing. Lo! he is an enemy, a mere
misleader.

S: And he went into the city at a time of unvigilance on the part of its
people, so he found therein two men fighting, one being of his party
and the other of his foes, and he who was of his party cried out to him
for help against him who was of his enemies, so Musa struck him with
his fist and killed him. He said: This is on account of the Shaitan's
doing; surely he is an enemy, openly leading astray.

028.016
Y: He prayed: "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul! Do Thou then
forgive me!" So (Allah) forgave him: for He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! I have wronged my soul, so forgive me. Then He
forgave him. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

S: He said: My Lord! surely I have done harm to myself, so do Thou
protect me. So He protected him; surely He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.

028.017
Y: He said: "O my Lord! For that Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace on me,
never shall I be a help to those who sin!"

P: He said: My Lord! Forasmuch as Thou hast favoured me, I will
nevermore be a supporter of the guilty.

S: He said: My Lord! because Thou hast bestowed a favor on me, I shall
never be a backer of the guilty.

028.018
Y: So he saw the morning in the city, looking about, in a state of fear,
when behold, the man who had, the day before, sought his help called
aloud for his help (again). Moses said to him: "Thou art truly, it is
clear, a quarrelsome fellow!"

P: And morning found him in the city, fearing, vigilant, when behold! he
who had appealed to him the day before cried out to him for help. Moses
said unto him: Lo! thou art indeed a mere hothead.

S: And he was in the city, fearing, awaiting, when lo! he who had asked
his assistance the day before was crying out to him for aid. Musa said
to him: You are most surely one erring manifestly.

028.019
Y: Then, when he decided to lay hold of the man who was an enemy to both
of them, that man said: "O Moses! Is it thy intention to slay me as
thou slewest a man yesterday? Thy intention is none other than to
become a powerful violent man in the land, and not to be one who sets
things right!"

P: And when he would have fallen upon the man who was an enemy unto them
both, he said: O Moses! Wouldst thou kill me as thou didst kill a
person yesterday. Thou wouldst be nothing but a tyrant in the land,
thou wouldst not be of the reformers.

S: So when he desired to seize him who was an enemy to them both, he
said: O Musa! do you intend to kill me as you killed a person
yesterday? You desire nothing but that you should be a tyrant in the
land, and you do not desire to be of those who act aright.

028.020
Y: And there came a man, running, from the furthest end of the City. He
said: "O Moses! the Chiefs are taking counsel together about thee, to
slay thee: so get thee away, for I do give thee sincere advice."

P: And a man came from the uttermost part of the city, running. He said:
O Moses! Lo! the chiefs take counsel against thee to slay thee;
therefor escape. Lo! I am of those who give thee good advice.

S: And a man came running from the remotest part of the city. He said: O
Musa! surely the chiefs are consulting together to slay you, therefore
depart (at once); surely I am of those who wish well to you.

028.021
Y: He therefore got away therefrom, looking about, in a state of fear.
He prayed "O my Lord! save me from people given to wrong-doing."

P: So he escaped from thence, fearing, vigilant. He said: My Lord!
Deliver me from the wrongdoing folk.

S: So he went forth therefrom, fearing, awaiting, (and) he said: My
Lord! deliver me from the unjust people.

028.022
Y: Then, when he turned his face towards (the land of) Madyan, he said:
"I do hope that my Lord will show me the smooth and straight Path."

P: And when he turned his face toward Midian, he said: Peradventure my
Lord will guide me in the right road.

S: And when he turned his face towards Madyan, he said: Maybe my Lord
will guide me in the right path.

028.023
Y: And when he arrived at the watering (place) in Madyan, he found there
a group of men watering (their flocks), and besides them he found two
women who were keeping back (their flocks). He said: "What is the
matter with you?" They said: "We cannot water (our flocks) until the
shepherds take back (their flocks): And our father is a very old man."

P: And when he came unto the water of Midian he found there a whole
tribe of men, watering. And he found apart from them two women keeping
back (their flocks). He said: What aileth you? The two said: We cannot
give (our flocks) to drink till the shepherds return from the water;
and our father is a very old man.

S: And when he came to the water of Madyan, he found on it a group of
men watering, and he found besides them two women keeping back (their
flocks). He said: What is the matter with you? They said: We cannot
water until the shepherds take away (their sheep) from the water, and
our father is a very old man.

028.024
Y: So he watered (their flocks) for them; then he turned back to the
shade, and said: "O my Lord! truly am I in (desperate) need of any good
that Thou dost send me!"...

P: So he watered (their flock) for them. Then he turned aside into the
shade, and said: My Lord! I am needy of whatever good Thou sendest down
for me.

S: So he watered (their sheep) for them, then went back to the shade and
said: My Lord! surely I stand in need of whatever good Thou mayest send
down to me.

028.025
Y: Afterwards one of the (damsels) came (back) to him, walking
bashfully. She said: "My father invites thee that he may reward thee
for having watered (our flocks) for us." So when he came to him and
narrated the story, he said: "Fear thou not: (well) hast thou escaped
from unjust people."

P: Then there came unto him one of the two women, walking shyly. She
said: Lo! my father biddeth thee, that he may reward thee with a
payment for that thou didst water (the flock) for us. Then, when he
came unto him and told him the (whole) story, he said: Fear not! Thou
hast escaped from the wrongdoing folk.

S: Then one of the two women came to him walking bashfully. She said: My
father invites you that he may give you the reward of your having
watered for us. So when he came to him and gave to him the account, he
said: Fear not, you are secure from the unjust people.

028.026
Y: Said one of the (damsels): "O my (dear) father! engage him on wages:
truly the best of men for thee to employ is the (man) who is strong and
trusty"....

P: One of the two women said: O my father! Hire him! For the best (man)
that thou canst hire in the strong, the trustworthy.

S: Said one of them: O my father! employ him, surely the best of those
that you can employ is the strong man, the faithful one.

028.027
Y: He said: "I intend to wed one of these my daughters to thee, on
condition that thou serve me for eight years; but if thou complete ten
years, it will be (grace) from thee. But I intend not to place thee
under a difficulty: thou wilt find me, indeed, if Allah wills, one of
the righteous."

P: He said: Lo! I fain would marry thee to one of these two daughters of
mine on condition that thou hirest thyself to me for (the term of)
eight pilgrimages. Then if thou completest ten it will be of thine own
accord, for I would not make it hard for thee. Allah willing, thou wilt
find me of the righteous.

S: He said: I desire to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you
on condition that you should serve me for eight years; but if you
complete ten, it will be of your own free will, and I do not wish to be
hard to you; if Allah please, you will find me one of the good.

028.028
Y: He said: "Be that (the agreement) between me and thee: whichever of
the two terms I fulfil, let there be no ill-will to me. Be Allah a
witness to what we say."

P: He said: That (is settled) between thee and me. Whichever of the two
terms I fulfil, there will be no injustice to me, and Allah is Surety
over what we say.

S: He said: This shall be (an agreement) between me and you; whichever
of the two terms I fulfill, there shall be no wrongdoing to me; and
Allah is a witness of what we say.

028.029
Y: Now when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his
family, he perceived a fire in the direction of Mount Tur. He said to
his family: "Tarry ye; I perceive a fire; I hope to bring you from
there some information, or a burning firebrand, that ye may warm
yourselves."

P: Then, when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his
housefolk, he saw in the distance a fire and said unto his housefolk:
Bide ye (here). Lo! I see in the distance a fire; peradventure I shall
bring you tidings thence, or a brand from the fire that ye may warm
yourselves.

S: So when Musa had fulfilled the term, and he journeyed with his
family, he perceived on this side of the mountain a fire. He said to
his family: Wait, I have seen a fire, maybe I will bring to you from it
some news or a brand of fire, so that you may warm yourselves.

028.030
Y: But when he came to the (fire), a voice was heard from the right bank
of the valley, from a tree in hallowed ground: "O Moses! Verily I am
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds...."

P: And when he reached it, he was called from the right side of the
valley in the blessed field, from the tree: O Moses! Lo! I, even I, am
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds;

S: And when he came to it, a voice was uttered from the right side of
the valley in the blessed spot of the bush, saying: O Musa! surely I am
Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

028.031
Y: "Now do thou throw thy rod!" but when he saw it moving (of its own
accord) as if it had been a snake, he turned back in retreat, and
retraced not his steps: "O Moses!" (It was said), "Draw near, and fear
not: for thou art of those who are secure."

P: Throw down thy staff. And when he saw it writhing as it had been a
demon, he turned to flee headlong, (and it was said unto him): O Moses!
Draw nigh and fear not. Lo! thou art of those who are secure.

S: And saying: Cast down you staff. So when he saw it in motion as if it
were a serpent, he turned back retreating, and did not return. O Musa!
come forward and fear not; surely you are of those who are secure;

028.032
Y: "Move thy hand into thy bosom, and it will come forth white without
stain (or harm), and draw thy hand close to thy side (to guard) against
fear. Those are the two credentials from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his
Chiefs: for truly they are a people rebellious and wicked."

P: Thrust thy hand into the bosom of thy robe it will come forth white
without hurt. And guard thy heart from fear. Then these shall be two
proofs from your Lord unto Pharaoh and his chiefs. Lo! they are
evil-living folk.

S: Enter your hand into the opening of your bosom, it will come forth
white without evil, and draw your hand to yourself to ward off fear: so
these two shall be two arguments from your Lord to Firon and his
chiefs, surely they are a transgressing people.

028.033
Y: He said: "O my Lord! I have slain a man among them, and I fear lest
they slay me."

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! I killed a man among them and I fear that they
will kill me.

S: He said: My Lord! surely I killed one of them, so I fear lest they
should slay me;

028.034
Y: "And my brother Aaron - He is more eloquent in speech than I: so send
him with me as a helper, to confirm (and strengthen) me: for I fear
that they may accuse me of falsehood."

P: My brother Aaron is more eloquent than me in speech. Therefor send
him with me as a helper to confirm me. Lo! I fear that they will give
the lie to me.

S: And my brother, Haroun, he is more eloquent of tongue than I,
therefore send him with me as an aider, verifying me: surely I fear
that they would reject me.

028.035
Y: He said: "We will certainly strengthen thy arm through thy brother,
and invest you both with authority, so they shall not be able to touch
you: with Our Sign shall ye triumph,- you two as well as those who
follow you."

P: He said: We will strengthen thine arm with thy brother, and We will
give unto you both power so that they cannot reach you for Our
portents. Ye twain, and those who follow you, will be the winners.

S: He said: We will strengthen your arm with your brother, and We will
give you both an authority, so that they shall not reach you; (go) with
Our signs; you two and those who follow you shall be uppermost.

028.036
Y: When Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said: "This is
nothing but sorcery faked up: never did we head the like among our
fathers of old!"

P: But when Moses came unto them with Our clear tokens, they said: This
is naught but invented magic. We never heard of this among our fathers
of old.

S: So when Musa came to them with Our clear signs, they said: This is
nothing but forged enchantment, and we never heard of it amongst our
fathers of old.

028.037
Y: Moses said: "My Lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance
from Him and whose end will be best in the Hereafter: certain it is
that the wrong-doers will not prosper."

P: And Moses said: My Lord is Best Aware of him who bringeth guidance
from His presence, and whose will be the sequel of the Home (of bliss).
Lo! wrong-doers will not be successful.

S: And Musa said: My Lord knows best who comes with guidance from Him,
and whose shall be the good end of the abode; surely the unjust shall
not be successful.

028.038
Y: Pharaoh said: "O Chiefs! no god do I know for you but myself:
therefore, O Haman! light me a (kiln to bake bricks) out of clay, and
build me a lofty palace, that I may mount up to the god of Moses: but
as far as I am concerned, I think (Moses) is a liar!"

P: And Pharaoh said: O chiefs! I know not that ye have a god other than
me, so kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake the mud; and set up for
me a lofty tower in order that I may survey the god of Moses; and lo! I
deem him of the liars.

S: And Firon said: O chiefs! I do not know of any god for you besides
myself; therefore kindle a fire for me, O Haman, for brick, then
prepare for me a lofty building so that I may obtain knowledge of
Musa's god, and most surely I think him to be one of the liars.

028.039
Y: And he was arrogant and insolent in the land, beyond reason,- He and
his hosts: they thought that they would not have to return to Us!

P: And he and his hosts were haughty in the land without right, and
deemed that they would never be brought back to Us.

S: And he was unjustly proud in the land, he and his hosts, and they
deemed that they would not be brought back to Us.

028.040
Y: So We seized him and his hosts, and We flung them into the sea: Now
behold what was the end of those who did wrong!

P: Therefor We seized him and his hosts, and abandoned them unto the
sea. Behold the nature of the consequence for evil-doers!

S: So We caught hold of him and his hosts, then We cast them into the
sea, and see how was the end of the unjust.

028.041
Y: And we made them (but) leaders inviting to the Fire; and on the Day
of Judgment no help shall they find.

P: And We made them patterns that invite unto the Fire, and on the Day
of Resurrection they will not be helped.

S: And We made them Imams who call to the fire, and on the day of
resurrection they shall not be assisted.

028.042
Y: in this world We made a curse to follow them and on the Day of
Judgment they will be among the loathed (and despised).

P: And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and on the Day of
Resurrection they will be among the hateful.

S: And We caused a curse to follow them in this world, and on the day of
resurrection they shall be of those made to appear hideous.

028.043
Y: We did reveal to Moses the Book after We had destroyed the earlier
generations, (to give) Insight to men, and guidance and Mercy, that
they might receive admonition.

P: And We verily gave the Scripture unto Moses after We had destroyed
the generations of old: clear testimonies for mankind, and a guidance
and a mercy, that haply they might reflect.

S: And certainly We gave Musa the Book after We had destroyed the former
generations, clear arguments for men and a guidance and a mercy, that
they may be mindful.

028.044
Y: Thou wast not on the Western side when We decreed the Commission to
Moses, nor wast thou a witness (of those events).

P: And thou (Muhammad) wast not on the western side (of the Mount) when
We expounded unto Moses the commandment, and thou wast not among those
present;

S: And you were not on the western side when We revealed to Musa the
commandment, and you were not among the witnesses;

028.045
Y: But We raised up (new) generations, and long were the ages that
passed over them; but thou wast not a dweller among the people of
Madyan, rehearsing Our Signs to them; but it is We Who send messengers
(with inspiration).

P: But We brought forth generations, and their lives dragged on for
them. And thou wast not a dweller in Midian, reciting unto them Our
revelations, but We kept sending (messengers to men).

S: But We raised up generations, then life became prolonged to them; and
you were not dwelling among the people of Madyan, reciting to them Our
communications, but We were the senders.

028.046
Y: Nor wast thou at the side of (the Mountain of) Tur when we called (to
Moses). Yet (art thou sent) as Mercy from thy Lord, to give warning to
a people to whom no warner had come before thee: in order that they may
receive admonition.

P: And thou was not beside the Mount when We did call; but (the
knowledge of it is) a mercy from thy Lord that thou mayst warn a folk
unto whom no warner came before thee, that haply they may give heed.

S: And you were not on this side of the mountain when We called, but a
mercy from your Lord that you may warn a people to whom no warner came
before you, that they may be mindful.

028.047
Y: If (We had) not (sent thee to the Quraish),- in case a calamity
should seize them for (the deeds) that their hands have sent forth,
they might say: "Our Lord! why didst Thou not sent us a messenger? We
should then have followed Thy Signs and been amongst those who
believe!"

P: Otherwise, if disaster should afflict them because of that which
their own hands have sent before (them), they might say: Our Lord! Why
sentest Thou no messenger unto us, that we might have followed Thy
revelations and been of the believers?

S: And were it not that there should befall them a disaster for what
their hands have sent before, then they should say: Our Lord! why didst
Thou not send to us a messenger so that we should have followed Thy
communications and been of the believers!

028.048
Y: But (now), when the Truth has come to them from Ourselves, they say,
"Why are not (Signs) sent to him, like those which were sent to Moses?"
Do they not then reject (the Signs) which were formerly sent to Moses?
They say: "Two kinds of sorcery, each assisting the other!" And they
say: "For us, we reject all (such things)!"

P: But when there came unto them the Truth from Our presence, they said:
Why is he not given the like of what was given unto Moses? Did they not
disbelieve in that which was given unto Moses of old? They say: Two
magics that support each other; and they say: Lo! in both we are
disbelievers.

S: But (now) when the truth has come to them from Us, they say: Why is
he not given the like of what was given to Musa? What! did they not
disbelieve in what Musa was given before? They say: Two magicians
backing up each other; and they say: Surely we are unbelievers in all.

028.049
Y: Say: "Then bring ye a Book from Allah, which is a better guide than
either of them, that I may follow it! (do), if ye are truthful!"

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Then bring a scripture from the presence
of Allah that giveth clearer guidance than these two (that) I may
follow it, if ye are truthful.

S: Say: Then bring some (other) book from Allah which is a better guide
than both of them, (that) I may follow it, if you are truthful.

028.050
Y: But if they hearken not to thee, know that they only follow their own
lusts: and who is more astray than one who follow his own lusts, devoid
of guidance from Allah? for Allah guides not people given to
wrong-doing.

P: And if they answer thee not, then know that what they follow is their
lusts. And who goeth farther astray than he who followeth his lust
without guidance from Allah. Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

S: But if they do not answer you, then know that they only follow their
low desires; and who is more erring than he who follows his low desires
without any guidance from Allah? Surely Allah does not guide the unjust
people.

028.051
Y: Now have We caused the Word to reach them themselves, in order that
they may receive admonition.

P: And now verily We have caused the Word to reach them, that haply they
may give heed.

S: And certainly We have made the word to reach them so that they may be
mindful.

028.052
Y: Those to whom We sent the Book before this,- they do believe in this
(revelation):

P: Those unto whom We gave the Scripture before it, they believe in it,

S: (As to) those whom We gave the Book before it, they are believers in
it.

028.053
Y: And when it is recited to them, they say: "We believe therein, for it
is the Truth from our Lord: indeed we have been Muslims (bowing to
Allah's Will) from before this."

P: And when it is recited unto them, they say: We believe in it. Lo! it
is the Truth from our Lord. Lo! even before it we were of those who
surrender (unto Him).

S: And when it is recited to them they say: We believe in it surely it
is the truth from our Lord; surely we were submitters before this.

028.054
Y: Twice will they be given their reward, for that they have persevered,
that they avert Evil with Good, and that they spend (in charity) out of
what We have given them.

P: These will be given their reward twice over, because they are
steadfast and repel evil with good, and spend of that wherewith We have
provided them,

S: These shall be granted their reward twice, because they are steadfast
and they repel evil with good and spend out of what We have given them.

028.055
Y: And when they hear vain talk, they turn away therefrom and say:
"To us our deeds, and to you yours; peace be to you: we seek not the
ignorant."

P: And when they hear vanity they withdraw from it and say: Unto us our
works and unto you your works. Peace be unto you! We desire not the
ignorant.

S: And when they hear idle talk they turn aside from it and say: We
shall have our deeds and you shall have your deeds; peace be on you, we
do not desire the ignorant.

028.056
Y: It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one, whom thou
lovest; but Allah guides those whom He will and He knows best those who
receive guidance.

P: Lo! thou (O Muhammad) guidest not whom thou lovest, but Allah guideth
whom He will. And He is Best Aware of those who walk aright.

S: Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He
pleases, and He knows best the followers of the right way.

028.057
Y: They say: "If we were to follow the guidance with thee, we should be
snatched away from our land." Have We not established for them a secure
sanctuary, to which are brought as tribute fruits of all kinds,- a
provision from Ourselves? but most of them understand not.

P: And they say: If we were to follow the Guidance with thee we should
be torn out of our land. Have We not established for them a sure
sanctuary, whereunto the produce of all things is brought (in trade), a
provision from Our presence? But most of them know not.

S: And they say: If we follow the guidance with you, we shall be carried
off from our country. What! have We not settled them in a safe, sacred
territory to which fruits of every kind shall be drawn?-- a sustenance
from Us; but most of them do not know.

028.058
Y: And how many populations We destroyed, which exulted in their life
(of ease and plenty)! now those habitations of theirs, after them, are
deserted,- All but a (miserable) few! and We are their heirs!

P: And how many a community have We destroyed that was thankless for its
means of livelihood! And yonder are their dwellings, which have not
been inhabited after them save a little. And We, even We, were the
inheritors.

S: And how many a town have We destroyed which exulted in its means of
subsistence, so these are their abodes, they have not been dwelt in
after them except a little, and We are the inheritors,

028.059
Y: Nor was thy Lord the one to destroy a population until He had sent to
its centre a messenger, rehearsing to them Our Signs; nor are We going
to destroy a population except when its members practise iniquity.

P: And never did thy Lord destroy the townships, till He had raised up
in their mother(-town) a messenger reciting unto them Our revelations.
And never did We destroy the townships unless the folk thereof were
evil-doers.

S: And your Lord never destroyed the towns until He raised in their
metropolis a messenger, reciting to them Our communications, and We
never destroyed the towns except when their people were unjust.

028.060
Y: The (material) things which ye are given are but the conveniences of
this life and the glitter thereof; but that which is with Allah is
better and more enduring: will ye not then be wise?

P: And whatsoever ye have been given is a comfort of the life of the
world and an ornament thereof; and that which Allah hath is better and
more lasting. Have ye then no sense?

S: And whatever things you have been given are only a provision of this
world's life and its adornment, and whatever is with Allah is better
and more lasting; do you not then understand?

028.061
Y: Are (these two) alike?- one to whom We have made a goodly promise,
and who is going to reach its (fulfilment), and one to whom We have
given the good things of this life, but who, on the Day of Judgment, is
to be among those brought up (for punishment)?

P: Is he whom We have promised a fair promise which he will find (true)
like him whom We suffer to enjoy awhile the comfort of the life of the
world, then on the Day of Resurrection he will be of those arraigned?

S: Is he to whom We have promised a goodly promise which he shall meet
with like him whom We have provided with the provisions of this world's
life, then on the day of resurrection he shall be of those who are
brought up?

028.062
Y: That Day (Allah) will call to them, and say "Where are my
'partners'?- whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

P: On the day when He will call unto them and say: Where are My partners
whom ye imagined?

S: And on the day when He will call them and say: Where are those whom
you deemed to be My associates?

028.063
Y: Those against whom the charge will be proved, will say: "Our Lord!
These are the ones whom we led astray: we led them astray, as we were
astray ourselves: we free ourselves (from them) in Thy presence: it was
not us they worshipped."

P: Those concerning whom the Word will have come true will say: Our
Lord! These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray even as we
ourselves were astray. We declare our innocence before Thee: us they
never worshipped.

S: Those against whom the sentence has become confirmed will say: Our
Lord! these are they whom we caused to err; we caused them to err as we
ourselves did err; to Thee we declare ourselves to be clear (of them);
they never served Us.

028.064
Y: It will be said (to them): "Call upon your 'partners' (for help)":
they will call upon them, but they will not listen to them; and they
will see the Penalty (before them); (how they will wish) 'if only they
had been open to guidance!'

P: And it will be said: Cry unto your (so-called) partners (of Allah).
And they will cry unto them, and they will give no answer unto them,
and they will see the Doom. Ah, if they had but been guided!

S: And it will be said: Call your associate-gods. So they will call upon
them, but they will not answer them, and they shall see the punishment;
would that they had followed the right way!

028.065
Y: That Day (Allah) will call to them, and say: "What was the answer ye
gave to the messengers?"

P: And on the Day when He will call unto them and say: What answer gave
ye to the messengers?

S: And on the day when He shall call them and say: What was the answer
you gave to the messengers?

028.066
Y: Then the (whole) story that Day will seem obscure to them (like light
to the blind) and they will not be able (even) to question each other.

P: On that day (all) tidings will be dimmed for them, nor will they ask
one of another,

S: Then the pleas shall become obscure to them on that day, so they
shall not ask each other.

028.067
Y: But any that (in this life) had repented, believed, and worked
righteousness, will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation.

P: But as for him who shall repent and believe and do right, he haply
may be one of the successful.

S: But as to him who repents and believes and does good, maybe he will
be among the successful:

028.068
Y: Thy Lord does create and choose as He pleases: no choice have they
(in the matter): Glory to Allah! and far is He above the partners they
ascribe (to Him)!

P: Thy Lord bringeth to pass what He willeth and chooseth. They have
never any choice. Glorified be Allah and Exalted above all that they
associate (with Him)!

S: And your Lord creates and chooses whom He pleases; to choose is not
theirs; glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what they associate
(with Him).

028.069
Y: And thy Lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they
reveal.

P: And thy Lord knoweth what their breasts conceal, and what they
publish.

S: And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they
manifest.

028.070
Y: And He is Allah: There is no god but He. To Him be praise, at the
first and at the last: for Him is the Command, and to Him shall ye
(all) be brought back.

P: And He is Allah; there is no God save Him. His is all praise in the
former and the latter (state), and His is the command, and unto Him ye
will be brought back.

S: And He is Allah, there is no god but He! All praise is due to Him in
this (life) and the hereafter, and His is the judgment, and to Him you
shall be brought back.

028.071
Y: Say: See ye? If Allah were to make the night perpetual over you to
the Day of Judgment, what god is there other than Allah, who can give
you enlightenment? Will ye not then hearken?

P: Say: Have ye thought, if Allah made night everlasting for you till
the Day of Resurrection, who is a god beside Allah who could bring you
light? Will ye not then hear?

S: Say: Tell me, if Allah were to make the night to continue incessantly
on you till the day of resurrection, who is the god besides Allah that
could bring you light? Do you not then hear?

028.072
Y: Say: See ye? If Allah were to make the day perpetual over you to the
Day of Judgment, what god is there other than Allah, who can give you a
night in which ye can rest? Will ye not then see?

P: Say: Have ye thought, if Allah made day everlasting for you till the
Day of Resurrection, who is a god beside Allah who could bring you
night wherein ye rest? Will ye not then see?

S: Say: Tell me, if Allah were to make the day to continue incessantly
on you till the day of resurrection, who is the god besides Allah that
could bring you the night in which you take rest? Do you not then see?

028.073
Y: It is out of His Mercy that He has made for you Night and Day,- that
ye may rest therein, and that ye may seek of his Grace;- and in order
that ye may be grateful.

P: Of His mercy hath He appointed for you night and day, that therein ye
may rest, and that ye may seek His bounty, and that haply ye may be
thankful.

S: And out of His mercy He has made for you the night and the day, that
you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His grace, and that you
may give thanks.

028.074
Y: The Day that He will call on them, He will say: "Where are my
'partners'? whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

P: And on the Day when He shall call unto them and say: Where are My
partners whom ye pretended?

S: And on the day when He shall call them and say: Where are those whom
you deemed to be My associates?

028.075
Y: And from each people shall We draw a witness, and We shall say:
"Produce your Proof": then shall they know that the Truth is in Allah
(alone), and the (lies) which they invented will leave them in lurch.

P: And We shall take out from every nation a witness and We shall say:
Bring your proof. Then they will know that Allah hath the Truth, and
all that they invented will have failed them.

S: And We will draw forth from among every nation a witness and say:
Bring your proof; then shall they know that the truth is Allah's, and
that which they forged shall depart from them.

028.076
Y: Qarun was doubtless, of the people of Moses; but he acted insolently
towards them: such were the treasures We had bestowed on him that their
very keys would have been a burden to a body of strong men, behold, his
people said to him: "Exult not, for Allah loveth not those who exult
(in riches)."

P: Now Korah was of Moses' folk, but he oppressed them; and We gave him
so much treasure that the stores thereof would verily have been a
burden for a troop of mighty men. When his own folk said unto him:
Exult not; lo! Allah loveth not the exultant;

S: Surely Qaroun was of the people of Musa, but he rebelled against
them, and We had given him of the treasures, so much so that his hoards
of wealth would certainly weigh down a company of men possessed of
great strength. When his people said to him: Do not exult, surely Allah
does not love the exultant;

028.077
Y: "But seek, with the (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on thee, the
Home of the Hereafter, nor forget thy portion in this world: but do
thou good, as Allah has been good to thee, and seek not (occasions for)
mischief in the land: for Allah loves not those who do mischief."

P: But seek the abode of the Hereafter in that which Allah hath given
thee and neglect not thy portion of the world, and be thou kind even as
Allah hath been kind to thee, and seek not corruption in the earth; lo!
Allah loveth not corrupters,

S: And seek by means of what Allah has given you the future abode, and
do not neglect your portion of this world, and do good (to others) as
Allah has done good to you, and do not seek to make mischief in the
land, surely Allah does not love the mischief-makers.

028.078
Y: He said: "This has been given to me because of a certain knowledge
which I have." Did he not know that Allah had destroyed, before him,
(whole) generations,- which were superior to him in strength and
greater in the amount (of riches) they had collected? but the wicked
are not called (immediately) to account for their sins.

P: He said: I have been given it only on account of knowledge I possess.
Knew he not that Allah had destroyed already of the generations before
him men who were mightier than him in strength and greater in respect
of following? The guilty are not questioned of their sins.

S: He said: I have been given this only on account of the knowledge I
have. Did he not know that Allah had destroyed before him of the
generations those who were mightier in strength than he and greater in
assemblage? And the guilty shall not be asked about their faults.

028.079
Y: So he went forth among his people in the (pride of his wordly)
glitter. Said those whose aim is the Life of this World: "Oh! that we
had the like of what Qarun has got! for he is truly a lord of mighty
good fortune!"

P: Then went he forth before his people in his pomp. Those who were
desirous of the life of the world said: Ah, would that we had the like
of what hath been given unto Korah! Lo! he is lord of rare good
fortune.

S: So he went forth to his people in his finery. Those who desire this
world's life said: O would that we had the like of what Qaroun is
given; most surely he is possessed of mighty good fortune.

028.080
Y: But those who had been granted (true) knowledge said: "Alas for you!
The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is best for those who believe
and work righteousness: but this none shall attain, save those who
steadfastly persevere (in good)."

P: But those who had been given knowledge said: Woe unto you! The reward
of Allah for him who believeth and doeth right is better, and only the
steadfast will obtain it.

S: And those who were given the knowledge said: Woe to you! Allah's
reward is better for him who believes and does good, and none is made
to receive this except the patient.

028.081
Y: Then We caused the earth to swallow up him and his house; and he had
not (the least little) party to help him against Allah, nor could he
defend himself.

P: So We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place. Then he
had no host to help him against Allah, nor was he of those who can save
themselves.

S: Thus We made the earth to swallow up him and his abode; so he had no
body of helpers to assist him against Allah nor was he of those who can
defend themselves.

028.082
Y: And those who had envied his position the day before began to say on
the morrow: "Ah! it is indeed Allah Who enlarges the provision or
restricts it, to any of His servants He pleases! had it not been that
Allah was gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us
up! Ah! those who reject Allah will assuredly never prosper."

P: And morning found those who had coveted his place but yesterday
crying: Ah, welladay! Allah enlargeth the provision for whom He will of
His slaves and straiteneth it (for whom He will). If Allah had not been
gracious unto us He would have caused it to swallow us (also). Ah,
welladay! the disbelievers never prosper.

S: And those who yearned for his place only the day before began to say:
Ah! (know) that Allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence
for whom He pleases of His servants; had not Allah been gracious to us,
He would most surely have abased us; ah! (know) that the ungrateful are
never successful.

028.083
Y: That Home of the Hereafter We shall give to those who intend not
high-handedness or mischief on earth: and the end is (best) for the
righteous.

P: As for that Abode of the Hereafter We assign it unto those who seek
not oppression in the earth, nor yet corruption. The sequel is for
those who ward off (evil).

S: (As for) that future abode, We assign it to those who have no desire
to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief and the good end
is for those who guard (against evil)

028.084
Y: If any does good, the reward to him is better than his deed; but if
any does evil, the doers of evil are only punished (to the extent) of
their deeds.

P: Whoso bringeth a good deed, he will have better than the same; while
as for him who bringeth an ill-deed, those who do ill-deeds will be
requited only what they did.

S: Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it, and whoever brings
evil, those who do evil shall not be rewarded (for) aught except what
they did.

028.085
Y: Verily He Who ordained the Qur'an for thee, will bring thee back to
the Place of Return. Say: "My Lord knows best who it is that brings
true guidance, and who is in manifest error."

P: Lo! He Who hath given thee the Qur'an for a law will surely bring
thee home again. Say: My Lord is Best Aware of him who bringeth
guidance and him who is in error manifest.

S: Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination. Say: My Lord knows best him who has brought
the guidance and him who is in manifest error.

028.086
Y: And thou hadst not expected that the Book would be sent to thee
except as a Mercy from thy Lord: Therefore lend not thou support in any
way to those who reject (Allah's Message).

P: Thou hadst no hope that the Scripture would be inspired in thee; but
it is a mercy from thy Lord, so never be a helper to the disbelievers.

S: And you did not expect that the Book would be inspired to you, but it
is a mercy from your Lord, therefore be not a backer-up of the
unbelievers.

028.087
Y: And let nothing keep thee back from the Signs of Allah after they
have been revealed to thee: and invite (men) to thy Lord, and be not of
the company of those who join gods with Allah.

P: And let them not divert thee from the revelations of Allah after they
have been sent down unto thee; but call (mankind) unto thy Lord, and be
not of those who ascribe partners (unto Him).

S: And let them not turn you aside from the communications of Allah
after they have been revealed to you, and call (men) to your Lord and
be not of the polytheists.

028.088
Y: And call not, besides Allah, on another god. There is no god but He.
Everything (that exists) will perish except His own Face. To Him
belongs the Command, and to Him will ye (all) be brought back.

P: And cry not unto any other god along with Allah. There is no God
save Him. Everything will perish save His countenance. His is the
command, and unto Him ye will be brought back.

S: And call not with Allah any other god; there is no god but He, every
thing is perishable but He; His is the judgment, and to Him you shall
be brought back.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 29:

                          AL-ANKABOOT (THE SPIDER)
 Total Verses: 69 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

029.001
Y: A.L.M.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim.

S: Alif Lam Mim.

029.002
Y: Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, "We believe",
and that they will not be tested?

P: Do men imagine that they will be left (at ease) because they say, We
believe, and will not be tested with affliction?

S: Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, We believe, and
not be tried?

029.003
Y: We did test those before them, and Allah will certainly know those
who are true from those who are false.

P: Lo! We tested those who were before you. Thus Allah knoweth those who
are sincere, and knoweth those who feign.

S: And certainly We tried those before them, so Allah will certainly
know those who are true and He will certainly know the liars.

029.004
Y: Do those who practise evil think that they will get the better of Us?
Evil is their judgment!

P: Or do those who do ill-deeds imagine that they can outstrip Us? Evil
(for them) is that which they decide.

S: Or do they who work evil think that they will escape Us? Evil is it
that they judge!

029.005
Y: For those whose hopes are in the meeting with Allah (in the
Hereafter, let them strive); for the term (appointed) by Allah is
surely coming and He hears and knows (all things).

P: Whoso looketh forward to the meeting with Allah (let him know that)
Allah's reckoning is surely nigh, and He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: Whoever hopes to meet Allah, the term appointed by Allah will then
most surely come; and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

029.006
Y: And if any strive (with might and main), they do so for their own
souls: for Allah is free of all needs from all creation.

P: And whosoever striveth, striveth only for himself, for lo! Allah is
altogether Independent of (His) creatures.

S: And whoever strives hard, he strives only for his own soul; most
surely Allah is Self-sufficient, above (need of) the worlds.

029.007
Y: Those who believe and work righteous deeds,- from them shall We blot
out all evil (that may be) in them, and We shall reward them according
to the best of their deeds.

P: And as for those who believe and do good works, We shall remit from
them their evil deeds and shall repay them the best that they did.

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will most certainly do
away with their evil deeds and We will most certainly reward them the
best of what they did.

029.008
Y: We have enjoined on man kindness to parents: but if they (either of
them) strive (to force) thee to join with Me (in worship) anything of
which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not. Ye have (all) to return to
me, and I will tell you (the truth) of all that ye did.

P: We have enjoined on man kindness to parents; but if they strive to
make thee join with Me that of which thou hast no knowledge, then obey
them not. Unto Me is your return and I shall tell you what ye used to
do.

S: And We have enjoined on man goodness to his parents, and if they
contend with you that you should associate (others) with Me, of which
you have no knowledge, do not obey them, to Me is your return, so I
will inform you of what you did.

029.009
Y: And those who believe and work righteous deeds,- them shall We admit
to the company of the Righteous.

P: And as for those who believe and do good works, We verily shall make
them enter in among the righteous.

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will most surely cause
them to enter among the good.

029.010
Y: Then there are among men such as say, "We believe in Allah"; but when
they suffer affliction in (the cause of) Allah, they treat men's
oppression as if it were the Wrath of Allah! And if help comes (to
thee) from thy Lord, they are sure to say, "We have (always) been with
you!" Does not Allah know best all that is in the hearts of all
creation?

P: Of mankind is he who saith: We believe in Allah, but, if he be made
to suffer for the sake of Allah, he mistaketh the persecution of
mankind for Allah's punishment; and then, if victory cometh from thy
Lord, will say: Lo! we were with you (all the while). Is not Allah Best
Aware of what is in the bosoms of (His) creatures?

S: And among men is he who says: We believe in Allah; but when he is
persecuted in (the way of) Allah he thinks the persecution of men to be
as the chastisement of Allah; and if there come assistance from your
Lord, they would most certainly say: Surely we were with you. What! is
not Allah the best knower of what is in the breasts of mankind.

029.011
Y: And Allah most certainly knows those who believe, and as certainly
those who are Hypocrites.

P: Verily Allah knoweth those who believe, and verily He knoweth the
hypocrites.

S: And most certainly Allah will know those who believe and most
certainly He will know the hypocrites.

029.012
Y: And the Unbelievers say to those who believe: "Follow our path, and
we will bear (the consequences) of your faults." Never in the least
will they bear their faults: in fact they are liars!

P: Those who disbelieve say unto those who believe: Follow our way (of
religion) and we verily will bear your sins (for you). They cannot bear
aught of their sins. Lo! they verily are liars.

S: And those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Follow our path
and we will bear your wrongs. And never shall they be the bearers of
any of their wrongs; most surely they are liars.

029.013
Y: They will bear their own burdens, and (other) burdens along with
their own, and on the Day of Judgments they will be called to account
for their falsehoods.

P: But they verily will bear their own loads and other loads beside
their own, and they verily will be questioned on the Day of
Resurrection concerning that which they invented.

S: And most certainly they shall carry their own burdens, and other
burdens with their own burdens, and most certainly they shall be
questioned on the resurrection day as to what they forged.

029.014
Y: We (once) sent Noah to his people, and he tarried among them a
thousand years less fifty: but the Deluge overwhelmed them while they
(persisted in) sin.

P: And verily we sent Noah (as Our messenger) unto his folk, and he
continued with them for a thousand years save fifty years; and the
flood engulfed them, for they were wrong-doers.

S: And certainly We sent Nuh to his people, so he remained among them a
thousand years save fifty years. And the deluge overtook them, while
they were unjust.

029.015
Y: But We saved him and the companions of the Ark, and We made the (Ark)
a Sign for all peoples!

P: And We rescued him and those with him in the ship, and made of it a
portent for the peoples.

S: So We delivered him and the inmates of the ark, and made it a sign to
the nations.

029.016
Y: And (We also saved) Abraham: behold, he said to his people, "Serve
Allah and fear Him: that will be best for you- if ye understand!"

P: And Abraham! (Remember) when he said unto his folk: Serve Allah, and
keep your duty unto Him; that is better for you if ye did but know.

S: And (We sent) Ibrahim, when he said to his people: Serve Allah and be
careful of (your duty to) Him; this is best for you, if you did but
know:

029.017
Y: "For ye do worship idols besides Allah, and ye invent falsehood. The
things that ye worship besides Allah have no power to give you
sustenance: then seek ye sustenance from Allah, serve Him, and be
grateful to Him: to Him will be your return."

P: Ye serve instead of Allah only idols, and ye only invent a lie. Lo!
those whom ye serve instead of Allah own no provision for you. So seek
your provision from Allah, and serve Him, and give thanks unto Him,
(for) unto Him ye will be brought back.

S: You only worship idols besides Allah and you create a lie surely they
whom you serve besides Allah do not control for you any sustenance,
therefore seek the sustenance from Allah and serve Him and be grateful
to Him; to Him you shall be brought back.

029.018
Y: "And if ye reject (the Message), so did generations before you: and
the duty of the messenger is only to preach publicly (and clearly)."

P: But if ye deny, then nations have denied before you. The messenger is
only to convey (the message) plainly.

S: And if you reject (the truth), nations before you did indeed reject
(the truth); and nothing is incumbent on the messenger but a plain
delivering (of the message).

029.019
Y: See they not how Allah originates creation, then repeats it: truly
that is easy for Allah.

P: See they not how Allah produceth creation, then reproduceth it? Lo!
for Allah that is easy.

S: What! do they not consider how Allah originates the creation, then
reproduces it? Surely that is easy to Allah.

029.020
Y: Say: "Travel through the earth and see how Allah did originate
creation; so will Allah produce a later creation: for Allah has power
over all things."

P: Say (O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see how He originated
creation, then Allah bringeth forth the later growth. Lo! Allah is Able
to do all things.

S: Say: Travel in the earth and see how He makes the first creation,
then Allah creates the latter creation; surely Allah has power over all
things.

029.021
Y: "He punishes whom He pleases, and He grants Mercy to whom He pleases,
and towards Him are ye turned."

P: He punisheth whom He will and showeth mercy unto whom He will, and
unto Him ye will be turned.

S: He punishes whom He pleases and has mercy on whom He pleases, and to
Him you shall be turned back.

029.022
Y: "Not on earth nor in heaven will ye be able (fleeing) to frustrate
(his Plan), nor have ye, besides Allah, any protector or helper."

P: Ye cannot escape (from Him) in the earth or in the sky, and beside
Allah there is for you no friend or helper.

S: And you shall not escape in the earth nor in the heaven, and you have
neither a protector nor a helper besides Allah.

029.023
Y: Those who reject the Signs of Allah and the Meeting with Him (in the
Hereafter),- it is they who shall despair of My Mercy: it is they who
will (suffer) a most grievous Penalty.

P: Those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah and in (their)
Meeting with Him, such have no hope of My mercy. For such there is a
painful doom.

S: And (as to) those who disbelieve in the communications of Allah and
His meeting, they have despaired of My mercy, and these it is that
shall have a painful punishment.

029.024
Y: So naught was the answer of (Abraham's) people except that they said:
"Slay him or burn him." But Allah did save him from the Fire. Verily in
this are Signs for people who believe.

P: But the answer of his folk was only that they said: "Kill him" or
"Burn him." Then Allah saved him from the Fire. Lo! herein verily are
portents for folk who believe.

S: So naught was the answer of his people except that they said: Slay
him or burn him; then Allah delivered him from the fire; most surely
there are signs in this for a people who believe.

029.025
Y: And he said: "For you, ye have taken (for worship) idols besides
Allah, out of mutual love and regard between yourselves in this life;
but on the Day of Judgment ye shall disown each other and curse each
other: and your abode will be the Fire, and ye shall have none to
help."

P: He said: Ye have chosen only idols instead of Allah. The love between
you is only in the life of the world. Then on the Day of Resurrection
ye will deny each other and curse each other, and your abode will be
the Fire, and ye will have no helpers.

S: And he said: You have only taken for yourselves idols besides Allah
by way of friendship between you in this world's life, then on the
resurrection day some of you shall deny others, and some of you shall
curse others, and your abode is the fire, and you shall not have any
helpers.

029.026
Y: But Lut had faith in Him: He said: "I will leave home for the sake of
my Lord: for He is Exalted in Might, and Wise."

P: And Lot believed him, and said: Lo! I am a fugitive unto my Lord. Lo!
He, only He, is the Mighty, the Wise.

S: And Lut believed in Him, and he said: I am fleeing to my Lord, surely
He is the Mighty, the Wise.

029.027
Y: And We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob, and ordained among his progeny
Prophethood and Revelation, and We granted him his reward in this life;
and he was in the Hereafter (of the company) of the Righteous.

P: And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and We established the
prophethood and the Scripture among his seed, and We gave him his
reward in the world, and lo! in the Hereafter he verily is among the
righteous.

S: And We granted him Ishaq and Yaqoub, and caused the prophethood and
the book to remain in his seed, and We gave him his reward in this
world, and in the hereafter he will most surely be among the good.

029.028
Y: And (remember) Lut: behold, he said to his people: "Ye do commit
lewdness, such as no people in Creation (ever) committed before you."

P: And Lot! (Remember) when he said unto his folk: Lo! ye commit
lewdness such as no creature did before you.

S: And (We sent) Lut when he said to his people: Most surely you are
guilty of an indecency which none of the nations has ever done before
you;

029.029
Y: "Do ye indeed approach men, and cut off the highway?- and practise
wickedness (even) in your councils?" But his people gave no answer but
this: they said: "Bring us the Wrath of Allah if thou tellest the
truth."

P: For come ye not in unto males, and cut ye not the road (for
travellers), and commit ye not abomination in your meetings? But the
answer of his folk was only that they said: Bring Allah's doom upon us
if thou art a truthteller!

S: What! do you come to the males and commit robbery on the highway, and
you commit evil deeds in your assemblies? But nothing was the answer of
his people except that they said: Bring on us Allah's punishment, if
you are one of the truthful.

029.030
Y: He said: "O my Lord! help Thou me against people who do mischief!"

P: He said: My Lord! Give me victory over folk who work corruption.

S: He said: My Lord! help me against the mischievous people.

029.031
Y: When Our Messengers came to Abraham with the good news, they said:
"We are indeed going to destroy the people of this township: for truly
they are (addicted to) crime."

P: And when Our messengers brought Abraham the good news, they said: Lo!
we are about to destroy the people of that township, for its people are
wrong-doers.

S: And when Our messengers came to Ibrahim with the good news, they
said: Surely we are going to destroy the people of this town, for its
people are unjust.

029.032
Y: He said: "But there is Lut there." They said: "Well do we know who is
there: we will certainly save him and his following,- except his wife:
she is of those who lag behind!"

P: He said: Lo! Lot is there. They said: We are best aware of who is
there. We are to deliver him and his household, all save his wife, who
is of those who stay behind.

S: He said: Surely in it is Lut. They said: We know well who is in it;
we shall certainly deliver him and his followers, except his wife; she
shall be of those who remain behind.

029.033
Y: And when Our Messengers came to Lut, he was grieved on their account,
and felt himself powerless (to protect) them: but they said: "Fear thou
not, nor grieve: we are (here) to save thee and thy following, except
thy wife: she is of those who lag behind."

P: And when Our messengers came unto Lot, he was troubled upon their
account, for he could not protect them; but they said: Fear not, nor
grieve! Lo! we are to deliver thee and thy household, (all) save thy
wife, who is of those who stay behind.

S: And when Our messengers came to Lut he was grieved on account of
them, and he felt powerless (to protect) them; and they said: Fear not,
nor grieve; surely we will deliver you and your followers, except your
wife; she shall be of those who remain behind.

029.034
Y: "For we are going to bring down on the people of this township a
Punishment from heaven, because they have been wickedly rebellious."

P: Lo! We are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury
from the sky because they are evil-livers.

S: Surely We will cause to come down upon the people of this town a
punishment from heaven, because they transgressed.

029.035
Y: And We have left thereof an evident Sign, for any people who (care
to) understand.

P: And verily of that We have left a clear sign for people who have
sense.

S: And certainly We have left a clear sign of it for a people who
understand.

029.036
Y: To the Madyan (people) (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. Then he said:
"O my people! serve Allah, and fear the Last Day: nor commit evil on
the earth, with intent to do mischief."

P: And unto Midian We sent Shu'eyb, their brother. He said: O my people!
Serve Allah, and look forward to the Last Day, and do not evil, making
mischief, in the earth.

S: And to Madyan (We sent) their brother Shuaib, so he said: O my
people! serve Allah and fear the latter day and do not act corruptly in
the land, making mischief.

029.037
Y: But they rejected him: Then the mighty Blast seized them, and they
lay prostrate in their homes by the morning.

P: But they denied him, and the dreadful earthquake took them, and
morning found them prostrate in their dwelling place.

S: But they rejected him, so a severe earthquake overtook them, and they
became motionless bodies in their abode.

029.038
Y: (Remember also) the 'Ad and the Thamud (people): clearly will appear
to you from (the traces) of their buildings (their fate): the Evil One
made their deeds alluring to them, and kept them back from the Path,
though they were gifted with intelligence and skill.

P: And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud! (Their fate) is manifest unto
you from their (ruined and deserted) dwellings. Satan made their deeds
seem fair unto them and so debarred them from the Way, though they were
keen observers.

S: And (We destroyed) Ad and Samood, and from their dwellings (this) is
apparent to you indeed; and the Shaitan made their deeds fair-seeming
to them, so he kept them back from the path, though they were endowed
with intelligence and skill,

029.039
Y: (Remember also) Qarun, Pharaoh, and Haman: there came to them Moses
with Clear Signs, but they behaved with insolence on the earth; yet
they could not overreach (Us).

P: And Korah, Pharaoh and Haman! Moses came unto them with clear proofs
(of Allah's Sovereignty), but they were boastful in the land. And they
were not winners (in the race).

S: And (We destroyed) Qaroun and Firon and Haman; and certainly Musa
came to them with clear arguments, but they behaved haughtily in the
land; yet they could not outstrip (Us).

029.040
Y: Each one of them We seized for his crime: of them, against some We
sent a violent tornado (with showers of stones); some were caught by a
(mighty) Blast; some We caused the earth to swallow up; and some We
drowned (in the waters): It was not Allah Who injured (or oppressed)
them: They injured (and oppressed) their own souls.

P: So We took each one in his sin; of them was he on whom We sent a
hurricane, and of them was he who was overtaken by the (Awful) Cry, and
of them was he whom We caused the earth to swallow, and of them was he
whom We drowned. It was not for Allah to wrong them, but they wronged
themselves.

S: So each We punished for his sin; of them was he on whom We sent down
a violent storm, and of them was he whom the rumbling overtook, and of
them was he whom We made to be swallowed up by the earth, and of them
was he whom We drowned; and it did not beseem Allah that He should be
unjust to them, but they were unjust to their own souls.

029.041
Y: The parable of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of
the spider, who builds (to itself) a house; but truly the flimsiest of
houses is the spider's house;- if they but knew.

P: The likeness of those who choose other patrons than Allah is as the
likeness of the spider when she taketh unto herself a house, and lo!
the frailest of all houses is the spider's house, if they but knew.

S: The parable of those who take guardians besides Allah is as the
parable of the spider that makes for itself a house; and most surely
the frailest of the houses is the spider's house did they but know.

029.042
Y: Verily Allah doth know of (every thing) whatever that they call upon
besides Him: and He is Exalted (in power), Wise.

P: Lo! Allah knoweth what thing they invoke instead of Him. He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

S: Surely Allah knows whatever thing they call upon besides Him; and He
is the Mighty, the Wise.

029.043
Y: And such are the Parables We set forth for mankind, but only those
understand them who have knowledge.

P: As for these similitudes, We coin them for mankind, but none will
grasp their meaning save the wise.

S: And (as for) these examples, We set them forth for men, and none
understand them but the learned.

029.044
Y: Allah created the heavens and the earth in true (proportions): verily
in that is a Sign for those who believe.

P: Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth. Lo! therein is
indeed a portent for believers.

S: Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth; most surely there
is a sign in this for the believers.

029.045
Y: Recite what is sent of the Book by inspiration to thee, and establish
regular Prayer: for Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds;
and remembrance of Allah is the greatest (thing in life) without doubt.
And Allah knows the (deeds) that ye do.

P: Recite that which hath been inspired in thee of the Scripture, and
establish worship. Lo! worship preserveth from lewdness and iniquity,
but verily remembrance of Allah is more important. And Allah knoweth
what ye do.

S: Recite that which has been revealed to you of the Book and keep up
prayer; surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil, and
certainly the remembrance of Allah is the greatest, and Allah knows
what you do.

029.046
Y: And dispute ye not with the People of the Book, except with means
better (than mere disputation), unless it be with those of them who
inflict wrong (and injury): but say, "We believe in the revelation
which has come down to us and in that which came down to you; Our Allah
and your Allah is one; and it is to Him we bow (in Islam)."

P: And argue not with the People of the Scripture unless it be in (a
way) that is better, save with such of them as do wrong; and say: We
believe in that which hath been revealed unto us and revealed unto you;
our Allah and your Allah is One, and unto Him we surrender.

S: And do not dispute with the followers of the Book except by what is
best, except those of them who act unjustly, and say: We believe in
that which has been revealed to us and revealed to you, and our Allah
and your Allah is One, and to Him do we submit.

029.047
Y: And thus (it is) that We have sent down the Book to thee. So the
People of the Book believe therein, as also do some of these (pagan
Arabs): and none but Unbelievers reject our signs.

P: In like manner We have revealed unto thee the Scripture, and those
unto whom We gave the Scripture aforetime will believe therein; and of
these (also) there are some who believe therein. And none deny Our
revelations save the disbelievers.

S: And thus have We revealed the Book to you. So those whom We have
given the Book believe in it, and of these there are those who believe
in it, and none deny Our communications except the unbelievers.

029.048
Y: And thou wast not (able) to recite a Book before this (Book came),
nor art thou (able) to transcribe it with thy right hand: In that case,
indeed, would the talkers of vanities have doubted.

P: And thou (O Muhammad) wast not a reader of any scripture before it,
nor didst thou write it with thy right hand, for then might those have
doubted, who follow falsehood.

S: And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe one
with your right hand, for then could those who say untrue things have
doubted.

029.049
Y: Nay, here are Signs self-evident in the hearts of those endowed with
knowledge: and none but the unjust reject Our Signs.

P: But it is clear revelations in the hearts of those who have been
given knowledge, and none deny Our revelations save wrong-doers.

S: Nay! these are clear communications in the breasts of those who are
granted knowledge; and none deny Our communications except the unjust.

029.050
Y: Ye they say: "Why are not Signs sent down to him from his Lord?" Say:
"The signs are indeed with Allah: and I am indeed a clear Warner."

P: And they say: Why are not portents sent down upon him from his Lord?
Say: Portents are with Allah only, and I am but a plain warner.

S: And they say: Why are not signs sent down upon him from his Lord?
Say: The signs are only with Allah, and I am only a plain warner.

029.051
Y: And is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the Book
which is rehearsed to them? Verily, in it is Mercy and a Reminder to
those who believe.

P: Is it not enough for them that We have sent down unto thee the
Scripture which is read unto them? Lo! herein verily is mercy, and a
reminder for folk who believe.

S: Is it not enough for them that We have revealed to you the Book which
is recited to them? Most surely there is mercy in this and a reminder
for a people who believe.

029.052
Y: Say: "Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you: He knows what
is in the heavens and on earth." And it is those who believe in vanities
and reject Allah, that will perish (in the end).

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Allah sufficeth for witness between me
and you. He knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. And
those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in Allah, they it is who are
the losers.

S: Say: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you; He knows
what is in the heavens and the earth. And (as for) those who believe in
the falsehood and disbelieve in Allah, these it is that are the losers.

029.053
Y: They ask thee to hasten on the Punishment (for them): had it not been
for a term (of respite) appointed, the Punishment would certainly have
come to them: and it will certainly reach them,- of a sudden, while
they perceive not!

P: They bid thee hasten on the doom (of Allah). And if a term had not
been appointed, the doom would assuredly have come unto them (ere now).
And verily it will come upon them suddenly when they perceive not.

S: And they ask you to hasten on the chastisement; and had not a term
been appointed, the chastisement would certainly have come to them; and
most certainly it will come to them all of a sudden while they will not
perceive.

029.054
Y: They ask thee to hasten on the Punishment: but, of a surety, Hell
will encompass the Rejecters of Faith!-

P: They bid thee hasten on the doom, when lo! hell verily will encompass
the disbelievers.

S: They ask you to hasten on the chastisement, and most surely hell
encompasses the unbelievers;

029.055
Y: On the Day that the Punishment shall cover them from above them and
from below them, and (a Voice) shall say: "Taste ye (the fruits) of
your deeds!"

P: On the day when the doom will overwhelm them from above them and from
underneath their feet, and He will say: Taste what ye used to do!

S: On the day when the chastisement shall cover them from above them,
and from beneath their feet; and He shall say: Taste what you did.

029.056
Y: O My servants who believe! truly, spacious is My Earth: therefore
serve ye Me - (and Me alone)!

P: O my bondmen who believe! Lo! My earth is spacious. Therefor serve Me
only.

S: O My servants who believe! surely My earth is vast, therefore Me
alone should you serve.

029.057
Y: Every soul shall have a taste of death: In the end to Us shall ye be
brought back.

P: Every soul will taste of death. Then unto Us ye will be returned.

S: Every soul must taste of death, then to Us you shall be brought back.

029.058
Y: But those who believe and work deeds of righteousness - to them shall
We give a Home in Heaven,- lofty mansions beneath which flow rivers,-
to dwell therein for aye;- an excellent reward for those who do
(good)!-

P: Those who believe and do good works, them verily We shall house in
lofty dwellings of the Garden underneath which rivers flow. There they
will dwell secure. How sweet the guerdon of the toilers,

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will certainly give
them abode in the high places in gardens beneath which rivers flow,
abiding therein; how good the reward of the workers:

029.059
Y: Those who persevere in patience, and put their trust, in their Lord
and Cherisher.

P: Who persevere, and put their trust in their Lord!

S: Those who are patient, and on their Lord do they rely.

029.060
Y: How many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance? It is
Allah who feeds (both) them and you: for He hears and knows (all
things).

P: And how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision!
Allah provideth for it and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And how many a living creature that does not carry its sustenance:
Allah sustains it and yourselves; and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

029.061
Y: If indeed thou ask them who has created the heavens and the earth and
subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law), they will certainly reply,

"Allah". How are they then deluded away (from the truth)?
P: And if thou wert to ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth,
and constrained the sun and the moon (to their appointed work)? they
would say: Allah. How then are they turned away?

S: And if you ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient, they will certainly say, Allah.
Whence are they then turned away?

029.062
Y: Allah enlarges the sustenance (which He gives) to whichever of His
servants He pleases; and He (similarly) grants by (strict) measure, (as
He pleases): for Allah has full knowledge of all things.

P: Allah maketh the provision wide for whom He will of His bondmen, and
straiteneth it for whom (He will). Lo! Allah is Aware of all things.

S: Allah makes abundant the means of subsistence for whom He pleases of
His servants, and straitens them for whom (He pleases) surely Allah is
Cognizant of all things.

029.063
Y: And if indeed thou ask them who it is that sends down rain from the
sky, and gives life therewith to the earth after its death, they will
certainly reply, "Allah!" Say, "Praise be to Allah!" But most of them
understand not.

P: And if thou wert to ask them: Who causeth water to come down from the
sky, and therewith reviveth the earth after its death? they verily
would say: Allah. Say: Praise be to Allah! But most of them have no
sense.

S: And if you ask them Who is it that sends down water from the clouds,
then gives life to the earth with it after its death, they will
certainly say, Allah. Say: All praise is due to Allah. Nay, most of
them do not understand.

029.064
Y: What is the life of this world but amusement and play? but verily the
Home in the Hereafter,- that is life indeed, if they but knew.

P: This life of the world is but a pastime and a game. Lo! the home of
the Hereafter - that is Life, if they but knew.

S: And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play; and as
for the next abode, that most surely is the life-- did they but know!

029.065
Y: Now, if they embark on a boat, they call on Allah, making their
devotion sincerely (and exclusively) to Him; but when He has delivered
them safely to (dry) land, behold, they give a share (of their worship
to others)!-

P: And when they mount upon the ships they pray to Allah, making their
faith pure for Him only, but when He bringeth them safe to land,
behold! they ascribe partners (unto Him),

S: So when they ride in the ships they call upon Allah, being sincerely
obedient to Him, but when He brings them safe to the land, lo! they
associate others (with Him);

029.066
Y: Disdaining ungratefully Our gifts, and giving themselves up to
(worldly) enjoyment! But soon will they know.

P: That they may disbelieve in that which We have given them, and that
they may take their ease. But they will come to know.

S: Thus they become ungrateful for what We have given them, so that they
may enjoy; but they shall soon know.

029.067
Y: Do they not then see that We have made a sanctuary secure, and that
men are being snatched away from all around them? Then, do they believe
in that which is vain, and reject the Grace of Allah?

P: Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary immune (from
violence), while mankind are ravaged all around them? Do they then
believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the bounty of Allah?

S: Do they not see that We have made a sacred territory secure, while
men are carried off by force from around them? Will they still believe
in the falsehood and disbelieve in the favour of Allah?

029.068
Y: And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or
rejects the Truth when it reaches him? Is there not a home in Hell for
those who reject Faith?

P: Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah,
or denieth the truth when it cometh unto him? Is not there a home in
hell for disbelievers?

S: And who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against Allah, or
gives the lie to the truth when it has come to him? Will not in hell be
