


CLXI.--THE MORALS OF THE GOSPEL ARE IMPRACTICABLE.

The votaries of Christ would like to make us regard as a miracle the
establishment of their religion, which is in every respect contrary to
nature, opposed to all the inclinations of the heart, an enemy to
physical pleasures. But the austerity of a doctrine has a tendency to
render it more wonderful to the ignorant. The same reason which makes us
respect, as Divine and supernatural, inconceivable mysteries, causes us
to admire, as Divine and supernatural, a morality impracticable and
beyond the power of man. To admire morals and to practice them, are two
very different things. All the Christians continually admire the morals
of the Gospel, but it is practiced but by a small number of saints;
admired by people who themselves avoid imitating their conduct, under
the pretext that they are lacking either the power or the grace.

The whole universe is infected more or less with a religious morality
which is founded upon the opinion that to please the Deity it is
necessary to render one's self unhappy upon earth. We see in all parts
of our globe penitents, hermits, fakirs, fanatics, who seem to have
studied profoundly the means of tormenting themselves for the glory of a
Being whose goodness they all agree in celebrating. Religion, by its
essence, is the enemy of joy and of the welfare of men. "Blessed are
those who suffer!" Woe to those who have abundance and joy! These are
the rare revelations which Christianity teaches!




CLXII.--A SOCIETY OF SAINTS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE.

In what consists the saint of all religions? It is a man who prays,
fasts, who torments himself, who avoids the world, who, like an owl, is
pleased but in solitude, who abstains from all pleasure, who seems
frightened at every object which turns him a moment from his fanatical
meditations. Is this virtue? Is a being of this stamp of any use to
himself or to others? Would not society be dissolved, and would not men
retrograde into barbarism, if each one should be fool enough to wish to
be a saint?

It is evident that the literal and rigorous practice of the Divine
morality of the Christians would lead nations to ruin. A Christian who
would attain perfection, ought to drive away from his mind all that can
alienate him from heaven--his true country. He sees upon earth but
temptations, snares, and opportunities to go astray; he must fear
science as injurious to faith; he must avoid industry, as it is a means
of obtaining riches, which are fatal to salvation; he must renounce
preferments and honors, as things capable of exciting his pride and
calling his attention away from his soul; in a word, the sublime
morality of Christ, if it were not impracticable, would sever all the
ties of society.

A saint in the world is no more useful than a saint in the desert; the
saint has an unhappy, discontented, and often irritable, turbulent
disposition; his zeal often obliges him, conscientiously, to disturb
society by opinions or dreams which his vanity makes him accept as
inspirations from Heaven. The annals of all religions are filled with
accounts of anxious, intractable, seditious saints, who have
distinguished themselves by ravages that, for the greater glory of God,
they have scattered throughout the universe. If the saints who live in
solitude are useless, those who live in the world are very often
dangerous. The vanity of performing a role, the desire of distinguishing
themselves in the eyes of the stupid vulgar by a strange conduct,
constitute usually the distinctive characteristics of great saints;
pride persuades them that they are extraordinary men, far above human
nature; beings who are more perfect than others; chosen ones, which God
looks upon with more complaisance than the rest of mortals. Humility in
a saint is, is a general rule, but a pride more refined than that of
common men. It must be a very ridiculous vanity which can determine a
man to continually war with his own nature!




CLXIII.--HUMAN NATURE IS NOT DEPRAVED; AND A MORALITY WHICH CONTRADICTS
THIS FACT IS NOT MADE FOR MAN.

A morality which contradicts the nature of man is not made for him. But
you will say that man's nature is depraved. In what consists this
pretended depravity? Is it because he has passions? But are not passions
the very essence of man? Must he not seek, desire, love that which is,
or that which he believes to be, essential to his happiness? Must he not
fear and avoid that which he judges injurious or fatal to him? Excite
his passions by useful objects; let him attach himself to these same
objects, divert him by sensible and known motives from that which can do
him or others harm, and you will make of him a reasonable and virtuous
being. A man without passions would be equally indifferent to vice and
to virtue.

Holy doctors! you constantly tell us that man's nature is perverted; you
tell us that the way of all flesh is corrupt; you tell us that nature
gives us but inordinate inclinations. In this case you accuse your God,
who has not been able or willing to keep this nature in its original
perfection. If this nature became corrupted, why did not this God repair
it? The Christian assures me that human nature is repaired, that the
death of his God has reestablished it in its integrity. How comes it
then, that human nature, notwithstanding the death of a God, is still
depraved? Is it, then, a pure loss that your God died? What becomes of
His omnipotence and His victory over the Devil, if it is true that the
Devil still holds the empire which, according to you, he has always
exercised in the world?

Death, according to Christian theology, is the penalty of sin. This
opinion agrees with that of some savage Negro nations, who imagine that
the death of a man is always the supernatural effect of the wrath of the
Gods. The Christians firmly believe that Christ has delivered them from
sin, while they see that, in their religion as in the others, man is
subject to death. To say that Jesus Christ has delivered us from sin, is
it not claiming that a judge has granted pardon to a guilty man, while
we see him sent to torture?




CLXIV.--OF JESUS CHRIST, THE PRIEST'S GOD.

If, closing our eyes upon all that transpires in this world, we should
rely upon the votaries of the Christian religion, we would believe that
the coming of our Divine Saviour has produced the most wonderful
revolution and the most complete reform in the morals of nations. The
Messiah, according to Pascal, [See Thoughts of Pascal] ought of Himself
alone to produce a great, select, and holy people; conducting and
nourishing it, and introducing it into the place of repose and sanctity,
rendering it holy to God, making it the temple of God, saving it from
the wrath of God, delivering it from the servitude of sin, giving laws
to this people, engraving these laws upon their hearts, offering Himself
to God for them, crushing the head of the serpent, etc. This great man
has forgotten to show us the people upon whom His Divine Messiah has
produced the miraculous effects of which He speaks with so much
emphasis; so far, it seems, they do not exist upon the earth!

If we examine ever so little the morals of the Christian nations, and
listen to the clamors of their priests, we will be obliged to conclude
that their God, Jesus Christ, preached without fruit, without success;
that His Almighty will still finds in men a resistance, over which this
God either can not or does not wish to triumph. The morality of this
Divine Doctor which His disciples admire so much, and practice so
little, is followed during a whole century but by half a dozen of
obscure saints, fanatical and ignorant monks, who alone will have the
glory of shining in the celestial court; all the remainder of mortals,
although redeemed by the blood of this God, will be the prey of eternal
flames.




CLXV.--THE DOGMA OF THE REMISSION OF SINS HAS BEEN INVENTED IN THE
INTEREST OF THE PRIESTS.

When a man has a great desire to sin, he thinks very little about his
God; more than this, whatever crimes he may have committed, he always
flatters himself that this God will mitigate the severity of his
punishments. No mortal seriously believes that his conduct can damn him.
Although he fears a terrible God, who often makes him tremble, every
time he is strongly tempted he succumbs and sees but a God of mercy, the
idea of whom quiets him. Does he do evil? He hopes to have the time to
correct himself, and promises earnestly to repent some day.

There are in the religious pharmacy infallible receipts for calming the
conscience; the priests in every country possess sovereign secrets for
disarming the wrath of Heaven. However true it may be that the anger of
Deity is appeased by prayers, by offerings, by sacrifices, by
penitential tears, we have no right to say that religion holds in check
the irregularities of men; they will first sin, and afterward seek the
means to reconcile God. Every religion which expiates, and which
promises the remission of crimes, if it restrains any, it encourages the
great number to commit evil. Notwithstanding His immutability, God is,
in all the religions of this world, a veritable Proteus. His priests
show Him now armed with severity, and then full of clemency and
gentleness; now cruel and pitiless, and then easily reconciled by the
repentance and the tears of the sinners. Consequently, men face the
Deity in the manner which conforms the most to their present interests.
An always wrathful God would repel His worshipers, or cast them into
despair. Men need a God who becomes angry and who can be appeased; if
His anger alarms a few timid souls, His clemency reassures the
determined wicked ones who intend to have recourse sooner or later to
the means of reconciling themselves with Him; if the judgments of God
frighten a few faint-hearted devotees who already by temperament and by
habitude are not inclined to evil, the treasures of Divine mercy
reassure the greatest criminals, who have reason to hope that they will
participate in them with the others.




CLXVI.--THE FEAR OF GOD IS POWERLESS AGAINST HUMAN PASSIONS.

The majority of men rarely think of God, or, at least, do not occupy
themselves much with Him. The idea of God has so little stability, it is
so afflicting, that it can not hold the imagination for a long time,
except in some sad and melancholy visionists who do not constitute the
majority of the inhabitants of this world. The common man has no
conception of it; his weak brain becomes perplexed the moment he
attempts to think of Him. The business man thinks of nothing but his
affairs; the courtier of his intrigues; worldly men, women, youth, of
their pleasures; dissipation soon dispels the wearisome notions of
religion. The ambitious, the avaricious, and the debauchee sedulously
lay aside speculations too feeble to counterbalance their diverse
passions.

Whom does the idea of God overawe? A few weak men disappointed and
disgusted with this world; some persons whose passions are already
extinguished by age, by infirmities, or by reverses of fortune. Religion
is a restraint but for those whose temperament or circumstances have
already subjected them to reason. The fear of God does not prevent any
from committing sin but those who do not wish to sin very much, or who
are no longer in a condition to sin. To tell men that Divinity punishes
crime in this world, is to claim as a fact that which experience
contradicts constantly The most wicked men are usually the arbiters of
the world, and those whom fortune blesses with its favors. To convince
us of the judgments of God by sending us to the other life, is to make
us accept conjectures in order to destroy facts which we can not
dispute.




CLXVII.--THE INVENTION OF HELL IS TOO ABSURD TO PREVENT EVIL.

No one dreams about another life when he is very much absorbed in
objects which he meets on earth. In the eyes of a passionate lover, the
presence of his mistress extinguishes the fires of hell, and her charms
blot out all the pleasures of Paradise. Woman! you leave, you say, your
lover for your God? It is that your lover is no longer the same in your
estimation; or your lover leaves you, and you must fill the void which
is made in your heart. Nothing is more common than to see ambitious,
perverse, corrupt, and immoral men who are religious, and who sometimes
exhibit even zeal in its behalf; if they do not practice religion, they
promise themselves they will practice it some day; they keep it in
reserve as a remedy which, sooner or later, will be necessary to quiet
the conscience for the evil which they intend yet to do. Besides,
devotees and priests being a very numerous, active, and powerful party,
it is not astonishing to see impostors and thieves seek for its support
in order to gain their ends. We will be told, no doubt, that many honest
people are sincerely religious without profit; but is uprightness of
heart always accompanied with intelligence? We are cited to a great
number of learned men, men of genius, who are very religious. This
proves that men of genius can have prejudices, can be pusillanimous, can
have an imagination which seduces them and prevents them from examining
objects coolly. Pascal proves nothing in favor of religion, except that
a man of genius can possess a grain of weakness, and is but a child when
he is weak enough to listen to prejudices. Pascal himself tells us "that
the mind can be strong and narrow, and just as extended as it is weak."
He says more: "We can have our senses all right, and not be equally able
in all things; because there are men who, being right in a certain
sphere of things, lose themselves in others."




CLXVIII.--ABSURDITY OF THE MORALITY AND OF THE RELIGIOUS VIRTUES
ESTABLISHED SOLELY IN THE INTEREST OF THE PRIESTS.

What is virtue according to theology? It is, we are told, the conformity
of men's actions with the will of God. But who is God? He is a being
whom no one is able to conceive of, and whom, consequently, each one
modifies in his own way. What is the will of God? It is what men who
have seen God, or whom God has inspired, have told us. Who are those who
have seen God? They are either fanatics, or scoundrels, or ambitious
men, whose word we can not rely upon. To found morality upon a God that
each man represents differently, that each one composes by his own idea,
whom everybody arranges according to his own temperament and his own
interest, is evidently founding morality upon the caprice and upon the
imagination of men; it is basing it upon the whims of a sect, faction,
or party, who, excluding all others, claim to have the advantage of
worshiping the true God.

To establish morality, or the duties of man, upon the Divine will, is
founding it upon the wishes, the reveries, or the interests of those who
make God talk without fear of contradiction. In every religion the
priests alone have the right to decide upon what pleases or displeases
their God; we may rest assured that they will decide upon what pleases
or displeases themselves.

The dogmas, ceremonies, the morality and the virtues which all religions
of the world prescribe, are visibly calculated only to extend the power
or to increase the emoluments of the founders and of the ministers of
these religions; the dogmas are obscure, inconceivable, frightful, and,
thereby, very liable to cause the imagination to wander, and to render
the common man more docile to those who wish to domineer over him; the
ceremonies and practices procure fortune or consideration to the
priests; the religious morals and virtues consist in a submissive faith,
which prevents reasoning; in a devout humility, which assures to the
priests the submission of their slaves; in an ardent zeal, when the
question of religion is agitated; that is to say, when the interest of
these priests is considered, all religious virtues having evidently for
their object the advantage of the priests.




CLXIX.--WHAT DOES THAT CHRISTIAN CHARITY AMOUNT TO, SUCH AS THEOLOGIANS
TEACH AND PRACTICE?

When we reproach the theologians with the sterility of their religious
virtues, they praise, with emphasis, charity, that tender love of our
neighbor which Christianity makes an essential duty for its disciples.
But, alas! what becomes of this pretended charity as soon as we examine
the actions of the Lord's ministers? Ask if you must love your neighbor
if he is impious, heretical, and incredulous, that is to say, if he does
