
    The foe long since in silence slept;
      Alike the conqueror silent sleeps;
    And Time the ruined bridge has swept
      Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.

    On this green bank, by this soft stream,
      We set today a votive stone;
    That memory may their deed redeem,
      When, like our sires, our sons are gone.

    Spirit, that made those heroes dare
      To die, and leave their children free,
    Bid Time and Nature gently spare
      The shaft we raise to them and Thee.

This does not appear in the hymnals and owns no special tune. Its niche
of honor is in the temple of anthology, but it will always be called the
"Concord Hymn"--and the fourth line of its first stanza is a perennial
quotation.

Ralph Waldo Emerson, LL.D., the renowned American essayist and poet, was
born in Boston, 1803. He graduated at Harvard in 1821, and was ordained
to the Unitarian ministry, but turned his attention to literature,
writing and lecturing on ethical and philosophical themes, and winning
universal fame by his original and suggestive prose and verse. He died
April 27, 1882.


BATTLE HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC.

After a visit to the Federal camps on the Potomac in 1861, Mrs. Julia
Ward Howe returned to her lodgings in Washington, fatigued, as she says,
by her "long, cold drive," and slept soundly. Awakening at early
daybreak, she began "to twine the long lines of a hymn which promised to
suit the measure of the 'John Brown' melody."

This hymn was written out after a fashion in the dark, by Mrs. Howe, and
she then went back to sleep.

    Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;
    He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored;
    He hath loosed the fateful lightning of His terrible swift sword;
        His truth is marching on.

    I have seen Him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps,
    They have builded Him an altar in the evening dews and damps;
    I can read His righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps;
        His day is marching on.

    I have read a fiery gospel writ in burnished rows of steel;
   "As ye deal with my contemners, so with you my grace shall deal;"
    Let the Hero, born of woman, crush the serpent with His heel,
        Since God is marching on.

    He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat;
    He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat;
    Oh, be swift, my soul, to answer Him! be jubilant my feet!
        Our God is marching on.

    In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea,
    With a glory in His bosom that transfigures you and me;
    As He died to make men holy, let us die to make men free.
        While God is marching on.


_THE TUNE._

The music of the old camp-meeting refrain,--

    Say, brothers will you meet us?

--or,--

    O brother, will you meet me,

(No. 173 in the _Revivalist_,) was written in 1855, by John William
Steffe, of Richmond, Va., for a fire company, and was afterwards
arranged by Franklin H. Lummis. The air of the "John Brown Song" was
caught from this religious melody. The old hymn-tune had the "Glory,
Hallelujah" coda, cadenced off with, "For ever, ever more."

In 1860-61 the garrison of soldiers at work on the half-dismantled
defenses of Fort Warren in Boston Harbor, were fain to lighten labor and
mock fatigue with any species of fun suggested by circumstances or
accident, and, as for music, they sang everything they could remember or
make up. John Brown's memory and fate were fresh in the Northern mind,
and the jollity of the not very reverent army men did not exclude
frequent allusions to the rash old Harper's Ferry hero.

A wag conjured his spirit into the camp with a witticism as to what he
was doing, and a comrade retorted,

"Marchin' on, of course."

A third cried, "Pooh, John Brown's underground."

A serio-comic debate added more words, and in the midst of the banter, a
musical fellow strung a rhythmic sentence and trolled it to the
Methodist tune. "John Brown's body lies a mould'rin' in the ground" was
taken up by others who knew the air, the following line was improvised
almost instantly, and soon, to the accompaniment of pick, shovel and
crowbar,--

    His soul goes marching on,

--rounded the couplet with full lung power through all the repetitions,
till the inevitable "glory, glory hallelujah" had the voice of every
soldier in the fort. The song "took," and the marching chorus of the
Federal armies of the Civil War was started on its way. Mrs. Howe gave
it a poem that made its rusticity sublime, and the "Battle Hymn of the
Republic" began a career that promises to run till battle hymns cease to
be sung.

Julia Ward was born in New York city, May 27, 1819. In 1843 she became
the wife of Samuel Gridley Howe, the far-famed philanthropist and
champion of liberty, and with him edited an anti-slavery paper, the
_Boston Commonwealth_, until the Civil War closed its mission. During
the war she was active and influential--and has never ceased to be
so--in the cause of peace and justice, and in every philanthropic
movement. Her great hymn first brought her prominently before the
public, but her many other writings would have made a literary
reputation. Her four surviving children are all eminent in the
scientific and literary world.


KELLER'S AMERICAN HYMN.

Naturally the title suggests the authorship of the ode, but fate made
Keller a musician rather than a poet and hymnist, and the honors of the
fine anthem are divided. At the grand performance which created its
reputation, the hymn of Dr. O.W. Holmes was substituted for the
composer's words. This is Keller's first stanza:

    Speed our republic, O Father on high!
      Lead us in pathways of justice and right,
    Rulers, as well as the ruled, one and all,
      Girdle with virtue the armor of might.
    Hail! three times hail, to our country and flag!
      Rulers, as well as the ruled, one and all,
    Girdle with virtue the armor of might;
      Hail! three times hail, to our country and flag!

"Flag" was the unhappy word at the end of every one of the four stanzas.
To match a short vowel to an orotund concert note for two beats and a
"hold" was impossible. When the great Peace Jubilee of 1872, in Boston,
was projected, Dr. Holmes was applied to, and responded with a lyric
that gave each stanza the rondeau effect designed by the composer, but
replaced the flat final with a climax syllable of breadth and music:

    Angel of Peace, thou hast wandered too long!
      Spread thy white wings to the sunshine of love!
    Come while our voices are blended in song,
      Fly to our ark like the storm-beaten dove!
    Fly to our ark on the wings of the dove,
      Speed o'er the far-sounding billows of song,
    Crown'd with thine olive-leaf garland of love,
      Angel of Peace, thou hast waited too long!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Angels of Bethlehem, answer the strain!
      Hark! a new birth-song is filling the sky!
    Loud as the storm-wind that tumbles the main,
      Bid the full breath of the organ reply,
    Let the loud tempest of voices reply,
      Roll its long surge like the earth-shaking main!
    Swell the vast song till it mounts to the sky!
      Angels of Bethlehem, echo the strain!

But the glory of the _tune_ was Keller's own.

Soon after the close of the war a prize of $500 had been offered by a
committee of American gentlemen for the best "national hymn" (meaning
words and music). Mr. Keller, though a foreigner, was a naturalized
citizen and patriot and entered the lists as a competitor with the zeal
of a native and the ambition of an artist. Sometime in 1866 he finished
and copyrighted the noble anthem that bears his name, and then began the
struggle to get it before the public and test its merit. To enable him
to bring it out before the New York Academy of Music, where
(unfortunately) he determined to make his first trial, his brother
kindly lent him four hundred dollars (which he had laid by to purchase a
little home), and he borrowed two hundred more elsewhere.

The performance proved a failure, the total receipts being only
forty-two dollars, Keller was $500 in debt, and his brother's
house-money was gone. But he refused to accept his failure as final.
Boston (where he should have begun) was introduced to his masterpiece at
every opportunity, and gradually, with the help of the city bands and a
few public concerts, a decided liking for it was worked up. It was
entered on the program of the Peace Jubilee and sung by a chorus of ten
thousand voices. The effect was magnificent. "Keller's American Hymn"
became a recognized star number in the repertoire of "best" national
tunes; and now few public occasions where patriotic music is demanded
omit it in their menu of song.[33]

[Footnote 33: In Butterworth's "_Story of the Tunes_," under the account
of Keller's grand motet, the following sacred hymn is inserted as "often
sung to it:"--

    Father Almighty, we bow at thy feet;
      Humbly thy grace and thy goodness we own.
    Answer in love when thy children entreat,
      Hear our thanksgiving ascend to thy throne.
    Seeking thy blessing, in worship we meet,
      Trusting our souls on thy mercy alone;
    Father Almighty, we bow at thy feet.

    Breathe, Holy Spirit, thy comfort divine,
      Tune every voice to thy music of peace;
    Hushed in our hearts, with one whisper of thine,
      Pride and the tumult of passion will cease.
    Joy of the watchful, who wait for thy sign,
      Hope of the sinful, who long for release,
    Breathe, Holy Spirit, thy comfort divine.

    God of salvation, thy glory we sing,
      Honors to thee in thy temple belong;
    Welcome the tribute of gladness we bring,
      Loud-pealing organ and chorus of song.
    While our high praises, Redeemer and King,
      Blend with the notes of the angelic throng,
    God of salvation, thy glory we sing.
                                  --_Theron Brown_.]

It is pathetic to know that the composer's one great success brought him
only a barren renown. The prize committee, on the ground that _none_ of
the competing pieces reached the high standard of excellence
contemplated, withheld the $500, and Keller's work received merely the
compliment of being judged worth presentation. The artist had his
copyright, but he remained a poor man.

Matthias Keller was born at Ulm, Wurtemberg, March 20, 1813. In his
youth he was both a musician and a painter. Coming to this country, he
chose the calling that promised the better and quicker wages, playing in
bands and theatre orchestras, but never accumulating money. He could
make fine harmonies as well as play them, but English was not his
mother-tongue, and though he wrote a hundred and fifty songs, only one
made him well-known. When fame came to him it did not bring him wealth,
and in his latter days, crippled by partial paralysis, he went back to
his early art and earned a living by painting flowers and retouching
portraits and landscapes. He died in 1875, only three years after his
Coliseum triumph.


"GOD BLESS OUR NATIVE LAND."

This familiar patriotic hymn is notable--though not entirely
singular--for having two authors. The older singing-books signed the
name of J.S. Dwight to it, until inquiring correspondence brought out
the testimony and the joint claim of Dwight and C.T. Brooks, and it
appeared that both these scholars and writers translated it from the
German. Later hymnals attach both their names to the hymn.[34]

[Footnote 34: For a full account of this disputed hymn, and the curious
trick of memory which confused _four_ names in the question of its
authorship, see Dr. Benson's _Studies of Familiar Hymns_, pp. 179-190]

John Sullivan Dwight, born, in Boston, May 13, 1813, was a virtuoso in
music, and an enthusiastic student of the art and science of tonal
harmony. He joined a Harvard musical club known as "The Pierian
Sodality" while a student at the University, and after his graduation
became a prolific writer on musical subjects. Six years of his life were
passed in the "Brook Farm Community." He was best known by his serial
magazine, Dwight's _Journal of Music_, which was continued from 1852 to
1881. His death occurred in 1893.

Rev. Charles Timothy Brooks, the translator of Faust, was born, in
Salem, Mass., June 20, 1813, being only about a month younger than his
friend Dwight. Was a student at Harvard University and Divinity School
1829-1835, and was ordained to the Unitarian ministry and settled at
Newport, R.I. He resigned his charge there (1871) on account of ill
health, and occupied himself with literary work until his death, Jan.
14, 1883.

    God bless our native land!
    Firm may she ever stand
      Through storm and night!
    When the wild tempests rave.
    Ruler of wind and wave,
    Do Thou our country save
      By Thy great might!

    For her our prayer shall rise
    To God above the skies;
      On Him we wait.
    Thou who art ever nigh,
    Guarding with watchful eye;
    To Thee aloud we cry,
      God save the State!

The tune of "Dort," by Lowell Mason, has long been the popular melody
for this hymn. Indeed the two were united by Mason himself. It is
braver music than "America," and would have carried Dr. Smith's hymn
nobly, but the borrowed tune, on the whole, better suits "My Country
'tis of thee,"--and besides, it has the advantage of a middle-register
harmony easy for a multitude of voices.


"THOU, TOO, SAIL ON, O SHIP OF STATE,"

The closing canto of Longfellow's "Launching of the Ship," almost
deserves a patriotic hymn-tune, though its place and use are commonly
with school recitations.


"GOD OF OUR FATHERS, KNOWN OF OLD."

Rudyard Kipling, in a moment of serious reflection on the flamboyant
militarism of British sentiment during the South African War, wrote this
remarkable "Recessional," so strikingly unlike his other war-time poems.
It is to be hoped he did not suddenly repent his Christian impulse, but
with the chauvinistic cry around him, "Our Country, right or wrong!" he
seems to have felt the contrast of his prayer--and flung it into the
waste-basket. His watchful wife rescued it (the story says) and bravely
sent it to the London Times. The world owes her a debt. The hymn is not
only an anthem for Peace Societies, but a tonic for true patriotism.
When Freedom fights in self-defense, she need not force herself to
"forget" the Lord of Hosts.

    God of our fathers, known of old,
      Lord of our far-flung battle-line,
    Beneath whose awful hand we hold
      Dominion over palm and pine;
    Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
      Lest we forget, lest we forget.

    The tumult and the shouting dies,
      The captains and the kings depart,
    Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
      An humble and a contrite heart.
    Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
      Lest we forget, lest we forget.

    Far-called, our navies melt away,
      On dune and headland sinks the fire;
    Lo all our pomp of yesterday
      Is one with Nineveh and Tyre.
    Judge of the nations, spare us yet,
      Lest we forget, lest we forget.

    If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
      Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe,
    Such boasting as the Gentiles use
      Or lesser breeds without the law,
    Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
      Lest we forget, lest we forget.

    For heathen heart that puts her trust,
      In recking tube and iron shard,
    All valiant dust that builds on dust
      And guarding, calls not Thee to guard,
    For frantic boast and foolish word
      Thy mercy on thy people, Lord!

Had Kipling cared more for his poem, and kept it longer in hand, he
might have revised a line or two that would possibly seem commonplace
to him--and corrected the grammar in the first line of the second
stanza. But of so fine a composition there is no call for finical
criticism. The "Recessional" is a product of the poet's holiest mood.
"The Spirit of the Lord came upon him"--as the old Hebrew phrase is, and
for the time he was a rapt prophet, with a backward and a forward
vision. Providence saved the hymn, and it touched and sank into the
better mind of the nation. It is already learned by heart--and
sung--wherever English is the common speech, and will be heard in
numerous translations, with the wish that there were more patriotic
hymns of the same Christian temper and strength.

Rudyard Kipling was born in Hindostan in 1865. Even with his first
youthful experiments in the field of literature he was hailed as the
coming apostle of muscular poetry and prose. For a time he made America
his home, and it was while here that he faced death through a fearful
and protracted sickness that brought him very near to God. He has
visited many countries and described them all, and, though sometimes his
imagination drives a reckless pen, the Christian world hopes much from a
man whose genius can make the dullest souls listen.


_THE TUNE._

The music set to Kipling's hymn is Stainer's "Magdalen"--(not his
"Magdalina," which is a common-metre tune)--and wonderfully fits the
words and enhances their dignity. It is a grave and earnest melody in D
flat, with two bars in unison at "Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,"
making the utterance of the prayer a deep and powerful finale.

John Stainer, Doctor of Music, born June 6, 1840, was nine years the
chorister of St. Paul's, London, and afterwards organist to the
University of Oxford. He is a member of the various musical societies of
the Kingdom, and a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor. His talent for
sacred music is rare and versatile, and he seems to have consecrated
himself as a musician and composer to the service of the church.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every civilized nation has its patriotic hymns. In fact what makes a
nation a nation is largely the unifying influences of its common song.
Even the homeless Hebrew nation is kept together by its patriotic
Psalms. The ethnic melodies would fill a volume with their story. The
few presented in this chapter represent their range of quality and
character--defiant as the Marseillaise, thrilling as "Scots' wha hae,"
joyful as "The Star-spangled Banner," breezy and bold as the "Ranz de
Vaches," or sweet as the "Switzers' Song of Home."




CHAPTER X.

SAILORS' HYMNS.


The oldest sailors' hymn is found in the 107th Psalm, vss. 23-30:

    They that go down to the sea in ships,
      To do business in great waters,
      These see the works of the Lord,
      And His wonders in the deep, etc.

Montgomery has made this metrical rendering of these verses:

    They that toil upon the deep,
      And in vessels light and frail
    O'er the mighty waters sweep
      With the billows and the gale,

    Mark what wonders God performs
      When He speaks, and, unconfined,
    Rush to battle all His storms
      In the chariots of the wind.

The hymn is not in the collections, and has no tune. Addison paraphrased
the succeeding verses of the Psalm in his hymn, "How are thy servants
blessed O Lord," sung to Hugh Wilson's[35] tune of "Avon":

    When by the dreadful tempest borne
      High on the broken wave,
    They know Thou art not slow to hear,
      Nor impotent to save.

    The storm is laid, the winds retire,
      Obedient to Thy will;
    The sea that roars at Thy command,
      At Thy command is still.

[Footnote 35: Hugh Wilson was a Scotch weaver of Kilmarnock, born 1764;
died 1824.]


"FIERCE WAS THE WILD BILLOW."

([Greek: Zopheras trikumias])

The ancient writer, Anatolius, who composed this hymn has for centuries
been confounded with "St" Anatolius, patriarch of Constantinople, who
died A.D. 458. The author of the hymn lived in the seventh century, and
except that he wrote several hymns, and also poems in praise of the
martyrs, nothing or next to nothing, is known of him. The "Wild Billow"
song was the principle seaman's hymn of the early church. It is being
introduced into modern psalmody, the translation in use ranking among
the most successful of Dr. John Mason Neale's renderings from the Greek.

    Fierce was the wild billow,
      Dark was the night;
    Oars labored heavily,
      Foam glimmered white;
    Trembled the mariners;
      Peril was nigh;
    Then said the God of God,
     "Peace! It is I!"

    Ridge of the mountain wave,
      Lower thy crest!
    Wall of Euroclydon,
      Be thou at rest!
    Sorrow can never be,
      Darkness must fly,
    When saith the Light of Light,
     "Peace! It is I!"


_THE TUNE._

The desire to represent the antiquity of the hymn and the musical style
of Its age, and on the other hand the wish to utilize it in the
tune-manuals for Manners' Homes and Seamen's Bethels, makes a difficulty
for composers to study--and the task is still open to competition.
Considering the peculiar tone that sailors' singing instinctively
takes--and has taken doubtless from time immemorial perhaps the
plaintive melody of "Neale," by J.H. Cornell, comes as near to a vocal
success as could be hoped. The music is of middle register and less than
octave range, natural scale, minor, and the triple time lightens a
little the dirge-like harmony while the weird sea-song effect is kept. A
chorus of singing tars must create uncommon emotion, chanting this
coronach of the storm.

John Henry Cornell was born in New York city, May 8, 1838, and was for
many years organist at St. Paul's Chapel, Trinity Church. He is the
author of numerous educational works on the theory and practice of
music. He composed the above tune in 1872. Died March 1, 1894.


"AVE, MARIS STELLA."

One of the titles which the Roman Catholic world applied to the Mother
of Jesus, in the Middle Ages, was "Stella Maris," "Star of the Sea."
Columbus, being a Catholic, sang this hymn, or caused it to be sung,
every evening, it is said, during his perilous voyage to an unknown
land. The marine epithet by which the Virgin Mary is addressed is
admirable as a stroke of poetry, and the hymn--of six stanzas--is a
prayer which, though offered to her as to a divine being, was no doubt
sincere in the simple sailor hearts of 1492.

The two following quatrains finish the voyagers' petition, and point it
with a doxology--

    Vitam praesta puram,
    Iter para tutum,
    Ut videntes Jesum
    Semper collaetemur.

    Sit laus Deo Patri,
    Summo Christo decus,
    Spiritui Sancto,
    Tribus honor unus!

A free translation is--

    Guide us safe, unspotted
    Through life's long endeavor
    Till with Thee and Jesus
    We rejoice forever.

    Praise to God the Father,
    Son and Spirit be;
    One and equal honor
    To the Holy Three.

Inasmuch as this ancient hymn did not attain the height of its
popularity and appear in all the breviaries until the 10th century, its
assumed age has been doubted, but its reputed author, Venantius
Fortunatus, Bishop of Poitiers, was born about 531, at Treviso, Italy,
and died about 609. Though a religious teacher, he was a man of romantic
and convivial instincts--a strange compound of priest, poet and _beau
chevalier_. Duffield calls him "the last of the classics and first of
the troubadours," and states that he was the "first of the Christian
poets to begin that worship of the Virgin Mary which rose to a passion
and sank to an idolatry."


_TUNES_

To this ancient rogation poem have been composed by Aiblinger (Johann
Caspar), Bavarian, (1779-1867,) by Proch (Heinrich), Austrian,
(1809-1878,) by Tadolini (Giovanni), Italian, (1803-1872,) and by many
others. The "Ave, Maris Stella" is in constant use in the Romish church,
and its English translation by Caswall is a favorite hymn in the _Lyra
Catholica_.


"AVE, SANCTISSIMA!"

This beautiful hymn is not introduced here in order of time, but because
it seems akin to the foregoing, and born of its faith and
traditions--though it sounds rather too fine for a sailor song, on ship
or shore. Like the other, the tuneful prayer is the voice of
ultramontane piety accustomed to deify Mary, and is entitled the
"Evening Song to the Virgin."

    Ave Sanctissima! we lift our souls to Thee
    Ora pro nobis! 'tis nightfall on the sea.
    Watch us while shadows lie
    Far o'er the waters spread;
    Hear the heart's lonely sigh;
      Thine, too, hath bled.

    Thou that hast looked on death,
    Aid us when death is near;
    Whisper of heaven to faith;
    Sweet Mother, hear!
    Ora pro nobis! the wave must rock our sleep;
      Ora, Mater, ora! Star of the Deep!

This was first written in four separate quatrains, "'Tis nightfall on
the sea" being part of the first instead of the second line, and "We
lift our souls," etc., was "Our souls rise to Thee," while the
apostrophe at the end read, "Thou Star of the Deep."

The fact of the modern origin of the hymn does not make it less probable
that the earlier one of Fortunatus suggested it. It was written by Mrs.
Hemans, and occurs between the forty-third and forty-fourth stanzas of
her long poem, "The Forest Sanctuary."

A Spanish Christian who had embraced the Protestant faith fled to
America (such is the story of the poem) to escape the cruelties of the
Inquisition, and took with him his Catholic wife and his child. During
the voyage the wife pined away and died, a martyr to her conjugal
loyalty and love. The hymn to the Virgin purports to have been her daily
evening song at sea, plaintively remembered by the broken-hearted
husband and father in his forest retreat on the American shore with his
motherless boy.

The music was composed by a sister of Mrs. Hemans, Mrs. Hughes, who
probably arranged the lines as they now stand in the tune.

The song, though its words appear in the _Parochial Hymn-book_, seems to
be in use rather as parlor music than as a part of the liturgy.


"JESUS, LOVER OF MY SOUL."

The golden quality of this best-known and loved of Charles Wesley's
hymns is attested by two indorsements that cannot be impeached; its
perennial life, and the blessings of millions who needed it.

    Jesus, Lover of my soul
      Let me to Thy bosom fly,
    While the billows near me roll,
      While the tempest still is high.

    Hide me, O my Saviour, hide,
      Till the storm of life is past,
    Safe into the haven guide,
      O receive my soul at last!

Wesley is believed to have written it when a young man, and story and
legend have been busy with the circumstances of its birth. The most
poetical account alleges that a dove chased by a hawk dashed through
his open window into his bosom, and the inspiration to write the line--

    Let me to Thy bosom fly,
