[1] Chapter xxvii.

[2] Chapter xxix.

[3] Chapter xxix.

[4] Chapter xxviii.

The necessity had become obvious, but it was a trying process. It
was too much for Mar Yohanan. He must be spoken of kindly, for he
had long stood in friendly relations with the mission, though the
evidence of his piety was never entirely satisfactory.

Priest John, of Geog Tapa, gave unquestioned evidences of piety in
early life. But in 1868, if not earlier, his gold had become dim,
and his proceedings and their consequences must have a place in this
history.

Becoming extravagant in his habits, and thus involved in debt, he
was disaffected because the mission could not accede to exorbitant
demands, and relieve him from pecuniary embarrassments. So he went
abroad to collect money for this purpose, and made his way to
England, where he succeeded in interesting several of the
dignitaries of the Established Church. Returning home in the autumn
of 1869, he made such a report of his visit, and excited such
expectation of the coming of Episcopal clergymen, and large
patronage for ecclesiastics and civil protection for all classes,
that many of the simple-hearted people were carried away. The
mission had been hoping to get some of the evangelical churches, ere
long, upon a self-supporting basis; but the hopes thus excited of
their burdens being assumed by the Church of England, put back for a
time this work of self-support.

The narrative is continued in the language of Mr. Cochran: "Priest
John returned from England flushed with the apparent success of his
mission. At Geog Tapa, the next Sabbath after our communion, at
early dawn he baptized fifteen children with much display. More than
two hours were spent in reading the English Liturgy, chanting
Psalms, and explaining and vindicating the usages of the English
Church. He announced his intention to give the communion to all who
desired it. This innovation upon the evangelical usage of more than
a dozen years (though he had once previously practiced
indiscriminate baptism), was not inappropriately followed by the
suspension of the Sabbath-school and preaching service, and the
turn-out of the whole village, headed by Malek Yonan and Priest
John, to meet the son of the master of their village, who happened
to return on that day from a long absence in the army. In the delay
of the young Khan's arrival, a young deacon, more zealous than
discreet, proposed a service by the roadside, but many voices cried,
'We have become Episcopalians, and don't want any more preaching.'
This public and flagrant violation of the Sabbath, headed by the two
leading Christians of the village, painfully illustrates the
material found there, and sadly contrasts with the better days of
the excellent and lamented Malek Agha Beg and Mar Elias.

"We have heard nothing from friends in England, but from other
sources infer the probability of at least a visit of Episcopalians
to Mar Shimon, and possibly to Oroomiah, the coming spring. Priest
John states, that Dr. Perkins did him harm in England by his
published statement, that he (Priest John) had come, not as an
accredited agent to secure Episcopal interference, but rather on a
private and personal begging expedition (the truth of which is well
known in Oroomiah, and confirmed by a written stipulation lodged
with friends here, that his companion should receive one third of
the avails of the excursion). To destroy the force of Dr. Perkins'
statement, Priest John has secured the signature of a large number
of names, including Patriarchs, Bishops, Maleks, and principal men
among the people. The paper was circulated privately, but we learn
that only one of our employees, and very few, if any, of our
communicants, could be persuaded to sign it.

"If asked, what is the true state of feeling among our communicants,
an extensive and familiar acquaintance with them enables me to
testify with great confidence, that, with the exception of a very
small high-church party, headed mainly by Mar Yohanan, I discover no
special tendency to Old Churchism of any kind, and if let alone,
they are more than satisfied with the gospel simplicity and
spontaneity of worship."

Under date of January 10th, 1870, Mr. Cochran adds, "Geog Tapa
continues to witness novel scenes under the eccentric and reckless
Priest John. At the close of the fast of the nativity, the communion
was administered to the whole village, and numbers from surrounding
villages were also invited in. Many who had not communed for from
ten to thirty years, as well as the more superstitious and the
lowest rabble, participated. Four priests, all of whom are of
doubtful piety (though two were in our communion), officiated,
clothed in white. The whole Old Church service was read in ancient
Syriac, and long Psalms were chanted in the same. The baser sort
were exultant, but the thoughtful, even of those not with us, were
sad. Every artifice was used to draw in our communion, but we were
rejoiced to find that all except ten,--consisting of the family of
Priest John, and the priests and deacons who officiated,--refused to
partake with them.

"I have preached there three times since. Yesterday was our
communion. The house was crowded at both services. It was judged
that seven hundred were inside, and not less than one hundred and
fifty outside. I preached in the morning on the spiritual character
of a true church, and newness of life as the condition of admission,
and that the ordinances belong exclusively to the church, and not to
those outside. All listened attentively, though a disturbance was
feared. In the afternoon I 'fenced' our communion fully, but Priest
John had the effrontery to partake. I have since learned that had it
been withheld, he, with the rabble, would have taken it by force. A
perfect separation seems called for, and with it a casting out of
unworthy members from the church. But the heart of the body is
right, and will, I trust, stand by the truth."

"Enlightened villagers," adds Mr. Shedd, under date of January 20,
1870, "besides members of the evangelical communion, did not
partake. It shows the movement for high-church aid in its true
colors. Such aid on the part of the English bishops is nothing more
nor less than salarying Mar Shimon and his ecclesiastics, for
reading their old prayers and using their dead forms and rites, as
they have done for ages past. We rejoice in so simple an issue, and
are sure it can do no injury to vital Christianity."[1]

[1] _Missionary Herald_, 1870, p. 190.

The time having come for separate and independent church
organizations, these painful occurrences seem to have been
providentially designed to promote that result.

Mr. Cochran thus writes: "The progress of the gospel and
providential occurrences, are bringing us into many new relations to
the old Nestorian Church, and grave questions, affecting the purity
and future growth of our churches, are now forcing themselves upon
us. So long as the Old Church did not oppose evangelical labors, so
long as she freely opened her doors to our services, consenting to a
separate administration of the ordinances for the hopefully pious,
and silently tolerating many ecclesiastical and social reforms, and
an abandonment of the liturgical service; in short, so long as we
could see, under the preached gospel, the hold on the old
superstitions steadily lessening, and the masses being leavened with
evangelical truth, we were more than content to labor on without a
separate church organization.

"But experience in other fields, as well as our own, has proved that
such labors can only be prosecuted for a time. From year to year we
have found the old ecclesiastics more restive under their loss of
support, and more jealous of the progress of spiritual life. Mar
Shimon, as you are informed, has for years openly opposed the
gospel, and now so intimidates the interior mountain districts under
his immediate control, that it seems preposterous to attempt to
prosecute labors there, unless on a separate foundation. And we now
find the opposition on the plains, and all over the field, not less
positive, and daily becoming more concerted and potent.

"Mar Yohanan has also, for years, secretly, and often openly and
most offensively, opposed spiritual and reformatory labors. Priest
John, a most untiring and reckless man, is arousing a furor of zeal
for Old Churchism,--a fanaticism that will not be likely to subside
with the spasmodic efforts he may make. He and others are now
administering the communion every few weeks to the whole people,
without distinction of character. They also enjoin the fasts and
saints' days, resume the use of the liturgy in ancient Syriac, burn
incense daily, bow before the altar, and make the sign of the cross;
though some, as yet, refuse to come into all these measures.

"With the return of these old superstitions, there is also a painful
throwing off of moral restraint, and intemperance and kindred vices
have greatly increased.

"In these circumstances the question has arisen, first in Geog Tapa,
and subsequently in other places; Can 'the evangelicals' further
unite in the morning and evening service conducted by priests--and
there happen to be five or six in that village--who are reviving
these superstitions? Almost the whole church are surprisingly united
in the decision to withdraw. This has been done for the last two
months, and we find upwards of one hundred members there, who are
firm, and daily waxing stronger in faith and opposition to the old
superstitions."

These and other distractions seriously hindered the spiritual growth
of the churches in the winter of 1869 and 1870. But in the spring, a
very thorough work of grace was enjoyed at Degala, and it was
believed that there were more than twenty genuine conversions,
mostly among the aged and middle-aged. The church in that place paid
half the salary of its pastor, and was expected soon to pay the
whole. Mar Yooseph, the young bishop at Bootan, wrote that his
congregation had increased to one hundred and fifty, and that, for
much of the time, Christ and his salvation formed the only theme of
conversation. He had hopes concerning considerably more than a score
of new converts. Deacon Toma, who had spent a year in the Seminary,
was with him as a helper, and promised to become another Deacon
Guwergis.

The immediate foreign mission field of the Nestorians, is among the
Armenians in Russia, and the same people at Tabriz, Hamadan (the
ancient Ecbatana), Teheran, and Ispahan in Persia, with the numerous
villages in the intervening regions; descendants, to a great extent,
of Armenians carried captive, in the year 1605, from the regions of
Ararat by Shah Abbas the Great. They furnish the field
providentially offered to the Nestorians, as the Koords do for the
Armenians in Turkey. Hamadan is about three hundred miles southeast
of Oroomiah, on the great caravan road between Tabriz and Bagdad. On
the 28th of May, 1870, the mission resolved, that they considered it
a duty urged upon them to embrace at once within their efforts the
Armenians and the Mussulman sects of Central Persia, by planting a
station at Hamadan; and they expressed the hope that the Board would
heartily endorse this action, and help them to carry it out without
delay, and also to occupy Tabriz.

The members of the mission, in the spring of 1870, were the Rev.
Messrs. Coan, Labaree, Cochran, and Shedd, and Dr. Van Norden, with
their wives, and Miss Dean, principal of the female seminary. The
mission was now known as the "Mission to Persia," in view of plans
to reach the entire population of the country. To Mr. Cochran was
assigned the superintendence of twenty out-stations in Oroomiah,
Sooldooz, and Tergawer, and the field outlying these, together with
the male Seminary, To Mr. Coan was committed the press, the editing
of the "Rays of Light," care of the treasury, and the oversight of
the city church, and of two out-stations. To Messrs. Shedd and
Labaree, jointly, was given the care of twenty out-stations in
Oroomiah and Salmas, besides Tabriz and Hamadan, with the Armenian
work in general; and, separately, to Mr. Shedd the mountain field,
and to Mr. Labaree the Mussulman work. Dr. Van Norden was to carry
on his medical department, and to translate the Gospel of John into
Turkish.

In the autumn of this year the Mission to Persia was formally
transferred to the care of the Presbyterian Board of Foreign
Missions; reserving, however, the Armenian work in the northern
portion of the field, from its intimate connection with the mission
to the Armenians of Turkey.

It remains only to speak of the honored founder of the mission.

Dr. Perkins lived through the entire connection of the mission with
the American Board, and died at Chicopee, Massachusetts, on the 31st
of December, 1869, when he had nearly attained the age of
sixty-five; having been born on the 12th of March, 1805. He
graduated at Amherst College in 1829, taught the next year in
Amherst Academy; spent the two following years in Andover Seminary;
and was tutor in his Alma Mater for the greater part of another
year. The engagement last named was shortened by his call to
commence the mission among the Nestorians. His life, from the time
of his sailing from Boston, with Mrs. Perkins, in September, 1833,
for six-and-thirty years, is largely the history of the Nestorian
mission.

The careful reader of this history will not need a portraiture of
his character. He was evidently made for the position he so long
occupied. He was an acknowledged leader in the Lord's host; a Moses
and a Joshua, with traits of character resembling those both of
Elijah, and of the Apostle Paul. To idleness, vagrancy, and
drunkenness, besetting sins of the Nestorians, he was the old
prophet; and in his longing desire to make them savingly acquainted
with the gospel, he was the apostle. Their spoken language he
reduced to a written form, and gave them, in their vernacular, the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments; with a commentary on
Genesis and on Daniel. Is it too much to pronounce him the Apostle
to the Nestorians? He came to his end as a shock of corn fully ripe;
and glorious results of his self denying, and in some respects
suffering mission, he will assuredly behold in the heavenly world.
Where in his native land could he have labored, with the prospect of
so large a spiritual harvest, taking no account of the widely
reacting influence of his labors on the churches at home? And we
might propose the same inquiry with respect to the departed
Stoddard, and Rhea, and Grant, and Fidelia Fiske, and others, both
among the dead, and the living.






CHAPTER XXXVIII.

SYRIA.

1857-1860.


Dr. Eli Smith, whose name has an honorable place among the
translators of the Scriptures, died at Beirut, Sabbath morning,
January 11th, 1857.[1] Thirty years had elapsed since his first
arrival in Syria, and he had before been connected for several
months with the press at Malta. In 1829, he made an exploring visit,
with the author, to the Ionian Islands, the Morea, and the Grecian
Archipelago; and the next year, he and Dr. Dwight explored Armenia,
and a part of the Nestorian country. The other more important events
of his life are so far known to the reader, that they need not be
repeated.

[1] Dr. Smith expressed a decided opinion, in his last sickness,
that no memoir of his life and labors should be published, since he
had never kept a journal, and there were not sufficient materials.
In this he was probably correct, considering what the public would
have expected. A well written obituary, somewhat extended for that
publication, may be found in the Missionary Herald for 1857, pp.
224-229. See, also, pp. 123-125.

The mind of Dr. Smith was rich in general principles, and in
well-considered applications of them to the missionary work; though,
in this latter respect, he was restricted more than his brethren
among the Armenians, by the less pliable nature of the materials on
which he was called to operate. After having explored countries
which others were to occupy; after contributing largely to the
accuracy, variety, and value of Dr. Robinson's "Biblical
Researches"; and after securing the formation of type that would be
acceptable to the most fastidious Arab; he set himself to prepare a
new translation of the Bible into the Arabic language. With this in
view, he pursued the study of Arabic and kindred languages to a
greater extent than was necessary to become either a good speaker,
or a good preacher. His learning was both extensive and accurate,
and he was continually adding to his stores by a wide range of
judicious reading. To a good knowledge of the ancient classics, he
added an acquaintance, more or less perfect, with the French,
Italian, German, and Turkish languages. With the Hebrew he was
familiar; and the Arabic, by far the most difficult of all, was to
him a second vernacular.

Dr. Smith was eminently a man of business, and was accustomed to
give attention to the minutest details. He spent much time in
superintending the cutting, casting, and perfecting of the various
fonts of type, made from models that he had accurately drawn from
the best specimens of Arabic caligraphy.[1] For many years he read
the proof-sheets of nearly every work that was printed at the
mission press; and he bestowed much thought and labor upon the
mechanical apparatus and fixtures of that establishment.

[1] See. vol. i. p. 233.

To him every pursuit was subsidiary to a faithful translation of the
Word of God into the Arabic language. Yet he did not neglect the
regular preaching of the gospel, which he regarded as the first duty
of every missionary; and having early become a fluent speaker in the
Arabic, this was ever his delight. "Almost as a matter of course,
his preaching was expository and didactic. In clear, lucid, logical
exposition of divine truth, he had few equals. His language, though
select and grammatical, was always simple, and within the
comprehension of the humblest of his hearers. In regard to matter,
his discourses were eminently Biblical, sound, and evangelical. In
form and costume, his theology was that of Edwards, and Dwight, and
Woods,--the theology of the Puritan fathers of New England. Upon
this system of divine truth his own hopes of eternal life rested,
and it was this which he earnestly labored, for thirty years, to
infuse into the Arabic literature, and transplant into the hard and
stony soil of Syria's moral desert."

The author, having had the best opportunities for knowing Dr. Smith,
bears testimony to his excellent judgment, and to the great value of
his correspondence with the executive officers of the Board, in the
forming period of the missionary work.

It did not please the Lord to grant the earnest desire of Dr. Smith
to live and complete his translation of the Scriptures; and it must
be admitted, that his ideal of perfection in the work was such, that
it is doubtful whether he ever could have been satisfied that his
entire translation was ready for publication. Only Genesis, Exodus,
and the first sixteen chapters of Matthew, had received his final
revision, and were acknowledged by him as complete. But, with the
help of Mr. Bistany, his assistant translator, he had put into
Arabic the entire New Testament, the Pentateuch, the Historical
Books of the Old Testament, and the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Lamentations, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, and Nahum.
He had revised, and nearly prepared for the press, the whole of the
New Testament, and all except Jeremiah, Lamentations, and the last
fourteen chapters of Isaiah, of the books named in the Old
Testament. With these finished specimens, and with so large a
portion of the remainder translated and carefully revised, together
with the helps to translation which he had accumulated, his brethren
believed that he had laid the foundation for one of the best
versions of the sacred Scriptures to be found in any language.

Dr. Van Dyck had been connected with the mission since 1840, and
very soon made himself master of the spoken Arabic, in which he
greatly excelled as a preacher. It soon appeared, that he was the
man to succeed Dr. Smith as translator of the Scriptures, and the
mission arranged his removal, for that purpose, from Sidon to
Beirut; so that in due time he was enabled to bring the great work
to successful completion.[1]

[1] See chapter xl.

Mr. Aiken had joined Mr. Wilson at Hums, a new station north of
Damascus, where he was bereaved of his wife before she had been six
months in the field. The arrangement for 1857 was that Beirut should
be occupied by Messrs. Van Dyck and Ford, and Mr. Hurter, the
printer; Abeih by Messrs. Calhoun and Bliss; Sidon by Mr. Eddy; Deir
el Komr by Mr. Bird; Bhamdun by Mr. Benton; Tripoli by Messrs.
Jessup and Lyons; and Hums by Mr. Wilson. Dr. Thomson and Mr. Aiken
were in the United States; the latter with health so impaired as to
forbid his resuming his mission. He had previously married Miss
Cheney. In the following year, Miss Jane E. Johnson and Miss Amelia
C. Temple arrived to take the care of a girls' boarding-school at
Suk el Ghurb, on Mount Lebanon; but the former was soon found unable
to endure the climate. Dr. Thomson, while in this country, published
a valuable work on Biblical literature, in two volumes, entitled
"The Land and the Book." Dr. and Mrs. De Forest had come to this
country in the hope of a restoration of his health; but on the 24th
of November, 1858, this excellent missionary was released from long
and severe physical sufferings by a peaceful death.

The health of Mrs. Wilson made it necessary, for a time, to leave
Hums without a resident missionary. The principal operations, both
here and at Deir el-Komr, were through schools for both sexes, which
had been embarrassed by Syrian and Greek opposers, but in no case
suppressed. The female department of the school at Deir el-Komr
commenced with a dozen pupils, but in six months the attendance
exceeded fifty. When Mr. Bird came to that place, he thought there
were not six females in the nominally Christian population, who
could read; but a year had not passed before half the pupils in his
girls' school could read their Bibles. There were other mountain
schools under the care of the station, and in one there were more
than sixty pupils.

The following contrast of the state of things in 1857 with what it
had been fifteen years before, indicates a preparatory work in no
small degree encouraging. "Then, the missionary could hardly
purchase here the necessaries of life; and when he left, he was
followed by stones and execrations. Now, he is welcomed and honored.
Then, fear kept even his friends from venturing to visit him; now,
priests and even a bishop are ashamed not to return his calls. Then,
the Protestant sect could not be vilified enough; now, it is spoken
of with favor in public and in high places. The old Emir Beshir,
once the persecutor and terror of Protestants, has passed away, and
his dilapidated palace is used as barracks for Turkish soldiers. His
prime minister, or secretary, who did much injury to the cause of
evangelical religion, and whose mansion was, as it were, the
stronghold of the enemy, is no more. What remains of this
Ahithophel's house is the abode of the missionary, and furnishes
apartments for Scripture schools, and a Protestant chapel. His
sons-in-law were leaders in the movement which brought us to Deir
el-Komr, and are among our firmest friends. His grandchildren learn
the folly of popery by the knowledge of the Bible they acquire in
our schools.

"Time was, when every one trembled at the anathema of the clergy.
Now, the latter dare not show their impotence by pronouncing it.
Some of the people would be glad to be thus dissevered from a church
which they abhor, for they would thus not only gain their end, but
retain the sympathies of many who would else oppose them. Those who
send their children to our schools, have been refused admission to
the confessional and the eucharist; the Maronite bishop, however,
has at length yielded the point, and tries to win, rather than
compel. Their high school he has made free of charge, and has
promised to open a girls' school beside. In the Greek Catholic
communion, on the other hand, the men and some of the women remain
"suspended;" yet they are of good courage, some glad of so excellent
an excuse to get rid of the confessional, and others incensed at the
glaring injustice that would admit the drunkard and the notoriously
vicious, but exclude the respectable and the moral. We have here the
anomaly of those being thrust out of the church, who are still its
very pillars, its substantial supporters, whose names are known, and
whose influence is felt, throughout the region.

"We have reason to thank God and take courage. Still we long to see
a work more purely spiritual. Light is being diffused, but there is
not the corresponding religious interest. The truth is viewed by
many as a beautiful theory, the heart remaining a flint. We have to
regret the fact, that some of the best minds in the place are tinged
with skepticism. Happily the most influential are, notwithstanding,
our firm friends, and are in favor of good education and good
morals."

Ain Zehalty, a village situated in the heart of Lebanon, has been
already mentioned.[1] Mr. Bird says, "We now have there five
church-members. There have been regular Sabbath services under the
charge of the native helper, Khalil. The audience has been on the
increase, and is now not only larger than that in Deir el-Komr, but
is composed of better materials. Those who come desire instruction,
and are regular attendants and declared Protestants." An Ain
Zehaltian, when out of his village, if not a Druze, was set down at
once as a Protestant. The day school in that place had forty
