and third parts of the Third Lesson were from a Commentary.

The occurrence of Saints' Days was so frequent as to disturb many of
these: for the special Lessons of a Saint's Day were read, instead of
those of the regular course.

The theory of reading the whole books had been maintained; but it broke
down in practice.

It is worthy of notice that these various Lessons, from the Bible, from
Commentaries, and from the acts and martyrdoms of Saints, were all
"set" with Verses, Responds etc. so as to be Acts of Worship, as well
as a means of Instruction.




APPENDIX D.

ON PLINY'S LETTER TO THE EMPEROR TRAJAN. (p. 107.)

[Pliny the younger was Governor of Pontus and Bithynia during some of
the early years of the 2nd century.  Trajan was Emperor from A.D. 98 to
117.  The letter, from which we give some extracts, has been dated (Bp
Lightfoot) A.D. 112.  It shows that the marvellous spreading of the
Faith took place in the face of laws which made it a crime to be a
Christian: and that the closest enquiry on Pliny's part made him aware
of their high moral standard, and of the stedfastness of their
devotion.]

"* * * The method I have observed towards those who have been brought
before me as Christians is this; I interrogated them whether they were
Christians; {175} if they confessed, I repeated the question twice,
adding threats at the same time; and if they still persevered, I
ordered them to be immediately punished.  For, I was persuaded,
whatever the nature of their opinions might be, a contumacious and
inflexible obstinacy certainly deserves correction.  * * * An
information was presented to me without any name subscribed, containing
a charge against several persons; these, upon examination, denied they
were, or ever had been, Christians.  They repeated after me an
invocation to the gods, and offered religious rites with wine and
frankincense before your statue * * * and even reviled the name of
Christ; whereas there is no forcing, it is said, those who are really
Christians, into any of these compliances. * * * The rest owned indeed
they had been of that number formerly, but had now (some above three,
others more, and a few above twenty years ago) renounced that error. *
* * They affirmed the whole of their guilt, or their error, was, that
they met on a certain stated day before it was light, and addressed
themselves in a form of prayer to Christ, as to some god, binding
themselves by a solemn oath, not for the purposes of any wicked design,
but never to commit any fraud, theft, or adultery; never to falsify
their word, nor deny a trust when they should be called upon to deliver
it up: after which, it was their custom to separate, and then
reassemble to eat in common a harmless meal.  * * * Great numbers must
be involved in the danger of these prosecutions which have already
extended and are still likely to extend, to persons of all ranks and
ages, and even of both sexes.  In fact, this contagious superstition is
not confined to the cities only, but has spread its infection among the
neighbouring villages and country.  * * *"

_Melmoth's Translation_ (1747).




{176}

APPENDIX E.

ON THE ADDITION OF "FILIOQUE" TO THE CREED. (p. 124.)

The Nicene Creed (325) had the words "_Proceeding from the Father_":
the Council of Ephesus (431[1]) decreed that no addition was to be made
to the Creed, as there settled.  When, however, the question was raised
whether we ought not to say "proceeding from the Father, _and the Son_
(Filioque)," various Scripture phrases were adduced in support of it:
such as, _the Spirit of Christ_ (Rom. viii. 9), _the Spirit of His Son_
(Gal. iv. 6), _the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ_ (Phil. i. 19),
_the Spirit of Christ_ (1 Pet. i. 11).  Also S. John xv. 26, xvi. 7,
xx. 32, and the general similarity of expressions which, speaking of
the Holy Spirit, refer to the Father, and to the Son.

The Eastern Churches were opposed to the addition of the words, "and
from the Son."  The Western Churches were, mainly, in favour of it.
The controversy lasted from the 5th to the 11th century, and resulted
in the schism which still separates the Eastern and Western Churches.

It is usually agreed that the difference is not one of doctrine.  The
Easterns prefer the phrase "receiving from the Son": the Westerns
prefer to assert afresh the equality of the Father and the Son, by
using the phrase, "proceeding from the Father and the Son."  It may be
{177} doubted whether the words should have been added without the
assent of a General Council.  But there is no denial of the equality of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in the Eastern, nor in the
Western, Churches.



[1] On p. 124, we have accidentally written 'Chalcedon' for 'Ephesus':
and _vice versa_.  The dates are correctly given on pp. 122, 123.




APPENDIX F.

ON THE GREEK ORIGIN OF LITANIES (p. 153).

_Litany_ comes from the Greek _litaneia_.

_lite_ means a prayer; whence (_litanos_) one who prays; _litaneuo_ to
be a person who prays; _litaneia_ a continued prayer.  Thus _Litany_
has the meaning of "prolonged prayers."


In _the (Greek) Liturgy of S. James_, there are three Bidding Prayers
(besides the "Diptychs"), which have something of the Litany Form.  The
following suffrages are selected from the one to which we have referred:

"_The Deacon_.  Let us beseech the Lord in peace.

_The Laity_.  Lord, have mercy.

_The Deacon_.  O God, by thy love grant us safety, mercy, compassion,
and protection.  _The Laity_.  Lord, have mercy.

_The Deacon_.  For the peace that is from above, for the love of God
towards man, and for the safety of our souls, let us beseech the Lord.
_The Laity_ (after each suffrage).  Lord, have mercy.

_The Deacon_.  For the peace of the whole world, and the unity of all
the holy churches of God, let us &c.

{178}

For those who bear fruit and do good in the holy churches of God, those
who remember the poor, the widows, and fatherless, strangers and needy
persons, and for those who have bidden us to remember them in our
prayers, let us &c.

For those who are in old age and weakness, by disease or illness, for
those who are oppressed by unclean spirits, for their speedy recovery
and safety through God's help, let us &c.

For those who pass their lives in singleness, devotion, or meditation,
for those in holy matrimony, those engaged in life's battle in
mountains, and caves, and pits of the earth, our holy fathers and
brothers, let us &c.

For Christian sailors, travellers, strangers, and those in captivity,
in exile, those in prisons, and bitter slavery, being our brethren, for
their return in peace, let us &c.

For the remission of our sins, and pardon of our faults, and for our
deliverance from all tribulation, anger, danger, and necessity, and
from the rising-up of enemies, let us &c.

For a mild season, gentle rains, and kindly dews, for plenteous crops,
and a perfect year crowned (with His goodness), let us &c.

For those who are present and pray with us at this sacred hour and at
any time, our fathers and brothers, for their earnestness, toil, and
readiness of heart, let us beseech the Lord.

That our prayer may be heard, and may be acceptable before God; and
that his mercies and compassions may be poured abundantly upon us, let
us beseech the Lord."

      *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *




{179}

DATES.

The principal dates which are of use in reading this book fall into
four groups:

  1.  The Early Church.
  2.  The Discussion of the Creed.
  3.  The Growth of Services.
  4.  The Growth of the English Services.

There is of course a certain amount of overlapping: but this will be
readily understood.  The reader will also easily guess when the years
mentioned are those of a life, or those of a reign.

  Early Dates.

  A.D.                               A.D.

  14-37. Tiberius, emp.

  54-68. Nero, emp.

  98-117. Trajan, emp.              112. Pliny's letter.

                                    55-(117). Tacitus, hist.

                                      -(120). Suetonius, hist.

  138-161.  Antoninus Pius, emp.    140. Justin's 1st Apology.

                                    70-156. Polycarp, Bp.

  161-180.  Marcus Aurelius, emp.   86-117. Pothinus, Bp.

                                    (125)-202. Irenaeus, Bp.

                                    -(222). Tertullian.

                                    -253. Origen.

                                    -253. Cyprian, Bp.

  306-337.  Constantine, emp.


{180}

The discussion of the Articles of the Creed.

  Doubts.              Writers.          Councils.         Creed.

  First & second
    centuries.

  Ebionites.           Irenaeus,
                       abt 180.

                       Tertullian,
                       abt 200.

  Docetae.

  Gnostics.

  Third century.       Cyprian, Bp,                        ? Apostles'
                       ? 253.                                Creed.

  Sabellians.

  Arians.

  Fourth century.      Athanasius, Bp,   Nicaea, 325.    ) Nicene
                       (300)-371.                        ) Creed
                                                         )
                       Basil, Bp,                        )
                       329-379                           )
                                                         )
  Apollinarians.       Ambrose, Bp,      Constantinople, )
                       340-397.          381.            )

                       Chrysostom, Bp,
                       (347)-407.

  Fifth century.       Jerome,
                       346-420.

  Nestorians.          Augustine, Bp,    Ephesus, 431.
                       354-430.

  Eutychians, or  )                      Chalcedon, 461.
  Monophysites.   )

  Seventh century.

  Monothelites.                          Constantinople,   'Athanasian'
                                         680.              Creed.

{181}

DATES CONNECTED WITH THE

Growth of the Christian Service Books.

A.D.

      112. Pliny's Letter.
      140. Justin Martyr's 1st Apology.
  340-397. Ambrose, Bp of Milan.
  347-407. Chrysostom, Bp of Constantinople.
  Before 400. Clementine Liturgy.
  463-474. Mamertus, Bp of Vienne.  _Litanies_.
  590-604. Gregory, Bp of Rome.  _Litany: Sacramentary_.
           Sacramentaries of 7th century, &c., representing
           work of
             440-461. Leo, Bp of Rome.
             492-496. Gelasius, Bp of Rome.
             590-604. Gregory, Bp of Rome.

  742-814. Charlemagne.  Abolition of Gallican Liturgy.
      747. Great Council of Cloveshoo.



DATES CONNECTED WITH THE

Growth of the Service Books in England.

  200. Christianity already established in Britain.  (_Tertullian_.)
  314. Council at Arles in France.  Three British Bishops signed.
  596-605. Augustine, Archbishop of Canterbury.
  664. Council of Whitby.
  747. The great Council of Cloveshoo.


Restraints upon the influence of the Pope in England.

  1215. Magna Charta.
  1279. Statute of Mortmain.
  1351. Statute of Provisors.
  1352. Statute of Praemunire.


{182}

  Translations of the Bible          Revisions of the Prayer Book
    in England.                        in England.

  8th century.  Psalms (_Saxon_).
    The Gospels (_Egbert_).
    S. John (_Bede_).

  880. The Psalms (_King Alfred_).

                                     1085. The Sarum Use.

  1380-4. Wyclifs Bible.

  1526-31. Tyndale.

  1535. Coverdale.

