office. At the request of some of the bishops St. Vincent determined
to give retreats to those who were preparing for Holy Orders. At first
these retreats lasted only ten days, but they were productive of such
splendid results that they were extended to several months. Finally
they led to the establishment of clerical seminaries, of which
institutions St. Vincent and his associates took charge in several of
the dioceses of France. Before his death they had control of eleven
French seminaries; and at the time of the Revolution fully one-third
of the diocesan seminaries were in the hands of his disciples.[14] By
means of retreats for the clergy, and spiritual conferences organised
for their improvement St. Vincent kept in close touch with those whom
he had trained, and afforded them an opportunity of renewing their
fervour and completing their education.

It was fortunate for France that God had raised up a man so prudent
and zealous as St. Vincent to be a guide to both priests and people
during the difficult times through which the country was then passing.
From without, danger threatened the Church on the side of the Huguenot
heretics, and from within, Jansenism and Gallicanism bade fair to
captivate the sympathy of both clergy and people. At first St. Vincent
was on friendly terms with the Abbot de St. Cyran, the leader of the
Jansenists in France, but once he realised the dangerous nature of his
opinions and the errors contained in such publications as the
/Augustus/ of Jansen and the /Frequent Communion/ of Arnauld he threw
himself vigorously into the campaign against Jansenism. At court, in
his conferences with bishops and priests, in university circles, and
in the seminaries he exposed the insidious character of its tenets. At
Rome he urged the authorities to have recourse to stern measures, and
in France he strove hard to procure acceptance of the Roman decisions.
And yet in all his work against the Jansenists there was nothing of
the bitterness of the controversialist. He could strike hard when he
wished, but he never forgot that charity is a much more effective
weapon than violence. In his own person he set the example of complete
submission to the authority of the Pope, and enjoined such submission
on his successors. St. Vincent died in 1660. His loss was mourned not
merely by his own spiritual children, the Congregation of the Mission
and the Sisters of Charity, but by the poor of Paris and of France to
whom he was a generous benefactor, as well as by the bishops and
clergy to whom he had been a friend and a guide. To his influence more
than to any other cause is due the preservation of France to the
Church in the seventeenth century.

But the work of the Congregation of the Mission was not confined to
France. Its disciples spread into Italy, Spain, Portugal, Poland,
Ireland, and England. They went as missionaries to Northern Africa to
labour among the Barbary pirates by whom St. Vincent had been
captured, to Madagascar, to some of the Portuguese colonies in the
East, to China, and to the territories of the Sultan. At the
Revolution most of their houses in France were destroyed, and many of
the Vincentians suffered martyrdom. When the worst storms, however,
had passed the congregation was re-established in France, and its
members laboured earnestly in the spirit of its holy founder to
recover much of what had been lost.

The founder of the Sulpicians was Jean Jacques Olier[15] (1608-57) the
friend and disciple of St. Vincent de Paul. Impressed with the
importance of securing a good education and training for the clergy,
he and a couple of companions retired to a house in Vaugirard (1641),
where they were joined by a few seminarists, who desired to place
themselves under his direction. Later on he was offered the parish of
St. Sulpice, then one of the worst parishes in Paris from the point of
view of religion and morality. The little community of priests working
under the rules compiled by Olier for their guidance soon changed
completely the face of the entire district. House to house visitations
were introduced; sermons suitable to the needs of the people were
given; catechism classes were established, and in a very short time
St. Sulpice became the model parish of the capital.

In 1642 a little seminary was opened and rules were drawn up for the
direction of the students, most of whom attended the theological
lectures at the Sorbonne. Priests and students formed one community,
and as far as possible followed the same daily routine. During their
free time the students assisted in the work of the parish by visiting
the sick and taking charge of classes for catechism. At first Olier
had no intention of founding seminaries throughout France. His aim was
rather to make St. Sulpice a national seminary, from which young
priests might go forth properly equipped, and qualified to found
diocesan institutions on similar lines if their superiors favoured
such an undertaking. But yielding to the earnest solicitations of
several of the bishops he opened seminaries in several parts of
France, and entrusted their administration to members of his own
community. The first of these was founded at Nantes in 1648. During
the lifetime of the founder a few of the Sulpicians were despatched to
Canada, where they established themselves at Montreal, and laboured
zealously for the conversion of the natives. Like St. Vincent, the
founder of the Sulpicians worked incessantly against Jansenism, and
impressed upon his followers the duty of prompt obedience to the
bishops and to the Pope, lessons which they seem never to have
forgotten. The Sulpicians according to their constitution are a
community of secular priests bound by no special religious vows.

The religious order, however, that did most to stem the advancing tide
of heresy and to raise the drooping spirits of the Catholic body
during the saddest days of the sixteenth century was undoubtedly the
Society of Jesus, founded by St. Ignatius of Loyola.[16] By birth St.
Ignatius was a Spaniard, and by profession he was a soldier. Having
been wounded at the siege of Pampeluna in 1521 he turned his mind
during the period of his convalescence to the study of spiritual
books, more particularly the Lives of the Saints. As he read of the
struggles some of these men had sustained and of the victories they
had achieved he realised that martial fame was but a shadow in
comparison with the glory of the saints, and he determined to desert
the army of Spain to enrol himself among the servants of Christ. With
the overthrow of the Moorish kingdom of Granada fresh in his mind, it
is not strange that he should have dreamt of the still greater triumph
that might be secured by attacking the Mahomedans in the very seat of
their power, and by inducing them to abandon the law of the Prophet
for the Gospel of the Christians. With the intention of preparing
himself for this work he bade good-bye to his friends and the
associations of his youth, and betook himself to a lonely retreat at
Manresa near Montserrat, where he gave himself up to meditation and
prayer under the direction of a Benedictine monk. The result of his
stay at Manresa and of his communings with God are to be seen in the
/Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius/, a work which in the hands of
his disciples has done wonders for the conversion and perfection of
souls, and which in the opinion of those competent to judge has no
serious rivals except the Bible and the Imitation of Christ. From
Manresa he journeyed to the Holy Land to visit its sacred shrines, and
to labour for the conversion of the Infidel conquerors, but having
found it impossible to undertake this work at the time he returned to
Europe.

Realising that his defective education was a serious obstacle to the
establishment of the religious order that he contemplated, he went to
work with a will to acquire the rudiments of grammar. When this had
been accomplished successfully he pursued his higher studies at
Alcala, Salamanca, and Paris, where he graduated as a doctor in 1534.
But while earnest in the pursuit of knowledge he never forgot that
knowledge was but a means of preparing himself for the accomplishment
of the mission to which God had called him. While at Paris he gathered
around him a group of students, Francis Xavier, Lainez, Salmeron,
Bodadilla, Rodriguez and Faber, with which body Lejay, Codure and
Broet were associated at a later period. On the feast of the
Assumption (1534) Ignatius and his companions wended their way to the
summit of Montmartre overlooking the city of Paris, where having
received Holy Communion they pledged themselves to labour in the Holy
Land. Having discovered that this project was almost impossible they
determined to place themselves at the disposal of the Pope. In Rome
Ignatius explained the objects and rules of the proposed society to
Paul III. and his advisers. In September 1540 the approval of the Pope
was obtained though with certain restrictions, which were abolished in
1543, and in the following year Ignatius was elected first general of
the Society of Jesus.

St. Ignatius had the greatest respect for the older religious orders,
the Benedictines, the Dominicans, and the Franciscans, to all of which
he was deeply indebted; but he believed that the new conditions under
which his followers would be called upon to do battle for Christ
necessitated new rules and a new constitution. The Society of Jesus
was not to be a contemplative order seeking only the salvation of its
own members. Its energies were not to be confined to any particular
channel. No extraordinary fasts or austerities were imposed, nor was
the solemn chanting of the office or the use of a particular dress
insisted upon. The society was to work "for the greater glory of God"
in whatever way the circumstances demanded. On one thing only did St.
Ignatius lay peculiar emphasis, and that was the absolute necessity of
obedience to superiors in all things lawful, and above all of
obedience to the Pope. The wisdom of this injunction is evident enough
at all times, but particularly in an age when religious authority,
even that of the successor of St. Peter, was being called in question
by so many. Members of the society were forbidden to seek or accept
any ecclesiastical dignities or preferments.

The constitution[17] of the Society of Jesus was not drawn up with
undue haste. St. Ignatius laid down rules for his followers, but it
was only when the value of these regulations had been tested by
practice that he embodied them in the constitution, endorsed by the
first general congregation held in 1558. According to the constitution
complete administrative authority is vested in the general, who is
elected by a general congregation, and holds office for life. He is
assisted by a council consisting of a representative from each
province. The provincials, rectors of colleges, heads of professed
houses, and masters of notices are appointed by the general, usually,
however, only for a definite number of years, while all minor
officials are appointed by the provincial. The novitiate lasts for two
years during which time candidates for admission to the order are
engaged almost entirely in prayer, meditation, and spiritual reading.
When the novitiate has been completed the scholasticate begins.
Students are obliged to read a course in arts and philosophy and to
teach in some of the colleges of the society, after which they proceed
to the study of theology. When the theological course has been ended
they are admitted as coadjutors or professed members according to
their ability and conduct. Between these two bodies, the coadjutors
and the professed, there is very little difference, except that the
professed in addition to the ordinary vows pledge themselves to go
wherever the Pope may send them, and besides, it is from this body as
a rule that the higher officials of the order are selected. Lay
brothers are also attached to the society.

When the Society of Jesus was founded, Protestantism had already made
great strides in Northern Europe, and though the Latin countries were
not then affected no man could foresee what change a decade of years
might bring. St. Ignatius adopted the best precautions against the
spread of heresy. While he himself remained in Rome engaged in
organising the members of his society and in establishing colleges and
charitable institutions, he sent his followers to all parts of Italy.
Bishops availed themselves freely of their services as preachers and
teachers. Colleges were opened in Venice, Naples, Bologna, Florence,
and in many other leading cities. St. Charles Borromeo became the
patron and defender of the society in Milan. Everywhere the labours of
the Jesuits led to a great religious revival, while by means of their
colleges they strengthened the faith of the rising generation. In
Spain, too, the home of St. Ignatius the Jesuits received a friendly
welcome. Their colleges were crowded with students, as were their
churches with the faithful. Difficulties, indeed, arose owing to the
tendency of some of the Spanish Jesuits to have none but Spanish
superiors, but with a little prudence these difficulties were overcome
in 1593. Most of the best known writers on ecclesiastical subjects,
Vasquez, Suarez, De Lugo, and Ripalda on Dogmatic Theology, Sanchez on
Moral Theology, and Maldonatus and Pereira on Scripture belonged to
the Spanish province.

In France the society met with serious difficulties at first. Hatred
of Spain and of everything that savoured of Spanish origin, dislike of
what was considered the excessive loyalty of the society to the Pope,
and jealousy on the part of the University of Paris were the principal
obstacles that were to be overcome. But notwithstanding these the
Jesuits found a home in Paris, where they opened the College de
Clermont (Louis-le-Grand), and they founded similar colleges in
several of the leading cities of France. In the struggle against the
Calvinists they were of great assistance to the Catholic body. The
progress of their numerous colleges and the influence which they
acquired over the young men roused the fierce opposition of the
University, but being befriended by the court, where they were
retained as royal confessors, the Jesuits were enabled to hold their
ground. During the wars of the League against Henry III. and Henry of
Navarre, though their position was one of extreme delicacy, the
prudent action of their general, Aquaviva, in recommending his
subjects to respect the consciences of both parties saved the
situation. They were, however, expelled from Paris in 1594, but Henry
IV. allowed them to return in 1603.

In the German States, Hungary, and Poland, where the fate of
Catholicity seemed trembling in the balance, the Jesuit Fathers stayed
what threatened to be a triumphal progress for Protestantism. St.
Ignatius soon despatched some of his disciples to the scene of
conflict under the leadership of the Blessed Peter Canisius.[18] By
his sermons, his lectures as professor, his prudent suggestions to
those in authority, as well as by his controversial writings, and more
particularly his celebrated Catechism, Canisius did more to stay the
advance of Protestantism in Germany than any single individual of his
age. Colleges were founded in Vienna, Ingoldstadt, Treves, Mainz, and
in most of the cities of Germany that were not subject to the
Protestant princes. From these colleges went forth young men who were
determined to resist the further encroachments of heresy. Maximilian
of Bavaria and the Emperor Ferdinand II., both of whom took such a
prominent part in the Catholic Counter-Reformation, were pupils of the
Jesuits, and were but types of the men who left their colleges. In
Hungary, too, and in Poland the tide was turned in favour of the
Catholic Church mainly by the exertions of the Jesuits. In Ireland,
England and Scotland, in the Netherlands, and Sweden, in a word
wherever Catholic interests were endangered, the Jesuits risked their
lives in defence of the Catholic religion. It is on account of the
defeats that they inflicted on heresy at this period that the hatred
of the Jesuits is so deep-rooted and so universal amongst Protestants
even to the present day.

The Ursulines, so called from their patron St. Ursula, began as a
religious association of pious ladies formed by Angela de' Merici[19]
(Angela of Brescia) in 1537. At first the aim of the association was
to reclaim fallen women, to visit the sick, and to educate the young.
The members lived in their own homes according to a scheme of life
drawn up for their guidance, meeting only for certain spiritual
exercises. In 1535 the foundress succeeded in bringing a few of them
together into a small community. After her death in 1540 the community
increased in numbers, and was approved by Paul III., who allowed the
Ursulines to change their rules according to circumstances. For a long
time the Ursulines did not spread outside Brescia, but as their work
became known, particularly their work as educationalists, they were
invited to other parts of Italy. In Milan they had a warm friend in
the person of its Cardinal Archbishop, St. Charles Borromeo. The first
community of the Ursulines was formed in France by Madame de Beuve. A
rule was drawn up by Father Gonterey, S.J., and others of his society,
and approved by Paul V. (1612). In a comparatively short time the
Ursulines spread over most of the Catholic countries of Europe, so
that nearly all the most modern and best equipped schools for Catholic
girls were in their hands. In 1639 they went to Canada where they
opened the convent known as the Hotel-Dieu at Quebec, and in 1727 they
settled in New Orleans.

St. Teresa[20] (1515-82) is the reformer rather than the foundress of
the Carmelite nuns. Being anxious from an early age to follow her
religious vocation, much against the wishes of her father she entered
the convent of the Carmelite nuns at Avila (1535). After her
profession she fell ill, and for years was subject to excruciating
torture. During this period she turned her mind completely to
spiritual subjects, and was visited by God with most extraordinary
marks of divine favour, an account of which is to be found in her life
written by herself, in her /Relations/, and in many other of her
works. She determined to return to the primitive austerity of the
Carmelite rule, and in 1562 she founded the first convent of Discalced
Carmelite nuns at Avila. Through her exertions other convents of the
order adopted the reform, and in 1580 the existence of the Discalced
Carmelites as a separate order was approved. She died in 1582, and
forty years later she was canonised by Gregory XV.

The Sisters of the Visitation were established by St. Francis de
Sales[21] and St. Frances de Chantal.[22] St. Francis de Sales (1567-
1622), so called from the castle of Sales in Savoy at which he was
born, made his rhetoric and philosophical studies at Paris under the
Jesuits. From Paris he went to Padua for law, and having received his
diploma he returned to his native country, where his father had
secured for him a place as senator and had arranged a very desirable
marriage. But St. Francis, feeling that he had been called by God to
another sphere of life, threw up his position at the bar, accepted the
office of provost of the chapter of Geneva, and received Holy Orders
(1593). A great part of the diocese of Geneva was at this time overrun
by the heretics. St. Francis threw himself with ardour into the work
of converting those who had fallen away especially in the district of
Le Chablais, where he won over thousands to the faith. He became
coadjutor-bishop of Geneva, and on the death of his friend Claude de
Granier he was appointed to the See (1602). In conjunction with Madam
de Chantal he established a community of women at Annecy in 1610. His
idea at first was that the little community should not be bound by the
enclosure, but should devote themselves to their own sanctification
and to the visitation of the sick and the poor. Objections, however,
having been raised against such an innovation, he drew up for the
community a rule based mainly on the rule of St. Augustine. In 1618
the society received recognition as a religious order under the title
of the Order of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin. The order
undertook the work of educating young girls as well as of visiting the
sick. It spread rapidly in Italy, France, Germany, Poland, and later
on in the United States.

The Sisters of Charity,[23] or the Grey Sisters as they were called,
were founded by St. Vincent de Paul. While St. Vincent was cure of
Chatillon-les-Dombes he established in the parish a confraternity of
charitable ladies for the care of the sick, the poor, and the orphans.
The experiment was so successful that he founded similar
confraternities in Paris, and wherever he gave missions throughout the
country. Having found, however, that in Paris the ladies of charity
were accustomed to entrust the work to their servants he brought a
number of young girls from the country, who could be relied upon to
carry out his wishes. These he looked after with a special solicitude,
and in 1633 Madam Le Gras took a house in Paris, where she brought
together a few of the most promising of them to form a little
community. In 1642 after the community had moved into a house opposite
St. Lazare, some of the sisters were allowed to take vows. The Sisters
of Charity have been at all times exceedingly popular in France. By
their schools, their orphanages, their hospitals, and by their
kindness to the poor and the suffering they won for themselves a place
in the hearts of the French people. For a while during the worst days
of the Revolution their work was suspended, and their communities were
disbanded; but their suppression was deplored so generally that in
1801 the Superioress was commanded to re-organise the society. Outside
France the Sisters of Charity had several houses in Poland,
Switzerland, Spain, and Germany.

Mary Ward[24] (1585-1645) was born of a good Catholic family in
England. She joined the Poor Clares at St. Omer in 1600, but,
preferring an active to a contemplative life, she gathered around her
a few companions, and formed a little community at St. Omer mainly for
the work of education. According to her plan, which was derived in
great measure from the constitution of the Society of Jesus (hence the
name Jesuitesses given to her followers by her opponents), her sisters
were not bound by the enclosure, were not to wear any distinctive
dress, and were to be subject directly only to Rome. Serious
objections were raised immediately against such an institute,
particularly as Pius V. had declared expressly that the enclosure and
solemn vows were essential conditions for the recognition of religious
communities of women. Branches were opened in the Netherlands,
Austria, and Italy under the patronage of the highest civil
authorities. As the opponents of the community continued their attacks
the foundress was summoned to Rome to make her defence (1629), but in
the following year the decree of suppression was issued. The house in
Munich was allowed to continue, and at the advice of the Pope she
opened a house in Rome. The principal change introduced was that the
houses should be subject to the bishops of the dioceses in which they
were situated. At last in 1703, on the petition of Maximilian Emanuel
of Bavaria and of Mary the wife of James II., the rule was approved
formally by Clement XI. The society continued to spread especially in
Bavaria. The followers of Mary Ward are designated variously, the
Institute of Mary, Englische Fraulein, and Loreto Nuns from the name
given to Rathfarnham, the mother-house of the Irish branch, founded by
Frances Ball in 1821.
                              ----------

[1] /Histoire du Ven Didier de la Cour, reformateur des Benedictins/,
    1772.

[2] De Lama, /Bibliotheque des ecrivains de la congregation de St.
    Maur/, 1882.

[3] Da Forli, /Annali Cappuccini/, 1882.

[4] Dumortier, /Saint Gaetan di Thiene/, 1882.

[5] Dubois, /Le bienheureux A. M. Zaccaria fondateur des Barnabites/,
    1896.

[6] Sylvain, /Histoire de St. Charles Borromee/, 3 vols., 1884.

[7] Perraud, /L'Oratoire de France au XVIIe et au XVIIIe siecle/.

[8] Perraud, /L'Oratoire de France au XVIIe et au XVIIIe siecle/,
    1866.

[9] Girard, /La vie de St. Jean de Dieu/, 1691.

[10] Hubert, /Der hl. Joseph Calasanza, stifter der frommen Schulen/,
    1886.

[11] Ravelet-O'Meara, /The Life of the Blessed John Baptist de la
    Salle/, 1888. Lucard, /Annales de l'Institut des Freres des Ecoles
    Chretiennes/, 1883.

[12] Paris became an archiepiscopal See in 1622.

[13] Lorti, /Saint Vincent de Paul et sa mission sociale/, 1880.

[14] Degert, /Histoire des seminaires francais/, 1912.

[15] Faillon, /Vie de M. Olier/, 3 vols., 1873. Thompson, /Life of
    Jean Jacques Olier/.

[16] Thompson, /Life of St. Ignatius/, 1910. Clair, /La vie de S.
    Ignace/, 1894.

[17] /Constitutiones Societatis Jesu Latine et Hispanice/, 1892.

[18] Duhr, /Geschichte der Jesuiten in den Landen Deutscher Zunge/,
    Bd. i., 1907.

[19] O'Reilly, /Life of St. Angela/, 1880. Meer, /Die ersten
    Schwestern des Ursulinenordens/, 1897.

[20] /Autobiography of St. Teresa/, tr. from the French by B.
    Zimmerman, 1904.

[21] Hamon, /Vie de St. Francois de Sales/, 2 vols., 1875.

[22] Bougaud, /Histoire de Ste. J. F. Chantal et des origines de la
    Visitation/, 1899.

[23] Marcel, /Les Soeurs de Charite/, 1888.

[24] Salome, /Mother Mary Ward, a Foundress of the 17th Century/,
    1901.


                      (d) The Thirty Years' War.

  See bibliography, chap. ii. (a). Klopp, /Der Dreissigjahrige Krieg
  bis Zum Tode Gustav. Adolfs u.s.w./, 3 Bde, 1891-6. Bougeant,
  /Histoire des guerres et des negociations qui precederent le
  traite de Westphalie/, 3 vols., 1751. Ritter, /Deutsche Geschichte
  im Zeitalter der Gegenreformation und des Dreissigjahrigen
  Krieges/, 1889. Huber, /Geschichte Osterreichs/, Bd. v., 1896.
  /Nunziaturberichte aus Deutschland/, 1892. De Meaux, /La reforme
  et la politique Francaise en Europe jusqu' a la paix de
  Westphalie/, 1889. /Cambridge Modern History/, vol. iii. (chap.
  iii.).

The Religious Peace of Augsburg (1555) did not put an end to the
struggle between the Catholics and Protestants in Germany. Feeling on
both sides was too intense to permit either party to be satisfied with
the arrangement or to accept it as a permanent definition of their
respective rights. The German Catholics were indignant that a party
that had sprung up so recently and that had done such injury to their
Church and country, should be rewarded for heresy and disloyalty to
the Emperor by such concessions. Nor was their indignation likely to
be appeased by the manner in which Lutheran and Calvinist preachers
caricatured and denounced the doctrines and practices of the Catholic
world. Possibly it was, however, the clause of the Augsburg Peace
known as the /Ecclesiasticum Reservatum/ that gave rise to the most
heated controversies, and played the greatest part in bringing about
civil war. By this clause it was provided that in case any of the
bishops and abbots passed over to the reformed religion they could not
bring with them the ecclesiastical property attached to their office.
The Lutherans, who had benefited so largely by such secessions from
the Church in the past, objected to this clause at the Diet, and
protested against the decision when their objections were overruled.

Having realised that the Emperor was unable or unwilling to prevent
them they continued to act in open defiance of the /Ecclesiasticam
