deluded, gave up the chase.

But when the rest had escaped into the town Hector stood without,
determined to await the combat.  His old father called to him
from the walls and begged him to retire nor tempt the encounter.
His mother, Hecuba, also besought him to the same effect, but all
in vain.  "How can I," said he to himself, "by whose command the
people went to this day's contest, where so many have fallen,
seek safety for myself against a single foe?  But what if I offer
him to yield up Helen and all her treasures and ample of our own
beside?  Ah no!  It is too late.  He would not even hear me
through, but slay me while I spoke."   While he thus ruminated,
Achilles approached, terrible as Mars, his armor flashing
lighting as he moved.  At that sight Hector's heart failed him
and he fled.  Achilles swiftly pursued.  They ran, still keeping
near the walls, till they had thrice encircled the city.  As
often as Hector approached the walls Achilles intercepted him and
forced him to keep out in a wider circle.  But Apollo sustained
Hector's strength, and would not let him sink in weariness.  Then
Pallas, assuming the form of Deiphobus, Hector's bravest brother,
appeared suddenly at his side.  Hector saw him with delight, and,
thus strengthened, stopped his flight and turned to meet
Achilles.  Hector threw his spear, which struck the shield of
Achilles and bounded back.  He turned to receive another from the
hand of Deiphobus, but Deiphobus was gone.  Then Hector
understood his doom and said, "Alas!  It is plain this is my hour
to die!  I thought Deiphobus at hand, but Pallas deceived me, and
he is still in Troy.  But I will not fall inglorious."  So
saying, he drew his falchion from his side and rushed at once to
combat.  Achilles, secured behind his shield, waited the approach
of Hector.  When he came within reach of his spear, Achilles,
choosing with his eye a vulnerable part where the armor leaves
the neck uncovered, aimed his spear at that part, and Hector
fell, death-wounded, and feebly said, "Spare my body!  Let my
parents ransom it, and let me receive funeral rites from the sons
and daughters of Troy."  To which Achilles replied, "Dog, name
not ransom nor pity to me, on whom you have brought such dire
distress.  No!  Trust me, nought shall save thy carcass from the
dogs.  Though twenty ransoms and thy weight in gold were offered,
I would refuse it all."

So saying, he stripped the body of its armor, and fastening cords
to the feet, tied them behind his chariot, leaving the body to
trail along the ground.  Then mounting the chariot he lashed the
steeds, and so dragged the body to and fro before the city.  What
words can tell the grief of King Priam and Queen Hecuba at this
sight!  His people could scarce restrain the old king from
rushing forth.  He threw himself in the dust, and besought them
each by name to give him way.  Hecuba's distress was not less
violent.  The citizens stood round them weeping.  The sound of
the mourning reached the ears of Andromache, the wife of Hector,
as she sat among her maidens at work, and anticipating evil she
went forth to the wall.  When she saw the sight there presented,
she would have thrown herself headlong from the wall, but fainted
and fell into the arms of her maidens.  Recovering, she bewailed
her fate, picturing to herself her country ruined, herself a
captive, and her son dependent for his bread on the charity of
strangers.

When Achilles and the Greeks had taken their revenge on the
killer of Patroclus they busied themselves in paying due funeral
rites to their friend.  A pile was erected, and the body burned
with due solemnity; and then ensued games of strength and skill,
chariot races, wrestling, boxing, and archery.  Then the chiefs
sat down to the funeral banquet and after that retired to rest.
But Achilles neither partook of the feast nor of sleep.  The
recollection of his lost friend kept him awake, remembering their
companionship in toil and dangers, in battle or on the perilous
deep.  Before the earliest dawn he left his tent, and joining to
his chariot his swift steeds, he fastened Hector's body to be
dragged behind.  Twice he dragged him round the tomb of
Patroclus, leaving him at length stretched in the dust.  But
Apollo would not permit the body to be torn or disfigured with
all this abuse, but preserved it free from all taint or
defilement.

When Achilles indulged his wrath in thus disgracing brave Hector,
Jupiter in pity summoned Thetis to his presence.  He told her to
go to her son and prevail on him to restore the body of Hector to
his friends.  Then Jupiter sent Iris to King Priam to encourage
him to go to Achilles and beg the body of his son.  Iris
delivered her message, and Priam immediately prepared to obey.
He opened his treasures and took out rich garments and cloths,
with ten talents in gold and two splendid tripods and a golden
cup of matchless workmanship.  Then he called to his sons and
bade them draw forth his litter and place in it the various
articles designed for a ransom to Achilles.

When all was ready, the old king with a single companion, as aged
as himself, the herald Idaeus, drove forth from the gates,
parting there with Hecuba his queen, and all his friends, who
lamented him as going to certain death.

But Jupiter, beholding with compassion the venerable king, sent
Mercury to be his guide and protector.  Mercury, assuming the
form of a young warrior, presented himself to the aged couple,
and while at the sight of him they hesitated whether to fly or
yield, the god approached, and grasping Priam's hand, offered to
be their guide to Achilles' tent.  Priam gladly accepted his
offered service, and he, mounting the carriage, assumed the reins
and soon conveyed them to the tent of Achilles.  Mercury's wand
put to sleep all the guards, and without hindrance he introduced
Priam into the tent where Achilles sat, attended hy two of his
warriors.  The old king threw himself at the feet of Achilles and
kissed those terrible hands which had destroyed so many of his
sons.  "Think, O Achilles," he said, "of thy own father, full of
days like me, and trembling on the gloomy verge of life.  Perhaps
even now some neighbor chief oppresses him, and there is none at
hand to succor him in his distress.  Yet doubtless knowing that
Achilles lives he still rejoices, hoping that one day he shall
see thy face again.  But no comfort cheers me, whose bravest
sons, so late the flower of Ilium, all have fallen.  Yet one I
had, one more than all the rest the strength of my age, whom
fighting for his country, thou hast slain.  I come to redeem his
body, bringing inestimable ransom with me. Achilles, reverence
the gods!  Recollect thy father!  For his sake show compassion to
me!"  These words moved Achilles and he wept; remembering by
turns his absent father and his lost friend.  Moved with pity of
Priam's silver locks and beard, he raised him from the earth and
thus spake: "Priam, I know that thou has reached this place
conducted by some god, for without divine aid no mortal even in
the prime of youth had dared the attempt.  I grant thy request;
moved thereto by the evident will of Jove."  So saying he arose,
and went forth with his two friends, and unloaded of its charge
the litter, leaving two mantles and a robe for the covering of
the body, which they placed on the litter, and spread the
garments over it, that not unveiled it should be borne back to
Troy.  Then Achilles dismissed the old king with his attendants,
having first pledged himself to allow a truce of twelve days for
the funeral solemnities.

As the litter approached the city and was descried from the
walls, the people poured forth to gaze once more on the face of
their hero.  Foremost of all, the mother and the wife of Hector
came, and at the sight of the lifeless body renewed their
lamentations.  The people all wept with them, and to the going
down of the sun there was no pause or abatement of their grief.

The next day preparations were made for the funeral solemnities.
For nine days the people brought wood and built the pile, and on
the tenth they placed the body on the summit and applied the
torch; while all Troy, thronging forth, encompassed the pile.
When it had completely burned, they quenched the cinders with
wine, collected the bones and placed them in a golden urn, which
they buried in the earth, and reared a pile of stones over the
spot.

  "Such honors Ilium to her hero paid,
  And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade."
  Pope's Homer



Chapter XXI

The Fall of Troy.  Return of the Greeks.  Orestes and Electra

The story of the Iliad ends with the death of Hector, and it is
from the Odyssey and later poems that we learn the fate of the
other heroes.  After the death of Hector, Troy did not
immediately fall, but receiving aid from new allies still
continued its resistance.  One of these allies was Memnon, the
AETHIOPIAN prince, whose story we have already told.  Another was
Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, who came with a band of female
warriors.  All the authorities attest their valor and the fearful
effect of their war-cry.  Penthesilea slew many of the bravest
warriors, but was at last slain by Achilles.  But when the hero
bent over his fallen foe, and contemplated her beauty, youth and
valor, he bitterly regretted his victory.  Thersites, an insolent
brawler and demagogue, ridiculed his grief, and was in
consequence slain by the hero.

Achilles by chance had seen Polyxena, daughter of King Priam,
perhaps on occasion of the truce which was allowed the Trojans
for the burial of Hector.  He was captivated with her charms, and
to win her in marriage agreed to use his influence with the
Greeks to grant peace to Troy.  While in the temple of Apollo,
negotiating the marriage, Paris discharged at him a poisoned
arrow, which guided by Apollo, wounded Achilles in the heel, the
only vulnerable part about him.  For Thetis, his mother, had
dipped him when an infant in the river Styx, which made every
part of him invulnerable except the heel by which she held him.
(The story of the invulnerability of Achilles is not found in
Homer, and is inconsistent with his account.  For how could
Achilles require the aid of celestial armor if he were
invulnerable?)

The body of Achilles, so treacherously slain, was rescued by Ajax
and Ulysses.  Thetis directed the Greeks to bestow her son's
armor on the hero who, of all survivors, should be judged most
deserving of it.  Ajax and Ulysses were the only claimants; a
select number of the other chiefs were appointed to award the
prize.  It was awarded to Ulysses, thus placing wisdom before
valor; whereupon Ajax slew himself.  On the spot where his blood
sank into the earth a flower sprang up, called the hyacinth,
bearing on its leaves the first two letters of the name of Ajax,
Ai, the Greek for "woe."  Thus Ajax is a claimant with the boy
Hyacinthus for the honor of giving birth to this flower.  There
is a species of Larkspur which represents the hyacinth of the
poets in preserving the memory of this event, the Delphinium
Ajacis   Ajax's Larkspur.

It was now discovered that Troy could not be taken but by the
arrows of Hercules.  They were in possession of Philoctetes, the
friend who had been with Hercules at the last, and lighted his
funeral pyre.  Philoctetes had joined the Grecian expedition
against Troy, but had accidentally wounded his foot with one of
the poisoned arrows, and the smell from his wound proved so
offensive that his companions carried him to the Isle of Lemnos
and left him there.  Diomedes was now sent to induce him to
rejoin the army.  He succeeded.  Philoctetes was cured of his
wound by Machaon, and Paris was the first victim of the fatal
arrows.  In his distress Paris bethought him of one whom in his
prosperity he had forgotten.  This was the nymph OEnone, whom he
had married when a youth, and had abandoned for the fatal beauty
Helen.  OEnone, remembering the wrongs she had suffered, refused
to heal the wound, and Paris went back to Troy and died.  OEnone
quickly repented, and hastened after him with remedies, but came
too late, and in her grief hung herself.

Tennyson has chosen OEnone as the subject of a short poem; but he
has omitted the concluding part of the story, the return of Paris
wounded, her cruelty and subsequent repentance.

  "---- Hither came at noon
  Mournful OENONE, wandering forlorn
  Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills.
  Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
  Floated her hair, or seemed to float in rest.
  She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
  Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade
  Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.
  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
  "'O Mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  I waited underneath the dawning hills,
  Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
  And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
  Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
  Leading a jet-black goat, white-horned, white-hooved,
  Come up from reedy Simois, all alone.

  "'O Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Far off the torrent called me from the cliff:
  Far up the solitary morning smote
  The streaks of virgin snow.  With downdropt eyes
  I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
  Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard-skin
  Drooped from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
  Clustered about his temples like a God's,
  And his cheek brightened as the foambow brightens
  When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
  Went forth to embrace him coming, ere he came.

  "'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
  Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
  That smelt ambrosially, and while I looked
  And listened, the full-flowing river of speech
  Came down upon my heart.

  "My own OENONE,
  Beautiful-browed OENONE, my own soul,
  Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingraven
  'For the most fair,' would seem award it thine
  As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
  The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
  Of movement, and the charm of married brows."

  "'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
  And added, "This was cast upon the board,
  When all the full-faced presence of the gods
  Hanged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
  Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twas due;
  But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve
  Delivering, that to me, by common voice
  Elected umpire, Her, comes to-day,
  Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
  This meed of fairest.  Thou within the cave
  Beyond yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
  May'st well behold them unbeheld, unheard
  Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of gods."'"

There was in Troy a celebrated statue of Minerva called the
Palladium.  It was said to have fallen from heaven, and the
belief was that the city could not be taken so long as this
statue remained within it.  Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city
in disguise, and succeeded in obtaining the Palladium, which they
carried off to the Grecian camp.

But Troy still held out, and the Greeks began to despair of ever
subduing it by force, and by advice of Ulysses resolved to resort
to stratagem.  They pretended to be making preparations to
abandon the siege, and a portion of the ships were withdrawn, and
lay hid behind a neighboring island.  The Greeks then constructed
an immense WOODEN HORSE, which they gave out was intended as a
propitiatory offering to Minerva, but in fact was filled with
armed men.  The remaining Greeks then betook themselves to their
ships and sailed away, as if for a final departure.  The Trojans,
seeing the encampment broken up and the fleet gone, concluded the
enemy to have abandoned the siege.  The gates were thrown open,
and the whole population issued forth rejoicing at the long-
prohibited liberty of passing freely over the scene of the late
encampment.  The great horse was the chief object of curiosity.
All wondered what it could be for.  Some recommended to take it
into the city as a trophy; others felt afraid of it.

While they hesitate, Laocoon, the priest of Neptune, exclaims,
"What madness, citizens, is this!  Have you not learned enough of
Grecian fraud to be on your guard against it?  For my part I fear
the Greeks even when they offer gifts."  So saying he threw his
lance at the horse's side.  It struck, and a hollow sound
reverberated like a groan.  Then perhaps the people might have
taken his advice and destroyed the fatal horse and all its
contents; but just at that moment a group of people appeared
dragging forward one who seemed a prisoner and a Greek.
Stupefied with terror he was brought before the chiefs, who
reassured him, promising that his life should be spared on
condition of his returning true answers to the questions asked
him.  He informed them that he was a Greek, Sinon by name, and
that in consequence of the malice of Ulysses he had been left
behind by his countrymen at their departure.  With regard to the
wooden horse, he told them that it was a propitiatory offering to
Minerva, and made so huge for the express purpose of preventing
its being carried within the city; for Calchas the prophet had
told them that if the Trojans took possession of it, they would
assuredly triumph over the Greeks.  This language turned the tide
of the people's feelings, and they began to think how they might
best secure the monstrous horse and the favorable auguries
connected with it, when suddenly a prodigy occurred which left no
room to doubt.  There appeared advancing over the sea two immense
serpents.  They came upon the land, and the crowd fled in all
directions.  The serpents advanced directly to the spot where
Laocoon stood with his two sons.  They first attacked the
children, winding round their bodies and breathing their
pestilential breath in their faces.  The father, attempting to
rescue them, is next seized and involved in the serpents' coils.
He struggles to tear them away, but they overpower all his
efforts and strangle him and the children in their poisonous
folds.  This event was regarded as a clear indication of the
displeasure of the gods at Laocoon's irreverent treatment of the
wooden horse, which they no longer hesitated to regard as a
sacred object and prepared to introduce with due solemnity into
the city.  This was done with songs and triumphal acclamations,
and the day closed with festivity.  In the night the armed men
who were enclosed in the body of the horse, being led out by the
traitor Sinon, opened the gates of the city to their friends who
had returned under cover of the night.  The city was set on fire;
the people, overcome with feasting and sleep, put to the sword,
and Troy completely subdued.

One of the most celebrated groups of statuary in existence is
that of Laocoon and his children in the embrace of the serpents.
"There is a cast of it in the Boston Athenaeum; the original is
in the Vatican at Rome.  The following lines are from the Childe
Harold of Byron:

  "Now turning to the Vatican go see
  Laocoon's torture dignifying pain;
  A father's love and mortal's agony
  With as immortal's patience blending; vain
  The struggle!  Vain against the coiling strain
  And gripe and deepening of the dragon's grasp
  The old man's clinch; the long envenomed chain
  Rivets the living links; the enormous asp
  Enforces pang on pang and stifles gasp on gasp."

The comic poets will also occasionally borrow a classical
allusion.  The following is from Swift's description of a City
Shower:

  "Boxed in a chair the beau impatient sits,
  While spouts run clattering o'er the roof by fits,
  And over and anon with frightful din
  The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
  So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed
  Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed,
  (Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
  Instead of paying chairmen, run them through;)
  Laocoon struck the outside with a spear,
  And each imprisoned champion quaked with fear."

King Priam lived to see the downfall of his kingdom, and was
slain at last on the fatal night when the Greeks took the city.
He had armed himself and was about to mingle with the combatants,
but was prevailed on by Hecuba, his aged queen, to take refuge
with herself and his daughters as a suppliant at the altar of
Jupiter.  While there, his youngest son Polites, pursued by
Pyrrhus (Pyrrhus's exclamation, "Not such aid nor such defenders
does the time require," has become proverbial.), the son of
Achilles, rushed in wounded, and expired at the feet of his
father; whereupon Priam, overcome with indignation, hurled his
spear with feeble hand against Pyrrhus, and was forthwith slain
by him.

Queen Hecuba and her daughter Cassandra were carried captives to
Greece.  Cassandra had been loved by Apollo, and he gave her the
gift of prophecy; but afterwards offended with her, he rendered
the gift unavailing by ordaining that her predictions should
never be believed.  Polyxena, another daughter, who had been
loved by Achilles, was demanded by the ghost of this warrior, and
was sacrificed by the Greeks upon his tomb.

From Schiller's poem "Cassandra":

  "And men my prophet wail deride!
  The solemn sorrow dies in scorn;
  And lonely in the waste, I hide
  The tortured heart that would forewarn.
  Amid the happy, unregarded,
  Mock'd by their fearful joy, I trod;
  Oh, dark to me the lot awarded,
  Thou evil Pythian God!

  "Thine oracle, in vain to be,
  Oh, wherefore am I thus consigned,
  With eyes that every truth must see,
  Lone in the city of the blind?
  Cursed with the anguish of a power
  To view the fates I may not thrall,
  The hovering tempest still must lower,
  The horror must befall!

  Boots it th veil to lift, and give
  To sight the frowning fates beneath?
  For error is the life we live,
  And, oh, our knowledge is but death!
  Take back the clear and awful mirror,
  Shut from my eyes the blood-red glare;
  Thy truth is but the gift of terror,
  When mortal lips declare.

  "My blindness give to me once more,
  They gay dim senses that rejoice;
  The past's delighted songs are o'er
  For lips that speak a prophet's voice.
  To me the future thou hast granted;
  I miss the moment from the chain
  The happy present hour enchanted!
  Take back thy gift again!"
  Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


MENELAUS AND HELEN

Our readers will be anxious to know the fate of Helen, the fair
but guilty occasion of so much slaughter.  On the fall of Troy
Menelaus recovered possession of his wife, who had not ceased to
love him, though she had yielded to the might of Venus and
deserted him for another.  After the death of Paris she aided the
Greeks secretly on several occasions, and in particular when
Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city in disguise to carry off
the Palladium.  She saw and recognized Ulysses, but kept the
secret, and even assisted them in obtaining the image.  Thus she
became reconciled to her husband, and they were among the first
to leave the shores of Troy for their native land.  But having
incurred the displeasure of the gods they were driven by storms
from shore to shore of the Mediterranean, visiting Cyprus,
Phoenicia and Egypt.  In Egypt they were kindly treated and
presented with rich gifts, of which Helen's share was a golden
spindle and a basket on wheels.  The basket was to hold the wool
and spools for the queen's work.

Dyer, in his poem of The Fleece, thus alludes to the incident:

  "----many yet adhere
  To the ancient distaff at the bosom fixed.
  Casting the whirling spindle as they walk.
  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
  This was of old, in no inglorious days,
  The mode of spinning, when the Egyptian prince
  A golden distaff gave that beauteous nymph,
  Too beauteous Helen; no uncourtly gift."

Milton also alludes to a famous recipe for an invigorating
draught, called Nepenthe, which the Egyptian queen gave to Helen:

  "Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone
  In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena,
  Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
  To life so friendly or so cool to thirst."
  Comus

Menelaus and Helen at length arrived in safety at Sparta, resumed
their royal dignity, and lived and reigned in splendor; and when
Telemachus, the son of Ulysses, in search of his father, arrived
at Sparta, he found Menelaus and Helen celebrating the marriage
of their daughter Hermione to Neoptolemus, son of Achilles.

In "the Victory Feast," Schiller thus reviews the return of the
Greek heroes.

  "The son of Atreus, king of men,
  The muster of the hosts surveyed,
  How dwindled from the thousands, when
  Along Scamander first arrayed!
  With sorrow and the cloudy thought,
  The great king's stately look grew dim,
  Of all the hosts to Ilion brought,
  How few to Greece return with him!
  Still let the song to gladness call,
  For those who yet their home shall greet!
  For them the blooming life is sweet;
  Return is not for all!

  "Nor all who reach their native land
  May long the joy of welcome feel;
  Beside the household gods may stand
  Grim Murder, with awaiting steel
  And they who 'scape the foe, may die
  Beneath the foul, familiar glaive.
  Thus he to whom prophetic eye
  Her light the wise Minerva gave;
  'Ah!  Bless'd, whose hearth, to memory true
  The goddess keeps unstained and pure;
  For woman's guile is deep and sure,
  And falsehood loves the new!'

  "The Spartan eyes his Helen's charms,
  By the best blood of Greece recaptured;
  Round that fair form his glowing arms
  (A second bridal) wreath, enraptured.
  Woe waits the work of evil birth,
  Revenge to deeds unblessed is given!
  For watchful o'er the things of earth,
  The eternal council-halls of heaven.
  Yes, ill shall never ill repay;
  Jove to the impious hands that stain
  The altar of man's heart,
  Again the doomer's doom shall weigh!"
  Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


AGAMEMNON, ORESTES, AND ELECTRA

Agamemnon, the general-in-chief of the Greeks, the brother of
Menelaus, who had been drawn into the quarrel to avenge another's
wrongs, was not so fortunate in the issue as his brother.  During
his absence his wife Clytemnestra had been false to him, and when
his return was expected, she, with her paramour, AEgisthus, laid
a plan for his destruction, and at the banquet given to celebrate
his return, murdered him.

The conspirators intended also to slay his son Orestes, a lad not
yet old enough to be an object of apprehension, but from whom, if
he should be suffered to grow up, there might be danger.
Electra, the sister of Orestes, saved her brother's life by
sending him secretly away to his uncle Strophius, king of Phocis.
In the palace of Strophius, Orestes grew up with the king's son,
Pylades, and formed with him that ardent friendship which has
become proverbial.  Electra frequently reminded her brother hy
messengers of the duty of avenging his father's death, and when
grown up he consulted the oracle of Delphi, which confirmed him
in his design.  He therefore repaired in disguise to Argos,
pretending to he a messenger from Strophius, who had come to
announce the death of Orestes, and brought the ashes of the
deceased in a funeral urn.  After visiting his father's tomb and
sacrificing upon it, according to the rites of the ancients, he
made himself known to his sister Electra, and soon after slew
