pledge myself to this, that to my successors as they follow me
year after year, and, if God so wills, century after century, the
staff will be handed down as a most sacred deposit and memorial.
It will drop from many a hand before another hundred years go by
and another gathering takes place here in this place of sacred
memories, but the office of which the staff is the symbol--that
office, I thank God, never dies. Men pass away, the office lives
on; and though many hands that shall have held this staff may by
that time be folded in the sleep of death, I trust that when the
hundred years come round again, my successor may come here, as I,
Bishop Seabury's successor, have come, to offer to the Bishops of
the Scottish Church, to its clergy, and its faithful laity, the
assurance of his deep love and undying gratitude that they were
bound together in one common bond of one holy faith, and in a
common love of one living Lord and of each other. I trust that
that day will show the whole world, as this day has done, "how
good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity."

On the afternoon of the same day a conference was held in the
Albert Hall, at which the Rev. Dr. Beardsley read the following
paper:

SEABURY AS A BISHOP.

A great deal has been said within the last week--never too much,
I trust--of that grand man who left the shores of America a
century ago, and came to the mother country in quest of a
spiritual gift which, for reasons of state, was refused him by the
Bishops of the Church of England.

In the providence of God, and under instructions from the clergy
of Connecticut, who selected and sent him over, he found his way
to Aberdeen, and was here duly raised to the Apostolic office, and
so became the head of an anxious and long-waiting body, as well as
the first Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United
States of America.

The many blessings which have flowed from this act of consecration
by the Scottish Bishops have been recognized and recounted again
and again, and it is not my purpose to dwell on them now; but
rather to speak of that part of the life of Seabury which covers
the exercise of his Episcopal office.

But before I proceed to do this, let me step back for a few
moments under the arches of history, and make two or three
references to show that our Church in America is indebted to
Scotland, and especially to Aberdeen, for other favors besides the
gift of Episcopacy. You gave us men who were great historic
pioneers in our ecclesiastical existence. The Venerable Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts was chartered
in 1701, and for three-quarters of a century its chief field of
labor was in New England. This fact may be ignored, but it forms
an important and salient feature in its early history; and what is
remarkable, the very first missionary sent out by the Society to
the American colonies was a native of Aberdeen, George Keith, a
school companion of the celebrated Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of
Salisbury, whom he mentions in his "History of his own Time." And
then that wonderfully numerous tribe or family, which always has
its representatives in every Christian country of the wide world,
furnished us William Smith, born on the banks of the river Dee,
not far from this city, a man with glaring imperfections of
character, but a scholar and a divine, who knelt side by side with
Seabury in the chapel of Fulham Palace when they were admitted to
Holy Orders, and who subsequently became a conspicuous actor in
the organization and establishment of our American Church, having
been the first President of the House of Deputies, and having
guided that body to concurrence with the House of Bishops in
revising the Book of Common Prayer and accepting the Scotch
Communion-office. We might not have had this office in its present
shape had he not risen to favor its adoption when signs of
dissatisfaction and a disposition to reject it appeared.

Still again we are indebted to another native of Aberdeenshire,
known in our history as William Smith the younger, who went to
America soon after the acknowledgment of American Independence,
being in Holy Orders which he received in Scotland, and, having
served the Church for a time in other States of our Republic,
appeared in Connecticut, and held important educational and
parochial positions in that diocese. The office for the
Institution or Induction of Ministers into parishes or churches,
set forth in our Book of Common Prayer, was compiled by him. He
was a man of much learning, ardent temperament, and quick
impulses. He possessed singular versatility of talents, was a
composer of church music, and a constructor of church organs. He
was a pioneer in our country in chanting, and did us good service
in overcoming or diminishing the popular love for a Puritan style
of metrical psalm-singing.

Men of this stamp went to America when our Church was in, or
passing through, a broken and disordered condition, and we have
reason to be thankful to them for the aid they rendered us when we
were sorely in need. I believe we _are_ thankful. I believe
there is a growing interest among our people in the Scottish
Church, an increasing desire that Churches of the one faith--
English, Scotch, Irish, and American--should have a closer bond of
fellowship, and rejoice more heartily in each other's prosperity.
It is a good thing that we have come together on this centennial
occasion and mingled our congratulations. As we have met here face
to face, we have learned to respect ourselves more, and, I hope,
to love and respect each other more.

But let me leave these references, and draw your thoughts around
Seabury in his Episcopal character. On the morning of a bleak
November Sunday in 1784 we enter an "upper room" in Longacre,
built and fitted for Divine worship, and find there three of the
four bishops then administering the dioceses of the Scottish
Church; and after prayers and a suitable sermon, they proceed to
consecrate this self-sacrificing servant of God to the Apostolic
office. Though the penal laws enacted against the clergy of the
Scottish Church had not yet been repealed, their edge had worn
away, or they had ceased altogether to be enforced, so that the
service was in no manner secret. It was witnessed by a number of
respectable clergymen, and a large body of laity, "on which
occasion all testified great satisfaction." As the letter of
Consecration reads: _Presentibus tam e Clero quam e Populo
Testibus idoneis_. The occasion was a memorable and particularly
solemn one. Seabury himself said of it: "It was the most solemn
day of all my life--God grant I may never forget it."

He preached in the afternoon of the day of his consecration, and
his earnestness and manner of address, accompanied with
gesticulations, which appear not to have been common in Scotland
at that period, made a favorable impression. On his return to
London, he stopped at Edinburgh, where his friend and fellow-
sufferer in the trials of the American Revolution, Dr. Myles
Cooper, with others, welcomed him, and gave him hearty congratulations
on the accomplishment of his mission. From this city, he
wrote to the Rev. Jonathan Boucher, vicar of Epsom in Surrey,
who had interested himself in his application, to acquaint
him, as he had promised to do, with the success of his visit to
Scotland. "The Church in Connecticut," said he, "has only done her
duty in endeavoring to obtain the Episcopacy for herself, and I
have only done my duty in carrying her endeavors into execution.
Political reasons prevented her application from being complied
with in England. It was natural in the next instance to apply to
Scotland, whose Episcopacy, though now under a cloud, is the very
same in every ecclesiastical sense with the English."

He had grown up and lived hitherto under the influence of the
highest veneration for the Church of England, and his attachment
to her was still strong, notwithstanding he considered it bad
policy that his application for consecration had been rejected by
the English Bishops. He began to fear, however, that the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel might cease to aid him, which
would be a result to be deplored for other than pecuniary reasons.
"Should the Society itself," said he, "be obliged to take such a
step, though I shall be sorry for it and hurt by it, I shall not
be dejected. If my father and mother forsake me, if the governors
of the Church and the Society discard me, I shall still be that
humble pensioner of Divine Providence which I have been through my
whole life. God, I trust, will take me up, continue His goodness
to me, and bless my endeavors to serve the cause of His infant
Church in Connecticut. I trust that it is not the loss of 50 pounds per
annum that I dread--though that is an object of some importance to
a man who has nothing--but the consequences that must ensue, the
total alienation of regard and affection."

His path was not yet cleared of trials and perplexities, for on
reaching London he found those high in authority so dissatisfied
with the step he had taken that they pronounced it _precipitate_.
"Since my return from Scotland," said he in his first pastoral
letter to the clergy of Connecticut, "I have seen none of
the bishops, but I have been informed that the step I have
taken has displeased the two Archbishops, and it is now a
matter of doubt whether I shall be continued on the Society's
list. The day before I set out on my northern journey I had an
interview with each of the Archbishops, when my design was avowed,
so that the measure was known, though it has made no noise. My own
poverty is one of the greatest discouragements I have. Two years'
absence from my family, and expensive residence here, have more
than expended all I had. But in so good a cause, and of such
magnitude, something must be risked by somebody. To my lot it has
fallen; I have done it cheerfully, and despair not of a happy
issue."

All his apprehensions in regard to aid were realized, though he
wrote a most admirable letter to the Venerable Society giving a
concise history of his mission to England, and making a pathetic
appeal for future remembrance and consideration. After a delay of
two months, it was acknowledged by the Secretary without
recognizing his official character, being addressed "To the Rev.
Dr. Seabury, New London, Connecticut." He was told that his case
was comprehended under the general rule, that the charter would
not allow the Society to "employ any missionaries except in the
plantations, colonies, and factories belonging to the Kingdom of
Great Britain."

Bishop Seabury received from the British Government 50 pounds per
annum half-pay as a chaplain in the King's American regiment during
the War of the Revolution; and a few of his fast friends in England--
among them Dr. Horne, then Dean of Canterbury, Rev. Jonathan
Boucher, and William Stevens, Esq.--associated themselves together
and engaged to send him annually 50 pounds from the date of his arrival
in Connecticut. This engagement was faithfully kept to the day of
his death, and was an equivalent for the stipend which had been
withdrawn by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.

His preparations for returning to America were now completed, and
early in March, 1785, he embarked in a ship commanded by Captain
Dawson, which sailed from London for Halifax. His main object in
going by the way of Nova Scotia was to see the situation of that
part of his family then resident in that neighborhood. He is
recorded as officiating at Annapolis Royal, April, 1785, and was,
therefore, the first bishop of our Church who preached in the
Dominion of Canada. Mention is also made of his preaching several
Sundays in St. John, New Brunswick, where a daughter with her
husband was living at the time.

He landed at Newport, Rhode Island, after a voyage of three
months, including his stay in Canada, Monday, June 2Oth; and the
next Sunday he preached in Trinity Church in that place, the first
sermon of an American bishop in the United States, from the text
(Hebrews xii. I, 2): "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight
and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the
Author and Finisher of our faith."

More than half a century prior to this, a great dignitary of the
Church of England, Dean Berkeley, after a voyage of nearly five
months from Gravesend, arrived at the same port, and preached many
times in the same church, which is still standing. The missions of
these men had many points of resemblance; but while one, after a
trial of more than two years and a half, failed to accomplish his
heroic object, and returned to the land of his birth to be honored
with a mitre in the see of Cloyne, the other was blessed in his
work, and lived to behold the Church in America united in the
adoption of a revised liturgy, and settled upon the old
"foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself
being the chief corner-stone."

The next step of Bishop Seabury was to arrange for a meeting with
his clergy, and he wrote immediately to the Rev. Mr. Jarvis, who
had acted as their secretary, and invited him to New London to
consult with him on the time and place. It was held in Middletown
on the 2d of August, 1785--a meeting full of joy to both parties--
and the clergy, in their address of congratulation and formal
recognition, said among other things: "We, in the presence of
Almighty God, declare to the world, that we do unanimously accept,
receive, and recognize you to be _our Bishop_, supreme in the
government of the Church, and in the administration of all
ecclesiastical offices. And we do solemnly engage to render you
all that respect, duty, and submission, which we believe do belong
and are due to your high office, and which, we understand, were
given by the presbyters to their bishop in the primitive Church,
while in her native purity she was unconnected with and
uncontrolled by any secular power."

The Bishop opened his reply to this address with hearty thanks to
the clergy for their kind congratulations on his safe return, and
cordially united with them in their joy for the accomplishment of
the important business which he had been excited to undertake. His
first ordination was held on this occasion, and steps were taken
to make such changes in the liturgy as might be necessary to adapt
it to the use of the Church in the new civil relations. But what
added to the interest and significance of the occasion was the
charge which he delivered to the clergy, so valuable both in its
teachings and its connection with American Episcopacy. The three
points which he enlarged upon in it were the obligations they were
under to be very careful of "the doctrines which they preached
from the pulpit or inculcated in conversation"; to be cautious
about giving recommendations to candidates for Holy Orders, whose
moral character, learning, and abilities were not only to be
exactly inquired into, but their good temper, prudence, diligence,
and everything by which their usefulness in the ministry might be
affected. "A clergyman," said he, "who does no _good_ always
does _hurt_; there is no medium." The third point of the
charge was upon the necessity of immediate attention to that old
and sacred rite handed down by the primitive Church, the laying-on
of hands in Confirmation--a rite which, for want of the proper
officer to administer it, had hitherto been unused in the American
Church.

Seabury had the double work of a bishop and a parish minister,
being rector of the church in New London, and meeting its demands
with the aid of one of his newly-ordained deacons. His entrance
upon the public duties of his Episcopal office in Connecticut had
been looked forward to with much curiosity and some prejudice by
those outside of the Church. The old Puritan dread of a hierarchy,
instilled into the popular mind before the independence of the
Colonies, still lingered, and helped to foster the expectation
that he would assume great dignity, and appear in a degree of
external splendor. There was disappointment in this respect when
he began the visitation of his diocese in the simplest and most
primitive manner, riding on horseback or in a sulky over rough and
circuitous roads, and through regions sparsely inhabited. A plain
yeoman, who had never seen a bishop in his robes, and knew not how
he would appear in officiating, took an early opportunity to
gratify his curiosity and attend a service where he was to preach.
The next morning a neighbor, who had not the boldness to follow
his example, met him, and asked him what he thought of Bishop
Seabury. "Was he proud?" he inquired. "Proud! Bless you, no!" was
the reply. "Why, he preached in his shirt-sleeves!"

Beyond the labor of regulating and settling the Church in
Connecticut upon right principles, Bishop Seabury was especially
anxious that the whole Church in the United States should be so
guided as to prevent any division in government, doctrine, and
discipline. A Convention was about to be held in Philadelphia to
adopt an ecclesiastical constitution and make application for
bishops in the English line of succession; and he asked, through
Dr. Smith, and renewed the expression of his sentiments in a
letter to Dr. (afterwards Bishop) White a few days later, that
that body would reconsider certain measures which it had hastily
adopted, and which seemed to indicate a forgetfulness that "the
government, sacraments, faith, and doctrines of the Church are
