those which we call miraculous. God is separable from the universe, but
the universe is not separable from God. If it were separated, it would
cease. So far as the reality of the divine operation is concerned, it
matters not whether He works in the established fashion, through
material things, or whether His will acts directly. The chain which
binds a phenomenon to the divine will may be long or short; the
intervening links may be many, or they may be abolished, and the divine
cause and the visible effect may touch without anything between. But in
either case the power is of God. Bread made out of flour grown on the
other side of the world, and fashioned by the baker, and bought by the
fruits of my industry, is as truly the gift of God as was the manna.
For once, He showed these men His hand at work, that we all might know
that it was at work, when hidden. The lesson of the 'angel's food'
eaten in the wilderness is that men are fed by the power of God's
expressed and active will,--for that is the meaning of 'the word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of God,'--in whatever fashion they get
their food. The gift of it is from Him; its power to nourish is from
Him. It is as true to-day as ever it was: 'Thou openest Thine hand, and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing.' The manna ceased when the
people came near cornfields and settled homes. Miracles end when means
are possible. But the God of the miracle is the God of the means.

Commentators make much of what is supposed to be a natural substratum
for the manna, in a certain vegetable product, found in small
quantities in parts of the Arabian peninsula. No doubt, we are to
recognise in the plagues of Egypt, and in the dividing of the Red Sea,
the extraordinary action of ordinary causes; and there is no objection
in principle to doing so here. But that an exudation from the bark of a
shrub, which has no nutritive properties at all, is found only in one
or two places in Arabia, and that only at certain seasons and in
infinitesimal quantity, seems a singularly thin 'substratum' on which
to build up the feeding of two millions of people, more or less
exclusively and continuously for forty years, by means of a substance
which has nothing to do with tamarisk-trees, and is like the natural
product in nothing but sweetness and name. Whether we admit connection
between the two, or not, the miraculous character of the manna of the
Israelites is unaffected. It was miraculous in its origin--'rained from
heaven,' in its quantity, in its observance of times and seasons, in
its putrefaction and preservation,--as rotting when kept for greed, and
remaining sweet when preserved for the Sabbath. It came straight from
the creative will of God, and whether its name means 'What is it?' or
'It is a gift,' the designation is equally true and appropriate,
pointing, in the one case, to the mystery of its nature; in the other,
to the love of the Giver, and in both referring it directly to the hand
of God.

IV. The manna was typical of Christ.

Our Lord Himself has laid His hand upon it, and claimed it as a faint
foreshadowing of what He is. The Jews, not satisfied with the miracle
of the loaves, demand from Him a greater sign, as the condition of what
they are pleased to call 'belief'--which is nothing but accepting the
testimony of sense. They quote Moses as giving the manna, and imply
that Messiah is expected to repeat the miracle. Christ accepts the
challenge, and goes on to claim that He not only gives, but Himself is,
for all men's souls, all and more than all which the manna had been to
the bodies of that dead generation. Like it, He came--but in how much
more profound a sense!--from heaven. Like it, He was food. But unlike
it, He could still for ever the craving of the else famishing soul;
unlike it, He not only nourished a bodily life already possessed, but
communicated a spiritual life which never dies; and, unlike it, He was
meant to be the food of the whole world. His teaching passed beyond the
symbolism of the manna, when He not only declared Himself to be the
'true bread from heaven which gives life to the world,' but opened a
glimpse into the solemn mystery of His atoning death by the startling
and apparently repulsive paradox that 'His flesh was food indeed and
His blood drink indeed.' The manna does not typically teach Christ's
atonement, but it does set Him forth as the true sustenance and
life-giver, sweet as honey to the soul, sent from heaven for us each,
but needing to be made ours by the act of our faith. An Israelite would
have starved, though the manna lay all round the camp, if he did not go
forth and secure his portion; and he might no less have starved, if he
did not eat what Heaven had sent. 'Crede et manducasti,' 'Believe, and
thou hast eaten,'--as St. Augustine says. The personal appropriating
act of faith is essential to our having Christ for the food of our
souls. The bread that nourishes our bodies is assimilated to their
substance, and so becomes sustenance. This bread of God, entering into
our souls by faith, transforms them into its substance, and so gives
and feeds an immortal life. The manna was for a generation; this bread
is 'the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.' That was for a
handful of men; this is for the world. Nor is the prophetic value of
the manna exhausted when we recognise its witness to Christ. The food
of the wilderness is the food of the city. The bread that is laid on
the table, 'spread in the presence of the enemy,' is the bread that
makes the feast in the king's palace. The Christ who feeds the pilgrim
soldiers is the Christ on whom the conquerors banquet. 'To him that
overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna.'




JEHOVAH NISSI


    'And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it
    Jehovah Nissi [that is, the Lord is my Banner].'
    --EXODUS xvii. 15.

We are all familiar with that picturesque incident of the conflict
between Israel and Amalek, which ended in victory and the erection of
this memorial trophy. Moses, as you remember, went up on the mount
whilst Joshua and the men of war fought in the plain. But I question
whether we usually attach the right meaning to the symbolism of this
event. We ordinarily, I suppose, think of Moses as interceding on the
mountain with God. But there is no word about prayer in the story, and
the attitude of Moses is contrary to the idea that his occupation was
intercession. He sat there, with the rod of God in his hand, and the
rod of God was the symbol and the vehicle of divine power. When he
lifted the rod Amalek fled before Israel; when the rod dropped Israel
fled before Amalek. That is to say, the uplifted hand was not the hand
of intercession, but the hand which communicated power and victory. And
so, when the conflict is over, Moses builds this memorial of
thanksgiving to God, and piles together these great stones--which,
perhaps, still stand in some of the unexplored valleys of that weird
desert land--to teach Israel the laws of conflict and the conditions of
victory. These laws and conditions are implied in the name which he
gave to the altar that he built--Jehovah Nissi, 'the Lord is my Banner.'

Now, then, what do these stones, with their significant name, teach us,
as they taught the ancient Israelites? Let me throw these lessons into
three brief exhortations.

I. First, realise for whose cause you fight.

The Banner was the symbol of the cause for which an army fought, or the
cognizance of the king or commander whom it followed. So Moses, by that
name given to the altar, would impress upon the minds of the cowardly
mob that he had brought out of Egypt--and who now had looked into an
enemy's eyes for the first time--the elevating and bracing thought that
they were God's soldiers, and that the warfare which they waged was not
for themselves, nor for the conquest of the country for their own sake,
nor for mere outward liberty, but that they were fighting that the will
of God might prevail, and that He might be the King now of one land--a
mere corner of the earth--and thereby might come to be King of all the
earth. That rude altar said to Israel: 'Remember, when you go into the
battle, that the battle is the Lord's; and that the standard under
which you war is the God for whose cause you contend--none else and
none less than Jehovah Himself. You are consecrated soldiers, set apart
to fight for God.'

Such is the destination of all Christians. They have a battle to fight,
of which they do not think loftily enough, unless they clearly and
constantly recognise that they are fighting on God's side.

I need not dwell upon the particulars of this conflict, or run into
details of the way in which it is to be waged. Only let us remember
that the first field upon which we have to fight for God we carry about
within ourselves; and that there will be no victories for us over other
enemies until we have, first of all, subdued the foes that are within.
And then let us remember that the absorbing importance of inward
conflict absolves no Christian man from the duty of strenuously
contending for all things that are 'lovely and of good report,' and
from waging war against every form of sorrow and sin which his
influence can touch. There is no surer way of securing victory in the
warfare within and conquering self than to throw myself into the
service of others, and lose myself in their sorrows and needs. There is
no possibility of my taking my share in the merciful warfare against
sin and sorrow, the tyrants that oppress my fellows, unless I conquer
myself. These two fields of the Christian warfare are not two in the
sense of being separable from one another, but they are two in the
sense of being the inside and the outside of the same fabric. The
warfare is one, though the fields are two.

Let us remember, on the other hand, that whilst it is our simple
bounden duty, as Christian men and women, to reckon ourselves as
anointed and called for the purpose of warring against sin and sorrow,
wherever we can assail them, there is nothing more dangerous, and few
things more common, than the hasty identification of fighting for some
whim, or prejudice, or narrow view, or partial conception of our own,
with contending for the establishment of the will of God. How many
wicked things have been done in this world for God's glory! How many
obstinate men, who were really only forcing their own opinions down
people's throats because they were theirs, have fancied themselves to
be pure-minded warriors for God! How easy it has been, in all
generations, to make the sign of the Cross over what had none of the
spirit of the Cross in it; and to say, 'The cause is God's, and
therefore I war for it'; when the reality was, 'The cause is mine, and
therefore I take it for granted that it is God's.'

Let us beware of the 'wolf in sheep's clothing,' the pretence of
sanctity which is only selfishness with a mask on. And, above all, let
us beware of the uncharitableness and narrowness of view, the vehemence
of temper, the fighting for our own hands, the enforcing of our own
notions and whims and peculiarities, which have often done duty as
being true Christian service for the Master's sake. We are God's host,
but we are not to suppose that every notion that we take into our
heads, and for which we may contend, is part of the cause of God.

And then remember what sort of men the soldiers in such an army ought
to be. 'Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.' These bearers
may either be regarded as a solemn procession of priests carrying the
sacrificial vessels; or, as is more probable from the context of the
original, as the armour-bearers of the great King. They must be pure
who bear His weapons, for these are His righteous love, His loving
purity. If our camp is the camp of the Lord, no violence should be
there. What sanctity, what purity, what patience, what long-suffering,
what self-denial, and what enthusiastic confidence of victory there
should be in those who can say, 'We are the Lord's host, Jehovah is our
Banner!' He always wins who sides with God. And he only worthily takes
his place in the ranks of the sacramental host of the Most High who
goes into the warfare knowing that, because He is God's soldier, he
will come out of it, bringing his victorious shield with him, and ready
for the laurels to be twined round his undinted helmet. That is the
first of the thoughts, then, that are here.

II. The second of the exhortations which come from the altar and its
name is, Remember whose commands you follow.

The banner in ancient warfare, even more than in modern, moved in front
of the host, and determined the movements of the army. And so, by the
stones that he piled and the name which he gave them, Moses taught
Israel and us that they and we are under the command of God, and that
it is the movements of His staff that are to be followed. Absolute
obedience is the first duty of the Christian soldier, and absolute
obedience means the entire suppression of my own will, the holding of
it in equilibrium until He puts His finger on the side that He desires
to dip and lets the other rise. They only understand their place as
Christ's servants and soldiers who have learned to hush their own will
until they know their Captain's. In order to be blessed, to be strong,
to be victorious, the indispensable condition is that our inmost desire
shall be, 'Not my will, but Thine be done.'

Sometimes, and often, there will be perplexities in our daily lives,
and conflicts very hard to unravel. We shall often be brought to a
point where we cannot see which way the Banner is leading us. What
then? 'It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait' for the
salvation and for the guidance of his God. And we shall generally find
that it is when we are looking too far ahead that we do not get
guidance. You will not get guidance to-day for this day next week. When
this day next week comes, it will bring its own enlightenment with it.

  'Lead, kindly Light, ...
   ... One step enough for me.'

Let us take short views both of duty and of hope, and we shall not so
often have to complain that we are left without knowing what the
Commander's orders are. Sometimes we are so left, and that is a lesson
in patience, and is generally God's way of telling us that it is not
His will that we should do anything at all just yet. Sometimes we are
so left in order that we may put our hand out through the darkness, and
hold on by Him, and say, 'I know not what to do, but mine eyes are
towards Thee.'

And be sure of this, brethren, that He will not desert His own promise,
and that they who in their inmost hearts can say, 'The Lord is my
Banner,' will never have to complain that He led them into a 'pathless
wilderness where there was no way.' It is sometimes a very narrow
track, it is often a very rough one, it is sometimes a dreadfully
solitary one; but He always goes before us, and they who hold His hand
will not hold it in vain. 'The Lord is my Banner'; obey His orders and
do not take anybody else's; nor, above all, the suggestions of that
impatient, talkative heart of yours, instead of His commandments.

III. Lastly, the third lesson that these grey stones preach to us is,
Recognise by whose power you conquer.

The banner, I suppose, to us English people, suggests a false idea. It
suggests the notion of a flag, or some bit of flexible drapery which
fluttered and flapped in the wind; but the banner of old-world armies
was a rigid pole, with some solid ornament of bright metal on the top,
so as to catch the light. The banner-staff spoken of in the text links
itself with the preceding incident. I said that Moses stood on the
mountain-top with the rod in his hand. Now that rod was exactly a
miniature banner, and when he lifted it, victory came to Israel; and
when it fell, victory deserted their arms. So by the altar's name he
would say, Do not suppose that it was Moses that won the battle, nor
that it was the rod that Moses carried in his hand that brought you
strength. The true Victor was Jehovah, and it was He who was Moses'
Banner. It was by Him that the lifted rod brought victory; as for
Moses, he had nothing to do with it; and the people had to look higher
than the hill-top where he sat.

This thought puts stress on the first word of the phrase instead of on
the last, as in my previous remarks. 'The Lord is my Banner,'--no
Moses, no outward symbol, no man or thing, but only He Himself.
Therefore, in all our duties, and in all our difficulties, and in all
our conflicts, and for all our conquests, we are to look away from
creatures, self, externals, and to look only to God. We are all too apt
to trust in rods instead of in Him, in Moses instead of in Moses' Lord.

We are all too apt to trust in externals, in organisations, sacraments,
services, committees, outside aids of all sorts, as our means for doing
God's work, and bringing power to us and blessing to the world. Let us
get away from them all, dig deeper down than any of these, be sure that
these are but surface reservoirs, but that the fountain which fills
them with any refreshing liquid which they may bear lies in God
Himself. Why should we trouble ourselves about reservoirs when we can
go to the Fountain? Why should we put such reliance on churches and
services and preaching and sermons and schemes and institutions and
organisations when we have the divine Lord Himself for our strength?
'Jehovah is my Banner,' and Moses' rod is only a symbol. At most it is
like a lightning-conductor, but it is not the lightning. The lightning
will come without the rod, if our eyes are to the heaven, for the true
power that brings God down to men is that forsaking of externals and
waiting upon Him which He never refuses to answer.

In like manner we are too apt to put far too much confidence in human
teachers and human helpers of various kinds. And when God takes them
away we say to ourselves that there is a gap that can never be filled.
Ay! but the great sea can come in and fill any gap, and make the
deepest and the driest of the excavations in the desert to abound in
sweet water.

So let us turn away from everything external, gather in our souls and
fix our hopes on Him; let us recognise the imperative duty of the
Christian warfare which is laid upon us; let us docilely submit
ourselves to His sweet commands, and trust in His sufficient and
punctual guidance, and not expect from any outward sources that which
no outward sources can ever give, but which He Himself will
give--strength to our fingers to fight, and weapons for the warfare,
and covering for our heads in the day of battle.

And then, when our lives are done, may the only inscription on the
stone that covers us be 'Jehovah Nissi: the Lord is my banner'! The
trophy that commemorates the Christian's victory should bear no name
but His by whose grace we are more than conquerors. 'Thanks be to God
who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.'




GERSHOM AND ELIEZER


    'The name of the one [of Moses' sons] was Gershom ... and
    the name of the other was Eliezer....'--EXODUS xviii. 3, 4.

In old times parents often used to give expression to their hopes or
their emotions in the names of their children. Very clearly that was
the case in Moses' naming of his two sons, who seem to have been the
whole of his family. The significance of each name is appended to it in
the text. The explanation of the first is, 'For he said, I have been an
alien in a strange land'; and that of the second, 'For the God of my
fathers, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of
Pharaoh.' These two names give us a pathetic glimpse of the feelings
with which Moses began his exile, and of the better thoughts into which
these gradually cleared. The first child's name expresses his father's
discontent, and suggests the bitter contrast between Sinai and Egypt;
the court and the sheepfold; the gloomy, verdureless, gaunt peaks of
Sinai, blazing in the fierce sunshine, and the cool, luscious
vegetation of Goshen, the land for cattle. The exile felt himself all
out of joint with his surroundings, and so he called the little child
that came to him 'Gershom,' which, according to one explanation, means
'banishment,' and, according to another (a kind of punning etymology),
means 'a stranger here'; in the other case expressing the same sense of
homelessness and want of harmony with his surroundings. But as the
years went on, Moses began to acclimatise himself, and to become more
reconciled to his position and to see things more as they really were.
So, when the second child is born, all his murmuring has been hushed,
and he looks beyond circumstances, and lays his hand upon God. 'And the
name of the second was Eliezer, for, he said, the God of my fathers was
my help.'

Now, there are the two main streams of thought that filled these forty
years; and it was worth while to put Moses into the desert for all that
time, and to break off the purposes and hopes of his life sharp and
short, and to condemn him to comparative idleness, or work that was all
unfitted to bring out his special powers, for that huge scantling out
of his life, one-third of the whole of it, in order that there might be
burnt into him, not either of these two thoughts separately, but the
two of them in their blessed conjunction; 'I am a stranger here'; 'God
is my Help.' And so these are the thoughts which, in like
juxtaposition, ought to be ours; and in higher fashion with regard to
the former of them than was experienced by Moses. Let me say a word or
two about each of these two things. Let us think of the strangers, and
of the divine helper that is with the strangers.

I. 'A stranger here.'

Now, that is true, in the deepest sense, about all men; for the one
thing that makes the difference between the man and the beast is that
the beast is perfectly at home in his surroundings, and gets all that
he needs out of them, and finds in them a field for all that he can do,
and is fully developed to the very highest point of his capacity by
what people nowadays call the 'environment' in which he is put. But the
very opposite is the case in regard to us men. 'Foxes have holes,' and
they are quite comfortable there; 'and the birds of the air have
roosting-places,' and tuck their heads under their wings and go to
sleep without a care and without a consciousness. 'But the Son of man,'
the ideal Humanity as well as the realised ideal in the person of Jesus
Christ, 'hath not where to lay His head.' No; because He is so 'much
better than they.' Their immunity from care is not a prerogative--it is
an inferiority. We are plunged into the midst of a scene of things
which obviously does not match our capacities. There is a great deal
more in every man than can ever find a field of expression, of work, or
of satisfaction in anything beneath the stars. And no man that
understands, even superficially, his own character, his own
requirements, can fail to feel in his sane and quiet moments, when the
rush of temptation and the illusions of this fleeting life have lost
their grip upon him: 'This is not the place that can bring out all that
is in me, or that can yield me all that I desire.' Our capacities
transcend the present, and the experiences of the present are all
unintelligible, unless the true end of every human life is not here at
all, but in another region, for which these experiences are fitting us.

But, then, the temptations of life, the strong appeals of flesh and
sense, the duties which in their proper place are lofty and elevating
and refining, and put out of their place, are contemptible and
degrading, all come in to make it hard for any of us to keep clearly
before us what our consciousness tells us when it is strongly appealed
to, that we are strangers and sojourners here and that this is not 'our
rest, because it is polluted.' Therefore it comes to be the great glory
and blessedness of the Christian Revelation that it obviously shifts
the centre for us, and makes that future, and not this present, the aim
for which, and in the pursuit of which, we are to live. So, Christian
people, in a far higher sense than Moses, who only felt himself 'a
stranger there,' because he did not like Midian as well as Egypt, have
to say, 'We are strangers here'; and the very aim, in one aspect, of
our Christian discipline of ourselves is that we shall keep vivid, in
the face of all the temptations to forget it, this consciousness of
being away from our true home.

One means of doing that is to think rather oftener than the most of us
do, about our true home. You have heard, I dare say, of half-reclaimed
gipsies, who for a while have been coaxed out of the free life of the
woods and the moors, and have gone into settled homes. After a while
there has come over them a rush of feeling, a remembrance of how
blessed it used to be out in the open and away from the squalor and
filth where men 'sit and hear each other groan' and they have flung off
'as if they were fetters' the trappings of 'civilisation,' and gone
back to liberty. That is what we ought to do--not going back from the
higher to the lower, but smitten with what the Germans call the
_heimweh_, the home-sickness, that makes us feel that we must get
clearer sight of that land to which we truly belong.

Do you think about it, do you feel that where Jesus Christ is, is your
home? I have no doubt that most of you have, or have had, dear ones
here on earth about whom you could say that, 'Where my husband, my wife
is; where my beloved is, or my children are, that is my home, wherever
my abode may be.' Are you, Christian people, saying the same thing
about heaven and Jesus Christ? Do you feel that you are strangers here,
not only because you, reflecting upon your character and capacities and
on human life, see that all these require another life for their
explanation and development, but because your hearts are knit to Him,
and 'where your treasure is there your heart is also'; and where your
heart is there you are? We go home when we come into communion with
Jesus Christ. Do you ever, in the course of the rush of your daily
work, think about the calm city beyond the sea, and about its King, and
that you belong to it? 'Our citizenship is in heaven' and here we are
strangers.

II. Now let me say a word about the other child's name.

'God is Helper.' We do not know what interval of time elapsed between
the birth of these two children. There are some indications that the
second of them was in years very much the junior. Perhaps the
transition from the mood represented in the one name to that
represented in the other, was a long and slow process. But be that as
it may, note the connection between these two names. You can never say
'We are strangers here' without feeling a little prick of pain, unless
you say too 'God is my Helper.' There is a beautiful variation of the
former word which will occur to many of you, I have no doubt, in one of
the old psalms: 'I am a stranger _with Thee_, and a sojourner, as were
all my fathers.' There is the secret that takes away all the mourning,
all the possible discomfort and pain, out of the thought: 'Here we have
no continuing city,' and makes it all blessed. It does not matter
whether we are in a foreign land or no, if we have that Companion with
us. His presence will make blessedness in Midian, or in Thebes. It does
not matter whether it is Goshen or the wilderness, if the Lord is by
our side. So sweetness is breathed into the thought, and bitterness is
sucked out of it, when the name of the second child is braided into the
name of the first; and we can contemplate quietly all else of tragic
and limiting and sad that is involved in the thought that we are
sojourners and pilgrims, when we say 'Yes! we are; but the Lord is my
Helper.'

Then, on the other hand, we shall never say and feel 'the Lord is my
Helper,' as we ought to do, until we have got deep in our hearts, and
settled in our consciousness, the other conviction that we are
strangers here. It is only when we realise that there is no other
permanence for us that we put out our hands and grasp at the Eternal,
in order not to be swept away upon the dark waves of the rushing stream
of Time. It is only when all other props are stricken from us that we
rest our whole weight upon that one strong central pillar, which can
never be moved. Learn that God helps, for that makes it possible to say
'I am a stranger,' and not to weep. Learn that you are strangers, for
that stimulates to take God for out help. Just as when the floods are
out, men are driven to the highest ground to save their lives; so when
the billows of the waters of time are seen to be rolling over all
creatural things, we take our flight to the Rock of Ages. Put the two
together, and they fit one another and strengthen us.

This second conviction was the illuminating light upon a perplexed and
problematic past. Moses, when he fled from Egypt, thought that his
life's work was rent in twain. He had believed that his brethren would
have seen that it was God's purpose to use him as the deliverer. For
the sake of being such, he had surrendered the court and its delights.
But on his young ambition and innocent enthusiasm there came this
_douche_ of cold water, which lasted for forty years, and sent him away
into the wilderness, to be a shepherd under an Arab sheikh, with
nothing to look forward to. At first he said, 'This is not what I was
meant for; I am out of my element here.' But before the forty years
were over he said, 'The God of my father was my help, and He delivered
me from the sword of Pharaoh.' What had looked a disaster turned out to
be a deliverance, a manifestation of divine help, and not a hindrance.
He had got far enough away from that past to look at it sanely, that is
to say gratefully. So we, when we get far enough away from our sorrows,
can look back at them, sometimes even here on earth, and say, 'The
mercy of the Lord compassed me about.' Here is the key that unlocks all
the perplexities of providence, 'The Lord was my Helper.'

And that conviction will steady and uphold a man in a present, however
dark. It was no small exercise of his faith and patience that the great
lawgiver should for so many years have such unworthy work to do as he
had in Midian. But even then he gathered into his heart this
confidence, and brought summer about him into the mid-winter of his
life, and light into the midst of darkness; 'for he said'--even then,
when there was no work for him to do that seemed much to need a divine
help--'the Lord is my Helper.'

And so, however dark may be our present moment, and however obscure or
repulsive our own tasks, let us fall back upon that old word, 'Thou
hast been my Help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.'

When Moses named his boy, his gratitude was allied with faith in
favours to come; and when he said 'was,' he meant also 'will be.' And
he was right. He dreamt very little of what was coming, but this
confidence that was expressed in his second child's name was warranted
by that great future that lay before him, though he did not know it.
When the pinch came his confidence faltered. It was easy to say 'The
Lord is my Helper,' when there was nothing very special for which God's
help was needed, and nothing harder to do than to look after a few
sheep in the wilderness. But when God said to him, 'Go and stand before
Pharaoh,' Moses for the moment forgot all about God's being his helper,
and was full of all manner of cowardly excuses, which, like the excuses
of a great many more of us for not doing our plain duty, took the shape
of a very engaging modesty and diffidence as to his capacities. But God
said to him, 'Surely I will be with thee.' He gave him back 'Eliezer'
in a little different form. 'You used to say that I was your helper.
What has become of your faith now? Has it all evaporated when the trial
comes? Surely I will be with thee.' If we will set ourselves to our
tasks, not doubting God's help, we shall have occasion in the event to
be sure that God did help us.

So, brethren, let us cherish these two thoughts, and never keep them
apart, and God will be, as our good old hymn has it--

  'Our help while troubles last,
   And our eternal home.'




THE IDEAL STATESMAN [Footnote: Preached on occasion of Mr. Gladstone's
death.]

    'Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men,
    such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness;
    and place such over them.'--EXODUS xviii. 21.

You will have anticipated my purpose in selecting this text. I should
be doing violence to your feelings and mine if I made no reference to
the event which has united the Empire and the world in one sentiment.
The great tree has fallen, and the crash has for the moment silenced
all the sounds of the forest. Wars abroad and controversies at home are
hushed. All men, of all schools of opinion, creeds, and parties, see
now, in the calm face of the dead, 'the likeness to the great of old';
and it says something, with all our faults, for the soundness of the
heart of English opinion, that all sorts and conditions of men have
brought their sad wreaths to lay them on that coffin.

But, whilst much has been said, far more eloquently and authoritatively
than I can say it, about the many aspects of that many-sided life,
surely it becomes us, as Christian people, to look at it from the
distinctively Christian point of view, and to gather some of the
lessons which, so regarded, it teaches us.

My text is part of the sagacious advice which Jethro, the father-in-law
of Moses, gave him about the sort of men that he should pick out to be
his lieutenants in civic government. Its old-fashioned, simple
phraseology may hide from some of us the elevation and
comprehensiveness of the ideal that it sets forth. But it is a grand
ideal; and amongst the great names of Englishmen who have guided the
destinies of this land, none have approached more nearly to it than he
whose death has taken away the most striking personality from our
public life.

So let me ask you to look with me, first, at the ideal of a politician
that is set forth here.

The free life of the desert, far away from the oppressions of
surrounding military despotisms, that remarkable and antique
constitution of the clan, with all its beautiful loyalty, had given
this Arab sheikh a far loftier conception of what a ruler of men was
than he could have found exemplified at Pharaoh's court; or than, alas!
has been common in many so-called Christian countries. The field upon
which he intended that these great qualities should be exercised was a
very limited one, to manage the little affairs of a handful of
fugitives in the desert. But the scale on which we work has nothing to
do with the principles by which we work, and the laws of perspective
and colouring are the same, whether you paint the minutest miniature or
a gigantic fresco. So what was needed for managing the little concerns
of Moses' wanderers in the wilderness is the ideal of what is needed
for the men who direct the public affairs of world-wide empires.

Let me run over the details. They must be 'able men,' or, as the
original has it, 'men of strength.' There is the intellectual basis,
and especially the basis of firm, brave, strongly-set will which will
grasp convictions, and, whatever comes, will follow them to their
conclusions. The statesman is not one that puts his ear down to the
ground to hear the tramp of some advancing host, and then makes up his
mind to follow in their paths; he is not sensitive to the varying winds
of public opinion, nor does he trim his sails to suit them, but he
comes to his convictions by first-hand approach to, and meditation on,
the great principles that are to guide, and then holds to them with a
strength that nothing can weaken, and a courage that nothing can daunt.
'Men of strength' is what democracies like ours do most need in their
leaders; a 'strong man, in a blatant land,' who knows his own mind, and
is faithful to it for ever. That is a great demand.

'Such as fear God'--there is the secret of strength, not merely in
reference to the intellectual powers which are not dependent for their
origin, though they may be for the health and vigour of their work,
upon any religious sentiment, but in regard to all true power. He that
would govern others must first be lord of himself, and he only is lord
of himself who is consciously and habitually the servant of God. So
that whatever natural endowment we start with, it must be heightened,
purified, deepened, enlarged, by the presence in our lives of a deep
and vital religious conviction. That is true about all men, leaders and
led, large and small. That is the bottom-heat in the greenhouse, as it
were, that will make riper and sweeter all the fruits which are the
natural result of natural capacities. That is the amulet and the charm
which will keep a man from the temptations incident to his position and
the weaknesses incident to his character. The fear of God underlies the
noblest lives. That is not to-day's theory. We are familiar with the
fact, and familiar with the doctrine formulated out of it, that there
may be men of strong and noble lives and great leaders in many a
department of human activity without any reference to the Unseen. Yes,
there may be, but they are all fragments, and the complete man comes
only when the fear of the Lord is guide, leader, impulse, polestar,
regulator, corrector, and inspirer of all that he is and all that he
does.

'Men of truth'--that, of course, glances at the crooked ways which
belong not only to Eastern statesmanship, but it does more than that.
He that is to lead men must himself be led by an eager haste to follow
after, and to apprehend, the very truth of things. And there must be in
him clear transparent willingness to render his utmost allegiance, at
any sacrifice, to the dawning convictions that may grow upon him. It is
only fools that do not change. Freshness of enthusiasm, and fidelity to
new convictions opening upon a man, to the end of his life, are not the
least important of the requirements in him who would persuade and guide
individuals or a nation.

'Hating covetousness'; or, as it might be rendered, 'unjust gain.' That
reference to the 'oiling of the palms' of Eastern judges may be taken
in a loftier signification. If a man is to stand forth as the leader of
a people, he must be clear, as old Samuel said that he was, from all
suspicion of having been following out his career for any form of
personal advantage. 'Clean hands,' and that not only from the vulgar
filth of wealth, but from the more subtle advantages which may accrue
from a lofty position, are demanded of the leader of men.

Such is the ideal. The requirements are stern and high, and they
exclude the vermin that infest 'politics,' as they are called, and
cause them to stink in many nostrils. The self-seeking schemer, the
one-eyed partisan, the cynic who disbelieves in ideals of any sort, the
charlatan who assumes virtues that he does not possess, and mouths
noble sentiments that go no deeper than his teeth, are all shut out by
them. The doctrine that a man may do in his public capacity things
which would be disgraceful in private life, and yet retain his personal
honour untarnished, is blown to atoms by this ideal. It is much to be
regretted, and in some senses to be censured, that so many of our
wisest, best, and most influential men stand apart from public life.
Much of that is due to personal bias, much more of it is due to the
pressure of more congenial duties, and not a little of it is due to the
disregard of Jethro's ideal, and to the degradation of public life
which has ensued thereby. But there have been great men in our history
whose lives have helped to lift up the ideal of a statesman, who have
made such a sketch as Jethro outlined, though they may not have used
his words, their polestar; and amongst the highest of these has been
the man whose loss we to-day lament.

Let me try to vindicate that expression of opinion in a word or two. I
cannot hope to vie in literary grace, or in completeness, with the
eulogies that have been abundantly poured out; and I should not have
thought it right to divert this hour of worship from its ordinary
themes, if I had had no more to say than has been far better said a
thousand times in these last days. But I cannot help noticing that,
though there has been a consensus of admiration of, and a practically
unanimous pointing to, character as after all the secret of the spell
which Mr. Gladstone has exercised for two generations, there has not
been, as it seems to me, equal and due prominence given to what was,
and what he himself would have said was, the real root of his character
and the productive cause of his achievements.

And so I venture now to say a word or two about the religion of the man
that to his own consciousness underlay all the rest of him. It is not
for me to speak, and there is no need to speak, about the marvellous
natural endowments and the equally marvellous, many-sided equipment of
attainment which enriched the rich, natural soil. Intermeddling as he
did with all knowledge, he must necessarily have been but an amateur in
many of the subjects into which he rushed with such generous eagerness.
But none the less is the example of all but omnivorous acquisitiveness
of everything that was to be known, a protest, very needful in these
days, against the possible evils of an excessive specialising which the
very progress of knowledge in all departments seems to make inevitable.
I do not need to speak, either, of the flow, and sometimes the torrent,
of eloquence ever at his command, nor of the lithe and sinewy force of
his extraordinarily nimble, as well as massive, mind; nor need I say
more than one word about the remarkable combination of qualities so
generally held and seen to be incompatible, which put into one
personality a genius for dry arithmetical figures and a genius for
enthusiasm and sympathy with all the oppressed. All these things have
been said far better than I can say them, and I do not repeat them.

But I desire to hammer this one conviction into your hearts and my own,
that the inmost secret of that noble life, of all that wealth of
capacity, all that load of learning, which he bore lightly like a
flower, was the fact that the man was, to the very depths of his
nature, a devout Christian. He would have been as capable, as eloquent,
and all the rest of it, if he had been an unbeliever. But he would
never have been nor done what he was and did, and he would never have
left the dint of an impressive and lofty personality upon a whole
nation and a world, if beneath the intellect there had not been
character, and beneath character Christianity.

He was far removed, in ecclesiastical connections, from us
Nonconformists, and he held opinions in regard to some very important
ecclesiastical questions which cut straight across some of our deepest
convictions. We never had to look for much favour from his hands,
because his intellectual atmosphere removed him far from sympathy with
many of the truths which are dearest to the members of the Free
Evangelical Churches. But none the less we recognise in him a brother
in Jesus Christ, and rejoice that there, on the high places of a
careless and sceptical generation, there stood a Christian man.

In this connection I cannot but, though I have no right to do so,
express how profoundly thankful I, for one, was to the present Prime
Minister of England that in his brief eulogium on, I was going to say,
his great rival, he ended all by the emphatic declaration that Mr.
Gladstone was, first and foremost, a great Christian man. Yes; and
there was the secret, as I have already said, not of his merely
political eminence, but of the universal reverence which a nation
expresses to-day. All detraction is silenced, and all calumnies have
dropped away, as filth from the white wings of a swan as it soars, and
with one voice the Empire and the world confess that he was a great and
a good man.

I need not dwell in detail on the thoughts of how, by reason of this
deep underlying fear of God, the other qualifications which are
sketched in our ideal found their realisation in him; how those who,
all through his career, smiled most at the successive enthusiasms which
monopolised his mind, and sometimes at the contrasts between these, are
now ready to admit that, whether the enthusiasms were right or wrong,
there is something noble in the spectacle of a man ever keeping his
mind, even when its windows were beginning to be dimmed by the frosts
of age, open to the beams of new truth. And the greatest, as some
people think, of his political blunders, as we are beginning, all of
us, to recognise, now that party strife is hushed, was the direct
consequence of that ever fresh and youthful enthusiasm for new thoughts
