person. But the light that is in us hath been dimmed by this act of
insult to our wife. How, O Arjuna, can a son born from this insulted
wife of ours prove serviceable to us?'

"Arjuna replied,--'Superior persons, O Bharata, never prate about the
harsh words that may or may not be uttered by inferior men. Persons
that have earned respect for themselves, even if they are able to
retaliate, remember not the acts of hostility done by their enemies,
but, on the other hand, treasure up only their good deeds.'

"Bhima said,--'Shall I, O king, slay, without loss of time all these
foes assembled together, even here, or shall I destroy them, O Bharata,
by the roots, outside this palace? Or, what need is there of words or
of command? I shall slay all these even now, and rule thou the whole
earth, O king, without a rival.' And saying this, Bhima with his
younger brothers, like a lion in the midst of a herd of inferior
animals, repeatedly cast his angry glances around. But Arjuna, however,
of white deeds, with appealing looks began to pacify his elder brother.
And the mighty-armed hero endued with great prowess began to burn with
the fire of his wrath. And, O king, this fire began to issue out of
Vrikodara's ears and other senses with smoke and sparks and flames. And
his face became terrible to behold in consequence of his furrowed brows
like those of Yama himself at the time of the universal destruction.
Then Yudhishthira forbade the mighty hero, embracing him with his arms
and telling him 'Be not so. Stay in silence and peace.' And having
pacified the mighty-armed one with eyes red in wrath, the king
approached his uncle Dhritarashtra, with hands joined in entreaty.


SECTION LXXII

"Yudhishthira said,--'O king, thou art our master. Command us as to
what we shall do. O Bharata, we desire to remain always in obedience to
thee.'

"Dhritarashtra replied.--'O Ajatasatru, blest be thou. Go thou in peace
and safety. Commanded by me, go, rule thy own kingdom with thy wealth.
And, O child, take to heart this command of an old man, this wholesome
advice that I give, and which is even a nutritive regimen. O
Yudhishthira, O child, thou knowest the subtle path of morality.
Possessed of great wisdom, thou art also humble, and thou waitest also
upon the old. Where there is intelligence, there is forbearance.
Therefore, O Bharata, follow thou counsels of peace. The axe falleth
upon wood, not upon stone. (Thou art open to advice, not Duryodhana).
They are the best of men that remember not the acts of hostility of
their foes; that behold only the merits, not the faults, of their
enemies; and that never enter into hostilities themselves. They that
are good remember only the good deeds of their foes and not the hostile
acts their foes might have done unto them. The good, besides, do good
unto others without expectation of any good, in return. O Yudhishthira,
it is only the worst of men that utter harsh words in quarrelling;
while they that are indifferent reply to such when spoken by others.
But they that are good and wise never think of or recapitulate such
harsh words, little caring whether these may or may not have been
uttered by their foes. They that are good, having regard to the state
of their own feelings, can understand the feelings of others, and
therefore remember only the good deeds and not the acts of hostility of
their foes. Thou hast acted even as good men of prepossessing
countenance do, who transgress not the limits of virtue, wealth,
pleasure and salvation. O child, remember not the harsh words of
Duryodhana. Look at thy mother Gandhari and myself also, if thou
desirest to remember only what is good. O Bharata, look at me, who am
thy father unto you and am old and blind, and still alive. It was for
seeing our friends and examining also the strength and weakness of my
children, that I had, from motives of policy, suffered this match at
dice to proceed. O king those amongst the Kurus that have thee for
their ruler, and the intelligent Vidura conversant with every branch of
learning for their counsellor, have, indeed, nothing to grieve for. In
thee is virtue, in Arjuna is patience, in Bhimasena is prowess, and the
twins, those foremost of men, is pure reverence for superiors. Blest be
thou, O Ajatasatru. Return to Khandavaprastha, and let there be
brotherly love between thee and thy cousins. Let thy heart also be ever
fixed on virtue.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"That foremost of the Bharatas--king
Yudhishthira the just--then, thus addressed by his uncle, having gone
through every ceremony of politeness, set out with his brothers for
Khandavaprastha. And accompanied by Draupadi and ascending their cars
which were all of the hue of the clouds, with cheerful hearts they all
set out for that best of cities called Indraprastha."


SECTION LXXIII

Janamejaya said,--"How did the sons of Dhritarashtra feel, when they
came to know that the Pandavas had, with Dhritarashtra's leave, left
Hastinapore with all their wealth and jewels?"

Vaisampayana said,--"O king, learning that the Pandavas had been
commanded by the wise Dhritarashtra to return to their capital,
Dussasana went without loss of time unto his brother. And, O bull of
the Bharata race, having arrived before Duryodhana with his counsellor,
the prince, afflicted with grief, began to say,--'Ye mighty warriors,
that which we had won after so much trouble, the old man (our father)
hath thrown away. Know ye that he hath made over the whole of that
wealth to the foes.' At these words, Duryodhana and Karna and Sakuni,
the son of Suvala, all of whom were guided by vanity, united together,
and desirous of counteracting the sons of Pandu, approaching in haste
saw privately the wise king Dhritarashtra--the son of Vichitravirya and
spake unto him these pleasing and artful words. Duryodhana said,--

"'Hast thou not heard, O king, what the learned Vrihaspati the
preceptor of the celestials, said in course of counselling Sakra about
mortals and politics? Even these, O slayer of foes, were the words of
Vrihaspati, "Those enemies that always do wrong by stratagem or force,
should be slain by every means." If, therefore, with the wealth of the
Pandavas, we gratify the kings of the earth and then fight with the
sons of Pandu, what reverses can overtake us? When one hath placed on
the neck and back of venomous snakes full of wrath for encompassing his
destruction, is it possible for him to take them off? Equipped with
weapon and seated on their cars, the angry sons of Pandu like wrathful
and venomous snakes will assuredly annihilate us, O father. Even now
Arjuna proceedeth, encased in mail and furnished with his couple of
quivers, frequently taking up the Gandiva and breathing hard and
casting angry glances around. It hath (also) been heard by us that
Vrikodara, hastily ordering his car to be made ready and riding on it,
is proceeding along, frequently whirling his heavy mace. Nakula also is
going along, with the sword in his grasp and the semi-circular shield
in his hand. And Sahadeva and the king (Yudhishthira) have made signs
clearly testifying to their intentions. Having ascended their cars that
are full of all kinds of arms, they are whipping their horses (for
going to Khandava soon) and assembling their forces. Persecuted thus by
us they are incapable of forgiving us those injuries. Who is there
among them that will forgive that insult to Draupadi? Blest be thou. We
will again gamble with the son of Pandu for sending them to exile. O
bull among men, we are competent to bring them thus under our sway.
Dressed in skins, either we or they defeated at dice, shall repair to
the woods for twelve years. The thirteenth year shall have to be spent
in some inhabited country unrecognised; and, if recognised, an exile
for another twelve years shall be the consequence. Either we or they
shall live so. Let the play begin, casting the dice, let the sons of
Pandu once more play. O bull of the Bharata race, O king, even this is
our highest duty. This Sakuni knoweth well the whole science of dice.
Even if they succeed in observing this vow for thirteen years, we shall
be in the meantime firmly rooted in the kingdom and making alliances,
assemble a vast invincible host and keep them content, so that we
shall, O king, defeat the sons of Pandu if they reappear. Let this plan
recommend itself to thee, O slayer of foes.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'Bring back the Pandavas then, indeed, even if
they have gone a great way. Let them come at once again to cast dice.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Then Drona, Somadatta and Valhika, Gautama,
Vidura, the son of Drona, and the mighty son of Dhritarashtra by his
Vaisya wife, Bhurisravas, and Bhishma, and that mighty warrior
Vikarna,--all said, 'Let not the play commence. Let there be peace.'
But Dhritarashtra, partial to his sons, disregarding the counsels of
all his wise friends and relatives, summoned the sons of Pandu."


SECTION LXXIV

Vaisampayana said,--"O monarch, it was then that the virtuous Gandhari,
afflicted with grief on account of her affection for her sons,
addressed king Dhritarashtra and said, 'When Duryodhana was born,
Vidura of great intelligence had said, "It is well to send this
disgrace of the race to the other world. He cried repeatedly and
dissonantly like a jackal. It is certain he will prove the destruction
of our race." Take this to heart, O king of the Kurus. O Bharata, sink
not, for thy own fault, into an ocean of calamity. O lord, accord not
thy approbation to the counsels of the wicked ones of immature years.
Be not thou the cause of the terrible destruction of this race. Who is
there that will break an embankment which hath been completed, or
re-kindle a conflagration which hath been extinguished? O bull of the
Bharata race, who is there that will provoke the peaceful sons of
Pritha? Thou rememberest, O Ajamida, everything, but still I will call
thy attention to this. The scriptures can never control the
wicked-minded for good or evil. And, O king, a person of immature
understanding will never act as one of mature years. Let thy sons
follow thee as their leader. Let them not be separated from thee for
ever (by losing their lives). Therefore, at my word, O king, abandon
this wretch of our race. Thou couldst not, O king, from parental
affection, do it before. Know that the time hath come for the
destruction of race through him. Err not, O king. Let thy mind, guided
by counsels of peace, virtue, and true policy, be what it naturally is.
That prosperity which is acquired by the aid of wicked acts, is soon
destroyed; while that which is won by mild means taketh root and
descendeth from generation to generation.'

"The king, thus addressed by Gandhari who pointed out to him in such
language the path of virtue, replied unto her, saying,--'If the
destruction of our race is come, let it take place freely. I am ill
able to prevent it. Let it be as they (these my sons) desire. Let the
Pandavas return. And let my sons again gamble with the sons of Pandu.'"


SECTION LXXV

Vaisampayana said,--"The royal messenger, agreeably to the commands of
the intelligent king Dhritarashtra, coming upon Yudhishthira, the son
of Pritha who had by that time gone a great way, addressed the monarch
and said,--'Even these are the words of thy father-like uncle, O
Bharata, spoken unto thee, "The assembly is ready. O son of Pandu, O
king Yudhisthira, come and cast the dice."'

"Yudhishthira said,--'Creatures obtain fruits good and ill according to
the dispensation of the Ordainer of the creation. Those fruits are
inevitable whether I play or not. This is a summons to dice; it is,
besides the command of the old king. Although I know that it will prove
destructive to me, yet I cannot refuse.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Although (a living) animal made of gold was
an impossibility, yet Rama suffered himself to be tempted by a (golden)
deer. Indeed, the minds of men over whom calamities hang, became
deranged and out of order. Yudhishthira, therefore, having said these
words, retraced his steps along with his brothers. And knowing full
well the deception practised by Sakuni, the son of Pritha came back to
sit at dice with him again. These mighty warriors again entered that
assembly, afflicting the hearts of all their friends. And compelled by
Fate they once more sat down at ease for gambling for the destruction
of themselves.

"Sakuni then said,--'The old king hath given ye back all your wealth.
That is well. But, O bull of the Bharata race, listen to me, there is a
stake of great value. Either defeated by ye at dice, dressed in deer
skins we shall enter the great forest and live there for twelve years
passing the whole of the thirteenth year in some inhabited region,
unrecognised, and if recognised return to an exile of another twelve
years; or vanquished by us, dressed in deer skins ye shall, with
Krishna, live for twelve years in the woods passing the whole of the
thirteenth year unrecognised, in some inhabited region. If recognised,
an exile of another twelve years is to be the consequence. On the
expiry of the thirteenth year, each is to have his kingdom surrendered
by the other. O Yudhishthira, with this resolution, play with us, O
Bharata, casting the dice.'

"At these words, they that were in that assembly, raising up their arms
said in great anxiety of mind, and from the strength of their feelings
these words,--'Alas, fie on the friends of Duryodhana that they do not
apprise him of his great danger. Whether he, O bull among the Bharatas,
(Dhritarashtra) understandeth or not, of his own sense, it is thy duty
to tell him plainly.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"King Yudhishthira, even hearing these various
remarks, from shame and a sense of virtue again sat at dice. And though
possessed of great intelligence and fully knowing the consequences, he
again began to play, as if knowing that the destruction of the Kurus
was at hand.

"And Yudhishthira said,--'How can, O Sakuni, a king like me, always
observant of the uses of his own order, refuse, when summoned to dice?
Therefore I play with thee.'

"Sakuni answered,--'We have many kine and horses, and milch cows, and
an infinite number of goats and sheep; and elephants and treasures and
gold and slaves both male and female. All these were staked by us
before but now let this be our one stake, viz., exile into the
woods,--being defeated either ye or we will dwell in the woods (for
twelve years) and the thirteenth year, unrecognised, in some inhabited
place. Ye bulls among men, with this determination, will we play.'

"O Bharata, this proposal about a stay in the woods was uttered but
once. The son of Pritha, however, accepted it and Sakuni took up the
dice. And casting them he said unto Yudhishthira,--'Lo, I have won.'"


SECTION LXXVI

Vaisampayana said,--"Then the vanquished sons of Pritha prepared for
their exile into the woods. And they, one after another, in due order,
casting off their royal robes, attired themselves in deer-skins. And
Dussasana, beholding those chastisers of foes, dressed in deer-skins
and deprived of their kingdom and ready to go into exile, exclaimed
'The absolute sovereignty of the illustrious king Duryodhana hath
commenced. The sons of Pandu have been vanquished, and plunged into
great affliction. Now have we attained the goal either by broad or
narrow paths. For today becoming superior to our foes in point of
prosperity as also of duration of rule have we become praiseworthy of
men. The sons of Pritha have all been plunged by us into everlasting
hell. They have been deprived of happiness and kingdom for ever and
ever. They who, proud of their wealth, laughed in derision at the son
of Dhritarashtra, will now have to go into the woods, defeated and
deprived by us of all their wealth. Let them now put off their
variegated coats of mail, their resplendent robes of celestial make,
and let them all attire themselves in deer-skins according to the stake
they had accepted of the son of Suvala. They who always used to boast
that they had no equals in all the world, will now know and regard
themselves in this their calamity as grains of sesame without the
kernel. Although in this dress of theirs the Pandavas seem like unto
wise and powerful persons installed in a sacrifice, yet they look like
persons not entitled to perform sacrifices, wearing such a guise. The
wise Yajnasena of the Somake race, having bestowed his daughter--the
princess of Panchala--on the sons of Pandu, acted most unfortunately
for the husbands of Yajnaseni--these sons of Pritha are as eunuchs. And
O Yajnaseni, what joy will be thine upon beholding in the woods these
thy husbands dressed in skins and thread-bare rags, deprived of their
wealth and possessions. Elect thou a husband, whomsoever thou likest,
from among all these present here. These Kurus assembled here, are all
forbearing and self-controlled, and possessed of great wealth. Elect
thou one amongst these as thy lord, so that these great calamity may
not drag thee to wretchedness. The sons of Pandu now are even like
grains of sesame without the kernel, or like show-animals encased in
skins, or like grains of rice without the kernel. Why shouldst thou
then longer wait upon the fallen sons of Pandu? Vain is the labour used
upon pressing the sesame grain devoid of the kernel!'

"Thus did Dussasana, the son of Dhritarashtra, utter in the hearing of
the Pandavas, harsh words of the most cruel import. And hearing them,
the unforbearing Bhima, in wrath suddenly approaching that prince like
a Himalayan lion upon a jackal, loudly and chastisingly rebuked him in
these words,--'Wicked-minded villain, ravest thou so in words that are
uttered alone by the sinful? Boastest thou thus in the midst of the
kings, advanced as thou art by the skill of the king of Gandhara. As
thou piercest our hearts here with these thy arrowy words, so shall I
pierce thy heart in battle, recalling all this to thy mind. And they
also who from anger or covetousness are walking behind thee as thy
protectors,--them also shall I send to the abode of Yama with their
descendants and relatives.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Unto Bhima dressed in deer-skins and uttering
these words of wrath without doing any thing, for he could not deviate
from the path of virtue, Dussasana abandoning all sense of shame,
dancing around the Kurus, loudly said, 'O cow! O cow!'

"Bhima at this once more said,--'Wretch darest thou, O Dussasana, use
harsh words as these? Whom doth it behove to boast, thus having won
wealth by foul means? I tell thee that if Vrikodara, the son of Pritha,
drinketh not thy life-blood, piercing open thy breast in battle, let
him not attain to regions of blessedness, I tell thee truly that by
slaying the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle, before the very eyes of
all the warriors, I shall pacify this wrath of mine soon enough.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"And as the Pandavas were going away from the
assembly, the wicked king Duryodhana from excess of joy mimiced by his
own steps the playful leonine trade of Bhima. Then Vrikodara, half
turning towards the king said, 'Think not ye fool that by this thou
gainest any ascendency over me; slay thee shall I soon with all thy
followers, and answer thee, recalling all this to thy mind.' And
beholding this insult offered to him, the mighty and proud Bhima,
suppressing his rising rage and following the steps of Yudhishthira,
also spake these words while going out of the Kaurava court, 'I will
slay Duryodhana, and Dhananjaya will slay Karna, and Sahadeva will slay
Sakuni that gambler with dice. I also repeat in this assembly these
proud words which the gods will assuredly make good, if ever we engage
in battle with the Kurus, I will slay this wretched Duryodhana in
battle with my mace, and prostrating him on the ground I will place my
foot on his head. And as regards this (other) wicked person--Dussasana
who is audacious in speech, I will drink his blood like a lion.'

"And Arjuna said,--'O Bhima, the resolutions of superior men are not
known in words only. On the fourteenth year from this day, they shall
see what happeneth.'

"And Bhima again said,--'The earth shall drink the blood of Duryodhana,
and Karna, and the wicked Sakuni, and Dussasana that maketh the fourth.'

"And Arjuna said,--'O Bhima, I will, as thou directest, slay in battle
this Karna so malicious and jealous and harsh-speeched and vain. For
doing what is agreeable to Bhima, Arjuna voweth that he will slay in
battle with his arrows this Karna with all his followers. And I will
send unto the regions of Yama also all those other kings that will from
foolishness fight against me. The mountains of Himavat might be removed
from where they are, the maker of the day lose his brightness, the moon
his coldness, but this vow of mine will ever be cherished. And all this
shall assuredly happen if on the fourteenth year from this, Duryodhana
doth not, with proper respect, return us our kingdom.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"After Arjuna had said this, Sahadeva the
handsome son of Madri, endued with great energy, desirous of slaying
Sakuni, waving his mighty arms and sighing like snake, exclaimed, with
eyes red with anger--'Thou disgrace of the Gandhara kings, those whom
thou thinkest as defeated are not really so. Those are even
sharp-pointed arrows from whose wounds thou hast run the risk in
battle. I shall certainly accomplish all which Bhima hath said
adverting to thee with all thy followers. If therefore thou hast
anything to do, do it before that day cometh. I shall assuredly slay
thee in battle with all thy followers soon enough, it thou, O son of
Suvala, stayest in the light pursuant to the Kshatriya usage.'

"Then, O monarch hearing these words of Sahadeva, Nakula the handsomest
of men spake these words,--'I shall certainly send unto the abode of
Yama all those wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, who desirous of death and
impelled by Fate, and moved also by the wish of doing what is agreeable
to Duryodhana, have used harsh and insulting speeches towards this
daughter of Yajnasena at the gambling match. Soon enough shall I, at
the command of Yudhishthira and remembering the wrongs to Draupadi,
make the earth destitute of the sons of Dhritarashtra.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"And those tigers among men, all endued with
