league was extended to include Syrian states farther east, and a still
more formidable expedition was fitted out to attack this dangerous
upstart king of Israel, who was casting his shadow so far. Such is
always the case. We are never in more danger of fresh assailants than
when we have won some victory over evil in ourselves or around us.
David repeated his former tactics. Not waiting to be attacked, and to
have the soil of Israel profaned and wasted by enemies, he crossed
Jordan to meet the would-be invader, and, when he met him, struck hard,
and crushed him and his host, slew the commander, and dispersed the
thunder-cloud. The coalition broke down. Hadad-ezer's tributaries were
glad to shake off his yoke and transfer their allegiance to David.

'Nothing succeeds like success.' The alliances between worldly men
banded against God's soldiers are held together by self-interest, and,
when that can be best secured by deserting a man when he is down, away
go all the allies, tumbling over each other in their haste to be the
first to desert and bring feigned submission to the conqueror. The
jackals leave the sick lion. The Syrians had had enough of helping
Ammon, and Rabbath might fall without their lifting a finger. So hollow
are the world's coalitions against God and His anointed!




THOU ART THE MAN

'And David said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done
this thing shall surely die; because he did this thing, and because he
had no pity. And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man.'--2 SAMUEL
xii. 5-7.


Nathan's apologue, so tenderly beautiful, takes the poet-king on the
most susceptible side of his character. All his history shows him as a
man of wonderfully sweet, chivalrous, generous, swiftly compassionate
nature. And so, when he hears the story of a mean, heartless
selfishness, all that is best in him kindles into a generous
indignation, and flames out into instinctive condemnation. 'The man
that did this thing shall die because he had no pity.'

And then, on to that hot fervour of righteous wrath, comes this dash of
cold water, 'And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man.' Like some
keen spear-point, sharpened almost to invisibility, this short sentence
(two words in the original) driven by a strong hand, goes right through
the armour to the very heart. What a collapse there would be in the
king when the pointed forefinger of the prophet emphasised and drove
home the application!

I. This dramatic scene before us may be taken as suggesting first that
we are all strangely blind to our own faults.

If a man's own sin is held up before him a little disguised, he says,
'How ugly it is!' And if only for a moment he can be persuaded that it
is not his own conduct but some other sinner's that he is judging, the
instinctive condemnation comes. We have two sets of names for vices:
one set which rather mitigates and excuses them, and another set which
puts them in their real hideousness. We keep the palliative set for
home consumption, and liberally distribute the plain-spoken, ugly set
amongst the vices and faults of our friends. The same thing which I
call in myself prudence I call in you meanness. The same thing which
you call in yourselves generous living, you call in your friend filthy
sensualism. That which, to the doer of it, is only righteous
indignation, to the onlooker is passionate anger. That which, in the
practiser of it, is no more than a due regard for the interests of his
own family and himself in the future, is, to the envious lookers-on,
shabbiness and meanness in money matters. That which, to the liar, is
only prudent diplomatic reticence, to the listener is falsehood. That
which, in the man that judges his own conduct, is but 'a choleric
word,' is, in his friend, when he judges him, 'flat blasphemy.'

And so we go all round the circle, and condemn our own vices, when we
see them in other people. So the king who had never thought, when he
stole away Uriah's one ewe lamb, and did him to death by traitorous
commands, setting him in the front of the battle, that he was wanting
in compassion, blazes up at once, and righteously sentences the other
'man' to death, 'because he had no pity.' He had never thought of
himself or of his crime as cruel, as mean, as selfish, as heartless.
But when he sees a partially disguised picture of it he knows it for
the devil's child that it is.

          'O wad some Power the giftie gie us
           To see oursels as ithers see us!
           It wad frae mony a blunder free us,'

and so it would, to see ourselves as we see others. We judge our
brother and ourselves by two different standards.

And that is only one phase of a more general principle, one case that
comes under a yet wider law, viz. that we are all blind, strangely
blind, to our own faults. Why that is so I do not need to spend time in
inquiring, except for a distinctly practical purpose. Let me just
remind you how a strong wish for a thing that seems desirable always
tends to confuse to a man the plain distinction between right and
wrong; and how passions once excited, or the animal lusts and desires
once kindled in a man, go straight to their object without the smallest
regard to whether that object is to be reached by the breach of all
laws, human and divine, or not. Excite any passion, and the passion is
but a blind propensity towards certain good, and takes no question or
consideration of whether right or wrong is involved at all.

And further, habit familiarises with evil and diminishes our sense of
it as evil. A man that has been for half a day in some ill-ventilated
room does not notice the poisonous atmosphere; if you go into it you
are half suffocated at first, and breathe more easily as you get used
to it. A man can live amidst the foulest poison of evil; and, as the
Styrian peasants get fat upon arsenic, his whole nature may seem to
thrive by the poison that it absorbs. They tell us that the breed of
fish that live in the lightless caverns in the bowels of some
mountains, by long disuse have had their eyes atrophied out of them,
and are blind because they have lived out of the light. And so men that
live in the love of evil lose the capacity of discerning the evil, and
'he that walketh in darkness' becomes blind, blind to his sin, and
blind to all the realities of life.

Then is it not true, too, that many of us systematically and of set
purpose, continually avoid all questions as to the moral nature of our
conduct? How many a man and woman who reads these words never sits down
to think whether what they have been doing is right or wrong, because
they have deep down in their consciences an uneasy suspicion as to what
the answer would be. So, by reason of fostering passion, by reason of
listening to wishes, by reason of the habit of wrongdoing, by reason of
the systematic avoidance of all careful investigation of our character
and of our conduct, we lose the power of fairly deciding upon the
nature of our own acts.

Then self-love comes in, and still another thing tends to blind us. We
are all ready to acquiesce in the general indictment, and so to shirk
the particular application of it. That is what people do about all
great moral principles that ought to affect conduct,--they admit them
in words, as general truths applying to mankind, and then hide
themselves in the crowd, and think that they escape the incidence and
particular application of the truths. No one of us would, I suppose,
venture in plain words to stand up and say: 'I am an exception to your
general confessions of sin,' and most of us would be ready to unite in
the acknowledgment: 'We have all come short of the glory of God,'
though in our consciences there has never stirred the faintest movement
of self-condemnation even whilst our lips have been uttering the
confession. Do not shrink away in the crowd, my brother! Come out to
the front, and stand by yourself as God sees you, isolated. Look at
your own actions; never mind about other men's. Do not content
yourselves with saying,' _We_ have sinned'; say, '_I_ have sinned
against _Thee._' God and you are as if alone in the universe. 'Against
Thee, Thee only, have I sinned.' There are no crowds in God's eyes; He
deals with single souls. Every one of us,--thou, and thou, and
thou,--must give account of himself to God.

II. In the next place, let me ask you to think how this story suggests
that the true work of God's message is to tear down the veil and to
show the ugly thing.

'Nathan said unto David, Thou art the man.' It needed a prophet to do
that, with divine authority. Nothing less would suffice to get through
the thick bosses of the buckler of self-conceit and ignorance which he
had to penetrate. As God's messenger, he gathered up, as I said, into
one sharp-pointed, keen-edged, steel-bright sentence, the very spirit
of the whole ancient Law, which seeks to individualise the sinner, and
to drive home to the conscience the consciousness of wrong-doing.

The remarks that I have been making, in the former part of this sermon,
imperfect as they must necessarily be, may at least serve one or two
purposes in reference to this part of my discourse.

It seems to me that if what I have been saying as to a man's blindness
to his own true moral character be at all correct, there flows from
that thought a strong presumption in favour of a divine revelation. We
need another than our own voice to lay down the law of conduct, and to
accuse and condemn the breaches of it. Conscience is not a wholly
reliable guide, and is neither an impartial nor an all-knowing judge.
Unconsciousness of evil is not innocence. It is not the purest of women
who 'wipes her mouth and says, I have done no harm.' My conscience says
to me, 'It is wrong to do wrong'; but when I say to my conscience,
'Yes, and pray what is wrong?' a large variety of answers is possible.
A man may sophisticate his conscience, or bribe his conscience, or
throttle his conscience, or sear his conscience. And so the man who is
worst, who, therefore, ought to be most chastised by his conscience,
has most immunity from it, and where, if it is to be of use, it ought
to be most powerful, there it is weakest.

What then? Why this, then--a standard that varies is not a standard; we
are left with a leaden rule. My conscience, your conscience, is like
the standard measures which we at present possess, which by their very
names--foot, handbreadth, nail, and the like, tell us that they were
originally but the length of one man's limb. And so your measure of
right and wrong, and another man's measure, though they may
substantially correspond, yet differ according to your differences of
education, character, and a thousand other things. So that the
individual man's standard needs to be rectified. You have to send all
the weights and measures up to the Tower now and then, to get them
stamped and certified. And, as I believe, this fluctuation of our moral
judgments shows the need for a fixed pattern and firm unchangeable
standard, external to our mutable selves. A light on deck which pitches
with the pitching ship is no guide. It must flash from a white pillar
founded on a rock and immovable amid the restless waves. Our need of
such a standard raises a strong presumption that a good God will give
us what we need, if He can. Such a standard He has given, as I believe,
in the revelation of Himself which lies in this book, and culminates in
the life and character of Jesus Christ our Lord. There, and by that, we
can set our watches. There we can read the law of morality, and by our
deflections from it we can measure the amount of our guilt.

But beyond that, the remarks which I have already made in the former
part of my sermon may suggest to us, along with this utterance of the
prophet's, that one indispensable characteristic and certain criterion
of a true message and gospel from God is that it pierces the conscience
and kindles the sense of sin. My dear brethren, there is a great deal
of so-called Christian teaching, both from pulpits and books in this
day, which, to my mind, is altogether defective by reason of its
underestimate of the cardinal fact of sin, and its consequent failure
to represent the fundamental characteristic of the gospel as being
deliverance and redemption. I am quite sure that the root of
nine-tenths of all the heresies that have ever afflicted the Christian
Church, and of the weakness of so much popular Christianity, is none
other than this failure adequately to recognise the universality and
the gravity of the fact of transgression. If a word comes to you, calls
itself God's message, and does not start with man's sin, nor put in the
forefront of its utterances the way by which the dominion of that sin
in your own heart can be broken, and the penalties of that sin in your
present and future life can be swept away, it is condemned, _ipso
facto_, as not a gospel from God, or fit for man. O my brother! it
sounds harsh; but it is the truest kindness, when Nathan stands before
the king, and with his flashing eye and stern, calm voice says, 'Thou
art the man.' Was not that nobler, truer, tenderer, worthier of God,
than if he had smoothed David down with soft speeches that would not
have roused his conscience? Is it not the truest benevolence that keeps
the surgeon's hand steady whilst his heart is touched by the pain that
he inflicts, as he thrusts his gleaming instrument of tender cruelty
into the poisonous sore? And are not God's mercy and love manifest for
us in this, that He begins all His work on us with the grave, solemn
indictment of each soul by itself, 'Thou art the man'?

               'He showed me all the mercy,
                For He taught me all the sin.'

III. Lastly, let me say that God accuses us and condemns us one by one
that He may save us one by one.

The meaning of Nathan's sharp sentence was speedily disclosed when the
broken-down king exclaimed, 'I have sinned against the Lord,' and when,
with laconic force as great as that which barbed the condemnation, the
prophet stanched the wound with the brief words, 'And the Lord hath
made to pass the iniquity of thy sin.' The intention of the accusation
is the extension of the mercy and forgiveness. God, as the Apostle puts
it, 'hath concluded all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all.'

And now, mark, for the carrying out of that divine purpose in regard to
us, and for our possession of the proffered mercy, the same
individualising and isolating process is needful as was needful for the
conviction of the sin. God desires to save the world, but God can only
save men one at a time. There must be an individual access to Him for
the reception of forgiveness, as there must be in regard to the
conviction of sin, just as if He and I were the only two beings in the
whole universe. There is no wholesale entrance into God's Church or
into God's kingdom. God's mercy is not given to crowds, except as
composed of individuals who have individually received it. There must
be the personal act of faith; there must be my solitary coming to Him.
As the old mystics used to define prayer, so I might define the whole
process by which men are saved from their sins, 'the flight of the
lonely soul to the lonely God.' My brother, it is not enough for you to
say, 'We have sinned'; say, 'I have sinned.' It is not enough that from
a gathered congregation there should go up the united litany, 'Lord,
have mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us! Lord, have mercy upon
us!' You must make the prayer your own: 'Lord, have mercy upon _me_!'
It is not enough that you should believe, as I suppose most of you
fancy that you believe, that Christ has died for the sins of the whole
world. That belief will give you no share in His forgiveness. You must
come to closer grips with Him than that; and you must be able to say,
'Who loved _me_, and gave Himself for _me_.' Let us have no running
away into the crowd. Come out, and stand by yourselves, and for
yourselves stretch out your own band, and take Christ for yourselves.

A man may die of starvation in a granary. You may be lost in the midst
of this abundance which Christ has provided for you. And the difference
between really possessing salvation and not possessing it, lies very
largely in the difference between saying 'us' and 'me.' 'Thou art the
man' in regard to the general accusation of sin; 'Thou art the man' in
regard to the solemn law which proclaims that 'the soul that sinneth it
shall die'; and, blessed be God, 'Thou art the man' in regard to the
great promise that says, 'If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and
drink.' Christ gives you a blank cheque in His word: 'Whoso cometh unto
Me, I will in no wise cast out.' Write thine own name in, and by thy
personal faith in the Lamb of God that died for thee, thy sins shall
pass away; and all the fulness of God shall be thy very own for ever.
'If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself, and if thou scornest,
thou alone shall bear it.'




DAVID AND NATHAN

'And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan
said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin.'--2 SAMUEL xii.
13.


We ought to be very thankful that Scripture never conceals the faults
of its noblest men. High among the highest of them stands the
poet-king. Whoever, for nearly three thousand years, has wished to
express the emotions of trust in God, longing after purity, aspiration,
and rapture of devotion, has found that his words have been before him.

And this man sins; black, inexcusable, aggravated transgression. You
know the shameful story; I need not tell it over again. The Bible gives
it us in all its naked ugliness, and there are precious lessons to be
got out of it; such, for instance, as that it is not innocence that
makes men good. '_This_ is the man after God's own heart!' people
sneer. Yes! Not because saints have a peculiar morality, and atone for
adultery and murder by making or singing psalms, but because, having
fallen into foul sin, he learned to abhor it, and with many tears, with
unconquerable resolution, with deepened trust in God, set his face once
more to press toward the mark. That is a lesson worth learning.

And, again, David was not a hypocrite because he thus fell. All sin is
inconsistent with devotion; but, thank God, we cannot say how much or
how dark the sin must be which is incompatible with devotion, nor how
much evil there may still lurk and linger in a heart of which the main
set and aspiration are towards purity and God.

And, again, the worst transgressions are not the passionate outbursts
contradictory of the main direction of a life which sometimes come; but
the habitual, though they be far smaller, evils which are honey-combing
the moral nature. White ants will pick a carcase clean sooner than a
lion. And many a man who calls himself a Christian, and thinks himself
one, is in far more danger, from little pieces of chronic meanness in
his daily life, or sharp practice in his business, than ever David was
in his blackest evil.

But the main lesson of all is that great and blessed one of the
possibility of any evil and sin like this black one, being annihilated
and caused to pass away through repentance and confession. It is to
that aspect of our text that I turn, and ask you to look with me at the
three things that come out of it: David's penitence; David's pardon
consequent upon his penitence; and David's punishment, notwithstanding
his penitence and pardon.

I. First, then, the penitence.

What a divine simplicity there is in the words of our text: 'David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.' That is all. In the
original, two words are enough to revolutionise the man's whole life,
and to alter all his relations to the divine justice and the divine
Friend. 'I have sinned against the Lord.' Not an easy thing to say; and
as the story shows us, a thing that David took a long time to mount up
to.

Remember the narrative. A year has passed since his transgression. What
sort of a year has it been? One of the Psalms tells us, 'When I kept
silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long; for day
and night Thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture was turned into the
drought of summer.' There were long months of sullen silence, in which
a clear apprehension and a torturing experience of divine
disapprobation, like a serpent's fang, struck poison into his veins.
His very physical frame seems to have suffered. His heart was as dry as
the parched grass upon the steppes. That was what he got by his sin. A
moment of turbid animal delight, and long days of agony; dumb suffering
in which the sense of evil had not yet broken him down into a rain of
sweet tears, but lay, like a burning consciousness, within his heart.

And then came the prophet with his parable, so tender, so ingenious, so
powerful. And the quick flash of generous indignation, which showed how
noble the man was after all, with which he responded to the picture,
unknowing that it was a picture of his own dastardly conduct, led on to
the solemn words in which Nathan tore away the veil; and with a
threefold lever, if I may so say, overthrew the toppling structure of
his impenitence.

First of all, and most chiefly, he seeks to win him to repentance by a
picture of God's great love and goodness. 'I have done this and that
and the other thing for thee. What hast thou done for Me?' Ah, that is
the true beginning. You cannot frighten men into penitence, you may
frighten them into remorse; and the remorse may or may not lead on to
repentance. But bring to bear upon a man's heart the thought of the
infinite and perfect love of God, and that is the solvent of all his
obstinate impenitence, and melts him to cry, 'I have sinned.' And along
with that element there is the other, the plain striking away of all
disguises from the ugly fact of the sin. The prophet gives it its
hideous name, and that is one element in the process which leads to
true repentance. For so strange and subtle are the veils which we cast
over our own evils, that it comes sometimes to us with a shock and a
start when some word, that we know to connote wickedness of the deepest
dye, is applied to them. David had very likely so sophisticated his
conscience that, though he had been writhing under the sense that he
was a wrongdoer, it came to him with a kind of ugly surprise when the
naked words 'adultery' and 'murder' were pressed up against his
consciousness.

And the third element that brought him to his senses, and to his knees,
was the threatening of punishment, which is salutary when it follows
these other two, the revelation of a divine love and the unveiling of
the essential nature of my own act; but which without these is but 'the
hangman's whip' to which only inferior natures will respond. And these
three, the appeal to God's love, the revelation of his own sin, the
solemn warning of its consequences--these three brought to bear upon
David's heart, broke him down into a passion of penitence in which he
has only the two words to say, 'I have sinned against the Lord.' That
is all. That is enough.

And what is it? It is the recognition--which is essential to all real
penitence--that I have not merely broken some impersonal law, or done
something that hurts my fellows, but that I have broken the relations
which I ought to sustain to a living, loving Person, who is God. We
commit crimes against society, we commit faults against one another, we
commit sins against God, and the very notion of sin involves, as its
correlative, the thought of the divine Lawgiver.

So, dear brethren, penitence goes deeper than a recognition of demerit
and unworthiness. It is more than an acknowledgment of imperfection and
breach of morality. It is something different altogether from the
acknowledgment that I have committed a fault against my fellow. David
had done Bathsheba and Uriah, and in them his whole kingdom, foul
wrong, but, as he says in Psalm li., 'Against Thee, Thee _only,_ have I
_sinned._' His account with these is of a less grave character, but
'against Thee I sinned.'

And in like manner, this penitence contains in it the recognition of
transgression against a loving Friend and Father, which had been
brought home to his mind by all the words of the rebuking prophet, who
was a kind of incarnate conscience for him now. And it contains, still
further, confession to God against whom he had sinned. The first
impulse of a man when he dimly discerns how far he has departed from
God's law, is that which the old story represents was the first impulse
of the first sinners--to hide himself in the trees of the garden. The
second impulse is to go to Him against whom we have sinned, and who
only therefore can deal with the sin in the way of forgiveness, and to
pour it all out before Him. Once an Apostle, when he caught a partial
glimpse of his own demerit and transgression, said to the Master with a
natural impulse, 'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord!' But
Peter had a deeper sense of his own sin, and a happier knowledge of
what Christ could do for his sin, when his brother Apostle whispering
to him in the boat, 'It is the Lord,' the traitor Apostle cast himself
into the shallow water and floundered through it anyhow, to get as
close as he could to the Master's feet.

Do not go away from God because you feel that you have sinned against
Him. Where should you go but to your mother's bosom, and hide your face
there, if you have committed faults against her? Where should you go
but to God if against Him you have transgressed? Look, my brother, at
your own character and conduct; measure the deficiencies and
imperfections, the transgressions and faults; ay! perhaps with some of
you, the crimes against men and society and human laws; but see beneath
all these a deeper thought; and stifle not the words that would come to
your lips as a relief, like a surgeon's lancet struck into some foul
gathering, 'I have sinned against the Lord.'

II. And now, secondly, notice with me David's pardon consequent upon
his repentance.

Can there be anything more striking--I do not say dramatic, for the
circumstances are far too serious for terms of art--can there be
anything more in the nature of a gospel to us all than that brief
dialogue? David said unto Nathan, 'I have sinned against the Lord.' And
Nathan said unto David, 'The Lord also hath put away thy sin.'

Immediate forgiveness, that is the first lesson that I would press upon
you. Dear brethren, it is an experience which you may each repeat in
your own history at this moment. It needs but the confession in order
that the forgiveness should come. At this end of the telephone whisper
your confession, and before it has well passed your lips there comes
back the voice sweet as that of angels, 'The Lord hath forgiven thy
sin.' One word, one motion of a heart aware of, and hating, and
desiring to escape from, its evil, brings with a rush the whole fulness
of fatherly and forgiving love into any heart. And that one confession
may be the turning-point of a man's life, and may obliterate all the
sinful past, and may bring him into loving, reconciled, harmonious
relations with the Almighty Judge.

Learn, too, not only the immediacy of the answer and the simplicity of
the means, but learn how thorough and complete God's dealing with your
sin may be. The original language of my text might be rendered, 'The
Lord hath caused thy sin to pass away'; the thought being substantially
that of some impediment or veil between man and Him which, with a touch
of His hand, He dissolves as it were into vapour, and so leaves all the
sky clear for His warmth and sunshine to pour down upon the heart. We
do not need to enter upon theological language in talking about this
great gift of forgiveness. It means substantially that howsoever you
and I have piled up mountain upon mountain, Alp upon Alp, of our evils
and transgressions, all pass away and become non-existent. Another word
of the Old Testament expresses the same idea when it speaks about sin
being 'covered.' Another word expresses the same idea when it speaks
about God as 'casting' men's sins 'into the depths of the sea'--all
meaning this one thing, that they no longer stand as barriers between
the free flow of His love and our poor hearts. He takes away the sense
of guilt, touches the wounded conscience, and there is healing in His
hand. As, according to the old belief, the sovereign, by laying his
hand upon sufferers from 'the King's evil' healed them and cleansed
them, so the touch of His forgiving love takes away the sense of guilt
and heals the spirit. He removes all the impediments between His love
and us. His love can now come undisturbed. His deepest and solemnest
judgments do not need to come; and no more does there stand frowning
between us and Him the spectre of our past.

People tell us that forgiveness is impossible, 'that whatsoever a man
soweth, that must he also reap'; that law is law, and that the
consequences cannot be averted. That is all quite true if there is not
a God. It is not true if there is; and if there is no God, there is no
sin. So if there is a God, there is forgiveness.

Consequences, as I shall have to show you in a moment, may still
remain, but pardon may be ours all the same. When you forgive your
child, does it mean that you do not thrash it, or does it mean that you
take it to your heart? And when God pardons, does it mean that He
waives His laws, or does it mean that He lets us come into the whole
warmth and sunshine of His love? Will you go there?

Forgiveness was to Jews a thing difficult to apprehend. It was hard for
them to understand the harmony of it with the rigid retribution on
which their whole system of religion reposed. But you and I have come
further into the light than Nathan and David had. And I have to preach
a modification of the words of my text which is not a limitation of
them, but the unveiling of their basis and the surest confirmation of
them, when I say 'In Him'--Jesus Christ--'we have redemption through
His blood, even the forgiveness of sins.'

The New Testament teaches us that the Cross of Christ threw its power
back upon former transgressions as well as forward upon future ones;
and that in Him past ages, though they knew Him not, received
remission. Christ is the Medium of the divine forgiveness; Christ's
Cross is the ground of the divine pardon; Christ's sacrifice is the
guarantee for us that the sin which He has borne He has borne away. 'By
His stripes we are healed.' 'Wherefore, men and brethren, be it known
unto you, that through this Man is preached unto _us_ the forgiveness
of _our_ sins.'

III. Third and lastly, look at the punishment which follows--shall I
say _notwithstanding_ or _because of_?--the penitence and the pardon.

In David's life there came the immediate retribution in kind, which was
signalised as such by the divine message--the death of the child  'who
was conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity.' But beyond that, look at
David's life after his great fall. There was no more brightness in it.
His own sin and example of lust loosed the bonds of morality in his
household, and his son followed his example and improved upon it. And
from that came Absalom's murder of his brother, and from that Absalom's
exile, and from that Absalom's rebellion, and from that Absalom's
death, which nearly killed his poor old father. And for all the rest of
his days his home was troubled, and his last years ended with the
turmoil of a disputed succession before his eyes were closed, all
traceable to this one foul crime.

Joab was the torment of David's later days, and Joab's power over him
depended upon his having been the instrument of Uriah's murder; and so
the master of the king, whose bidding he had done. Ahithophel was the
brain of Absalom's conspiracy. His defection struck a sharp arrow into
David's heart--'mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted.' He
evidently hated the king with fierce hatred. He was Bathsheba's
grandfather; and we are not going wrong, I think, in tracing his
passionate hatred, and the peculiar form of insult which he counselled
Absalom to adopt, to the sense of foul wrong which had been done to his
house by David's crime.

And so all through his days this poor old king had to do what you and I
have to do--to bear the temporal results of sin. 'Be not deceived, God
is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.'

So 'of our pleasant vices the gods make whips to scourge us.' And it is
in mercy that we have to drink as we have brewed, that we have to lie
upon the beds that we have made; that in regard to outward
consequences, and in regard to our own hearts and inward history, we
are the architects of our own fortunes, and cannot escape the penalties
of our sins and of our faults. Better to have it so than be cursed with
impunity!

Some of you young men are sowing diseases in your bones that will
either make you invalids or will kill you before your time. All of us
are bearing about with us, in some measure and sense, the issues, which
are the punishments, of our evil. Let us thank Him and take up the
praise of the old psalm, 'Thou wast a God that forgivest them, though
Thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.' There is either merciful
chastisement here, that we may be parted from our sins, or there is
judgment hereafter.

O my brother! let me beseech you, do not commit the suicide of
impenitence, but go to Christ, in whom all our sins are taken away, and
lay your hands on the head of that great Sacrifice, and 'the Lord shall
cause to pass the iniquity of your sin.'




GOD'S BANISHED ONES

'God doth devise means, that His banished be not expelled from Him.' 2
SAMUEL xiv. 14.


David's good-for-nothing son Absalom had brought about the murder of
one of his brothers, and had fled the country. His father weakly loved
the brilliant blackguard, and would fain have had him back, but was
restrained by a sense of kingly duty. Joab, the astute
Commander-in-chief, a devoted friend of David, saw how the land lay,
and formed a plan to give the king an excuse for doing what he wished
to do. So he got hold of a person who is called 'a wise woman' from the
country, dressed her as a mourner, and sent her with an ingeniously
made-up story of how she was a widow with two sons, one of whom had
killed the other, and of how the relatives insisted on their right of
avenging blood, and demanded the surrender of the murderer; by which,
as she pathetically said, 'the coal' that was left her would be
'quenched.' The king's sympathy was quickly roused--as was natural in
so impulsive and poetic a nature--and he pledged his word, and finally
his oath, that the offender should be safe.

So the woman has him in a trap, having induced him to waive justice and
to absolve the guilty by an arbitrary act. Then she turns upon him with
an application to his own case, and bids him free himself from the
guilt of double measures and inconsistency by doing with his banished
son the same thing--viz. abrogating law and bringing back the offender.
In our text she urges still higher considerations--viz. those of God's
way of treating criminals against His law, of whom she says that He
spares their lives, and devises means-or, as the words might perhaps be
rendered, 'plans plannings'--by which He may bring them back. She would
imply that human power and sovereignty are then noblest and likest
God's when they remit penalties and restore wanderers.

I do not further follow the story, which ends, as we all know, with
Absalom's ill-omened return. But the wise woman's saying goes very
deep, and, in its picturesque form, may help to bring out more vividly
some truths--all-important ones--of which I wish to beg your very
earnest consideration and acceptance.

I. Note, then, who are God's banished ones.

The woman's words are one of the few glimpses which we have of the
condition of religious thought amongst the masses of Israel. Clearly
she had laid to heart the teaching which declared the great, solemn,
universal fact of sin and consequent separation from God. For the
'banished ones' of whom she speaks are no particular class of glaring
criminals, but she includes within the designation the whole human
race, or, at all events, the whole Israel to which she and David
belonged. There may have been in her words--though that is very
doubtful--a reference to the old story of Cain after the murder of his
brother. For that narrative symbolises the consequences of all
evil-doing and evil-loving, in that he was cast out from the presence
of God, and went away into a 'land of wandering,' there to hide from
the face of the Father. On the one hand, it was banishment; on the
other hand, it was flight. So had Absalom's departure been, and so is
ours.

Strip away the metaphor, dear brethren, and it just comes to this
thought, which I seek to lay upon the hearts of all my hearers now--you
cannot be blessedly and peacefully near God, unless you are far away
from sin. If you take two polished plates of metal, and lay them
together, they will adhere. If you put half a dozen tiny grains of sand
or dust between them, they will fall apart. So our sins have come
between us and our God. They have not separated God from us, blessed be
His name! for His love, and His care, and His desire to bless, His
thought, and His knowledge, and His tenderness, all come to every soul
of man. But they have rent us apart from Him, in so far as they make us
unwilling to be near Him, incapable of receiving the truest nearness
and blessedness of His presence, and sometimes desirous to hustle Him
out of our thoughts, and, if we could, out of our world, rather than to
expatiate in the calm sunlight of His presence.

That banishment is self-inflicted. God spurns away no man, but men
spurn Him, and flee from Him. Many of us know what it is to pass whole
days, and weeks, and years, as practical Atheists. God is not in all
our thoughts.

And more than that, the miserable disgrace and solitude of a soul that
is godless in the world is what many of us like. The Prodigal Son
scraped all his goods together, and thought himself freed from a very
unwelcome bondage, and a fine independent youth, when he went away into
'the far country.' It was not quite so pleasant when provisions and
clothing fell short, and the swine's trough was the only table that was
spread before him. But yet there are many of us, I fear, who are
perfectly comfortable away from God, in so far as we can get away from
Him, and who never are aware of the degradation that lies in a soul's
having lowered itself to this, that it had rather not have God
inconveniently near.

Away down in the luxurious islands of the Southern Sea you will find
degraded Englishmen who have chosen rather to cast in their lot with
savages than to have to strain and work and grow. These poor
beach-combers of the Pacific, not happy in their degradation, but
wallowing in it, are no exaggerated pictures of the condition, in
reality, of thousands of us who dwell far from God, and far therefore
from righteousness and peace.

II. Notice God's yearning over His banished ones.

The woman in our story hints at, or suggests, a parallel which, though
inadequate, is deeply true. David was Absalom's father and Absalom's
king; and the two relationships fought against each other in his heart.
The king had to think of law and justice; the father cried out for his
son. The young man's offence had neither altered his relationship nor
affected the father's heart.

All that is true, far more deeply, blessedly true, in regard to our
relation, the wandering exiles' relation, to God. For, whilst I believe
that the highest form of sonship is only realised in the hearts of men
who have been made partakers of a new life through Jesus Christ, I
believe, just as firmly and earnestly, that every man and woman on the
face of the earth, by virtue of physical life derived from God, by
virtue of a spiritual being, which, in a very real and deep sense,
still bears the image of God, and by reason of His continued love and
care over them, is a child of His. The banished son is still a son, and
is '_His_ banished one.' If there is love--wonderful as the thought is,
and heart-melting as it ought to be--there must be loss when the child
goes away. Human love would not have the same name as God's unless
there were some analogy between the two. And though we walk in dark
places, and had better acknowledge that the less we speak upon such
profound subjects the less likely we are to err, yet it seems to me
that the whole preciousness of the revelation of God in Scripture is
imperilled unless we frankly recognise this--that His love is like
ours, delights in being returned like ours, and is like ours in that it
rejoices in presence and knows a sense of loss in absence. If you think
that that is too bold a thing to say, remember who it was that taught
us that the father fell on the neck of the returning prodigal, and
kissed him; and that the rapture of his joy was the token and measure
of the reality of his regret, and that it was the father to whom the
prodigal son was 'lost.' Deep as is the mystery, let nothing, dear
brethren, rob us of the plain fact that God's love moves all around the
worst, the unworthiest, the most rebellious in the far-off land, and
'desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from
his iniquity and live.'

And it is you, _you_, whom He wants back; you whom He would fain rescue
from your aversion to good and your carelessness of Him. It is you whom
He seeks, according to the great saying of the Master, 'the Father
seeketh' for worshippers in spirit and in truth.

III. Note the formidable obstacles to the restoration of the banished.

The words 'banished' and 'expelled' in our text are in the original the
same; and the force of the whole would be better expressed if the same
English word was employed as the equivalent of both. We should then see
more clearly than the variation of rendering in our text enables us to
see, that the being 'expelled' is no further stage which God devises
means to prevent, but that what is meant is that He provides methods by
which the banished should not be banished--that is, should be restored
to Himself.

Now, note that the language of this 'wise woman,' unconsciously to
herself, confesses that the parallel that she was trying to draw did
not go on all fours; for what she was asking the king to do was simply,
by an arbitrary act, to sweep aside law and to remit penalty. She
instinctively feels that that is not what can be done by God, and so
she says that He 'devises means' by which He can restore His banished.

That is to say, forgiveness and the obliteration of the consequences of
a man's sin, and his restoration to the blessed nearness to God, which
is life, are by no means such easy and simple matters as people
sometimes suppose them to be. The whole drift of popular thinking
to-day goes in the direction of a very superficial and easy gospel,
which merely says, 'Oh, of course, of course God forgives! Is not God
Love? Is not God our Father? What more do you want than that?' Ah! you
want a great deal more than that, my friends. Let me press upon you two
or three plain considerations. There are formidable obstacles in the
way of divine forgiveness.

If there are to be any pardon and restoration at all, they must be such
as will leave untouched the sovereign majesty of God's law, and,
untampered with, the eternal gulf between good and evil. That easygoing
gospel which says, 'God will pardon, of course!' sounds very charitable
and very catholic, but at bottom it is very cruel. For it shakes the
very foundations on which the government of God must repose. God's law
is the manifestation of God's character; and that is no flexible thing
which can be bent about at the bidding of a weak good-nature. I believe
that men are right in holding that certainly God must pardon, but I
believe that they are fatally wrong in not recognising this--that the
only kind of forgiveness which is possible for Him to bestow is one in
which there shall be no tampering with the tremendous sanctions of His
awful law; and no tendency to teach that it matters little whether a
man is good or bad. The pardon, which many of us seem to think is quite
sufficient, is a pardon that is nothing more noble than good-natured
winking at transgression. And oh! if this be all that men have to lean
on, they are leaning on a broken reed. The motto on the blue cover of
the _Edinburgh Review_, for over a hundred years now, is true: 'The
judge is condemned when the guilty is acquitted.' David struck a fatal
blow at the prestige of his own rule, when he weakly let his son off
from penalty. And, if it were possible to imagine such a thing, God
Himself would strike as fatal a blow at the justice and judgment which
are the foundations of His throne, if His forgiveness was such as to be
capable of being confounded with love which was too weakly indulgent to
be righteous.

Further, if there are to be forgiveness and restoration at all, they
must be such as will turn away the heart of the pardoned man from his
evil. The very story before us shows that it is not every kind of
pardon which makes a man better. The scapegrace Absalom came back
unsoftened, without one touch of gratitude to his father in his base
heart, without the least gleam of a better nature dawning upon him, and
went flaunting about the court until his viciousness culminated in his
unnatural rebellion. That is to say, there is a forgiveness which
nourishes the seeds of the crimes that it pardons. We have only to look
into our own hearts, and we have only to look at the sort of people
round us, to be very sure that, unless the forgiveness that is granted
us from the heavens has in it an element which will avert our wills and
desires from evil, the pardon will be very soon needed again, for the
evil will very soon be done again.

If there are to be forgiveness and restoration at all, they must come
in such a fashion as that there shall be no doubt whatsoever of their
reality and power. The vague kind of trust in a doubtful mercy, about
which I have been speaking, may do all very well for people that have
never probed the depths of their own hearts. Superficial notions of our
sin, which so many of us have, are contented with superficial remedies
for it. But let a man get a glimpse of his own real self, and I think
that he will wish for something a great deal more solid to grip hold
of, than nebulous talk of the kind that I have been describing. If once
we feel ourselves to be struggling in the black flood of that awful
river, we shall want a firmer hold upon the bank than is given to us by
some rootless tree or other. We must clutch something that will stand a
pull, if we are to be drawn from the muddy waters.

People say to us, 'Oh, God will forgive, of course!' Does this world
look like a place where forgiveness is such an easy thing? Is there
anything more certain than that consequences are inevitable when deeds
have been done, and 'that whatsoever a man sows that shall he also
reap' and whatsoever he brews that shall he also drink? And is it into
a grim, stern world of retribution like this that people will come,
with their smiling, sunny gospel of a matter-of-course forgiveness,
upon very easy terms of a slight penitence?

Brethren, God has to 'devise means,' which is a strong way of saying,
in analogy to the limitations of humanity, that He cannot, by an
arbitrary act of His will, pardon a sinful man. His eternal nature
forbids it. His established law forbids it. The fabric of His universe
forbids it. The good of men forbids it. The problem is insoluble by
human thought. The love of God is like some great river that pours its
waters down its channel, and is stayed by a black dam across its
course, along which it feels for any cranny through which it may pour
itself. We could never save ourselves, but

          'He that might the vengeance best have took,
           Found out the remedy.'

IV. And so the last word that I have to say is to note the triumphant,
divine solution of these difficulties.

The work of Jesus Christ, and the work of Jesus Christ alone, meets all
the requirements. It vindicates the majesty of law, it deepens the gulf
between righteousness and sin. Where is there such a demonstration of
the awful truth that 'the wages of sin is death' as on that Cross on
which the Son of God died for us and for all 'His banished ones'? Where
is there such a demonstration of the fixedness of the divine law as in
