not attained to the likeness of John the Baptist, still more, we have not 
attained to the likeness of Christ.  What, then, was John the Baptist 
like?  What picture of him and his character can we form to ourselves in 
our own imaginations? for that is all we have to picture him by--helped--
always remember that--by the Holy Spirit of God, who helps the 
imagination, the poetic and dramatic faculty of men; just as much as He 
helps the logical and argumentative faculty to see things and men as they 
really are, by the spirit of love, which also is the spirit of true 
understanding.

How, then, shall we picture John the Baptist to ourselves?  Great 
painters, greater than the world seems likely to see again, have 
exercised their fancy upon his face, his figure, his actions.  We must 
put out of our minds, I fear, at once, many of the loveliest of them all:  
those in which Raffaelle and others have depicted the child John, in his 
camel's hair raiment, with a child's cross in his hand, worshipping the 
infant Christ.  There is also one exquisite picture, by Annibale Caracci, 
if I recollect rightly, in which the blessed babe is lying asleep, and 
the blessed Virgin signs to St John, pressing forward to adore him, not 
to awaken his sleeping Lord and God.  But such imaginations, beautiful as 
they are, and true in a heavenly and spiritual sense, which therefore is 
true eternally for you, and me, and all mankind, are not historic fact.  
For St John the Baptist said himself, "and I knew him not."

He may have been, we must almost say, he must have been, brought up with 
or near our Lord.  He may have seen in Him such a child (we must believe 
that), as he never saw before.  He knew Him at least to be a princely 
child, of David's royal line.  But he was not conscious of who and what 
He was, till the mysterious inner voice, of whom he gives only the 
darkest hints, said to him, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit 
descending, and remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the 
Holy Ghost.  And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God."  But 
what manner of man was St John the Baptist in the meantime?  Painters 
have tried their hands at drawing him, and we thank them.  Pictures, says 
St Augustine, are the books of the unlearned.  And, my friends, when 
great painters paint, they are the books of the too-learned likewise.  
They bring us back, bring us home, by one glance at a human face, a human 
figure, a human scene of action, out of our philosophies, and criticisms, 
and doctrines, which narrow our hearts, without widening our heads, to 
the deeper facts of humanity, and therefore to the deeper facts of 
theology likewise.  But what picture of St John the Baptist shall we 
choose whereby to represent him to ourselves, as the forerunner of the 
incarnate God?

The best which I can recollect is the great picture by Guido--ah, that he 
had painted always as wisely and as well--of the magnificent lad sitting 
on the rock, half clad in his camel's hair robe, his stalwart hand lifted 
up to denounce he hardly knows what, save that things are going all 
wrong, utterly wrong to him; his beautiful mouth open to preach, he 
hardly knows what, save that he has a message from God, of which he is 
half-conscious as yet--that he is a forerunner, a prophet, a foreteller 
of something and some one which is to come, and which yet is very near at 
hand.  The wild rocks are round him, the clear sky is over him, and 
nothing more.  He, the gentleman born, the clergyman born--for you must 
recollect who and what St John the Baptist was, and that he was neither 
democrat nor vulgar demagogue, nor flatterer of ignorant mobs, but a man 
of an ancestry as ancient and illustrious as it was civilised, and bound 
by long ties of duty, of patriotism, of religion, and of the temple 
worship of God:--he, the noble and the priest, has thrown off--not in 
discontent and desperation, but in hope and awe--all his family 
privileges, all that seems to make life worth having; and there aloft and 
in the mountains, alone with nature and with God, feeding on locusts and 
wild honey and whatsoever God shall send, and clothed in skins, he, like 
Elijah of old, renews not merely the habits, but the spirit and power of 
Elijah, and preaches to a generation sunk in covetousness and 
superstition, party spirit, and the rest of the seven devils which 
brought on the fall of his native land, and which will bring on the fall 
of every land on earth, preaches to them, I say--What?

The most common, let me say boldly, the most vulgar--in the good old 
sense of the word--the most vulgar morality.  He tells them that an awful 
ruin was coming unless they repented and mended.  How fearfully true his 
words were, the next fifty years proved.  The axe, he said, was laid to 
the root of the tree; and the axe was the heathen Roman, even then master 
of the land.  But God, not the Roman Caesar merely, was laying the axe.  
And He was a good God, who only wanted goodness, which He would preserve; 
not badness, which He would destroy.  Therefore men must not merely 
repent and do penance, they must bring forth fruits meet for penance; do 
right instead of doing wrong, lest they be found barren trees, and be cut 
down, and cast into that everlasting fire of God, which, thanks be to His 
Holy name, burns for ever--unquenchable by all men's politics, and 
systems, and political or other economies, to destroy out of God's 
Kingdom all that offendeth and whatsoever loveth and maketh a lie--
oppressors, quacks, cheats, hypocrites, and the rest.

The people--the farming class--came to him with "What shall we do?"  The 
young priest and nobleman, in his garment of camel's hair, has nothing 
but plain morality for them.  "He that hath two coats, let him impart to 
him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise."  The 
publicans, the renegades, who were farming the taxes of the Roman 
conquerors, and making their base profit out of their countrymen's 
slavery, came to him,--"Master, what shall we do?"  He does not tell them 
not to be publicans.  He does not tell his countrymen to rebel, though he 
must have been sorely tempted to do it.  All he says is, Make the bad and 
base arrangement as good as you can; exact no more than that which is 
appointed you.  The soldiers, poor fellows, come to him.  Whether they 
were Herod's mercenaries, or real gallant Roman soldiers, we are not 
told.  Either had unlimited power under a military despotism, in an 
anarchic and half-enslaved country; but whichever they were, he has the 
same answer to them of common morality.  You are what you are; you are 
where you are.  Do it as well as you can.  Do no violence to any man, 
neither accuse any man falsely, and be content with your wages.

Ah, wise politician, ah, clear and rational spirit, who knows and tells 
others to do the duty which lies nearest them; who sees (as old Greek 
Hesiod says), how much bigger the half is than the whole; who, in the 
hour of his country's deepest degradation, had divine courage to say, our 
deliverance lies, not in rebellion, but in doing right.  But he has 
sterner words.  Pharisees, the separatists, the religious men, who think 
themselves holier than any one else; and Sadducees, materialist men of 
the world, who sneer at the unseen, the unknown, the heroic, come to him.  
And for Pharisee and Sadducee--for the man who prides himself on 
believing more than his neighbours, and for the man who prides himself on 
believing less--he has the same answer.  Both are exclusives, inhuman, 
while they are pretending to be more than human.  He knew them well, for 
he was born and bred among them, and he forestalls our Lord's words to 
them, "O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath 
to come?"

At last his preaching of common morality is put to the highest test.  The 
king--the tyrant as we should call him--the Herod of the day, an usurper, 
neither a son of David, nor a king chosen by the people, tries to 
patronize him.  The old spirit of his forefather Aaron, of his forefather 
Phineas, the spirit of Levi, which (rightly understood), is the Spirit of 
God, flashes up in the young priestly prophet, in the old form of common 
morality.  "It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife."  We 
know the rest; how, at the request of Herodias' daughter, Herod sent and 
beheaded John in prison, and how she took his head in a charger and 
brought it to her mother.  Great painters have shown us again and again 
the last act--outwardly hideous, but really beautiful--of St John's 
heroic drama, in a picture of the lovely dancing girl with the prophet's 
head in a charger--a dreadful picture; and yet one which needed to be 
painted, for it was a terrible fact, and is still, and will be till this 
wicked world's end, a matter for pity and tears rather than for 
indignation.  The most perfect representations, certainly the most 
tragical I know of it, are those which are remarkable, not for their 
expression, but for their want of expression--the young girl in brocade 
and jewels, with the gory head in her hands, thinking of nothing out of 
those wide vacant foolish eyes, save the triumph of self-satisfied 
vanity; for the spite and revenge is not in her, but in her wicked 
mother.  She is just the very creature, who, if she had been better 
trained, and taught what John the Baptist really was, might have 
reverenced him, worshipped him, and ministered unto him.  Alas! alas! how 
do the follies of poor humanity repeat themselves in every age.  The 
butterfly has killed the lion, without after all meaning much harm.  Ah, 
that such human butterflies would take warning by the fate of Herodias' 
daughter, and see how mere vanity will lead, if indulged too long and too 
freely, to awful crime.

One knows the old stories,--how Herod, and Herodias, and the vain foolish 
girl fell into disgrace with the Emperor, and were banished into 
Provence, and died in want and misery.  One knows too the old legends, 
how Herodias' daughter reappears in South Europe--even in old German 
legends--as the witch-goddess, fair and ruinous, sweeping for ever 
through wood and wold at night with her troop of fiends, tempting the 
traveller to dance with them till he dies; a name for ever accursed 
through its own vanity rather than its own deliberate sin, from which may 
God preserve us all, men as well as women.  So two women, one wicked and 
one vain, did all they could to destroy one of the noblest human beings 
who ever walked this earth.  And what did they do?  They did not prevent 
his being the forerunner and prophet of the incarnate Son of God.  They 
did not prevent his being the master and teacher of the blessed Apostle 
St John, who was his spiritual son and heir.  They did not prevent his 
teaching all men and women, to whom God gives grace to understand him, 
that the true repentance, the true conversion, the true deliverance from 
the wrath to come, the true entrance into the kingdom of heaven, the true 
way to Christ and to God, is common morality.

And now let us bless God's holy name for all His servants departed in His 
faith and fear, and especially for His servant St John the Baptist, 
beseeching Him to give us grace, so to follow his doctrine and holy life, 
that we may truly repent after his preaching and after his example.  May 
the Lord forgive our exceeding cowardice, and help us constantly to speak 
the truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truth's sake; 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.



SERMON XXIX.  THE PRESENT RECOMPENSE



Chester Cathedral, Nave Service, Evening.  May 1872.

Proverbs xi. 31.  "Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the 
earth:  much more the wicked and the sinner."

This is the key-note of the Book of Proverbs--that men are punished or 
rewarded according to their deeds in this life; nay, it is the key-note 
of the whole Old Testament.  "The eyes of the Lord are over the 
righteous, and His ears are open unto their prayers; the countenance of 
the Lord is against them that do evil, to root out the remembrance of 
them from the earth."

But here, at the beginning of my sermon, I can fancy some one ready to 
cry--Stay! you have spoken too strongly.  That is not the key-note of the 
whole Old Testament.  There are words in it of quite a different note--
words which complain to God that the good are not rewarded, and the 
wicked are not punished:  as for instance, when the Psalmist says how the 
ungodly men of this evil world are filled with God's hid treasure, and 
how they have children at their desire, and leave the rest of their 
substance for their babes.  And again, "I was envious at the foolish, 
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.  For there are no bands in their 
death; but their strength is firm.  They are not in trouble as other men; 
neither are they plagued like other men. . . .  They set their mouth 
against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.  
Therefore his people return hither; and waters of a full cup are wrung 
out to them.  And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in 
the most High?"  And though the Psalmist says that such persons will come 
to a sudden and fearful end, yet he confesses that so long as they live 
they have prospered, while he had been punished all day long, and 
chastened every morning.  And do we not know that so it is?  Is it not 
obvious now, and has it not been notorious in every country, and in all 
times, that so it is?  Do not good men often lead lives of poverty and 
affliction?  Do not men make large fortunes, or rise to fame and power, 
by base and wicked means? and do not those same men often enough die in 
their beds, and leave children behind them, and found families, who 
prosper for generations after they are dead?  How were they recompensed 
in the earth?  Now this is one of the puzzles of life, which tries a 
man's faith in God, as it tried the psalmists and prophets in old time.  
But that the text speaks truth I do not doubt.  I believe that the 
prosperous bad man is recompensed in the earth--is punished in this life-
-often with the most terrible of all punishments--Impunity; the not being 
punished at all; which is the worst thing in this life which can happen 
to a sinner.  But I am not going to speak of that, but rather of the 
first part of the text, "The righteous shall be recompensed in the 
earth."

Now is not the answer to the puzzle this:  That God is impartial; that He 
is no respecter of persons, but causing His sun to shine on the evil and 
on the good, and His rain to fall on the just and on the unjust; and so 
rewarding every man according to his work, paying him for all work done, 
of whatever kind it may be?  Some work for this world, which we do see, 
and God gives them what they earn in this life; some work for the world 
above, which we cannot see, and God gives them what they earn in this 
life, for ever and ever likewise.  If a man wishes for treasure on earth, 
he can have it if he will, and enjoy it as long as it lasts.  If a man 
wishes for treasure in heaven, he can have it if he will, and enjoy it as 
long as it lasts.  God deals fairly with both, and pays both what they 
have earned.

Some set their hearts on this world; some want money, some want power, 
some want fame and admiration from their fellow-men, some want merely to 
amuse themselves.  Then they will have what they want if they will take 
the right way to get it.  If a man wishes to make a large fortune, and 
die rich, he will very probably succeed, if he will only follow 
diligently the laws and rules by which God has appointed that money 
should be made.  If a man longs for power and glory, and must needs be 
admired and obeyed by his fellow-men, he can have his wish, if he will go 
the right way to get what he longs for; especially in a free country like 
this, he will get most probably just as much of them as he deserves--that 
is, as much as he has talent and knowledge enough to earn.  So did the 
Pharisees in our Lord's time.  They wanted power, fame, and money as 
religious leaders, and they knew how to get them as well as any men who 
ever lived; and they got them.  Our Lord did not deny that.  They had 
their reward, He said.  They succeeded--those old Pharisees--in being 
looked up to as the masters of the Jewish mob, and in crucifying our Lord 
Himself.  They had their reward; and so may you and I.  If we want any 
earthly thing, and have knowledge of the way to get it, and have ability 
and perseverance enough, then we shall very probably get it, and much 
good it will do us when we have got it after all.  We shall have had our 
treasure upon earth and our hearts likewise; and when we come to die we 
shall leave both our treasure and our hearts behind us, and the Lord have 
mercy on our souls.

But again, there are those, thank God, who have, or are at least trying 
to get, treasure in heaven, which they may carry away with them when they 
die, and keep for ever.  And who are they?  Those who are longing and 
trying to be true and to be good; who have seen how beautiful it is to be 
true and to be good; to know God and the will of God; to love God and the 
will of God; and therefore to copy His likeness and to do His will.  
Those who long for sanctification, and who desire to be holy, even as 
their Father in heaven is holy, and perfect, even as their Father in 
heaven is perfect; and who therefore think, as St Paul bade them, of 
whatsoever things are just, true, pure, lovely, and of good report, if 
there be any true manhood, and if there be any just praise--in three 
words--who seek after whatsoever is true, beautiful, and good.  These are 
they that have treasure in heaven.  For what is really true, really 
beautiful, really good, is also really heavenly.  God alone is perfect, 
good, beautiful, and true; and heaven is heaven because it is filled with 
the glory of His goodness, His beauty, and His truth.  But wherever there 
is a soul on earth led by the Spirit of God, and filled by the Spirit of 
God with good and beautiful and true graces and inspirations, there is a 
soul which, as St Paul says, is sitting in heavenly places with Christ 
Jesus--a soul which is already in heaven though still on earth.  We 
confess it by our own words.  We speak of a heavenly character; we speak 
even of a heavenly countenance; and we speak right.  We see that that 
character, though it be still imperfect, and marred by human weaknesses, 
is already good with the goodness which comes down from heaven; and that 
that countenance, though it may be mean and plain, is already beautiful 
with the beauty which comes down from heaven.

But how are such souls recompensed in the earth?  Oh! my friends, is not 
a man recompensed in the earth whenever he can lift up his heart above 
the earth?--whenever he can lift up his heart unto the Lord, and behold 
His glory above all the earth?  Does not this earth look brighter to him 
then?  The world of man looks brighter to him, in spite of all its sins 
and sorrows, for he sees the Lord ruling it, the Lord forgiving it, the 
Lord saving it.  He sees, by the eye of faith, the Lord fulfilling His 
own promise--"where two or three are gathered together in my name, there 
am I in the midst of them"; and he takes heart and hope for the poor 
earth, and says, The earth is not deserted; mankind is not without a 
Father, a Saviour, a Teacher, a King.  Bad men and bad spirits are not 
the masters of the world; and men are not as creeping things, as the 
fishes of the sea, which have no ruler over them.  For Christ has not 
left His church.  He reigns, and will reign, till He has put all enemies 
under His feet, and cast out of His kingdom all that offend, and 
whatsoever loveth and maketh a lie; and then the heavenly treasure will 
be the only treasure; for whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are true, pure, lovely, and of good report, if there be any valour, and 
if there be any praise, those things, and they alone, will be left in the 
kingdom of Christ and of God.  Is not that man recompensed in the earth?  
Must he not rise each morning to go about his daily work with a more 
cheerful heart, saying, with Jeremiah, in like case, "Upon this I awaked, 
and beheld, and my sleep was sweet to me?"

Yes, I see in experience that the righteous man is recompensed in the 
earth, every day, and all day long.  In proportion as a man's mind is 
heavenly, just so much will he enjoy this beautiful earth, and all that 
is therein.  I believe that if a man walks with God, then he can walk 
nowhither without seeing and hearing what the ungodly and bad man will 
never see and hear, because his eyes are blinded, and his heart hardened 
from thinking of himself, his own selfish wants, his own selfish sins.  
Which, for instance, was the happier man--which the man who was the more 
recompensed in the earth this very day--the poor man who went for his 
Sunday walk into the country, thinking of little but the sins and the 
follies of the week past, and probably of the sins and the follies of the 
week to come; or the man who went with a clear conscience, and had the 
heart to thank God for the green grass, and the shining river, and the 
misty mountains sleeping far away, and notice the song of the birds, and 
the scent of the flowers, as a little child might do, and know that his 
Father in heaven had made all these?

Yes, my friends, Christ is very near us, though our eyes are holden by 
our own sins, and therefore we see Him not.  But just in proportion as a 
man walks with God, just in proportion as the eyes of his soul are opened 
by the Spirit of God, he recovers, I believe, the privilege which Adam 
lost when he fell.  He hears the Word of the Lord walking among the trees 
of the garden in the cool of the day; and instead of trying, like guilty 
Adam, to hide himself from his Maker, answers, with reverence and yet 
with joy, Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.

Nay, I would go further still, and say, Is not the righteous man 
recompensed on the earth every time he hears a strain of noble music?  To 
him who has his treasure in heaven, music speaks about that treasure 
things far too deep for words.  Music speaks to him of whatsoever is 
just, true, pure, lovely, and of good report, of whatsoever is manful and 
ennobling, of whatsoever is worthy of praise and honour.  Music, to that 
man, speaks of a divine order and a divine proportion; of a divine 
harmony, through all the discords and confusions of men; of a divine 
melody, through all the cries and groans of sin and sorrow.  What says a 
