sacrifice. By visiting _Kanya-samvedya_, with senses restrained and
regulated fare, one acquireth, O bull among men, the region of Manu, the
lord of creation. Rishis of rigid vows have said that he that giveth
away rice or maketh any gift at the _tirtha_ called _Kanya_, rendereth
such gift eternal. Arriving next at _Nischira_ celebrated over the three
worlds, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and goeth to the
region of Vishnu. O king, those that give away at the confluence of the
Nischira, ascend to the blessed region of Brahma. There in that _tirtha_
is the asylum of Vasishtha that is known over the three worlds. Bathing
there, one obtaineth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. Proceeding
next to _Devakuta_ that is resorted to by celestial Rishis, one
acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and also delivereth his
race. Then should one, O king, go to the lake of the _Muni Kausika_,
where Kusika's son, Viswamitra, obtained high success. Bathing there, a
person acquireth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. There, O hero, at
Kausika, should one reside for a month, O bull of the Bharata race! By a
month's residence there, one reapeth the merit of the horse-sacrifice.
He that resideth at the best of tirthas called _Maha-hrada_, enjoys
immunity from misfortune, and also obtains the merit of giving away gold
in abundance. Beholding next Kartikeya who dwelleth at _Virasrama_, a
man certainly reapeth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. Proceeding then
to _Agnidhara_ celebrated over the three worlds, and beholding there
after a bath the eternal and boon-giving Vishnu, that god of gods, one
obtaineth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. Proceeding next to
the Grandsire's tank near the snowcapped of mountains, and bathing in
it, a man obtains the merit of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. Falling from
the Grandsire's tank, is that world-sanctifying (stream), celebrated
over the three worlds, called _Kumara-Dhara_. Bathing there, one
regardeth himself as having all his purposes fulfilled. Fasting in that
tirtha for three days, one is even cleansed from the sin of slaying a
Brahmana. The pilgrim should next, O virtuous one, proceed to the peak
of the great goddess Gauri, famed over the three worlds. Ascending it, O
best of men, one should approach _Stana-Kunda_. By touching the waters
of _Stana-Kunda_, a person obtaineth the merit of the _Vajapeya_
sacrifice. Bathing in that _tirtha_ and worshipping the gods and Pitris,
one acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and also ascendeth to the
region of Indra. Arriving next at the well of _Tamraruna_, that is
frequented by the gods, one acquireth, O lord of men, the merit that
attaches to human sacrifice. Bathing next at the confluence of the
Kirtika with the Kausiki and the Aruna, and fasting there for three
nights a man of learning is cleansed of all his sins. Proceeding next to
the _tirtha_ called _Urvasi_, and then to _Somasrama_, a wise man by
bathing next at _Kumbhakarnasrama_ becometh adored in the world. The
ancients knew that by touching the waters of _Kokamukha_, with steady
vows and leading Brahmacharya mode of life, the memory of one's former
life is revived. Arriving next with speed to the river called _Nanda_ a
regenerate one becometh freed from all his sins and ascendeth with soul
under control to Indra's region. Proceeding next to the island called
_Rishabha_, that is destructive of cranes, and bathing in the Saraswati,
an individual blazeth forth in heaven. Proceeding next to the _tirtha_
called _Auddalaka_ frequented by _Munis_, and bathing there one is
cleansed of all his sins. Repairing next to the sacred _tirtha_ called
_Dharma_ that is visited by Brahmarshis, one acquireth the merit of the
_Vajapeya_ sacrifice and becometh respected in heaven. Proceeding next
to _Champa_ and bathing in the _Bhagirathi_ he that sojourneth to
_Dandaparna_, acquireth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Then
should one proceed to the sacred _Lalitika_ that is graced by the
presence of the virtuous. By this one acquireth the merit of the
Rajasuya sacrifice and is regarded in heaven."'"


SECTION LXXXV

"'Pulastya said, "Arriving next at the excellent _tirtha_ called
_Samvedya_ in the evening, and touching its waters, one surely obtaineth
knowledge. Created a _tirtha_ in days of yore by Rama's energy, he that
proceedeth to _Lauhitya_ obtaineth the merit of giving away gold in
abundance. Proceeding next to the river _Karatoya_, and fasting there
for three nights, a man acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Even
this is the injunction of the Creator himself. It hath been said by the
wise, O king, that if a person goeth to the spot where the Ganga
mingleth with the sea, he reapeth merit which is ten times that of the
horse-sacrifice. Crossing over to the opposite bank of the Ganga, he
that batheth there having resided for three nights is, O king, cleansed
from all his sins. One should next proceed to the _Vaitarani_ capable of
destroying every sin. Arriving next at the _tirtha_ named _Viraja_ one
shineth like the moon, and sanctifying his race rescueth it and is
himself cleansed of all his sins. He that bathes in _Viraja_ further
reapeth the merit of giving away a thousand kine besides sanctifying his
line. Residing with purity at the confluence of the _Sona_ and the
_Jyotirathi_, and offering oblations of water to the gods and the
Pitris, a man reapeth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. Touching
next the waters of the _Vansagulma_ constituting the sources of both the
Sona and the Narmada, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice.
Sojourning next to the _tirtha_ called _Rishabha_ in Kosala, O lord of
men, and fasting there for three nights one earneth the merit of the
_Vajapeya_ sacrifice, and of the gift of a thousand kine, and also
delivereth his race. Arriving at Kosala, a man should bathe in the
_tirtha_ named _Kala_. By this one surely obtaineth the merit of giving
away one and ten bulls. By bathing in _Pushpavati_ and fasting there, O
king, for three nights one sanctifieth his own race, besides earning the
merit of the gift of a thousand kine. Then, O foremost of the Bharata
race, by bathing in the _tirtha_ called _Vadarika_, one obtaineth long
life, and also goeth to heaven. Arriving next at _Champa_, and bathing
in the _Bhagirathi_, and seeing _Danda_ one earneth the merit of giving
away a thousand kine. Then should one go to the sacred _Lapetika_,
graced by the presence of the pious. By so doing one reapeth the merit
of the _Vajapeya_ sacrifice and also becometh regarded by the gods.
Proceeding next to the mountain called _Mahendra_, inhabited (of yore)
by Jamadagnya, and bathing in Rama's _tirtha_, a person acquireth the
merit of the horse-sacrifice. Here is Matanga's _tirtha_ called
_Kedara_, O son of the Kuru race! Bathing in it, O foremost of the
Kurus, a man obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Going
to the mountain _Sree_, one who toucheth the waters of the stream that
is there by worshipping there the god having the bull for his mark
obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. On the mountain Sree
dwelleth happily, the effulgent Mahadeva with the goddess, as also
Brahma with the other gods. By bathing in the lake of _Deva_, with
purity and restrained mind, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice, and also attaineth to the highest success.

"'"Proceeding next to the mountain _Rishabha_ in Pandya, worshipped by
the gods, one obtains the merit of the _Vajapeya_ sacrifice and rejoices
in heaven. One should next proceed to the river Kaveri, frequented by
Apsaras. Bathing there, O monarch, one obtaineth the merit of giving
away a thousand kine. Touching next the waters of the _tirtha_ called
_Kanya_ on the shores of the sea one is cleansed from every sin.
Proceeding next to _Gokarna_ celebrated over the three worlds, and which
is situate, O best of kings, in the midst of the deep, and is reverenced
by all the worlds, and where the gods headed by Brahma, and Rishis
endued with wealth of asceticism, and spirits and Yakshas and Pisachas,
and Kinnaras and the great Nagas, and Siddhas and Charanas and
Gandharvas, and men and Pannagas, and rivers, Seas and Mountains,
worship the lord of Uma, one should worship _Isana_, fasting there for
three nights. By this, one acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice,
and the status of _Ganapatya_. By staying there for twelve nights, one's
soul is cleansed of all sins. One should next proceed to the _tirtha_
known as _Gayatri_ celebrated over the three worlds. Staying there for
three nights, one acquireth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. A
strange phenomenon is seen to occur there in respect to Brahmanas, O
Lord of men! If a Brahmana, whether born of a Brahmani or any other
woman, reciteth the _Gayatri_ there, the recitation becomes rhythmic and
musical, while, O king, a person who is not a Brahmana cannot adequately
hymn it at all. Proceeding next to the inaccessible tank of the Brahmana
Rishi Samvarta, one acquireth personal beauty and prosperity. Repairing
next to _Vena_, he that offers oblations of water to the gods and the
Pitris, obtains a car drawn by peacocks and cranes. Going next to the
_Godavari_, ever frequented by the Siddhas, one earneth the merit of the
cow-sacrifice, and goeth to the excellent region of _Vasuki_. Bathing
next at the confluence of the _Venna_, one obtains the merit of the
_Vajapeya_ sacrifice. By a dip next at the confluence of _Varada_, one
acquireth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Arriving next at
_Brahmasthuna_, one that stayeth there for three nights acquireth the
merit of giving away a thousand kine, and also ascendeth to heaven.
Coming next to _Kusaplavana_, with subdued soul and leading a
Brahmacharya mode of life, and staying there for three nights he that
bathes in it obtains the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Bathing next at
the romantic _Deva-hrada_ that is supplied by the waters of the
Krishna-Venna, and also in the _Jatismara-hrada_, one acquireth the
memory of one's former life. It was there that the chief of the
celestials celebrated a hundred sacrifices and ascended to heaven. By a
visit only to that spot, one acquireth the merit of the _Agnishtoma_
sacrifice. Bathing next in the _Sarvadeva-hrada_, a person obtaineth the
merit of giving away a thousand kine. Proceeding next to the highly
sacred tank called _Payoshni_, that best of waters, he that offers
oblations of water to the gods and the Pitris acquires the merit of the
gift of a thousand kine. Arriving next at the sacred forest of
_Dandaka_, a person should bathe (in the waters) there. By this, O king,
one at once obtains, O Bharata, the merit of giving away a thousand
kine. Proceeding next to the asylum of _Sarabhanga_ and that of the
illustrious Suka, one acquireth immunity from misfortune, besides
sanctifying his race. Then should one proceed to _Surparaka_, where
Jamadagni's son had formerly dwelt. Bathing in that _tirtha_ of Rama,
one acquireth the merit of giving away gold in abundance. Bathing next
in the _Saptagadavara_, with the subdued sense and regulated diet, one
earneth great merit, and goeth also to the region of the celestials.
Proceeding next to _Deva-hrada_, with subdued sense and regulated diet,
a man obtaineth the merit of the _Devasatra_ sacrifice. One should
proceed next to the forest of _Tungaka_, with subdued senses and leading
a Brahmacharya mode of life. It was here that in olden days Muni
Saraswata taught the Vedas to the ascetics. When the Vedas had been lost
(in consequence of the Munis having forgotten them), Angirasa's son,
seated at ease on the upper garments of the Munis (duly spread out),
pronounced distinctly and with emphasis the syllable _Om_. And at this,
the ascetics again recollected all that they had learnt before. It was
there that the Rishis and the gods Varuna, Agni, Prajapati, Narayana
also called Hari, Mahadeva and the illustrious Grandsire of great
splendour, appointed the resplendent Bhrigu to officiate at a sacrifice.
Gratifying Agni by libations of clarified butter poured according to the
ordinance, the illustrious Bhrigu once performed the _Agnyadhana_
sacrifice for all those Rishis, after which both they and the gods went
away to their respective homes one after another. One who enters the
forest of _Tungaka_, is, O best of kings, male or female, cleansed of
every sin. There in that _tirtha_, O hero, one should reside for a
month, with subdued senses and regulated diet. By this, O king, one
ascendeth to the region of Brahma, and delivereth also his race.
Arriving next at _Medhavika_, one should offer oblations of water to the
gods and the Pitris. By this, one acquires the merit of the _Agnishtoma_
sacrifice, and also memory and intellect. There in that _tirtha_ is the
mountain known over the whole world and called _Kalanjara_. Bathing in
the celestial lake that is there, one acquires the merit of giving away
a thousand kine. He that, O king, after a bath, offereth oblations (to
the gods and the Pitris) on the Kalanjara mountain, is, without doubt,
regarded in heaven. Proceeding next, O monarch, to the river _Mandakini_
capable of destroying all sins and which is on that best of mountains
called _Chitrakuta_, he that bathes there and worships the gods and the
Pitris, obtains the merit of the horse-sacrifice and attains to an
exalted state. One should next, O virtuous one, proceed to the excellent
_tirtha_ called _Bhartristhana_, where, O king, ever dwells the
celestial generalissimo Kartikeya. By a journey only to that spot, a
person, O foremost of kings, attaineth to success. Bathing next at the
_tirtha_ called _Koti_, one earneth the merit of giving away a thousand
kine. Having walked round Koti, one should proceed next to
_Jyeshthasthana_. Beholding Mahadeva who is there, one shineth like the
moon. There, O mighty monarch, is a celebrated well, O bull of the
Bharata race! There in that well, O foremost of warriors, are the four
seas. He that bathes there, O foremost of kings, and with subdued soul
worships the gods and the Pitris, is cleansed of all his sins and
attaineth to an exalted state. Then, O mighty king, should one proceed
to the great _Sringaverapura_, where, O foremost of kings, formerly
Rama, Dasaratha's son, had crossed (the Ganga). Bathing in that
_tirtha_, one, O mighty-armed one, is cleansed of all his sins. Bathing
with subdued senses and leading a Brahmacharya mode of life, in the
Ganga, one is cleansed of every sin, and obtains also the merit of the
_Vajapeya_ sacrifice. One should next proceed to the place called
_Mayuravala_, consecrated to Mahadeva of high intelligence. Beholding
there the god, bowing down to him and walking round the spot, one
acquireth, O Bharata, the _Ganapatya_ status. Bathing in Ganga at that
_tirtha_, one is cleansed of all his sins. Then, O king, should one
proceed to _Prayaga_, whose praises have been sung by Rishis and where
dwell the gods with Brahma at their head, the directions with their
presiding deities, the Lokapalas, the Siddhas, the Pitris adored by the
worlds, the great Rishis--Sanatkumara and others, stainless
Brahmarshis--Angiras and others,--the Nagas, the Suparnas, the Siddhas,
the Snakes, the Rivers, the Seas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, and the
Lord Hari with Prajapati. There in that _tirtha_ are three fiery caverns
between which the Ganga, that foremost of _tirthas_, rolleth rapidly.
There in that region also the world-purifying daughter of the sun,
Yamuna, celebrated over the three worlds, uniteth with the Ganga. The
country between the Ganga and the Yamuna is regarded as the _mons
veneris_ of the world, and Prayaga as the foremost point of that region.
The _tirthas Prayaga, Pratisthana, Kamvala, Aswatara_ and _Bhogavati_
are the sacrificial platforms of the Creator. There in those places, O
foremost of warriors, the Vedas and the Sacrifices, in embodied forms,
and the Rishis endued with wealth of asceticism, adore Brahma, and there
the gods and rulers of territories also celebrate their sacrifices. The
learned, however, say that of all these _tirthas_, O exalted one,
Prayaga is the most sacred, in fact, the foremost of all _tirthas_ in
the three worlds. By going to that _tirtha_, by singing its praises, or
by taking a little earth from it, one is cleansed from every sin. He
that bathes in that confluence celebrated over the world, acquires all
the merits of the Rajasuya and the horse-sacrifices. This sacrificial
place is worshipped by the gods themselves. If a man giveth there ever
so little, it increaseth, O Bharata, a thousandfold. O child, let not
the texts of the Veda, nor the opinions of men dissuade thy mind from
the desire of dying at Prayaga. O son of the Kuru race, the wise say
that six hundred million and ten thousand _tirthas_ exist at Prayaga.
Bathing in the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, one obtains the merit
that attaches to the four kinds of knowledge and the merits also of
those that are truthful. There at Prayaga is the excellent _tirtha_ of
_Vasuki_ called _Bhogavati_. He that batheth in it, obtaineth the merit
of the horse-sacrifice. There also in the Ganga is the _tirtha_ famed
over the three worlds, called _Ramaprapatana_, which conferreth the
merit of ten horse-sacrifices, O son of the Kuru race! Wherever may a
person bathe in the Ganga, he earneth merit equal to that of a trip to
Kurukshetra. An exception, however, is made in favour of _Kanakhala_,
while the merit attaching to _Prayaga_ is the greatest. Having committed
a hundred sins, he that bathes in the Ganga, hath all his sins washed
off by the waters thereof, even as fuel is consumed by fire. It hath
been said that in the _Satyayuga_ all the _tirthas_ were sacred; in the
_Treta_, Pushkara alone was such; in _Dwapara_, Kurukshetra; and in the
_Kali-yuga_, the Ganga alone is sacred. In Pushkara, one should practise
austerities; in Mahalaya, one should give away; in the Malaya mountains,
one should ascend the funeral pyre; and in Bhrigutunga, one should
renounce one's body by forgoing food. Bathing in Pushkara, in
Kurukshetra, in the Ganga and in the confluence (of the Ganga and the
Yamuna), one sanctifieth seven generations of one's race up and down. He
that reciteth the name of the Ganga is purified; while he that beholdeth
her, receiveth prosperity; while he that bathes in her and drinks of her
waters sanctifieth seven generations of his race up and down. As long, O
king, as one's bones lie in contact with the waters of the Ganga, so
long doth he live regarded in heaven, even as one liveth in heaven in
consequence of the merit he earneth by pious pilgrimages to sacred
_tirthas_ and holy spots. There is no _tirtha_ that is like unto the
Ganga, there is no god like unto Kesava, and there is none superior to
Brahmanas,--this hath been said even by the Grandsire. O great king, the
region through which the Ganga flows should be regarded as a sacred
asylum, and a spot of land that is on the Ganga's banks, should be
regarded as one favourable to the attainment of ascetic success.

"'"This truthful description (of the _tirthas_) one should recite only
unto the regenerate ones, unto those that are pious, unto one's son and
friends and disciples and dependents. This narrative, without a rival,
is blessed and holy and leadeth to heaven. Holy and entertaining and
sanctifying, it is productive of merit and high worth. Destructive of
every sin, it is a mystery that the great Rishis cherish with care. By
reciting it in the midst of Brahmanas, one is cleansed of every sin, and
ascends to heaven. This description of _tirthas_ is auspicious and
heaven-giving and sacred; ever blessed as it is, it destroys one's
enemies; foremost of all accounts, it sharpens the intellect. By reading
this narrative the sonless obtains sons, the destitute obtains riches, a
person of the royal order conquereth the whole earth, the Vaisya cometh
by wealth, the Sudra obtaineth all his desires, and the Brahmana
crosseth the ocean (of the world). Purifying himself, he that listens
daily to the merits of the different _tirthas_, recollects the incidents
of many previous births and rejoices in heaven. Of the _tirthas_ that
have been recited here, some are easily accessible, while others are
difficult of access. But he that is inspired with the desire of
beholding all _tirthas_, should visit them even in imagination. Desirous
of obtaining merit, the Vasus, and the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the Maruts,
the Aswins, and the Rishis equal unto celestials, all bathed in these
_tirthas_. Do thou also, O thou of the Kuru race, observing the
ordinance as explained by me, visit, with subdued senses, these
_tirthas_, increasing thy merit, O thou of excellent vows. Men of piety
and learning are able to visit these _tirthas_, by reason of their
purified senses, their belief in Godhead, and their acquaintance with
the Vedas. He that doth not observe vows, he that hath not his soul
under control, he that is impure, he that is a thief, and he that is of
crooked mind, doth not, O Kauravya, bathe in _tirthas_. Thou art ever
observant of virtue, and art of pure character. By thy virtue, O
virtuous one, thou hast always gratified thy father and thy
grand-father, and great-grand-fathers, and the gods with Brahma at their
head, and the _Rishis_ also, O thou versed in virtue! Thou who
resemblest Vasava, thou wilt, O Bhishma, attain to the region of the
Vasus, and also eternal fame on earth!"'

"Narada continued, 'Having cheerfully spoken thus, the illustrious Rishi
Pulastya, well-pleased, bidding Bhishma farewell, disappeared there and
then. And Bhishma also, O tiger among men, well understanding the true
import of the _Shastras_, wandered over the world at the command of
Pulastya. Thus, O thou blessed one, did Bhishma end at Prayaga his
highly meritorious journey to the _tirthas_ capable of destroying all
sins. The man that ranges the earth in accordance with these
injunctions, obtains the highest fruit of a hundred horse-sacrifices and
earns salvation hereafter. Thou wilt, O son of Pritha, obtain merit
consisting of the eight attributes, even like that which Bhishma, the
foremost of the Kurus, had obtained of yore. And as thou wilt lead these
ascetics to those _tirthas_, thy merit will be much greater. Those
_tirthas_ are infested by Rakshasas, and no one, save thyself, O son of
Kuru race, can go there. Rising early he that reciteth this narrative by
the celestial Rishis on the subject of the _tirthas_, becometh free from
all sins. Those foremost of Rishis, Valmiki, and Kasyapa, and Atreya,
and Kundajathara, and Viswamitra, and Gautama, and Asita, and Devala,
and Markandeya, and Galava, and Bharadwaja, and Vasishtha, and the
_Muni_ Uddalaka, and Saunaka with his son, and Vyasa, that best of
ascetics, and Durvasas, that foremost of _Munis_, and Javali of great
austerities--all these illustrious _Rishis_ endued with wealth of
asceticism, are staying in expectation of thee. With these, O mighty
king, do thou meet by visiting these _tirthas_. And, O illustrious
monarch, a great Rishi of immeasurable energy, Lomasa by name, will come
to thee. Do thou follow him, and me, and by turns visit these _tirthas_,
O thou virtuous one! By this, thou wilt acquire great fame, like king
Mahabhisha! O tiger among kings, even as the virtuous Yayati and king
Pururavas, dost thou blaze forth with thy own virtue. Like king
Bhagiratha and the illustrious Rama, dost thou shine among kings even as
the Sun himself. And thou art, O great king, celebrated (in the world)
even as Muni or Ikshwaku, or the highly famous Puru or Vainya! And as in
days of yore the slayer of Vritra, after burning all his foes, ruled the
three worlds, his mind freed from anxiety, so wilt thou rule thy
subjects, after slaying all thy enemies. And, O thou of eyes like lotus
leaves, having conquered the earth according to the customs of thy
order, thou wilt obtain renown by thy virtue, even like
Kartaviryaryuna.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "O great king, having comforted the monarch
thus, the illustrious Rishi Narada, bidding farewell to the king,
disappeared there and then. And the virtuous Yudhishthira, reflecting
upon the subject, began to recite unto the ascetics the merit attaching
to _tirthas_!"


SECTION LXXXVI

Vaisampayana continued, "Having ascertained the opinion of his brothers,
and of the intelligent Narada, king Yudhishthira, addressing Dhaumya,
who was like unto the Grandsire himself, said, 'I have for the
acquisition of arms, sent away that tiger among men, Jishnu, whose
prowess is incapable of being baffled, and who is possessed of long arms
and immeasurable intelligence. O thou of ascetic wealth, that hero is
devoted to me, endued with ability, and well-skilled in weapons, and
like unto the exalted Vasudeva himself. I know them both, Krishna and
Arjuna, those destroyers of enemies, O Brahmana, endued with prowess,
even as the puissant Vyasa knoweth them. I know Vasudeva and Dhananjaya
to be none else than Vishnu himself, possessed of the six attributes.
And this is also what Narada knoweth, for he hath always spoken so unto
me. I also know them to be _Rishis_, Nara and Narayana. Knowing him to
possess the ability, I have sent him (on the mission). Not inferior unto
Indra and fully competent (for the task), I have sent that son of a god
to see the lord of the celestials and obtain weapons from him. Bhishma
and Drona are _Atirathas_. Kripa and the son of Drona are invincible;
these mighty warriors have been installed by Dhritarashtra's son in the
command of his army. All these are versed in the Vedas, are heroic, and
possessed of the knowledge of every weapon. Endued with great strength,
these always desire to encounter Arjuna in fight. And Karna also of the
_Suta_ caste is a mighty warrior versed in celestial weapons. In respect
of the impetus of his weapons, he is endued with the strength of the
Wind-god. Himself like a flame of fire, the arrows (proceeding from him)
constitute its tongues. The slaps of his left hand cased in leathern
fence constitute the crackling of that flame. The dust of the
battle-field is its smoke. Urged by the sons of Dhritarashtra even as
the wind urgeth the fire, Karna like unto the all-consuming fire at the
end of the _Yuga_ that is sent by Death himself, will, without doubt,
consume my troops like unto a heap of straw. Only that mighty mass of
clouds called Arjuna, aided by Krishna like unto a powerful wind, with
celestial weapon representing its fierce lightning, the white steeds,
the rows of white cranes coursing underneath and the unbearable Gandiva,
the rainbow ahead, is capable of extinguishing the blazing flame
represented by Karna by means of its arrowy showers let off with
unflagging steadiness. That conqueror of hostile cities, Vibhatsu, will,
without doubt, succeed in obtaining from Indra himself all the celestial
weapons with their fullness and life. Alone he is equal, I think, unto
them all. Otherwise it is impossible (for us) to vanquish in fight all
those foes, who have attained to eminent success in all their purposes.
We shall behold Arjuna, that repressor of foes, fully equipped with
celestial weapons, for Vibhatsu having once undertaken a task, never
droopeth under its weight. Without that hero, however, that best of men,
ourselves, with Krishna, cannot be at rest in Kamyaka. Therefore, do
thou mention some other wood that is sacred and delightful, and abounds
in food and fruits, and that is inhabited by men of pious
practices:--where we may pass some time, expecting the warlike Arjuna of
unbaffled prowess, like the _Chataka_ in expectation of gathering
clouds. Do thou tell us of some asylums open to the regenerate ones, and
lakes and streams and beautiful mountains. O Brahmana, deprived of
Arjuna, I do not like to stay in this wood of Kamyaka. We wish to go
somewhere else.'"


SECTION LXXXVII

Vaisampayana said, "Beholding the Pandavas afflicted with anxiety and
depressed in spirits, Dhaumya, who resembled Vrihaspati, spake thus,
comforting them, 'O bull of the Bharata race, O sinless one, listen to
me as I mention certain sacred asylums and regions and _tirthas_ and
mountains that are approved of by Brahmanas. O king, listen to me as I
speak, thyself with the daughter of Drupada and thy brothers, wilt, O
lord of men, be relieved from grief. And, O son of Pandu, by hearing
only of these places, thou wilt acquire merit. And by visiting them thou
wilt obtain merit a hundred times greater, O best of men! First, O king,
I will, so far as I recollect, speak of the beautiful eastern country,
much regarded, O Yudhishthira, by royal Rishis. In that direction, O
Bharata is a place called Naimisha which is regarded by the celestials.
There in that region are several sacred tirthas belonging to the gods.
There also is the sacred and beautiful Gomati which is adored by
celestial Rishis and there also is the sacrificial region of the gods
and the sacrificial stake of Surya. In that quarter also is that best of
hills called Gaya, which is sacred and much regarded by royal ascetics.
There on that hill, is the auspicious lake called Brahmasara which is
adored by celestial Rishis. It is for this that the ancients say that
one should wish for many sons, so that even one among them may visit
Gaya, celebrate the horse-sacrifice or give away a _nila_ bull, and
thereby deliver ten generations of his race up and down. There, O
monarch, is a great river, and spot called Gayasira. In Gayasira is a
banian, which is called by the Brahmanas the _Eternal_ banian, for the
food that is offered there to the Pitris becometh eternal, O exalted
one! The great river that floweth by the place is known by the name of
Phalgu, and its waters are all sacred. And, O bull among the Bharatas,
there also, in that place, is the Kausiki, whose basin abounds in
various fruit and roots, and where Viswamitra endued with wealth of
asceticism acquired Brahmanahood. Towards that direction also is the
sacred Ganga, on whose banks Bhagiratha celebrated many sacrifices with
profuse gifts (to Brahmanas). They say that in the country of Panchala,
there is a wood called Utpala, where Viswamitra of Kusika's race had
performed sacrifices with his son, and where beholding the relics of
Viswamitra's superhuman power, Rama, the son of Jamadagni, recited the
praises of his ancestry. At Kamyaka, Kusika's son had quaffed the _Soma_
juice with Indra. Then abandoning the Kshatriya order, he began to say,
_I am a Brahmana_. In that quarter, O hero is the sacred confluence of
Ganga and Yamuna which is celebrated over the world. Holy and
sin-destroying, that _tirtha_ is much regarded by the Rishis. It is
there that the soul of all things, the Grandsire, had, in olden days,
performed his sacrifice, and it is for this, O chief of the Bharata
race, that the place hath come to be called Prayaga. In this direction,
O foremost of kings, lieth the excellent asylum of Agastya, O monarch,
and the forest called Tapasa, decked by many ascetics. And there also is
the great _tirtha_ called Hiranyavinda on the Kalanjara hills, and that
best of mountains called Agastya, which is beautiful, sacred and
auspicious. In that quarter, O descendant of the Kuru race, is the
mountain called Mahendra, sacred to the illustrious Rama of the Bhrigu
race. There, O son of Kunti, the Grandsire performed sacrifices of yore.
There, O Yudhishthira, the sacred Bhagiratha entereth a lake and there
