foremost of all Persons endued with energy and superior to every body on
earth in intelligence, devoted to asceticism, he is conversant with
various weapons. No other person among the mobile and immobile creatures
of the three worlds possesseth or will ever possess such knowledge of
weapons. And there is none even amongst the gods, or _Asuras_, or men,
or _Rakshasas_, or _Gandharvas_, or _Yaksha_ chiefs, or _Kinnaras_--or
mighty _Uragas_, who is like him. Endued with great foresight and
energy, beloved by the citizens and inhabitants of the provinces, he is
the mightiest of car-warriors amongst the sons of Pandu. A performer of
sacrifices, devoted to morality, and of subdued passions, like unto a
great _Rishi_, this royal sage is celebrated over all the worlds.
Possessed of great strength and great intelligence, able and truthful,
he hath all his senses under complete control. Equal unto Indra in
wealth and Kuvera in hoarding, he is the protector of the worlds like
unto _Manu_ himself of mighty prowess. Endued with great might, he is
even such. Kind unto all creatures he is no other than the bull of the
Kuru race, king Yudhishthira the just. The achievements of this king
resemble the sun himself of blazing effulgence. And his fame hath
travelled in all directions like the rays of that luminary. And like the
rays following the risen sun of blazing effulgence, ten thousand swift
elephants followed him, O king, when he dwelt among the Kurus. And, O
king, thirty thousand cars decked in gold and drawn by the best steeds,
also used to follow him then. And full eight hundred bards adorned with
ear-rings set with shining gems, and accompanied by minstrels, recited
his praises in those days, like the _Rishis_ adorning Indra. And, O
king, the Kauravas and other lords of earth always waited upon him like
slaves, as the celestials upon Kuvera. This eminent king, resembling the
bright-rayed sun, made all lords of earth pay tribute unto him like
persons of the agricultural class. And eighty-eight thousands of
high-souled _Snatakas_ depended for their subsistence upon this king
practising excellent vows. This illustrious lord protected the aged and
the helpless, the maimed and the blind, as his sons, and he ruled over
his subjects virtuously. Steady in morality and self-control, capable of
restraining his anger, bountiful, devoted to the Brahmanas, and
truthful, this one is the son of Pandu. The prosperity and prowess of
this one afflict king Suyodhana with his followers including Karna and
Suvala's son. And, O lord of men, the virtues of this one are incapable
of being enumerated. This son of Pandu is devoted to morality and always
abstains from injury. Possessed of such attributes, doth not this bull
among kings, this son of Pandu, deserve, O monarch, to occupy a royal
seat?'"


SECTION LXXI

"Virata said, 'If this one, indeed, be the Kuru king Yudhishthira the son
of Kunti, which amongst these is his brother Arjuna, and which, the
mighty Bhima. Which of these is Nakula, and which Sahadeva and where is
the celebrated Draupadi? After their defeat at dice, the sons of Pritha
have not been heard of by any one.'

"Arjuna said, 'Even this one, O king, who is called Vallava and is thy
cook, is that Bhima of mighty arms and terrible prowess and furious
impetus. It was he who slew the furious _Rakshasas_ on the mountains of
_Gandhamadana_, and procured for Krishna celestial flowers of great
fragrance. Even he is that _Gandharva_, who slew the Kichaka of wicked
soul and it was he who killed tigers and bears and boars in the inner
apartment of thy palace. He who had been the keeper of thy horse is that
slayer of foes called Nakula, and this one is Sahadeva, the keeper of
thy kine. Both these sons of Madri are great car-warriors, possessed of
great fame and beauty of person. These two bulls of the Bharata race,
attired in handsome robes and decked in excellent ornaments, are a match
for a thousand great car-warriors. And even this lady of eyes like
lotus-petals and slender waist and sweet smiles is Drupada's daughter,
thy wife's _Sairindhri_, for whose sake, O king, the Kichakas were
slain. I am, O king, Arjuna who, it is evident, thou hast heard, is that
son of Pritha, who is Bhima's junior and the senior of the twins! We
have, O king, happily passed in thy abode the period of non-discovery,
like infants in the womb!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "After Arjuna had pointed out those heroes--the
five Pandavas, the son of Virata then spoke of Arjuna's prowess. And
Uttara once again identified the sons of Pritha. And the prince said,
'That one whose complexion is bright like that of pure gold, who is
stout like a full-grown lion, whose nose is so prominent, whose eyes are
large and expansive, and whose face is broad and of coppery hue, is the
king of the Kurus. And behold, that one whose tread is like that of an
infuriate elephant, whose complexion is like that of heated gold, whose
shoulders are broad and expanded, and whose arms are long and thick, is
Vrikodara. And he who stands by his side, that youth of darkish hue, who
is like unto a leader of a herd of elephants, whose shoulders are broad
like those of a lion, whose tread is like that of a mighty elephant, and
whose eyes are large and expansive like lotus-leaves, is Arjuna that
foremost of bowmen. All lo, close to the king, are those foremost of
men, the twins, like unto Vishnu and Indra, and who have no equals, in
the world of men, in beauty, might, and behaviour. And close by them,
behold, standeth Krishna, beautiful as gold, like unto the very
embodiment of light, possessing the complexion of the blue lotus, like
unto a celestial damsel, and resembling the living embodiment of
_Lakshmi_ herself.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then Virata's son began to describe the prowess
of Arjuna, saying, 'Even this one is he that slew the foe, like unto a
lion devastating a flock of deer. Even he ranged through crowds of
hostile cars, slaying their best of car-warriors. By him was slain a
huge, infuriate elephant by means of a single arrow. Pierced by him,
that huge beast having its flanks adorned with an armour of gold, fell
down piercing the earth with his tusks. By him have the kine been
recovered and the Kauravas vanquished in battle. My ears have been
deafened by the blare of his conch. It was by this hero of fierce deeds
that Bhishma and Drona, along with Duryodhana, were vanquished. That
achievement is his and not mine.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of his, the mighty king of
the Matsyas, considering himself guilty of having offended Yudhishthira,
said unto Uttara in reply, 'I think the time hath come for me to
propitiate the sons of Pandu. And, if thou likest, I shall bestow my
daughter Uttara upon Arjuna.'

"Uttara said, 'Worthy of our adorations and worship and respect, the
time hath come for worshipping the illustrious sons of Pandu who deserve
to be worshipped by us.'

"Virata said, 'When brought under the foe's subjection in battle, it was
Bhimasena that rescued me. My kine also have been recovered by Arjuna.
It is through the might of their arms that we have obtained victory in
battle. Such being the case, all of us, with our counsellors, shall
propitiate Yudhishthira the son of Kunti. Blessed be thou, with all thy
brothers, O bull among the sons of Pandu. If, O king, we have ever said
or done anything in ignorance to offend thee, it behoveth thee to
forgive us. The son of Pandu is virtuous.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then the high-souled Virata, delighted greatly,
approached king Yudhishthira and made an alliance with him, and offered
him his whole kingdom together with the sceptre and treasury and
metropolis. And addressing all the Pandavas, and especially Dhananjaya,
the mighty king of the Matsyas repeatedly said, 'By good luck it is that
I see you.' And having again and again embraced Yudhishthira and Bhima
and the sons of Madri, and smelt their heads, Virata, that owner of a
large army, was not satiated with gazing at them. And being highly
pleased, he said unto king Yudhishthira, 'By good luck it is that I see
you safe from woods. By good luck it is that ye have accomplished with
difficulty the period of exile, undiscovered by those wicked wights. I
make over my entire kingdom to the sons of Pritha, and what else I have.
Let the sons of Pandu accept these without the slightest hesitation. And
let Dhananjaya, called also Savyasachin, accept the hand of Uttara:
for that best of men is fit to be her lord.' Thus addressed, king
Yudhishthira the just cast a look upon Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha.
And looked at by his brother, Arjuna said unto the Matsya king, 'O
monarch, I accept thy daughter as my daughter-in-law. And alliance of
this kind between the Matsya and the Bharatas is, indeed, desirable.'"


SECTION LXXII

"Virata said, 'Why, O best among the Pandavas, dost thou not wish to
accept as wife this my daughter that I bestow upon thee?'

"Arjuna said, 'Residing in thy inner apartments, I had occasion always
to behold thy daughter, and she too, alone or in company trusted me as
her father. Well-versed in singing and dancing, I was liked and regarded
by her, and, indeed, thy daughter always regardeth me as her protector.
O king, I lived for one whole year with her though she had attained the
age of puberty. Under these circumstances, thyself or other men may not
without reason, entertain suspicions against her or me. Therefore, O
king, myself who am pure, and have my senses under control, beg to thee,
O monarch, thy daughter as my daughter-in-law. Thus do I attest her
purity. There is no difference between a daughter-in-law and a daughter,
as also between a son and son's own-self. By adopting this course,
therefore, her purity will be proved. I am afraid of slanderous and
false accusations. I accept, therefore, O king, thy daughter Uttara as
my daughter-in-law. Surpassing all in knowledge of weapons, resembling a
celestial youth in beauty, my son, the mighty-armed Abhimanyu is the
favourite nephew of Vasudeva, the wielder of the discus. He, O king, is
fit to be thy son-in-law and the husband of thy daughter.'

"Virata said, 'It behoveth the best of the Kurus, Dhananjaya, the son of
Kunti, who is so virtuous and wise, to say this. O son of Pritha, do
thou carry out what thou thinkest should be done after this. He that
hath Arjuna for the father of his son-in-law, hath all his desires
gratified.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "The monarch having said this, Yudhishthira, the
son of Kunti, gave his assent to what was thus agreed upon between the
Matsya king and Arjuna. And, O Bharata, the son of Kunti sent
invitations to Vasudeva and to all his friends and relatives, and Virata
also did the same. And then, after the expiry of the thirteenth year,
the five Pandavas took up their abode in one of Virata's towns called
_Upaplavya_, and Vibhatsu, the son of Pandu, brought over Abhimanyu and
Janardana, and also many people of the Dasarha race from the Anarta
country. And the king of Kasi, and also Saivya, being very friendly to
Yudhishthira, arrived there, each accompanied by an _Akshauhini_ of
troops. And the mighty Drupada, also with the heroic sons of Draupadi
and the unvanquished Sikhandin, and that foremost of wielder of weapons,
the invincible Dhrishtadyumna came there with another _Akshauhini_ of
troops. And all the kings that came were not only lords of _Akshauhini_,
but performers of sacrifices with gifts in profusion to Brahmanas,
conversant with the _Vedas_ endued with heroism, and ready to die in
battle. And beholding them arrived, that foremost of virtuous men, the
king of the Matsyas, adored them duly, and entertained their troops and
servants and carriers of burdens. And he was highly pleased to bestow
his daughter upon Abhimanyu. And after the kings had come there from
different parts of the country, there came Vasudeva decked in floral
garlands, and Halayudha, and Kritavarman, the son of Hridika, and
Yuyudhana, the son of Satyaki, and Anadhristi and Akrura, and Samva and
Nisatha. And these repressers of foes came there bringing with them
Abhimanyu and his mother. And Indrasena and others, having lived at
Dwaraka for one whole year, came there, bringing with them the well
adorned cars of the Pandavas. And there came also ten thousand elephants
and ten thousand cars, and hundred millions of horses and hundred
billions of foot-soldiers, and innumerable Vrishni and Andhaka and Bhoja
warriors of great energy, in the train of that tiger among the Vrishnis,
Vasudeva of great effulgence. And Krishna gave unto each of the
illustrious sons of Pandu numerous female slaves, and gems and robes.
And then the nuptial festival set in between the families of the Matsya
king and the Pandavas. And then conchs and cymbals and horns and drums
and other musical instruments appointed by the Pandavas, began to play
in the palace of Virata. And deer of various kinds and clean animals by
hundreds were slain. And wines of various kinds and intoxicating juices
of trees were profusely collected. And mimes and bards and encomiasts,
versed in singing and legendary lore, waited upon the kings, and chanted
their praises and genealogies. And the matrons of the Matsyas of
symmetrical bodies and limbs, and wearing ear-rings of pearls and gems,
headed by Sudeshna, came to the place where the marriage knot was to be
tied. And amongst those beautiful females of fair complexion and
excellent ornaments, Krishna was the foremost in beauty and fame and
splendour. And they all came there, leading forth the princess Uttara
decked in every ornament and resembling the daughter of the great Indra
himself. And then Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, accepted Virata's
daughter of faultless limbs on behalf of his son by Subhadra. And that
great king, Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, who stood there like Indra,
also accepted her as his daughter-in-law. And having accepted her, the
son of Pritha, with Janardana before him, caused the nuptial ceremonies
to be performed of the illustrious son of Subhadra. And Virata then gave
him (as dowry) seven thousand steeds endued with the speed of the wind
and two hundred elephants of the best kind and much wealth also. And
having duly poured libations of clarified butter on the blazing fire,
and paid homage unto the twice-born ones, Virata offered to the Pandavas
his kingdom, army, treasury, and his own self. And after the marriage
had taken place, Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, gave away unto the
Brahmanas all the wealth that had been brought by Krishna of unfading
glory. And he also gave away thousands of kine, and diverse kinds of
robes, and various excellent ornaments, and vehicles, and beds,
delicious viands of various kinds, and cardinal drinks of diverse
species. And the king also made gifts of land unto the Brahmanas with
due rites, and also cattle by thousands. And he also gave away thousands
of steeds and much gold and much wealth of other kinds, unto persons of
all ages. And, O bull of the Bharata race, the city of the Matsya king,
thronged with men cheerful and well-fed, shone brightly like a great
festival."

_The end of Virata Parva._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana
Vyasa Bk. 4, by Kisari Mohan Ganguli

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAHABHARATAM, BK. 4 ***

***** This file should be named 12058.txt or 12058.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/0/5/12058/

Produced by John B. Hare, Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
