
{81b}  Taylor, New Zealand, p. 143.

{82a}  Liebrecht gives a Hindoo example, Zur Volkskunde, p. 239.

{82b}  Cymmrodor, iv. pt. 2.

{82c}  Prim. Cult., i. 140.

{83a}  Primitive Manners, p. 256.

{83b}  See Meyer, Gandharven-Kentauren, Benfey, Pantsch., i. 263.

{84a}  Selected Essays, i. 411.

{84b}  Callaway, p. 63.

{84c}  Ibid., p. 119.

{87}  Primitive Culture, i. 357: 'The savage sees individual stars as
animate beings, or combines star-groups into living celestial creatures,
or limbs of them, or objects connected with them.'

{88}  This formula occurs among Bushmen and Eskimo (Bleek and Rink).

{92}  The events of the flight are recorded correctly in the Gaelic
variant 'The Battle of the Birds.'  (Campbell, Tales of the West
Highlands, vol. i. p. 25.)

{93a}  Ralston, Russian Folk Tales, 132; Kohler, Orient und Occident, ii.
107, 114.

{93b}  Ko ti ki, p. 36.

{93c}  Callaway, pp. 51, 53, 64, 145, 228.

{93d}  See also 'Petrosinella' in the Pentamerone, and 'The Mastermaid'
in Dasent's Tales from the Norse.

{93e}  Folk-Lore Journal, August 1883.

{95}  Poetae Minores Gr. ii.

{96}  Mythol. Ar., ii. 150.

{97a}  Gr. My., ii. 318.

{97b}  Sonne, Mond und Sterne, pp. 213, 229.

{99a}  This proves that the tale belongs to the pre-Christian cannibal
age.

{99b}  Turner's Samoa, p. 102.  In this tale only the names of the
daughters are translated; they mean 'white fish' and 'dark fish.'

{99c}  Folk-Lore Journal, August 1883.

{101}  Schoolcraft, Algic Researches, ii. 94-104.

{102a}  Nature, March 14, 1884.

{102b}  The earlier part of the Jason cycle is analysed in the author's
preface to Grimm's Marchen (Bell & Sons).

{104a}  Comm. Real. i. 75.

{104b}  See Early History of the Family, infra.

{105a}  The names Totem and Totemism have been in use at least since
1792, among writers on the North American tribes.  Prof. Max Muller
(Academy, Jan. 1884) says the word should be, not Totem, but Ote or Otem.
Long, an interpreter among the Indians, introduced the word Totamism in
1792.

{105b}  Christoval de Moluna (1570), p. 5.

{105c}  Cieza de Leon, p. 183.

{105d}  Idyll xv.

{107}  Sayce, Herodotos, p. 344; Herodotus, ii. 42; Wilkinson's Ancient
Egyptians (1878, ii. 475, note 2); Plutarch, De Is. et Os., 71, 72;
Athenaeus, vii. 299; Strabo, xvii. 813.

{108a}  The Mouse, according to Dalton, is still a totem among the Oraons
of Bengal.  A man of the Mouse 'motherhood,' as the totem kindred is
locally styled, may not eat mice (esteemed a delicacy), nor marry a girl
who is a Mouse.

{108b}  xiii. 604.  Casaub. 1620.

{108c}  There were Sminthiac feasts at Rhodes, Gela, Lesbos, and Crete
(De Witte, Revue Numismatique, N.S. iii. 3-11).

{109a}  Iliad, i. 39.

{109b}  AElian, H. A. xii. 5.

{110a}  The bas-relief is published in Paoli's Della Religione de'
Gentili, Naples, 1771, p. 9; also by Fabretti, Ad Cal. Oper. de Colum.
Trajan. p. 315.  Paoli's book was written after the discovery in
Neapolitan territory of a small bronze image, hieratic in character,
representing a man with a mouse on his hand.  Paoli's engraving of this
work of art, unluckily, does not enable us to determine its date or
_provenance_.  The book is a mine of mouse-lore.

{110b}  Colden, History of the Five Nations, p. 15 (1727).

{110c}  Onomast., ix. 6, segm. 84, p. 1066.

{110d}  De Witte says Pollux was mistaken here.  In the Revue
Numismatique, N.S. iii., De Witte publishes coins of Alexandria, the more
ancient Hamaxitus, in the Troad.  The Sminthian Apollo is represented
with his bow, and the mouse on his hand.  Other coins show the god with
the mouse at his foot, or show us the lyre of Apollo supported by mice.  A
bronze coin in the British Museum gives Apollo with the mouse beside his
foot.

{111a}  Spanheim, ad Fl. Joseph., vi. I, p. 312.

{111b}  Della Rel., p. 174.

{111c}  Herodotus, ii. 141.

{112a}  Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, p. 13, quoting Journal Asiatique, 1st
series, 3, 307) finds the same myth in Chinese annals.  It is not a god,
however, but the king of the rats, who appears to the distressed monarch
in his dream.  Rats then gnaw the bowstrings of his enemies.  The
invaders were Turks, the rescued prince a king of Khotan.  The king
raised a temple, and offered sacrifice--to the rats?

{112b}  Herodotos, p. 204.

{113a}  Wilkinson, iii. 294, quoting the Ritual xxxiii.: 'Thou devourest
the abominable rat of Ra, or the sun.'

{113b}  Mr. Loftie has kindly shown me a green mouse containing the
throne-name of Thothmes III.  The animals thus used as substitutes for
scarabs were also sacred, as the fish, rhinoceros, fly, all represented
in Mr. Loftie's collection.  See his Essay of Scarabs, p. 27.  It may be
admitted that, in a country where Cats were gods, the religion of the
Mouse must have been struggling and oppressed.

[Illustration: 113.jpg]

{114a}  Strabo, xiii. 604.

{114b}  Eustathius on Iliad, i. 39.

{114c}  A Strange and True Relation of the Prodigious Multitude of Mice,
1670.

{115a}  Journal of Philol., xvii. p. 96.

{115b}  Leviticus xi. 29.

{116}  Samuel i. 5, 6.

{117a}  Zool. Myth, ii. 68.

{117b}  Melusine, N.S. i.

{118a}  De Iside et Osiride, lxxvi.

{118b}  This hypothesis does not maintain that totemism prevailed in
Greece during historic times.  Though Plutarch mentions an Athenian
[Greek], the Ioxidae, which claimed descent from and revered asparagus,
it is probable that genuine totemism had died out of Greece many hundreds
of years before even Homer's time.  But this view is not inconsistent
with the existence of survivals in religion and ritual.

{119}  Rolland, Faune populaire.

{121}  The attempt is not to explain the origin of each separate name but
only of the general habit of giving animal or human names stars.

{125}  Mr. Herbert Spencer believes that the Australians were once more
civilised than at present.  But there has never been found a trace of
pottery on the Australian continent, which says little for their
civilisation in the past.

{128}  Brugsch, History of Egypt, i. 32.

{130}  Brough Smith.

{131}  Amazonian Tortoise Myths, p. 39.

{132a}  Sahagun, vii. 3.

{132b}  Grimm, D. M., Engl. transl., p. 716.

{133}  Hartt, op. cit., p. 40.

{134a}  Kaegi, Der Rig Veda, p. 217.

{134b}  Mainjo-i-Khard, 49, 22, ed. West.

{134c}  Op. cit. p. 98.

{137}  Prim. Cult., i. 357.

{140}  Lectures on Language, pp. 359, 362.

{144}  Grimm, D. M., Engl., Trans. p. 1202.

{145}  Tom Sawyer, p. 87.

{146a}  Rep. vi. 488.  Dem. 10, 6.

{146b}  Journal Anthrop. Inst., Feb. 1881.

{147a}  Gregor, Folklore of North-east Counties, p, 40.

{147b}  Wars of Jews, vii. 6, 3.

{147c}  Var. Hist., 14, 27.

{148}  Max Muller, Selected Essays, ii. 622.

{151}  Myth of Kirke, p. 80.

{152a}  Turner's Samoa.

{152b}  Josephus, loc. cit.  For this, and many other references, I am
indebted to Schwartz's Prahistorisch-anthropologische Studien.  In most
magic herbs the learned author recognises thunder and lightning--a theory
no less plausible than Mr. Brown's.

{152c}  Lib. xxviii.

{152d}  Schoolcraft.

{157a}  Talvj, Charakteristik der Volkslieder, p. 3.

{157b}  Fauriel, Chants de la Grece moderne.

{160}  Thus Scotland scarcely produced any ballads, properly speaking,
after the Reformation.  The Kirk suppressed the dances to whose motion
the ballad was sung in Scotland, as in Greece, Provence, and France.

{161}  L. Preller's Ausgewahlte Aufsatze.  Greek ideas on the origin of
Man.  It is curious that the myth of a gold, a silver, and a copper race
occurs in South America.  See Brasseur de Bourbourg's Notes on the Popol
Vuh.

{164a}  See essay on Early History of the Family.

{164b}  This constant struggle may be, and of course by one school of
comparative mythologists will be, represented as the strife between light
and darkness, the sun's rays, and the clouds of night, and so on.  M.
Castren has well pointed out that the struggle has really an historical
meaning.  Even if the myth be an elementary one, its constructors must
have been in the exogamous stage of society.

{169}  Sampo _may_ be derived from a Thibetan word, meaning 'fountain of
good,' or it may possibly be connected with the Swedish Stamp, a hand-
mill.  The talisman is made of all the quaint odds and ends that the
Fetichist treasures: swan's feathers, flocks of wool, and so on.

{170}  Sir G. W. Cox's Popular Romances of the Middle Ages, p. 19.

{171}  Fortnightly Review, 1869: 'The Worship of Plants and Animals.'

{176}  Mr. McLennan in the Fortnightly Review, February 1870.

{178}  M. Schmidt, Volksleben der Neugriechen, finds comparatively few
traces of the worship of Zeus, and these mainly in proverbial
expressions.

{183}  Preller, Ausgewahlte Aufsatze, p. 154.

{184a}  Tylor, Prim. Cult., ii. 156.  Pinkerton, vii. 357.

{184b}  Universities Mission to Central Africa, p. 217.  Prim. Cult,, ii.
156, 157.

{186}  Quoted in 'Jacob's Rod': London, n.d., a translation of La Verge
de Jacob, Lyon, 1693.

{190}  Lettres sur la Baguette, pp. 106-112.

{200}  Turner's Samoa, pp, 77, 119.

{201}  Cox, Mythol. of Aryan Races, passim.

{202a}  See examples in 'A Far-travelled Tale,' 'Cupid and Psyche,' and
'The Myth of Cronus.'

{202b}  Trubner, 1881.

{203a}  Hahn, p. 23.

{203b}  Ibid., p. 45.

{204}  Expedition, i. 166.

{205}  Herodotus, ii.

{209}  See Fetichism and the Infinite.

{211}  Sacred Books of the East, xii. 130, 131,

{218}  Lectures on Language.  Second series, p. 41.

{222}  A defence of the evidence for our knowledge of savage faiths,
practices, and ideas will be found in Primitive Culture, i. 9-11.

{223}  A third reference to Pausanias I have been unable to verify.  There
are several references to Greek fetich-stones in Theophrastus's account
of the Superstitious Man.  A number of Greek sacred stones named by
Pausanias may be worth noticing.  In Boeotia (ix. 16), the people
believed that Alcmene, mother of Heracles, was changed into a stone.  The
Thespians worshipped, under the name of Eros, an unwrought stone,
[Greek], 'their most ancient sacred object' (ix. 27).  The people of
Orchomenos 'paid extreme regard to certain stones,' said to have fallen
from heaven, 'or to certain figures made of stone that descended from the
sky' (ix. 38).  Near Chaeronea, Rhea was said to have deceived Cronus, by
offering him, in place of Zeus, a stone wrapped in swaddling bands.  This
stone, which Cronus vomited forth after having swallowed it, was seen by
Pausanias at Delphi (ix. 41).  By the roadside, near the city of the
Panopeans, lay the stones out of which Prometheus made men (x. 4).  The
stone swallowed in place of Zeus by his father lay at the exit from the
Delphian temple, and was anointed (compare the action of Jacob, Gen.
xxviii. 18) with oil every day.  The Phocians worshipped thirty squared
stones, each named after a god (vii. xxii.).  '_Among all the Greeks rude
stones were worshipped before the images of the gods_.'  Among the
Troezenians a sacred stone lay in front of the temple, whereon the
Troezenian elders sat, and purified Orestes from the murder of his
mother.  In Attica there was a conical stone worshipped as Apollo (i.
xliv.).  Near Argos was a stone called Zeus Cappotas, on which Orestes
was said to have sat down, and so recovered peace of mind.  Such are
examples of the sacred stones, the oldest worshipful objects, of Greece.

{226}  See essays on 'Apollo and the Mouse' and 'The Early History of the
Family.'

{230}  Here I may mention a case illustrating the motives of the fetich-
worshipper.  My friend, Mr. J. J. Atkinson, who has for many years
studied the manners of the people of New Caledonia, asked a native _why_
he treasured a certain fetich-stone.  The man replied that, in one of the
vigils which are practised beside the corpses of deceased friends, he saw
a lizard.  The lizard is a totem, a worshipful animal in New Caledonia.
The native put out his hand to touch it, when it disappeared and left a
stone in its place.  This stone he therefore held sacred in the highest
degree.  Here then a fetich-stone was indicated as such by a spirit in
form of a lizard.

{233a}  Much the same theory is propounded in Mr. Muller's lectures on
'The Science of Religion.'

{233b}  The idea is expressed in a well known parody of Wordsworth, about
the tree which

   'Will grow ten times as tall as me
   And live ten times as long.'

{236}  See Essay on 'The Early History of the Family.'

{241}  Bergaigne's La Religion Vedique may be consulted for Vedic
Fetichism.

{247a}  Early Law and Custom.

{247b}  Studies in Ancient History, p. 127.

{248}  Descent of Man, ii. 362.

{249}  Early Law and Custom, p. 210.

{250a}  Here I would like to point out that Mr. M'Lennan's theory was not
so hard and fast as his manner (that of a very assured believer in his
own ideas) may lead some inquirers to suppose.  Sir Henry Maine writes,
that both Mr. Morgan and Mr. M'Lennan 'seem to me to think that human
society went everywhere through the same series of changes, and Mr.
M'Lennan, at any rate, expresses himself as if all those stages could be
clearly discriminated from one another, and the close of one and the
commencement of another announced with the distinctness of the clock-bell
telling the end of the hour.'  On the other hand, I remember Mr.
M'Lennan's saying that, in his opinion, 'all manner of arrangements
probably went on simultaneously in different places.'  In Studies in
Ancient History, p. 127, he expressly guards against the tendency 'to
assume that the progress of the various races of men from savagery has
been a uniform progress: that all the stages which any of them has gone
through have been passed in their order by all.'  Still more to the point
is his remark on polyandry among the very early Greeks and other Aryans;
'it is quite consistent with my view that in all these quarters (Persia,
Sparta, Troy, Lycia, Attica, Crete, &c.) monandry, and even the patria
potestas, may have prevailed at points.'

{250b}  Early Law and Custom, p. 212.

{251}  Studies in Ancient History, pp. 140-147.

{252}  Totem is the word generally given by travellers and interpreters
for the family crests of the Red Indians.  Cf. p. 105.

{256}  Domestic Manners of the Chinese, i. 99.

{258}  Fortnightly Review, June 1, 1877.

{259}  Kamilaroi and Kurnai.  Natives call these objects their kin, 'of
one flesh' with them.

{260}  Studies, p. 11.

