the greater damnation.

* Isaiah l xi. 8. + Isaiah i. 10. &c.

The next characteristic trait here given of the good man, is the love
of mercy. _What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to
love mercy_?

There is something particularly to be observed in the language here
used--_love mercy_.--It may not be in every one's power to shew mercy;
but every man may, and every good man does _love mercy_. To "feed the
hungry and clothe the naked," are acts of mercy, but not in the power
of all men. Some are, themselves wholly dependent on the mercy of
others for their own support.

Justice often restrains and sets bounds to the exercise of mercy. The
judge may be grieved for the malefactor, and wish that he could shew
mercy to him, but find himself obliged to condemn him and suffer
justice to take its course. The debts which a person hath contracted
may require all his goods, or all his necessities do not require. In
such cases he is under obligation to shut the hand of charity, even
against the proper objects of it. We have no right to defraud some,
that we may shew mercy to others. Justice is a prior duty. We are tied
up to the discharge of it--are bound to _do justly_; whereas it is
only required that we _love mercy_. The love of mercy will dispose us
to shew mercy, where we have ability to do it without violating
justice. Yea, it will cause us to do it with pleasure, rendering us
like God, who "delights in mercy."

Acts of mercy may proceed from other principles beside the love of
mercy, but these do not answer to the divine requirement. In the view
of him who sees the heart they are not characteristic of renovation,
or a heart right with God.

The third particular here mentioned as constituting the finishing part
of the good man's character, is humility--_that he walks humbly with,
his God_--that he is sensible of his imperfection, and of his need of
mercy from God. This always makes a part of the good man's character.

The good man, while he is just to all, and while kind and benevolent,
and disposed to do good to all, as he hath opportunity and ability,
retains a sense of his defects, of his remaining depravity--that he
but too often deviates from his own principles--that in every thing he
comes short of his duty. Therefore doth he confess himself "an
unprofitable servant"--that he lays God under no obligation--yea, that
he lives on mercy--that all the good things which he receives, are
unmerited, the gifts of divine grace--that was mercy denied him,
and "the reward of his hands given to him, it would be ill with him"
--he should be undone forever.

Such is the character drawn by the Eastern soothsayer in the last
verse of our text: And it is the perfect character of a child of God,
in this state of imperfection, trial, and improvement, where he is
pressing on towards that perfection which he never attains till he
"puts off the body, and is clothed on with his house which is from
heaven." Then "the spirits of just men are made perfect," and not
till then.

"The spirits of just men"--The words are expressive, plainly implying
that none who allow themselves in injustice are the children of God
--that all the saints will eventually be found, to be "Israelites
indeed in whom there is no guile."

Thus did Balaam instruct Balak, or remind him of what God required.
Balak did not regard him. He could not be persuaded to make such
sacrifices as these. He would give all the treasures of his kingdom,
and even the fruit of his body, to procure the favor of God; but to
sacrifice his corruptions, and put on the temper of a saint!--These
were hard requirements--he must be excused! Therefore did he dismiss
his instructor, who hitherto had "spoken only the word which God had
put into his mouth"--and went away though he went sorrowing!

The same is the temper of too many others. We may do much which God
requires, may even go beyond and do much which he doth not require,
and yet be nothing in religion. There must be the spirit and temper of
true religion. There can be no commutation--Nothing will be accepted
as a substitute. _We must do justly, love mercy and walk humbly with
our God_, or have no part in him. Nothing without it will be accepted;
not even "giving the body to be burned."

People may also have a good speculative acquaintance with religion and
yet remain devoid of it. Such cases sometimes occur. Such an one
occurred in him who spake so well in our text. Balaam appears to have
had a perfect knowledge of the nature of religion; to have understood
what it was and wherein it consisted. He was sensible also of the
importance of being found at last to have lived under the influence of
it. Therefore when looking forward to the period of his dissolution
did he utter that earnest wish or prayer--"Let me die the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his." Yet he was not a good
man! his knowledge resided in his head: It never reached his heart.
"He loved the wages of unrighteousness;" lived and died under the
government of depravity and wickedness! He dared not indeed to go in
direct opposition to the letter of the divine command--dared not curse
Israel with his lips, though he longed to do it, and wished the curse
to fall upon them, while he was blessing them and forefilling their
future greatness. But he dared privately to advise Balak "to cast a
stumbling block before them"--To send among them the women of Moab,
and seduce them to uncleanness and idolatry, in order to bring the
curse of heaven upon them! His advice was followed and partly
succeeded! Not to procure a victory for Moab, but to bring the
judgments of God upon Israel; twenty four thousands of whom fell by
the pestilence which was sent to punish "their sin the matter of
Peor." And more tragical events would probably have followed, had not
Phinebas stood up and executed vengeance on some of the principal
offenders, and thus turned away the anger of the Lord from his
offending people.*

* Numbers xv. and xxi. 16.

* * * * *

Who can contemplate these things without astonishment! Who consider
the character and conduct of Balaam and not be amazed! That a man so
instructed respecting the divine character, the nature of religion,
and the consequences which will follow human conduct here, should dare
to set himself deliberately to evade the divine law, as wicked and
artful men do human laws, surprises and confounds us! Yet so it
certainly was in the case before us!

We are not left ignorant of the consequences: To him the "end of
those things was death," eternal death, for he died in rebellion
against God. And he seems to have anticipated the event; when speaking
of the divine being, the true God and Redeemer, he breaks out into
that language--"I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but
not nigh."

We can form no judgment of a person's moral state by his speculative
knowledge of God and religion. Knowledge in divine things is
important; on many accounts it is so; but it does not ensure goodness
of heart, without which we cannot be saved; we may have "all
knowledge," yet perish in our sins. So it happened to Balaam, and
probably to others beside him. "If ye know these things happy are
ye, _if ye do them_."

But we are chiefly concerned at home--to know our own state. _Do we do
justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with our God_? If these are found
upon us, happy are we; but if any of them are habitually wanting to
us, we "are yet in our sins, and the wrath of God abideth on us."

If any are disposed to inquire with Balak, _Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God_? Let them attend
to the answer given by Balaam--if we add, reliance on divine grace in
Christ no better answer can be given.

How far those of old were let into the gospel way of salvation we know
not. Balaam expressed the temper of a child of God. Whoever possessed
that temper relied on divine mercy, while endeavoring to fulfil all
righteousness. Such would refer themselves to divine grace; and surely
God would not be wanting to them. He might lead them by a way which
they understood not; "but would bring them to their desired haven,
and unto God their exceeding joy. Their labor would not be in vain in
the Lord."

Dependence on divine mercy is still our duty. Though favored with
gospel light, many things are yet hidden from us. Let us therefore do
justly love mercy, and walk humbly with God, and he will guide us
through the darkness, and bring us through to the rest which he hath
prepared for those who love and serve, and trust him here. For these
there is no commutation. Knowledge the most perfect; faith the most
miraculous; and sacrifices the most costly, would all be of no avail.
God hath shewn us what is good, and what he requires. May we hear and
obey. Amen.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XIX.

Confessing Christ an indispensable Duty.

2 Timothy ii, 12.

"--If we deny him, he also will deny us."


This is predicated of Christ; and looks forward to the day when all
mankind will stand before him as their judge.

Denying Christ is here declared to be a mortal sin. Those found guilty
of it will hear that sentence--"Depart ye cursed!" But this is to be
understood only of a persevering denial of him. Those who turn by a
timely repentance, will find mercy. This is true of every sin. But
repentance may be too late. It must antecede death, or it will be of
no avail. The day of grace terminates with life. From that period man
ceases to be a probationer, and his state is unalterably fixed.

When the offers of pardon and peace are sent abroad, some will not
hear. Who will receive, and who reject the grace of life, is to us
unknown. Our expectations are often disappointed. Some come to Christ
of whom we had little hope; others cannot be persuaded, of whom our
hopes were strong. We have only to "preach Christ; warning every man,
and teaching every man," and must leave the event.

Some live where the sound of gospel grace is not heard. "We" are made
to differ from them. "To us is the word of this salvation sent."
But this doth not secure salvation to us. We must hear and obey. "If
we neglect so great salvation, we shall not escape."

Among the indispensable requirements of the gospel, is that of
confessing Christ, Himself hath determined it. "Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in
heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before
my Father which is in heaven." *

* Matthew x. 32.

Whether the apostle had this declaration of our Savior's in his eye;
or it was revealed to him by the holy Spirit, we are not informed; but
his language in the text is express to the same purpose--_If we deny
him, he also will deny us_.

These declarations have a particular reference to the duty of
appearing openly to be Christ's disciples; especially in times of
persecution, when Christian's are exposed to sufferings and death for
his sake. Even in such times, confessing Christ is a condition of
being confessed by him. If we think this a hard requirement, and
refuse compliance, we shall have no part in him.

What are we then to understand _by confessing and denying Christ_.

Considering one of these may suffice. The text regards the latter. To
this we will therefore turn our attention.

Christ _may be denied in words; or in works; or by a perversion of the
gospel, causing it to become another gospel_. We will treat of each
briefly.

I. Christ may be denied in words.

As "with the mouth confession is made to salvation," so with the
mouth we may "deny the Lord who bought us." This is done by those who
deny that Jesus is the Christ; Thus he was denied by the Jews, among
whom he was born, and passed the days of his earthly residence.

That people had many peculiar advantages for knowing Christ, and many
special evidences of his truth. "To them were committed the oracles
of God." They had the prophets who testified of Christ. To them did he
appeal, and by them call on the Jews to try his claims to the
Messiasship--"Search the scriptures; they are they which testify of
me." That people also witnessed his miracles, "which were such as no
man could do except God were with him." They witnessed the wonders
which attended his birth--those which attended, and followed his
death--many of that nation, who had seen his crucifixion, and the
soldier's spear pierce his heart while he hung on the cross, saw him
alive after his passion; and a sufficient number, mostly, if not
wholly Jews, witnessed his ascension. Yet as a people they rejected
him, and continued in unbelief! Not only denied him before Pilate, but
notwithstanding the teaching and miracles of the apostles, persevered
in their denial of him, and perished in it! This was foretold. Christ
warned them of the event of their infidelity--"If ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall perish in your sins." But they would not hear.

By the Gentiles the gospel was more kindly received. Though devoid of
that knowledge of God and true religion which might have prepared them
for the reception of it, when they witnessed the mighty works, wrought
by those who preached it, they believed. Miracles are appeals to the
senses of mankind. And when those who had worshipped dumb idols,
beheld the wonders wrought by the ministers of Christ, they perceived
that they were sent of God, and became obedient to the faith. Then did
"many come from the east and west, and set down in the kingdom of
God; while the children of the kingdom were call out." Christianity
spread abroad. "The heathen were given to the Son for an inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession." For several
ages, most who were educated in Christian lands, and blessed with
revelation, professed to believe the gospel. But in later ages there
hath been a falling away, agreeably to the predictions which went
before, and many deny the truth of the gospel, and reject it as
fabulous.

II. Christ may be denied in works. He is so by some who in words
confess him.

Those who enroll themselves among Christ's disciples, thereby engage
to be his followers. This is enjoined and made a term of acceptance.
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his
cross and follow me--whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after
me, cannot be my disciple."

To follow Christ is to cultivate his temper, and tread in his steps.
"Christ was meek and lowly in heart." He did God's commandments. It
was "his meat to do the will of him that sent him." Those who are his
disciples have learnt of him. The same mind is in them, which is in
him. When this divine temper is wrought into the soul, it appears in
the life. Those who have his spirit, walk as he walked.

Some call themselves Christians, who do not follow Christ. But he doth
not acknowledge them to be his. He ranks them among those who deny
him, "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and done: the things which I say?
Then are ye my friends, when ye do all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you."

Christ's name is blasphemed, when those who call themselves
after him live in allowed wickedness. Sore are the wounds which he
hath received in the house of his friends. No other have been so deep
and deadly.

But those who while they call themselves Christ's friends, live like
the wicked world, discover their hypocrisy--that they are not of
Christ's flock--"His flock hear his voice and follow him." Others
may creep in unawares, but they are not of his fold. The apostle
speaks of these false professors in his epistle to Titus. * "They
profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good works reprobate." +

* Titus i. 16. + Titus i. 16.

Others deny Christ by refusing to confess him: "For the refusal is in
works to deny him."

Under the former dispensation certain duties were enjoined as tokens
of subjection to the divine Sovereign. To neglect them, was considered
as breaking the covenant of God. "And God said to Abram, thou shalt
keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee. This is my covenant
which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every
man child among you shall be circumcised. The uncircumcised man child
shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant." ++ An
attendance on the passover was enjoined under the same penalty. The
person who should neglect it, was ordered to be cut off from Israel.
Every rite and ceremony enjoined in the law was obligatory. To neglect
them was to set up the standard of rebellion against God--deny his
sovereignty--his right to give law. Those who persevered in neglect,
after warnings, were no more to be considered as his people.

++ Genesis xvii. 9-14.

Under the gospel dispensation, duties of like import are enjoined, and
under the same penalty. The tokens of belonging to Christ are
commanded. To neglect them is to reject the Savior, and forfeit
the benefits of an interest in him. Among these an open profession of
faith in Christ, is one of the chief. So it was considered by the
apostles, and primitive Christians. They dared not neglect it when it
cost every worldly comfort, and even life. Neither was it a groundless
fear which excited them to so costly a duty. Their Lord, had expressly
declared, that "whoever should be ashamed of him, before an evil and
adulterous generation, he would be ashamed of them before his Father,
and before his angels."

If we attend to our context we shall see that the apostle has here a
special reference to denying Christ in this way--"Remember that Jesus
Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the dead, according to
my gospel: Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds;
but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for
the elect's sake, that they may obtain salvation, which is in Christ
Jesus, with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying, for if we be dead
with him, we shall also live with him: If we differ, we shall also
reign with him: _If we deny him, he also will deny us_: If we believe
not; yet he abideth faithful; he cannot deny himself."

The apostle persevered though he suffered the loss of all things, and
incurred every indignity and sorrow; and even when he foresaw the loss
of life, in consequence of adhering to the Christian cause and
continuing to preach the gospel. When some who were concerned for
him, would have dissuaded him from adventuring among the enemies of
Christianity, especially as his dangers and sufferings among them,
were foretold by a prophet, he refused their counsel and adhered to
his purpose, though tenderly affected with their concern for him.
"What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? For I am ready not only
to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus," and when his last conflict approached, apprized of what was
before him, he advanced without dismay--"I am now ready to be offered
and the time of my departure is at hand."

St. Paul might have avoided all the evils which he endured because he
belonged to Christ, by only practically denying him: But he dared not
deny him. He knew the consequences which would follow the part he
