([Greek: k].) _Rodrigo_, Archbishop of Toledo, "History of the Arabs
from Christian and Arabic Sources, carried down to 1140." He died in
1245. The work is full of irrelevant references to Scripture and to
profane history. He does not even mention the Christian martyrdoms in
the ninth century.
    Sidenote: Schott, "Hisp. Illustr.," i. pp. 121-246

([Greek: l].) _Annales Bertiniani_, from the French point of view.
    Sidenote: Florez, x. 570-579.

([Greek: m].) _Johannes Vasaeus_, "Hispaniae Chronicon."
    Sidenote: Schott, i. 700 ff.

The above writers must not be regarded as of equal value. Some are
valuable, but all are meagre to the last degree; others are nearly
worthless.

Other authorities there are of a different kind--not historians, but
writers on incidental subjects, whose works throw great light on the
history of the time. Among these are--

(_a._) _Elipandus_, Bishop of Toledo; died 810. Letters--
    Sidenote: Migne, xcvi.

  to Migetius.
    Sidenote: pp. 859-867.

  to Charles the Great.
    Sidenote: pp. 867-869.

  to Albinus (Alcuin).
    Sidenote: pp. 870-882.

  to Fidelis, an abbot (783).
    Sidenote: pp. 918,919.

(_b_.) _Felix_, Bishop of Urgel; died 816. Confessio fidei (799).
    Sidenote: Migne, xcvi. pp. 882-888.

(_c_.) _Beatus_, Priest of Libana (or Astorga). Letter to Elipandus.
    Sidenote: " 894-1030.

(_d_.) _Letters of Spanish Bishops_ to Bishops of Gaul.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, ci. 1321-1331.

(_e_.) _Alcuin_. Letters--
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, c. and ci.

  Ad Felicem haereticum (793).

  Ad Elipandum.

  Ad Carolum Magnum (800), sending his work against Felix.

  Epistle XC. (800),

  Epistle CXIII. (800).

  Ad Aquilam Pontificem (800).

Books--

  Adversus Felicis haeresin ad abbates et monachos.

  Gothiae missus (libellus), vii. books.

  Adversus Elipandum, iv. books.

  Epistola ad Leidradum et Nefridium Episcopum.

  Altera ad eosdem.

(_f._) _Adrian_, Pope.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xcviii. p. 373.

  Epistola Episcopis per universam Spaniam commorantibus
  directa, maxime tamen Elipando, vel Ascarico (785).

  Ad Egilam Episcopum (in Spania) seu Johannem presbyterum
  (782).
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, p. 336.

  Ad Carolum Magnum. Epistle lxiv.

(_g_.) Letter from _Louis the Debonnaire_ to the Christians of Merida
(826).
    Sidenote: Florez, xiii. 416.

(_h_.) _Etdogius_, priest of Cordova, and bishop-designate of Toledo.
Died 859.
    Sidenote: Migne, cxv. 703-966.

  Letter to Alvar, sending his book.

  "Documentum Martyrii," dedicated to Flora and Maria, Virgins
  and Martyrs, Oct. 851.

  Letter to Alvar: another letter to the same, sending "Memorialis
  Sanctorum Liber," 3 books.

  "Liber Apologeticus Martyrum" (857).

  "De Vita et Passione SS. Virginum Florae et Mariae."

(_i_.) _Alvar_, Paulus,[1] of Cordova, and, according to his letters,
both of Jewish birth and Gothic lineage. Died, 869, according to the
Pseudo-Luitprand.
    Sidenote: Florez, "Esp. Saagr.", xi.

    [1] Robertson says Peter.

  Confessio.
    Sidenote: pp. 62-81.

  Letter to John of Seville,
    Sidenote: " 81-88.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 88-91.

  To John of Seville.
    Sidenote: " 101-129.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 129-141.

  To Speraindeo.
    Sidenote: "Florez, "Esp. Sagr.," xi. pp. 147,148.

  To Romanus, a doctor (860).
    Sidenote: " 151-156.

  To Saul of Cordova.
    Sidenote: " 164-165.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 167-171.

  To Eleazar, a transgressor.
    Sidenote: " 171-177.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 178-189.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 189-217.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 218-219.

  To Eulogius.
    Sidenote: " 291-292.

  To Eulogius.
    Sidenote: " 296-299.

  Life of Eulogius.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, x. 593 ff.

  Indiculus Luminosus, so called because "Luminasse quae sequenda
  sunt docet, et apertis indiciis hostem ecclesiae, quem
  omnis vitare Christianitas debet, ostendit."
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xi. 219-275.[1]

    [1] Ascribed by Luitprand, sec. 309, to Bonitus, Bishop of
    Toledo. Morales doubts Alvar's authorship, from there being no
    mention of Eulogius; but see sec. 19, where _praesul_ is spoken
    of.

(_k_.) _John of Seville_.

  Letter to Alvar.
    Sidenote: Florez, xi. pp. 91-101.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, 142-147.

(_l_.) _Speraindeo_, Abbot, flourished 820.

  Letter to Alvar (853).
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, 148-151.

(_m_.) _Saul_ of Cordova.

  Letter to other Bishops.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xi. pp. 156-164.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 165-167.

(_n_.) _Eleazar_, an apostate to Judaism.

  Letter to Alvar.
    Sidenote: " 177-178.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 189, 190.

  To the Same.
    Sidenote: " 217, 218.

(_o_.) _Leovigildus_, priest of Cordova, flourished 860. "De habitu
Clericorum."
    Sidenote: Migne, cxxi. p. 565.

(_p_.) _Cyprianus_, arch-priest of Cordova. "Epigrammata." Sidenote:
_Ibid._, p. 567.

(_q_.) _Samson_, priest of St Zoilus at Cordova, Abbot of the Monastery
of Pegnamellar, died 890. (See Epigram or Epitaph of Cyprianus.)
"Apologeticus Liber contra perfidos" (Jan. 1, 863).

(_r_.) _Jonas Aurelianensis_. "De cultu imaginum." An Answer to
Claudius, Bishop of Turin (842).
    Sidenote: Florez, xi. 300-516.

(_s_.) _De Translatione SS. Martyrum Georgii_ Monachi, Aurelii et
Nathaliae ex urbe Cordubae Parisios auctore _Aimoino_ monacho: from
Usuard and Odilard, monks.
    Sidenote: Migne, cxv. pp. 939 ff.

(_t_.) _Vita Johannis Abbatis Gorziensis_ (died 973), by John, Abbot of
St Arnulph.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, cxxxvii. pp. 239-310.

(_u_.) _John of Cirita_, Abbot of Tharauca, in Spain.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, clxxxviii. pp. 1661-1671.

(_v_.) _Life of St Rudesindus._
    Sidenote: Florez, xviii. 379 ff.

(_w._) _Passio St Nicholai Alsamae_ regis filii et sociorum martyrum qui
passi sunt apud Ledesmam. A purely fabulous account.
    Sidenote: Florez, xiv., 392.

(_x._) _Vita et passio B. Virginis Argenteae_ et comitum eius qui passi
sunt Cordobae, Id. Maii.
    Sidenote: Florez.

(_y._) _Life of Beatus_, by an anonymous author. Not very
trustworthy,--_e.g._, death of Elipandus placed in 798 (sec. 8):
mythical council mentioned (sec. 7).
    Sidenote: Migne, xcvi. 890-894

And the following _Charters_, etc.:--

  Of Alfonso III. to the Church of Auria, 826.
    Sidenote: Florez, xvii. 244.

  Of the same to the Church of Mindumnetum, 867.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xviii. 312.

  Of Bermudo II. (982-999) to the Church of Compostella.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xvii. 397.

Assembly of Bishops pro restauratione monasterii St Mariae de Logio a
parentibus Rudesindi instaurati, 927.
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, xvii. 326


II. SECONDARY AUTHORITIES:--

(1.) "Histoire generale d'Espagne" par _Loys de Mayerne Turguet_. Book
xvi. (1608.)
    Sidenote: Schott.

(2.) _John de Mariana_.[1] "History of Spain." Books vi.-xi., translated
from the Spanish by John Stevens. (1699.)

    [1] Dr Dunham says of his work: "It is well that it is sunk in
    oblivion. No one reads it in Spain."

(3.) _Fleury_, "History of the Church," translated from the French.
(1727.) Vol. v. Books xli. ff.

(4.) _Morales_. "Remarks on the State of the Christian Religion under
the Arabs at Cordova."
    Sidenote: Migne, cxv. p. 917.

(5.) _Froben_. "Dissertatio Historica de haeresi Elipandi et Felicis."
    Sidenote: _Ibid._, 305-336.

(6.) _Enhueber's_ "Dissertation against Walchius' view of Adoptionism."
Sidenote: _Ibid._, 338-438.

(7.) _Dunham_. "History of Spain and Portugal" (Lardner), 1832. Buckle,
"Civilization in England," p. 430, says of this history, very
extravagantly, that it is "perhaps the best history in the English
language of a foreign modern country." It certainly has the merit--no
small one in so confused a period--of being clear and succinct; but he
has a bias against the Moors.

(8.) _W.H. Prescott_. "Ferdinand and Isabella." An excellent work. The
parts chiefly bearing on the present subject are the Introduction and
chapter viii. The great drawback to the work is the want of direct
citations of authorities used.

(9.) _Hardwicke's_ "History of the Christian Church in the Middle Ages,"
1853.

(10.) The Abbe _Rohrbacher_. "Histoire Universelle de l'Eglise
Catholique." Paris, 1844. Vols. xi., xii., xiii.

(11.) _Neander_. "General History of the Christian Religion and Church"
(Bohn's Translation). Vol. v. pp. 218-233, 461-475; vol. vi. 119-132.

(12.) "Histoire d'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous la domination des
Arabes," par _M. Cardonne_. 3 vols., 1765. A history based chiefly on
Arab writers, but not very trustworthy, as Conde (Pref., p. 14) and
Murphy (notes, passim) have shown.

(13.) _Dozy_. "Histoire des Mussulmans d'Espagne jusqu' a la conquete de
l'Andalousie par les Almoravides, 711-1110." 4 vols., Leyden, 1861. An
invaluable history of the time, being both lucid and thorough.

(14.) _E.A. Freeman_. "History and Conquests of the Saracens." Six
lectures (ed. 1870). Spanish affairs are treated rather as a [Greek:
parergon] in Lecture v. An unprejudiced and accurate writer, with a
strong bias, however, against chivalry (see Lecture v., p. 182).

(15.) _Ockley_. "History of the Saracen Empire" (Reprint in
the Chandos Classics).

(16.) _Gibbon_. The parts relating to the Saracens are conveniently
reprinted in the "Chandos Classics."

(17.) _Robertson's_ "History of the Christian Church." Vol. iii.

(18.) _Milman's_ "Latin Christianity." Bk. ix.

(19.) _Stanley_. "Lectures on the Eastern Church." Lect.
viii.

(20.) _Hallam's_ "Middle Ages." Vol. iii. (Chivalry).

(21.) _Geddes_. Expulsion of the Moriscoes, in his Miscellaneous Tracts.
1730. Also Account of MSS. and Relics found at Granada in 1588; and View
of Court of Inquisition in Portugal.

(22.) _Lecky's_ "Rise and Influence of Rationalism in Europe."
2 vols.

(23.) _Buckle_. "History of Civilisation in England," chap. viii.
"Spanish Intellect from Fifth to Nineteenth Centuries." Vol. ii. pp.
425-597.

(24.) _Carlyle_. "Hero Worship. The Hero as Prophet."

(25.) _C.M. Yonge_. "Christians and Moors in Spain." "Golden Treasury"
Series. 1878. Obscure in method, and often inaccurate in facts. To give
one instance only out of many--The authoress says (p. 29), that Ali, the
son-in-law of the Prophet rebelled and died in battle. It is well known
(Gibbon, vi. 274, 276) that he did neither.

(26.) _R. Bosworth Smith._ "Mohammed and Mohammedanism." 1874. A
brilliant, but essentially unfair book, Christianity being extolled in
theory, but sneered at in practice. We are too forcibly reminded of
"Brutus is an honourable man." His own accusation of others falls upon
himself. P. 61, he says--"Most other writers have approached the subject
only to prove a thesis. Mohammed was to be either a hero or an impostor:
they have held a brief for the prosecution or the defence."

(27.) _S. Lane-Poole._ "The Moors in Spain." "Story of the Nations"
Series. 1887. A clever and popular compilation from De Gayangos'
translation of Al Makkari, Dozy, Southey's "Chronicle of the Cid," and
Washington Irving's "Granada."

(28.) _Blunt._ "Dictionary of Sects, Heresies, and Schools of Thought."
1874. The articles on Mohammedanism, the Adoptionists, and others I have
found very useful. There is, however, nothing said of the
Priscillianists (of Spain), or the Druses.

(29.) _Hughes._ "Dictionary of Islam."

(30.) _The Koran._ Sale's edition.

(31.) _Encyclopaedia Metropolitana._ Vol. xi.

(32.) _Encyclopaedia Britannica._ Article on Averroes.


III. POETRY:--

(_a._) _Lockhart's_ "Spanish Ballads." 1823. Reprint, with Introduction,
in the "Chandos Classics."

(_b._) _Southey's_ "Chronicle of the Cid." Reprinted, with Introduction,
in the "Chandos Classics." A truly admirable
