the abode of the unbelievers?

029.069
Y: And those who strive in Our (cause),- We will certainly guide them to
our Paths: For verily Allah is with those who do right.

P: As for those who strive in Us, We surely guide them to Our paths, and
lo! Allah is with the good.

S: And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the doers of
good.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 30:

                    AL-ROOM (THE ROMANS, THE BYZANTINES)
 Total Verses: 60 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

030.001
Y: A. L. M.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim.

S: Alif Lam Mim.

030.002
Y: The Roman Empire has been defeated-

P: The Romans have been defeated,

S: The Romans are vanquished,

030.003
Y: In a land close by; but they, (even) after (this) defeat of theirs,
will soon be victorious-

P: In the nearer land, and they, after their defeat will be victorious,

S: In a near land, and they, after being vanquished, shall overcome,

030.004
Y: Within a few years. With Allah is the Decision, in the past and in
the Future: on that Day shall the Believers rejoice-

P: Within ten years - Allah's is the command in the former case and in
the latter - and in that day believers will rejoice,

S: Within a few years. Allah's is the command before and after; and on
that day the believers shall rejoice,

030.005
Y: With the help of Allah. He helps whom He will, and He is Exalted in
Might, most Merciful.

P: In Allah's help to victory. He helpeth to victory whom He will. He is
the Mighty, the Merciful.

S: With the help of Allah; He helps whom He pleases; and He is the
Mighty, the Merciful;

030.006
Y: (It is) the promise of Allah. Never does Allah depart from His
promise: but most men understand not.

P: It is a promise of Allah. Allah faileth not His promise, but most of
mankind know not.

S: (This is) Allah's promise! Allah will not fail His promise, but most
people do not know.

030.007
Y: They know but the outer (things) in the life of this world: but of
the End of things they are heedless.

P: They know only some appearance of the life of the world, and are
heedless of the Hereafter.

S: They know the outward of this world's life, but of the hereafter they
are absolutely heedless.

030.008
Y: Do they not reflect in their own minds? Not but for just ends and for
a term appointed, did Allah create the heavens and the earth, and all
between them: yet are there truly many among men who deny the meeting
with their Lord (at the Resurrection)!

P: Have they not pondered upon themselves? Allah created not the heavens
and the earth, and that which is between them, save with truth and for
a destined end. But truly many of mankind are disbelievers in the
meeting with their Lord.

S: Do they not reflect within themselves: Allah did not create the
heavens and the earth and what is between them two but with truth, and
(for) an appointed term? And most surely most of the people are deniers
of the meeting of their Lord.

030.009
Y: Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the end of
those before them? They were superior to them in strength: they tilled
the soil and populated it in greater numbers than these have done:
there came to them their messengers with Clear (Signs). (Which they
rejected, to their own destruction): It was not Allah Who wronged them,
but they wronged their own souls.

P: Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the
consequence for those who were before them? They were stronger than
these in power, and they dug the earth and built upon it more than
these have built. Messengers of their own came unto them with clear
proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty). Surely Allah wronged them not, but
they did wrong themselves.

S: Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of
those before them? They were stronger than these in prowess, and dug up
the earth, and built on it in greater abundance than these have built
on it, and there came to them their messengers with clear arguments; so
it was not beseeming for Allah that He should deal with them unjustly,
but they dealt unjustly with their own souls.

030.010
Y: In the long run evil in the extreme will be the End of those who do
evil; for that they rejected the Signs of Allah, and held them up to
ridicule.

P: Then evil was the consequence to those who dealt in evil, because
they denied the revelations of Allah and made a mock of them.

S: Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they | rejected
the communications of Allah and used to mock them.

030.011
Y: It is Allah Who begins (the process of) creation; then repeats it;
then shall ye be brought back to Him.

P: Allah produceth creation, then He reproduceth it, then unto Him ye
will be returned.

S: Allah originates the creation, then reproduces it, then to Him you
shall be brought back.

030.012
Y: On the Day that the Hour will be established, the guilty will be
struck dumb with despair.

P: And in the day when the Hour riseth the unrighteous will despair.

S: And at the time when the hour shall come the guilty shall be in
despair.

030.013
Y: No intercessor will they have among their "Partners" and they will
(themselves) reject their "Partners".

P: There will be none to intercede for them of those whom they made
equal with Allah. And they will reject their partners (whom they
ascribed unto Him).

S: And they shall not have any intercessors from among their gods they
have joined with Allah, and they shall be deniers of their
associate-gods.

030.014
Y: On the Day that the Hour will be established,- that Day shall (all
men) be sorted out.

P: In the day when the Hour cometh, in that day they will be sundered.

S: And at the time when the hour shall come, at that time they shall
become separated one from the other.

030.015
Y: Then those who have believed and worked righteous deeds, shall be
made happy in a Mead of Delight.

P: As for those who believed and did good works, they will be made happy
in a Garden.

S: Then as to those who believed and did good, they shall be made happy
in a garden.

030.016
Y: And those who have rejected Faith and falsely denied our Signs and
the meeting of the Hereafter,- such shall be brought forth to
Punishment.

P: But as for those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, and
denied the meeting of the Hereafter, such will be brought to doom.

S: And as to those who disbelieved and rejected Our communications and
the meeting of the hereafter, these shall be brought over to the
chastisement.

030.017
Y: So (give) glory to Allah, when ye reach eventide and when ye rise in
the morning;

P: So glory be to Allah when ye enter the night and when ye enter the
morning -

S: Therefore glory be to Allah when you enter upon the time of the
evening and when you enter upon the time of the morning.

030.018
Y: Yea, to Him be praise, in the heavens and on earth; and in the late
afternoon and when the day begins to decline.

P: Unto Him be praise in the heavens and the earth! - and at the sun's
decline and in the noonday.

S: And to Him belongs praise in the heavens and the earth, and at
nightfall and when you are at midday.

030.019
Y: It is He Who brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the
dead from the living, and Who gives life to the earth after it is dead:
and thus shall ye be brought out (from the dead).

P: He bringeth forth the living from the dead, and He bringeth forth the
dead from the living, and He reviveth the earth after her death. And
even so will ye be brought forth.

S: He brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead
from the living, and gives life to the earth after its death, and thus
shall you be brought forth.

030.020
Y: Among His Signs in this, that He created you from dust; and then,-
behold, ye are men scattered (far and wide)!

P: And of His signs is this: He created you of dust, and behold you
human beings, ranging widely!

S: And one of His signs is that He created you from dust, then lo! you
are mortals (who) scatter.

030.021
Y: And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from among
yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put
love and mercy between your (hearts): verily in that are Signs for
those who reflect.

P: And of His signs is this: He created for you helpmeets from
yourselves that ye might find rest in them, and He ordained between you
love and mercy. Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who reflect.

S: And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
reflect.

030.022
Y: And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
the variations in your languages and your colours: verily in that are
Signs for those who know.

P: And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
the difference of your languages and colours. Lo! herein indeed are
portents for men of knowledge.

S: And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
the diversity of your tongues and colors; most surely there are signs
in this for the learned.

030.023
Y: And among His Signs is the sleep that ye take by night and by day,
and the quest that ye (make for livelihood) out of His Bounty: verily
in that are signs for those who hearken.

P: And of His signs is your slumber by night and by day, and your
seeking of His bounty. Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who
heed.

S: And one of His signs is your sleeping and your seeking of His grace
by night and (by) day; most surely there are signs in this for a people
who would hear.

030.024
Y: And among His Signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear
and of hope, and He sends down rain from the sky and with it gives life
to the earth after it is dead: verily in that are Signs for those who
are wise.

P: And of His signs is this: He showeth you the lightning for a fear and
for a hope, and sendeth down water from the sky, and thereby quickeneth
the earth after her death. Lo! herein indeed are portents for folk who
understand.

S: And one of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and
for hope, and sends down water from the clouds then gives life
therewith to the earth after its death; most surely there are signs in
this for a people who understand.

030.025
Y: And among His Signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His
Command: then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth,
behold, ye (straightway) come forth.

P: And of His signs is this: The heavens and the earth stand fast by His
command, and afterward, when He calleth you, lo! from the earth ye will
emerge.

S: And one of His signs is that the heaven and the earth subsist by His
command, then when He calls you with a (single) call from out of the
earth, lo! you come forth.

030.026
Y: To Him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on earth: all
are devoutly obedient to Him.

P: Unto Him belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. All are
obedient unto Him.

S: And His is whosoever is in the heavens and the earth; all are
obedient to Him.

030.027
Y: It is He Who begins (the process of) creation; then repeats it; and
for Him it is most easy. To Him belongs the loftiest similitude (we can
think of) in the heavens and the earth: for He is Exalted in Might,
full of Wisdom.

P: He it is Who produceth creation, then reproduceth it, and it is
easier for Him. His is the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and the
earth. He is the Mighty, the Wise.

S: And He it is Who originates the creation, then reproduces it, and it
is easy to Him; and His are the most exalted attributes in the heavens
and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

030.028
Y: He does propound to you a similitude from your own (experience): do
ye have partners among those whom your right hands possess, to share as
equals in the wealth We have bestowed on you? Do ye fear them as ye
fear each other? Thus do we explain the Signs in detail to a people
that understand.

P: He coineth for you a similitude of yourselves. Have ye, from among
those whom your right hands possess, partners in the wealth We have
bestowed upon you, equal with you in respect thereof, so that ye fear
them as ye fear each other (that ye ascribe unto Us partners out of
that which We created)? Thus We display the revelations for people who
have sense.

S: He sets forth to you a parable relating to yourselves: Have you among
those whom your right hands possess partners in what We have given you
for sustenance, so that with respect to it you are alike; you fear them
as you fear each other? Thus do We make the communications distinct for
a people who understand.

030.029
Y: Nay, the wrong-doers (merely) follow their own lusts, being devoid of
knowledge. But who will guide those whom Allah leaves astray? To them
there will be no helpers.

P: Nay, but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge.
Who is able to guide him whom Allah hath sent astray? For such there
are no helpers.

S: Nay! those who are unjust follow their low desires without any
knowledge; so who can guide him whom Allah makes err? And they shall
have no helpers.

030.030
Y: So set thou thy face steadily and truly to the Faith: (establish)
Allah's handiwork according to the pattern on which He has made
mankind: no change (let there be) in the work (wrought) by Allah: that
is the standard Religion: but most among mankind understand not.

P: So set thy purpose (O Muhammad) for religion as a man by nature
upright - the nature (framed) of Allah, in which He hath created man.
There is no altering (the laws of) Allah's creation. That is the right
religion, but most men know not -

S: Then set your face upright for religion in the right state-- the
nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no altering of
Allah's creation; that is the right religion, but most people do not
know--

030.031
Y: Turn ye back in repentance to Him, and fear Him: establish regular
prayers, and be not ye among those who join gods with Allah,-

P: Turning unto Him (only); and be careful of your duty unto Him and
establish worship, and be not of those who ascribe partners (unto Him);

S: Turning to Him, and be careful of (your duty to) Him and keep up
prayer and be not of the polytheists,

030.032
Y: Those who split up their Religion, and become (mere) Sects,- each
party rejoicing in that which is with itself!

P: Of those who split up their religion and became schismatics, each
sect exulting in its tenets.

S: Of those who divided their religion and became sects, every sect
rejoicing in what they had with them.

030.033
Y: When trouble touches men, they cry to their Lord, turning back to Him
in repentance: but when He gives them a taste of Mercy as from Himself,
behold, some of them pay part-worship to other god's besides their
Lord,-

P: And when harm toucheth men they cry unto their Lord, turning to Him
in repentance; then, when they have tasted of His mercy, behold! some
of them attribute partners to their Lord.

S: And when harm afflicts men, they call upon their Lord, turning to
Him, then when He makes them taste of mercy from Him, lo! some of them
begin to associate (others) with their Lord,

030.034
Y: (As if) to show their ingratitude for the (favours) We have bestowed
on them! Then enjoy (your brief day); but soon will ye know (your
folly).

P: So as to disbelieve in that which We have given them. (Unto such it
is said): Enjoy yourselves awhile, but ye will come to know.

S: So as to be ungrateful for what We have given them; but enjoy
yourselves (for a while), for you shall soon come to know.

030.035
Y: Or have We sent down authority to them, which points out to them the
things to which they pay part-worship?

P: Or have We revealed unto them any warrant which speaketh of that
which they associate with Him?

S: Or, have We sent down upon them an authority so that it speaks of
that which they associate with Him?

030.036
Y: When We give men a taste of Mercy, they exult thereat: and when some
evil afflicts them because of what their (own) hands have sent forth,
behold, they are in despair!

P: And when We cause mankind to taste of mercy they rejoice therein; but
if an evil thing befall them as the consequence of their own deeds, lo!
they are in despair!

S: And when We make people taste of mercy they rejoice in it, and if an
evil befall them for what their hands have already wrought, lo! they
are in despair.

030.037
Y: See they not that Allah enlarges the provision and restricts it, to
whomsoever He pleases? Verily in that are Signs for those who believe.

P: See they not that Allah enlargeth the provision for whom He will, and
straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo! herein indeed are portents for
folk who believe.

S: Do they not see that Allah makes ample provision for whom He pleases,
or straitens? Most surely there are signs in this for a people who
believe.

030.038
Y: So give what is due to kindred, the needy, and the wayfarer. That is
best for those who seek the Countenance, of Allah, and it is they who
will prosper.

P: So give to the kinsman his due, and to the needy, and to the
wayfarer. That is best for those who seek Allah's Countenance. And such
are they who are successful.

S: Then give to the near of kin his due, and to the needy and the
wayfarer; this is best for those who desire Allah's pleasure, and these
it is who are successful.

030.039
Y: That which ye lay out for increase through the property of (other)
people, will have no increase with Allah: but that which ye lay out for
charity, seeking the Countenance of Allah, (will increase): it is these
who will get a recompense multiplied.

P: That which ye give in usury in order that it may increase on (other)
people's property hath no increase with Allah; but that which ye give
in charity, seeking Allah's Countenance, hath increase manifold.

S: And whatever you lay out as usury, so that it may increase in the
property of men, it shall not increase with Allah; and whatever you
give in charity, desiring Allah's pleasure-- it is these (persons) that
shall get manifold.

030.040
Y: It is Allah Who has created you: further, He has provided for your
sustenance; then He will cause you to die; and again He will give you
life. Are there any of your (false) "Partners" who can do any single
one of these things? Glory to Him! and high is He above the partners
they attribute (to him)!

P: Allah is He Who created you and then sustained you, then causeth you
to die, then giveth life to you again. Is there any of your (so-called)
partners (of Allah) that doeth aught of that? Praised and Exalted be He
above what they associate (with Him)!

S: Allah is He Who created you, then gave you sustenance, then He causes
you to die, then brings you to life. Is there any of your
associate-gods who does aught of it? Glory be to Him, and exalted be He
above what they associate (with Him).

030.041
Y: Mischief has appeared on land and sea because of (the meed) that the
hands of men have earned, that (Allah) may give them a taste of some of
their deeds: in order that they may turn back (from Evil).

P: Corruption doth appear on land and sea because of (the evil) which
men's hands have done, that He may make them taste a part of that which
they have done, in order that they may return.

S: Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought, that He may make them taste a part of
that which they have done, so that they may return.

030.042
Y: Say: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those
before (you): Most of them worshipped others besides Allah."

P: Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see
the nature of the consequence for those who were before you! Most of
them were idolaters.

S: Say: Travel in the land, then see how was the end of those before;
most of them were polytheists.

030.043
Y: But set thou thy face to the right Religion before there come from
Allah the Day which there is no chance of averting: on that Day shall
men be divided (in two).

P: So set thy purpose resolutely for the right religion, before the
inevitable day cometh from Allah. On that day mankind will be sundered-

S: Then turn thy face straight to the right religion before there come
from Allah the day which cannot be averted; on that day they shall
become separated.

030.044
Y: Those who reject Faith will suffer from that rejection: and those who
work righteousness will spread their couch (of repose) for themselves
(in heaven):

P: Whoso disbelieveth must (then) bear the consequences of his
disbelief, while those who do right make provision for themselves -

S: Whoever disbelieves, he shall be responsible for his disbelief, and
whoever does good, they prepare (good) for their own souls,

030.045
Y: That He may reward those who believe and work righteous deeds, out of
his Bounty. For He loves not those who reject Faith.

P: That He may reward out of His bounty those who believe and do good
works. Lo! He loveth not the disbelievers (in His guidance).

S: That He may reward those who believe and do good out of His grace;
surely He does not love the unbelievers.

030.046
Y: Among His Signs is this, that He sends the Winds, as heralds of Glad
Tidings, giving you a taste of His (Grace and) Mercy,- that the ships
may sail (majestically) by His Command and that ye may seek of His
Bounty: in order that ye may be grateful.

P: And of His signs is this: He sendeth herald winds to make you taste
His mercy, and that the ships may sail at His command, and that ye may
seek his favour, and that haply ye may be thankful.

S: And one of His signs is that He sends forth the winds bearing good
news, and that He may make your taste of His mercy, and that the ships
may run by His command, and that you may seek of His grace, and that
you may be grateful.

030.047
Y: We did indeed send, before thee, messengers to their (respective)
peoples, and they came to them with Clear Signs: then, to those who
transgressed, We meted out Retribution: and it was due from Us to aid
those who believed.

P: Verily We sent before thee (Muhammad) messengers to their own folk.
Then we took vengeance upon those who were guilty (in regard to them).
To help believers is ever incumbent upon Us.

S: And certainly We sent before you messengers to their people, so they
came to them with clear arguments, then We gave the punishment to those
who were guilty; and helping the believers is ever incumbent on Us.

030.048
Y: It is Allah Who sends the Winds, and they raise the Clouds: then does
He spread them in the sky as He wills, and break them into fragments,
until thou seest rain-drops issue from the midst thereof: then when He
has made them reach such of his servants as He wills behold, they do
rejoice!-

P: Allah is He Who sendeth the winds so that they raise clouds, and
spreadeth them along the sky as pleaseth Him, and causeth them to break
and thou seest the rain downpouring from within them. And when He
maketh it to fall on whom He will of His bondmen, lo! they rejoice;

S: Allah is he Who sends forth the winds so they raise a cloud, then He
spreads it forth in the sky as He pleases, and He breaks it up so that
you see the rain coming forth from inside it; then when He causes it to
fall upon whom He pleases of His servants, lo! they are joyful,

030.049
Y: Even though, before they received (the rain) - just before this -
they were dumb with despair!

P: Though before that, even before it was sent down upon them, they were
in despair.

S: Though they were before this, before it was sent down upon them,
confounded in sure despair.

030.050
Y: Then contemplate (O man!) the memorials of Allah's Mercy!- how He
gives life to the earth after its death: verily the same will give life
to the men who are dead: for He has power over all things.

P: Look, therefore, at the prints of Allah's mercy (in creation): how He
quickeneth the earth after her death. Lo! He verily is the Quickener of
the Dead, and He is Able to do all things.

S: Look then at the signs of Allah's mercy, how He gives life to the
earth after its death, most surely He will raise the dead to life; and
He has power over all things.

030.051
Y: And if We (but) send a Wind from which they see (their tilth) turn
yellow,- behold, they become, thereafter, Ungrateful (Unbelievers)!

P: And if We sent a wind and they beheld it yellow, they verily would
still continue in their disbelief.

S: And if We send a wind and they see it to be yellow, they would after
that certainly continue to disbelieve,

030.052
Y: So verily thou canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou make
the deaf to hear the call, when they show their backs and turn away.

P: For verily thou (Muhammad) canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst
thou make the deaf to hear the call when they have turned to flee.

S: For surely you cannot, make the dead to hear and you cannot make the
deaf to hear the call, when they turn back and flee.

030.053
Y: Nor canst thou lead back the blind from their straying: only those
wilt thou make to hear, who believe in Our signs and submit (their
wills in Islam).

P: Nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error. Thou canst make
none to hear save those who believe in Our revelations so that they
surrender (unto Him).

S: Nor can you lead away the blind out of their error. You cannot make
to hear any but those who believe in Our communications so they shall
submit.

030.054
Y: It is Allah Who created you in a state of (helpless) weakness, then
gave (you) strength after weakness, then, after strength, gave (you)
weakness and a hoary head: He creates as He wills, and it is He Who has
all knowledge and power.

P: Allah is He Who shaped you out of weakness, then appointed after
weakness strength, then, after strength, appointed weakness and grey
hair. He createth what He will. He is the Knower, the Mighty.

S: Allah is He Who created you from a state of weakness then He gave
strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and hoary hair after
strength; He creates what He pleases, and He is the Knowing, the
Powerful.

030.055
Y: On the Day that the Hour (of Reckoning) will be established, the
transgressors will swear that they tarried not but an hour: thus were
they used to being deluded!

P: And on the day when the Hour riseth the guilty will vow that they did
tarry but an hour - thus were they ever deceived.

S: And at the time when the hour shall come, the guilty shall swear
(that) they did not tarry but an hour; thus are they ever turned away.

030.056
Y: But those endued with knowledge and faith will say: "Indeed ye did
tarry, within Allah's Decree, to the Day of Resurrection, and this is
the Day of Resurrection: but ye - ye were not aware!"

P: But those to whom knowledge and faith are given will say: The truth
is, ye have tarried, by Allah's decree, until the Day of Resurrection.
This is the Day of Resurrection, but ye used not to know.

S: And those who are given knowledge and faith will say: Certainly you
tarried according to the ordinance of Allah till the day of
resurrection, so this is the day of resurrection, but you did not know.

030.057
Y: So on that Day no excuse of theirs will avail the transgressors, nor
will they be invited (then) to seek grace (by repentance).

P: In that day their excuses will not profit those who did injustice,
nor will they be allowed to make amends.

S: But on that day their excuse shall not profit those who were unjust,
nor shall they be regarded with goodwill.

030.058
Y: verily We have propounded for men, in this Qur'an every kind of
Parable: But if thou bring to them any Sign, the Unbelievers are sure
to say, "Ye do nothing but talk vanities."

P: Verily We have coined for mankind in this Qur'an all kinds of
similitudes; and indeed if thou camest unto them with a miracle, those
who disbelieve would verily exclaim: Ye are but tricksters!

S: And certainly We have set forth for men every kind of example in this
Quran; and if you should bring them a communication, those who
disbelieve would certainly say: You are naught but false claimants.

030.059
Y: Thus does Allah seal up the hearts of those who understand not.

P: Thus doth Allah seal the hearts of those who know not.

S: Thus does Allah set a seal on the hearts of those who do not know.

030.060
Y: So patiently persevere: for verily the promise of Allah is true: nor
let those shake thy firmness, who have (themselves) no certainty of
faith.

P: So have patience (O Muhammad)! Allah's promise is the very truth, and
let not those who have no certainty make thee impatient.

S: Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true and let not
those who have no certainty hold you in light estimation.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 31:

                              LUQMAN (LUQMAN)
 Total Verses: 34 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

031.001
Y: A. L. M.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim.

S: Alif Lam Mim.

031.002
Y: These are Verses of the Wise Book,-

P: These are revelations of the wise Scripture,

S: These are verses of the Book of Wisdom

031.003
Y: A Guide and a Mercy to the Doers of Good,-

P: A guidance and a mercy for the good,

S: A guidance and a mercy for the doers of goodness,

031.004
Y: Those who establish regular Prayer, and give regular Charity, and
have (in their hearts) the assurance of the Hereafter.

P: Those who establish worship and pay the poor-due and have sure faith
in the Hereafter.

S: Those who keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and they are certain
of the hereafter.

031.005
Y: These are on (true) guidance from their Lord: and these are the ones
who will prosper.

P: Such have guidance from their Lord. Such are the successful.

S: These are on a guidance from their Lord, and these are they who are
successful:

031.006
Y: But there are, among men, those who purchase idle tales, without
knowledge (or meaning), to mislead (men) from the Path of Allah and
throw ridicule (on the Path): for such there will be a Humiliating
Penalty.

P: And of mankind is he who payeth for mere pastime of discourse, that
he may mislead from Allah's way without knowledge, and maketh it the
butt of mockery. For such there is a shameful doom.

S: And of men is he who takes instead frivolous discourse to lead astray
from Allah's path without knowledge, and to take it for a mockery;
these shall have an abasing chastisement.

031.007
Y: When Our Signs are rehearsed to such a one, he turns away in
arrogance, as if he heard them not, as if there were deafness in both
his ears: announce to him a grievous Penalty.

P: And when Our revelations are recited unto him he turneth away in
pride as if he heard them not, as if there were a deafness in his ears.
So give him tidings of a painful doom.

S: And when Our communications are recited to him, he turns back
proudly, as if he had not heard them, as though in his ears were a
heaviness, therefore announce to him a painful chastisement.

031.008
Y: For those who believe and work righteous deeds, there will be Gardens
of Bliss,-

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works, for them are the gardens of
delight,

S: (As for) those who believe and do good, they shall surely have
gardens of bliss,

031.009
Y: To dwell therein. The promise of Allah is true: and He is Exalted in
Power, Wise.

P: Wherein they will abide. It is a promise of Allah in truth. He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

S: Abiding in them; the promise of Allah; (a) true (promise), and He is
the Mighty, the Wise.

031.010
Y: He created the heavens without any pillars that ye can see; He set on
the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with you; and
He scattered through it beasts of all kinds. We send down rain from the
sky, and produce on the earth every kind of noble creature, in pairs.

P: He hath created the heavens without supports that ye can see, and
hath cast into the earth firm hills, so that it quake not with you; and
He hath dispersed therein all kinds of beasts. And We send down water
from the sky and We cause (plants) of every goodly kind to grow
therein.

S: He created the heavens without pillars as you see them, and put
mountains upon the earth lest it might convulse with you, and He spread
in it animals of every kind; and We sent down water from the cloud,
then caused to grow therein (vegetation) of every noble kind.

031.011
Y: Such is the Creation of Allah: now show Me what is there that others
besides Him have created: nay, but the Transgressors are in manifest
error.

P: This is the Creation of Allah. Now show me that which those (ye
worship) beside Him have created. Nay, but the wrong-doers are in error
manifest!

S: This is Allah's creation, but show Me what those besides Him have
created. Nay, the unjust are in manifest error.

031.012
Y: We bestowed (in the past) Wisdom on Luqman: "Show (thy) gratitude to
Allah." Any who is (so) grateful does so to the profit of his own soul:
but if any is ungrateful, verily Allah is free of all wants, Worthy of
all praise.

P: And verily We gave Luqman wisdom, saying: Give thanks unto Allah; and
whosoever giveth thanks, he giveth thanks for (the good of) his soul.
And whosoever refuseth - Lo! Allah is Absolute, Owner of Praise.

S: And certainly We gave wisdom to Luqman, saying: Be grateful to Allah.
And whoever is grateful, he is only grateful for his own soul; and
whoever is ungrateful, then surely Allah is Self-sufficient, Praised.

031.013
Y: Behold, Luqman said to his son by way of instruction: "O my son! join
not in worship (others) with Allah: for false worship is indeed the
highest wrong-doing."

P: And (remember) when Luqman said unto his son, when he was exhorting
him: O my dear son! Ascribe no partners unto Allah. Lo! to ascribe
partners (unto Him) is a tremendous wrong -

S: And when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son! do
not associate aught with Allah; most surely polytheism is a grievous
iniquity-

031.014
Y: And We have enjoined on man (to be good) to his parents: in travail
upon travail did his mother bear him, and in years twain was his
weaning: (hear the command), "Show gratitude to Me and to thy parents:
to Me is (thy final) Goal."

P: And We have enjoined upon man concerning his partners - His mother
beareth him in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning is in two years
- Give thanks unto Me and unto thy parents. Unto Me is the journeying.

S: And We have enjoined man in respect of his parents-- his mother bears
him with faintings upon faintings and his weaning takes two years--
saying: Be grateful to Me and to both your parents; to Me is the
eventual coming.

031.015
Y: "But if they strive to make thee join in worship with Me things of
which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not; yet bear them company in
this life with justice (and consideration), and follow the way of those
who turn to me (in love): in the end the return of you all is to Me,
and I will tell you the truth (and meaning) of all that ye did."

P: But if they strive with thee to make thee ascribe unto Me as partner
that of which thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not. Consort with
them in the world kindly, and follow the path of him who repenteth unto
Me. Then unto Me will be your return, and I shall tell you what ye used
to do -

S: And if they contend with you that you should associate with Me what
you have no knowledge of, do not obey them, and keep company with them
in this world kindly, and follow the way of him who turns to Me, then
to Me is your return, then will I inform you of what you did--

031.016
Y: "O my son!" (said Luqman), "If there be (but) the weight of a
mustard-seed and it were (hidden) in a rock, or (anywhere) in the
heavens or on earth, Allah will bring it forth: for Allah understands
the finest mysteries, (and) is well-acquainted (with them)."

P: O my dear son! Lo! though it be but the weight of a grain of
mustard-seed, and though it be in a rock, or in the heavens, or in the
earth, Allah will bring it forth. Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware.

S: O my son! surely if it is the very weight of the grain of a
mustard-seed, even though it is in (the heart of) rock, or (high above)
in the heaven or (deep down) in the earth, Allah will bring it (to
light); surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware;

031.017
Y: "O my son! establish regular prayer, enjoin what is just, and forbid
what is wrong: and bear with patient constancy whatever betide thee;
for this is firmness (of purpose) in (the conduct of) affairs."

P: O my dear son! Establish worship and enjoin kindness and forbid
iniquity, and persevere whatever may befall thee. Lo! that is of the
steadfast heart of things.

S: O my son! keep up prayer and enjoin the good and forbid the evil, and
bear patiently that which befalls you; surely these acts require
courage;

031.018
Y: "And swell not thy cheek (for pride) at men, nor walk in insolence
through the earth; for Allah loveth not any arrogant boaster."

P: Turn not thy cheek in scorn toward folk, nor walk with pertness in
the land. Lo! Allah loveth not each braggart boaster.

S: And do not turn your face away from people in contempt, nor go about
in the land exulting overmuch; surely Allah does not love any
self-conceited boaster;

031.019
Y: "And be moderate in thy pace, and lower thy voice; for the harshest
of sounds without doubt is the braying of the ass."

P: Be modest in thy bearing and subdue thy voice. Lo! the harshest of
all voices is the voice of the ass.

S: And pursue the right course in your going about and lower your voice;
surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses.

031.020
Y: Do ye not see that Allah has subjected to your (use) all things in
the heavens and on earth, and has made his bounties flow to you in
exceeding measure, (both) seen and unseen? Yet there are among men
those who dispute about Allah, without knowledge and without guidance,
and without a Book to enlighten them!

P: See ye not how Allah hath made serviceable unto you whatsoever is in
the skies and whatsoever is in the earth and hath loaded you with His
favours both without and within? Yet of mankind is he who disputeth
concerning Allah, without knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving
light.

S: Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and what is
in the earth subservient to you, and made complete to you His favors
outwardly and inwardly? And among men is he who disputes in respect of
Allah though having no knowledge nor guidance, nor a book giving light.

031.021
Y: When they are told to follow the (Revelation) that Allah has sent
down, they say: "Nay, we shall follow the ways that we found our
fathers (following)." What! even if it is Satan beckoning them to the
Penalty of the (Blazing) Fire?

P: And if it be said unto them: Follow that which Allah hath revealed,
they say: Nay, but we follow that wherein we found our fathers. What!
Even though the devil were inviting them unto the doom of flame?

S: And when it is said to them: Follow what Allah has revealed, they
say: Nay, we follow that on which we found our fathers. What! though
the Shaitan calls them to the chastisement of the burning fire!

031.022
Y: Whoever submits his whole self to Allah, and is a doer of good, has
grasped indeed the most trustworthy hand-hold: and with Allah rests the
End and Decision of (all) affairs.

P: Whosoever surrendereth his purpose to Allah while doing good, he
verily hath grasped the firm hand-hold. Unto Allah belongeth the sequel
of all things.

S: And whoever submits himself wholly to Allah and he is the doer of
good (to others), he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon
which one can lay hold; and Allah's is the end of affairs.

031.023
Y: But if any reject Faith, let not his rejection grieve thee: to Us is
their return, and We shall tell them the truth of their deeds: for
Allah knows well all that is in (men's) hearts.

P: And whosoever disbelieveth, let not his disbelief afflict thee (O
Muhammad). Unto Us is their return, and We shall tell them what they
did. Lo! Allah is Aware of what is in the breasts (of men).

S: And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you; to Us is
their return, then will We inform them of what they did surely Allah is
the Knower of what is in the breasts.

031.024
Y: We grant them their pleasure for a little while: in the end shall We
drive them to a chastisement unrelenting.

P: We give them comfort for a little, and then We drive them to a heavy
doom.

S: We give them to enjoy a little, then will We drive them to a severe
chastisement.

031.025
Y: If thou ask them, who it is that created the heavens and the earth.
They will certainly say, "Allah". Say: "Praise be to Allah!" But most
of them understand not.

P: If thou shouldst ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth?
they would answer: Allah. Say: Praise be to Allah! But most of them
know not.

S: And if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly say: Allah. Say: (All) praise is due to Allah; nay! most of
them do not know.

031.026
Y: To Allah belong all things in heaven and earth: verily Allah is He
(that is) free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

P: Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Lo!
Allah, He is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.

S: What is in the heavens and the earth is Allah's; surely Allah is the
Self-sufficient, the Praised.

031.027
Y: And if all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean (were ink),
with seven oceans behind it to add to its (supply), yet would not the
words of Allah be exhausted (in the writing): for Allah is Exalted in
Power, full of Wisdom.

P: And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the sea, with seven
more seas to help it, (were ink), the words of Allah could not be
exhausted. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: And were every tree that is in the earth (made into) pens and the sea
(to supply it with ink), with seven more seas to increase it, the words
of Allah would not come to an end; surely Allah is Mighty, Wise.

031.028
Y: And your creation or your resurrection is in no wise but as an
individual soul: for Allah is He Who hears and sees (all things).

P: Your creation and your raising (from the dead) are only as (the
creation and the raising of) a single soul. Lo! Allah is Hearer,
Knower.

S: Neither your creation nor your raising is anything but as a single
soul; surely Allah is Hearing, Seeing.

031.029
Y: Seest thou not that Allah merges Night into Day and he merges Day
into Night; that He has subjected the sun, and the moon (to his Law),
each running its course for a term appointed; and that Allah is
well-acquainted with all that ye do?

P: Hast thou not seen how Allah causeth the night to pass into the day
and causeth the day to pass into the night, and hath subdued the sun
and the moon (to do their work), each running unto an appointed term;
and that Allah is Informed of what ye do?

S: Do you not see that Allah makes the night to enter into the day, and
He makes the day to enter into the night, and He has made the sun and
the moon subservient (to you); each pursues its course till an
appointed time; and that Allah is Aware of what you do?

031.030
Y: That is because Allah is the (only) Reality, and because whatever
else they invoke besides Him is Falsehood; and because Allah,- He is
the Most High, Most Great.

P: That (is so) because Allah, He is the True, and that which they
invoke beside Him is the False, and because Allah, He is the Sublime,
the Great.

S: This is because Allah is the Truth, and that which they call upon
besides Him is the falsehood, and that Allah is the High, the Great.

031.031
Y: Seest thou not that the ships sail through the ocean by the Grace of
Allah?- that He may show you of His Signs? Verily in this are Signs for
all who constantly persevere and give thanks.

P: Hast thou not seen how the ships glide on the sea by Allah's grace,
that He may show you of His wonders? Lo! therein indeed are portents
for every steadfast, grateful (heart).

S: Do you not see that the ships run on in the sea by Allah's favor that
He may show you of His signs? Most surely there are signs in this for
every patient endurer, grateful one.

031.032
Y: When a wave covers them like the canopy (of clouds), they call to
Allah, offering Him sincere devotion. But when He has delivered them
safely to land, there are among them those that halt between (right and
wrong). But none reject Our Signs except only a perfidious ungrateful
(wretch)!

P: And if a wave enshroudeth them like awnings, they cry unto Allah,
making their faith pure for Him only. But when He bringeth them safe to
land, some of them compromise. None denieth Our signs save every
traitor ingrate.

S: And when a wave like mountains covers them they call upon Allah,
being sincere to Him in obedience, but when He brings them safe to the
land, some of them follow the middle course; and none denies Our signs
but every perfidious, ungrateful one.

031.033
Y: O mankind! do your duty to your Lord, and fear (the coming of) a Day
when no father can avail aught for his son, nor a son avail aught for
his father. Verily, the promise of Allah is true: let not then this
present life deceive you, nor let the chief Deceiver deceive you about
Allah.

P: O mankind! Keep your duty to your Lord and fear a Day when the parent
will not be able to avail the child in aught, nor the child to avail
the parent. Lo! Allah's promise is the very truth. Let not the life of
the world beguile you, nor let the deceiver beguile you, in regard to
Allah.

S: O people! guard against (the punishment of) your Lord and dread the
day when a father shall not make any satisfaction for his son, nor
shall the child be the maker of any satisfaction for his father; surely
the promise of Allah is true, therefore let not this world's life
deceive you, nor let the arch-deceiver deceive you in respect of Allah.

031.034
Y: Verily the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah (alone). It is He Who
sends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs. Nor does any
one know what it is that he will earn on the morrow: Nor does any one
know in what land he is to die. Verily with Allah is full knowledge and
He is acquainted (with all things).

P: Lo! Allah! With Him is knowledge of the Hour. He sendeth down the
rain, and knoweth that which is in the wombs. No soul knoweth what it
will earn to-morrow, and no soul knoweth in what land it will die. Lo!
Allah is Knower, Aware.

S: Surely Allah is He with Whom is the knowledge of the hour, and He
sends down the rain and He knows what is in the wombs; and no one knows
what he shall earn on the morrow; and no one knows in what land he
shall die; surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 32:

               AS-SAJDA (THE PROSTRATION, WORSHIP, ADORATION)
 Total Verses: 30 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

032.001
Y: A. L. M.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim

S: Alif Lam Mim.

032.002
Y: (This is) the Revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt,-
from the Lord of the Worlds.

P: The revelation of the Scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the
Lord of the Worlds.

S: The revelation of the Book, there is no doubt in it, is from the Lord
of the worlds.

032.003
Y: Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Nay, it is the Truth from thy
Lord, that thou mayest admonish a people to whom no warner has come
before thee: in order that they may receive guidance.

P: Or say they: He hath invented it? Nay, but it is the Truth from thy
Lord, that thou mayst warn a folk to whom no warner came before thee,
that haply they may walk aright.

S: Or do they say: He has forged it? Nay! it is the truth from your Lord
that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, that
they may follow the right direction.

032.004
Y: It is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, and all
between them, in six Days, and is firmly established on the Throne (of
Authority): ye have none, besides Him, to protect or intercede (for
you): will ye not then receive admonition?

P: Allah it is Who created the heavens and the earth, and that which is
between them, in six Days. Then He mounted the Throne. Ye have not,
beside Him, a protecting friend or mediator. Will ye not then remember?

S: Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and what is between
them in six periods, and He mounted the throne (of authority); you have
not besides Him any guardian or any intercessor, will you not then
mind?

032.005
Y: He rules (all) affairs from the heavens to the earth: in the end will
(all affairs) go up to Him, on a Day, the space whereof will be (as) a
thousand years of your reckoning.

P: He directeth the ordinance from the heaven unto the earth; then it
ascendeth unto Him in a Day, whereof the measure is a thousand years of
that ye reckon.

S: He regulates the affair from the heaven to the earth; then shall it
ascend to Him in a day the measure of which is a thousand years of what
you count.

032.006
Y: Such is He, the Knower of all things, hidden and open, the Exalted
(in power), the Merciful;-

P: Such is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the
Merciful,

S: This is the Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty the
Merciful,

032.007
Y: He Who has made everything which He has created most good: He began
the creation of man with (nothing more than) clay,

P: Who made all things good which He created, and He began the creation
of man from clay;

S: Who made good everything that He has created, and He began the
creation of man from dust.

032.008
Y: And made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature of a fluid
despised:

P: Then He made his seed from a draught of despised fluid;

S: Then He made his progeny of an extract, of water held in light
estimation.

032.009
Y: But He fashioned him in due proportion, and breathed into him
something of His spirit. And He gave you (the faculties of) hearing and
sight and feeling (and understanding): little thanks do ye give!

P: Then He fashioned him and breathed into him of His Spirit; and
appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts. Small thanks give ye!

S: Then He made him complete and breathed into him of His spirit, and
made for you the ears and the eyes and the hearts; little is it that
you give thanks.

032.010
Y: And they say: "What! when we lie, hidden and lost, in the earth,
shall we indeed be in a Creation renewed? Nay, they deny the Meeting
with their Lord."

P: And they say: When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be
re-created? Nay but they are disbelievers in the meeting with their
Lord.

S: And they say: What! when we have become lost in the earth, shall we
then certainly be in a new creation? Nay! they are disbelievers in the
meeting of their Lord.

032.011
Y: Say: "The Angel of Death, put in charge of you, will (duly) take your
souls: then shall ye be brought back to your Lord."

P: Say: The angel of death, who hath charge concerning you, will gather
you, and afterward unto your Lord ye will be returned.

S: Say: The angel of death who is given charge of you shall cause you to
die, then to your Lord you shall be brought back.

032.012
Y: If only thou couldst see when the guilty ones will bend low their
heads before their Lord, (saying:) "Our Lord! We have seen and we have
heard: Now then send us back (to the world): we will work
righteousness: for we do indeed (now) believe."

P: Couldst thou but see when the guilty hang their heads before their
Lord, (and say): Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back;
we will do right, now we are sure.

S: And could you but see when the guilty shall hang down their heads
before their Lord: Our Lord! we have seen and we have heard, therefore
send us back, we will do good; surely (now) we are certain.

032.013
Y: If We had so willed, We could certainly have brought every soul its
true guidance: but the Word from Me will come true, "I will fill Hell
with jinns and men all together."

P: And if We had so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance,
but the word from Me concerning evildoers took effect: that I will fill
hell with the jinn and mankind together.

S: And if We had pleased We would certainly have given to every soul its
guidance, but the word (which had gone forth) from Me was just: I will
certainly fill hell with the jinn and men together.

032.014
Y: "Taste ye then - for ye forgot the Meeting of this Day of yours, and
We too will forget you - taste ye the Penalty of Eternity for your
(evil) deeds!"

P: So taste (the evil of your deeds). Forasmuch as ye forgot the meeting
of this your day, lo! We forget you. Taste the doom of immortality
because of what ye used to do.

S: So taste, because you neglected the meeting of this day of yours;
surely We forsake you; and taste the abiding chastisement for what you
did.

032.015
Y: Only those believe in Our Signs, who, when they are recited to them,
fall down in prostration, and celebrate the praises of their Lord, nor
are they (ever) puffed up with pride.

P: Only those believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded of
them, fall down prostrate and hymn the praise of their Lord, and they
are not scornful,

S: Only they believe in Our communications who, when they are reminded
of them, fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their
Lord, and they are not proud.

032.016
Y: Their limbs do forsake their beds of sleep, the while they call on
their Lord, in Fear and Hope: and they spend (in charity) out of the
sustenance which We have bestowed on them.

P: Who forsake their beds to cry unto their Lord in fear and hope, and
spend of that We have bestowed on them.

S: Their sides draw away from (their) beds, they call upon their Lord in
fear and in hope, and they spend (benevolently) out of what We have
given them.

032.017
Y: Now no person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in
reserve) for them - as a reward for their (good) deeds.

P: No soul knoweth what is kept hid for them of joy, as a reward for
what they used to do.

S: So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did.

032.018
Y: Is then the man who believes no better than the man who is rebellious
and wicked? Not equal are they.

P: Is he who is a believer like unto him who is an evil-liver? They are
not alike.

S: Is he then who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They are
not equal.

032.019
Y: For those who believe and do righteous deeds are Gardens as
hospitable homes, for their (good) deeds.

P: But as for those who believe and do good works, for them are the
Gardens of Retreat - a welcome (in reward) for what they used to do.

S: As for those who believe and do good, the gardens are their
abiding-place; an entertainment for what they did.

032.020
Y: As to those who are rebellious and wicked, their abode will be the
Fire: every time they wish to get away therefrom, they will be forced
thereinto, and it will be said to them: "Taste ye the Penalty of the
Fire, the which ye were wont to reject as false."

P: And as for those who do evil, their retreat is the Fire. Whenever
they desire to issue forth from thence, they are brought back thither.
Unto them it is said: Taste the torment of the Fire which ye used to
deny.

S: And as for those who transgress, their abode is the fire; whenever
they desire to go forth from it they shall be brought back into it, and
it will be said to them: Taste the chastisement of the fire which you
called a lie.

032.021
Y: And indeed We will make them taste of the Penalty of this (life)
prior to the supreme Penalty, in order that they may (repent and)
return.

P: And verily We make them taste the lower punishment before the
greater, that haply they may return.

S: And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer chastisement
before the greater chastisement that haply they may turn.

032.022
Y: And who does more wrong than one to whom are recited the Signs of his
Lord, and who then turns away therefrom? Verily from those who
transgress We shall exact (due) Retribution.

P: And who doth greater wrong than he who is reminded of the revelations
of his Lord, then turneth from them. Lo! We shall requite the guilty.

S: And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the communications
of his Lord, then he turns away from them? Surely We will give
punishment to the guilty.

032.023
Y: We did indeed aforetime give the Book to Moses: be not then in doubt
of its reaching (thee): and We made it a guide to the Children of
Israel.

P: We verily gave Moses the Scripture; so be not ye in doubt of his
receiving it; and We appointed it a guidance for the Children of
Israel.

S: And certainly We gave the Book to Musa, so be not in doubt concerning
the receiving of it, and We made it a guide for the children of Israel.

032.024
Y: And We appointed, from among them, leaders, giving guidance under Our
command, so long as they persevered with patience and continued to have
faith in Our Signs.

P: And when they became steadfast and believed firmly in Our
revelations, We appointed from among them leaders who guided by Our
command.

S: And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command when they were
patient, and they were certain of Our communications.

032.025
Y: Verily thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment, in
the matters wherein they differ (among themselves)

P: Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection
concerning that wherein they used to differ.

S: Surely your Lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection
concerning that wherein they differ.

032.026
Y: Does it not teach them a lesson, how many generations We destroyed
before them, in whose dwellings they (now) go to and fro? Verily in
that are Signs: Do they not then listen?

P: Is it not a guidance for them (to observe) how many generations We
destroyed before them, amid whose dwelling places they do walk? Lo!
therein verily are portents! Will they not then heed?

S: Does it not point out to them the right way, how many of the
generations, in whose abodes they go about, did We destroy before them?
Most surely there are signs in this; will they not then hear?

032.027
Y: And do they not see that We do drive rain to parched soil (bare of
herbage), and produce therewith crops, providing food for their cattle
and themselves? Have they not the vision?

P: Have they not seen how We lead the water to the barren land and
therewith bring forth crops whereof their cattle eat, and they
themselves? Will they not then see?

S: Do they not see that We drive the water to a land having no herbage,
then We bring forth thereby seed-produce of which their cattle and they
themselves eat; will they not then see?

032.028
Y: They say: "When will this decision be, if ye are telling the truth?"

P: And they say: When cometh this victory (of yours) if ye are truthful?

S: And they say: When will this judgment take place, if you are
truthful?

032.029
Y: Say: "On the Day of Decision, no profit will it be to Unbelievers if
they (then) believe! nor will they be granted a respite."

P: Say (unto them): On the day of the victory the faith of those who
disbelieve (and who then will believe) will not avail them, neither
will they be reprieved.

S: Say: On the Day of Judgment the faith of those who (now) disbelieve
will not profit them, nor will they be respited.

032.030
Y: So turn away from them, and wait: they too are waiting.

P: So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), and await (the event). Lo! they
(also) are awaiting (it).

S: Therefore turn away from them and wait, surely they too are waiting.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 33:

          AL-AHZAB (THE CLANS, THE COALITION, THE COMBINED FORCES)
 Total Verses: 73 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

033.001
Y: O Prophet! Fear Allah, and hearken not to the Unbelievers and the
Hypocrites: verily Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

P: O Prophet! Keep thy duty to Allah and obey not the disbelievers and
the hypocrites. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: O Prophet! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and do not comply with
(the wishes of) the unbelievers and the hypocrites; surely Allah is
Knowing, Wise;

033.002
Y: But follow that which comes to thee by inspiration from thy Lord: for
Allah is well acquainted with (all) that ye do.

P: And follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord. Lo! Allah is
Aware of what ye do.

S: And follow what is revealed to you from your Lord; surely Allah is
Aware of what you do;

033.003
Y: And put thy trust in Allah, and enough is Allah as a disposer of
affairs.

P: And put thy trust in Allah, for Allah is sufficient as Trustee.

S: And rely on Allah; and Allah is sufficient for a Protector.

033.004
Y: Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his (one) body: nor has
He made your wives whom ye divorce by Zihar your mothers: nor has He
made your adopted sons your sons. Such is (only) your (manner of)
speech by your mouths. But Allah tells (you) the Truth, and He shows
the (right) Way.

P: Allah hath not assigned unto any man two hearts within his body, nor
hath He made your wives whom ye declare (to be your mothers) your
mothers, nor hath He made those whom ye claim (to be your sons) your
sons. This is but a saying of your mouths. But Allah saith the truth
and He showeth the way.

S: Allah has not made for any man two hearts within him; nor has He made
your wives whose backs you liken to the backs of your mothers as your
mothers, nor has He made those whom you assert to be your sons your
real sons; these are the words of your mouths; and Allah speaks the
truth and He guides to the way.

033.005
Y: Call them by (the names of) their fathers: that is juster in the
sight of Allah. But if ye know not their father's (names, call them)
your Brothers in faith, or your maulas. But there is no blame on you if
ye make a mistake therein: (what counts is) the intention of your
hearts: and Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: Proclaim their real parentage. That will be more equitable in the
sight of Allah. And if ye know not their fathers, then (they are) your
brethren in the faith, and your clients. And there is no sin for you in
the mistakes that ye make unintentionally, but what your hearts purpose
(that will be a sin for you). Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Assert their relationship to their fathers; this is more equitable
with Allah; but if you do not know their fathers, then they are your
brethren in faith and your friends; and there is no blame on you
concerning that in which you made a mistake, but (concerning) that
which your hearts do purposely (blame may rest on you), and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

033.006
Y: The Prophet is closer to the Believers than their own selves, and his
wives are their mothers. Blood-relations among each other have closer
personal ties, in the Decree of Allah. Than (the Brotherhood of)
Believers and Muhajirs: nevertheless do ye what is just to your closest
friends: such is the writing in the Decree (of Allah).

P: The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves, and his
wives are (as) their mothers. And the owners of kinship are closer one
to another in the ordinance of Allah than (other) believers and the
fugitives (who fled from Mecca), except that ye should do kindness to
your friends. This is written in the Book (of nature).

S: The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves, and his wives are (as) their mothers; and the possessors of
relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of Allah to
inheritance, one with respect to another, than (other) believers, and
(than) those who have fled (their homes), except that you do some good
to your friends; this is written in the Book.

033.007
Y: And remember We took from the prophets their covenant: As (We did)
from thee: from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary: We
took from them a solemn covenant:

P: And when We exacted a covenant from the prophets, and from thee (O
Muhammad) and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary. We
took from them a solemn covenant;

S: And when We made a covenant with the prophets and with you, and with
Nuh and Ibrahim and Musa and Isa, son of Marium, and We made with them
a strong covenant,

033.008
Y: That (Allah) may question the (custodians) of Truth concerning the
Truth they (were charged with): And He has prepared for the Unbelievers
a grievous Penalty.

P: That He may ask the loyal of their loyalty. And He hath prepared a
painful doom for the unfaithful.

S: That He may question the truthful of their truth, and He has prepared
for the unbelievers a painful punishment.

033.009
Y: O ye who believe! Remember the Grace of Allah, (bestowed) on you,
when there came down on you hosts (to overwhelm you): But We sent
against them a hurricane and forces that ye saw not: but Allah sees
(clearly) all that ye do.

P: O ye who believe! Remember Allah's favour unto you when there came
against you hosts, and We sent against them a great wind and hosts ye
could not see. And Allah is ever Seer of what ye do.

S: O you who believe! call to mind the favor of Allah to you when there
came down upon you hosts, so We sent against them a strong wind and
hosts, that you saw not, and Allah is Seeing what you do.

033.010
Y: Behold! they came on you from above you and from below you, and
behold, the eyes became dim and the hearts gaped up to the throats, and
ye imagined various (vain) thoughts about Allah!

P: When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when
eyes grew wild and hearts reached to the throats, and ye were imagining
vain thoughts concerning Allah.

S: When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when
the eyes turned dull, and the hearts rose up to the throats, and you
began to think diverse thoughts of Allah.

033.011
Y: In that situation were the Believers tried: they were shaken as by a
tremendous shaking.

P: There were the believers sorely tried, and shaken with a mighty
shock.

S: There the believers were tried and they were shaken with severe
shaking.

033.012
Y: And behold! The Hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease
(even) say: "Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion!"

P: And when the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, were
saying: Allah and His messenger promised us naught but delusion.

S: And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease began
to say: Allah and His Messenger did not promise us (victory) but only
to deceive.

033.013
Y: Behold! A party among them said: "Ye men of Yathrib! ye cannot stand
(the attack)! therefore go back!" And a band of them ask for leave of
the Prophet, saying, "Truly our houses are bare and exposed," though
they were not exposed they intended nothing but to run away.

P: And when a party of them said: O folk of Yathrib! There is no stand
(possible) for you, therefor turn back. And certain of them (even)
sought permission of the Prophet, saying: Our homes lie open (to the
enemy). And they lay not open. They but wished to flee.

S: And when a party of them said: O people of Yasrib! there IS no place
to stand for you (here), therefore go back; and a party of them asked
permission of the prophet, saying. Surely our houses are exposed; and
they were not exposed; they only desired to fly away.

033.014
Y: And if an entry had been effected to them from the sides of the
(city), and they had been incited to sedition, they would certainly
have brought it to pass, with none but a brief delay!

P: If the enemy had entered from all sides and they had been exhorted to
treachery, they would have committed it, and would have hesitated
thereupon but little.

S: And if an entry were made upon them from the outlying parts of it,
then they were asked to wage war, they would certainly have done it,
and they would not have stayed in it but a little while.

033.015
Y: And yet they had already covenanted with Allah not to turn their
backs, and a covenant with Allah must (surely) be answered for.

P: And verily they had already sworn unto Allah that they would not turn
their backs (to the foe). An oath to Allah must be answered for.

S: And certainly they had made a covenant with Allah before, (that) they
would not turn (their) backs; and Allah's covenant shall be inquired
of.

033.016
Y: Say: "Running away will not profit you if ye are running away from
death or slaughter; and even if (ye do escape), no more than a brief
(respite) will ye be allowed to enjoy!"

P: Say: Flight will not avail you if ye flee from death or killing, and
then ye dwell in comfort but a little while.

S: Say: Flight shall not do you any good if you fly from death or
slaughter, and in that case you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves
but a little.

033.017
Y: Say: "Who is it that can screen you from Allah if it be His wish to
give you punishment or to give you Mercy?" Nor will they find for
themselves, besides Allah, any protector or helper.

P: Say: Who is he who can preserve you from Allah if He intendeth harm
for you, or intendeth mercy for you. They will not find that they have
any friend or helper other than Allah.

S: Say: Who is it that can withhold you from Allah if He intends to do
you evil, rather He intends to show you mercy? And they will not find
for themselves besides Allah any guardian or a helper.

033.018
Y: Verily Allah knows those among you who keep back (men) and those who
say to their brethren, "Come along to us", but come not to the fight
except for just a little while.

P: Allah already knoweth those of you who hinder, and those who say unto
their brethren: "Come ye hither unto us!" and they come not to the
stress of battle save a little,

S: Allah knows indeed those among you who hinder others and those who
say to their brethren: Come to us; and they come not to the fight but a
little,

033.019
Y: Covetous over you. Then when fear comes, thou wilt see them looking
to thee, their eyes revolving, like (those of) one over whom hovers
death: but when the fear is past, they will smite you with sharp
tongues, covetous of goods. Such men have no faith, and so Allah has
made their deeds of none effect: and that is easy for Allah.

P: Being sparing of their help to you (believers). But when the fear
cometh, then thou (Muhammad) seest them regarding thee with rolling
eyes like one who fainteth unto death. Then, when the fear departeth,
they scald you with sharp tongues in their greed for wealth (from the
spoil). Such have not believed. Therefor Allah maketh their deeds
fruitless. And that is easy for Allah.

S: Being niggardly with respect to you; but when fear comes, you will
see them looking to you, their eyes rolling like one swooning because
of death; but when the fear is gone they smite you with sharp tongues,
being niggardly of the good things. These have not believed, therefore
Allah has made their doing naught; and this is easy to Allah.

033.020
Y: They think that the Confederates have not withdrawn; and if the
Confederates should come (again), they would wish they were in the
deserts (wandering) among the Bedouins, and seeking news about you
(from a safe distance); and if they were in your midst, they would
fight but little.

P: They hold that the clans have not retired (for good); and if the
clans should advance (again), they would fain be in the desert with the
wandering Arabs, asking for the news of you; and if they were among
you, they would not give battle, save a little.

S: They think the allies are not gone, and if the allies should come
(again) they would fain be in the deserts with the desert Arabs asking
for news about you, and if they were among you they would not fight
save a little.

033.021
Y: Ye have indeed in the Messenger of Allah a beautiful pattern (of
conduct) for any one whose hope is in Allah and the Final Day, and who
engages much in the Praise of Allah.

P: Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example for him who
looketh unto Allah and the Last Day, and remembereth Allah much.

S: Certainly you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent exemplar
for him who hopes in Allah and the latter day and remembers Allah much.

033.022
Y: When the Believers saw the Confederate forces, they said: "This is
what Allah and his Messenger had promised us, and Allah and His
Messenger told us what was true." And it only added to their faith and
their zeal in obedience.

P: And when the true believers saw the clans, they said: This is that
which Allah and His messenger promised us. Allah and His messenger are
true. It did but confirm them in their faith and resignation.

S: And when the believers saw the allies, they said: This is what Allah
and His Messenger promised us, and Allah and His Messenger spoke the
truth; and it only increased them in faith and submission.

033.023
Y: Among the Believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
Allah: of them some have completed their vow (to the extreme), and some
(still) wait: but they have never changed (their determination) in the
least:

P: Of the believers are men who are true to that which they covenanted
with Allah. Some of them have paid their vow by death (in battle), and
some of them still are waiting; and they have not altered in the least;

S: Of the believers are men who are true to the covenant which they made
with Allah: so of them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is
he who yet waits, and they have not changed in the least;

033.024
Y: That Allah may reward the men of Truth for their Truth, and punish
the Hypocrites if that be His Will, or turn to them in Mercy: for Allah
is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: That Allah may reward the true men for their truth, and punish the
hypocrites if He will, or relent toward them (if He will). Lo! Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: That Allah may reward the truthful for their truth, and punish the
hypocrites if He please or turn to them (mercifully); surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

033.025
Y: And Allah turned back the Unbelievers for (all) their fury: no
advantage did they gain; and enough is Allah for the believers in their
fight. And Allah is full of Strength, able to enforce His Will.

P: And Allah repulsed the disbelievers in their wrath; they gained no
good. Allah averted their attack from the believers. Allah is ever
Strong, Mighty.

S: And Allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not
obtain any advantage, and Allah sufficed the believers in fighting; and
Allah is Strong, Mighty.

033.026
Y: And those of the People of the Book who aided them - Allah did take
them down from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts. (So
that) some ye slew, and some ye made prisoners.

P: And He brought those of the People of the Scripture who supported
them down from their strongholds, and cast panic into their hearts.
Some ye slew, and ye made captive some.

S: And He drove down those of the followers of the Book who backed them
from their fortresses and He cast awe into their hearts; some you
killed and you took captive another part.

033.027
Y: And He made you heirs of their lands, their houses, and their goods,
and of a land which ye had not frequented (before). And Allah has power
over all things.

P: And He caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their
wealth, and land ye have not trodden. Allah is ever Able to do all
things.

S: And He made you heirs to their land and their dwellings and their
property, and (to) a land which you have not yet trodden, and Allah has
power over all things.

033.028
Y: O Prophet! Say to thy Consorts: "If it be that ye desire the life of
this World, and its glitter,- then come! I will provide for your
enjoyment and set you free in a handsome manner."

P: O Prophet! Say unto thy wives: If ye desire the world's life and its
adornment, come! I will content you and will release you with a fair
release.

S: O Prophet! say to your wives: If you desire this world's life and its
adornment, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you to
depart a goodly departing;

033.029
Y: But if ye seek Allah and His Messenger, and the Home of the
Hereafter, verily Allah has prepared for the well-doers amongst you a
great reward.

P: But if ye desire Allah and His messenger and the abode of the
Hereafter, then lo! Allah hath prepared for the good among you an
immense reward.

S: And if you desire Allah and His Messenger and the latter abode, then
surely Allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty
reward.

033.030
Y: O Consorts of the Prophet! If any of you were guilty of evident
unseemly conduct, the Punishment would be doubled to her, and that is
easy for Allah.

P: O ye wives of the Prophet! Whosoever of you committeth manifest
lewdness, the punishment for her will be doubled, and that is easy for
Allah.

S: O wives of the prophet! whoever of you commits an open indecency, the
punishment shall be increased to her doubly; and this IS easy to Allah.

033.031
Y: But any of you that is devout in the service of Allah and His
Messenger, and works righteousness,- to her shall We grant her reward
twice: and We have prepared for her a generous Sustenance.

P: And whosoever of you is submissive unto Allah and His messenger and
doeth right, We shall give her reward twice over, and We have
prepared for her a rich provision.

S: And whoever of you is obedient to Allah and His Messenger and does
good, We will give to her her reward doubly, and We have prepared for
her an honorable sustenance.

033.032
Y: O Consorts of the Prophet! Ye are not like any of the (other) women:
if ye do fear (Allah), be not too complacent of speech, lest one in
whose heart is a disease should be moved with desire: but speak ye a
speech (that is) just.

P: O ye wives of the Prophet! Ye are not like any other women. If ye
keep your duty (to Allah), then be not soft of speech, lest he in whose
heart is a disease aspire (to you), but utter customary speech.

S: O wives of the Prophet! you are not like any other of the women; If
you will be on your guard, then be not soft in (your) speech, lest he
in whose heart is a disease yearn; and speak a good word.

033.033
Y: And stay quietly in your houses, and make not a dazzling display,
like that of the former Times of Ignorance; and establish regular
Prayer, and give regular Charity; and obey Allah and His Messenger. And
Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye Members of the
Family, and to make you pure and spotless.

P: And stay in your houses. Bedizen not yourselves with the bedizenment
of the Time of Ignorance. Be regular in prayer, and pay the poor-due,
and obey Allah and His messenger. Allah's wish is but to remove
uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with
a thorough cleansing.

S: And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the
displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and pay the
poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only desires to keep
away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify you
a (thorough) purifying.

033.034
Y: And recite what is rehearsed to you in your homes, of the Signs of
Allah and His Wisdom: for Allah understands the finest mysteries and is
well-acquainted (with them).

P: And bear in mind that which is recited in your houses of the
revelations of Allah and wisdom. Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware.

S: And keep to mind what is recited in your houses of the communications
of Allah and the wisdom; surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware.

033.035
Y: For Muslim men and women,- for believing men and women, for devout
men and women, for true men and women, for men and women who are
patient and constant, for men and women who humble themselves, for men
and women who give in Charity, for men and women who fast (and deny
themselves), for men and women who guard their chastity, and for men
and women who engage much in Allah's praise,- for them has Allah
prepared forgiveness and great reward.

P: Lo! men who surrender unto Allah, and women who surrender, and men
who believe and women who believe, and men who obey and women who obey,
and men who speak the truth and women who speak the truth, and men who
persevere (in righteousness) and women who persevere, and men who are
humble and women who are humble, and men who give alms and women who
give alms, and men who fast and women who fast, and men who guard their
modesty and women who guard (their modesty), and men who remember Allah
much and women who remember - Allah hath prepared for them forgiveness
and a vast reward.

S: Surely the men who submit and the women who submit, and the believing
men and the believing women, and the obeying men and the obeying women,
and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the patient men and
the patient women and the humble men and the humble women, and the
almsgiving men and the almsgiving women, and the fasting men and the
fasting women, and the men who guard their private parts and the women
who guard, and the men who remember Allah much and the women who
remember-- Allah has prepared for them forgiveness and a mighty reward.

033.036
Y: It is not fitting for a Believer, man or woman, when a matter has
been decided by Allah and His Messenger to have any option about their
decision: if any one disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he is indeed on
a clearly wrong Path.

P: And it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah
and His messenger have decided an affair (for them), that they should
(after that) claim any say in their affair; and whoso is rebellious to
Allah and His messenger, he verily goeth astray in error manifest.

S: And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger
have decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he
surely strays off a manifest straying.

033.037
Y: Behold! Thou didst say to one who had received the grace of Allah and
thy favour: "Retain thou (in wedlock) thy wife, and fear Allah." But
thou didst hide in thy heart that which Allah was about to make
manifest: thou didst fear the people, but it is more fitting that thou
shouldst fear Allah. Then when Zaid had dissolved (his marriage) with
her, with the necessary (formality), We joined her in marriage to thee:
in order that (in future) there may be no difficulty to the Believers
in (the matter of) marriage with the wives of their adopted sons, when
the latter have dissolved with the necessary (formality) (their
marriage) with them. And Allah's command must be fulfilled.

P: And when thou saidst unto him on whom Allah hath conferred favour and
thou hast conferred favour: Keep thy wife to thyself, and fear Allah.
And thou didst hide in thy mind that which Allah was to bring to light,
and thou didst fear mankind whereas Allah hath a better right that thou
shouldst fear Him. So when Zeyd had performed that necessary formality
(of divorce) from her, We gave her unto thee in marriage, so that
(henceforth) there may be no sin for believers in respect of wives of
their adopted sons, when the latter have performed the necessary
formality (of release) from them. The commandment of Allah must be
fulfilled.

S: And when you said to him to whom Allah had shown favor and to whom
you had shown a favor: Keep your wife to yourself and be careful of
(your duty to) Allah; and you concealed in your soul what Allah would
bring to light, and you feared men, and Allah had a greater right that
you should fear Him. But when Zaid had accomplished his want of her, We
gave her to you as a wife, so that there should be no difficulty for
the believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons, when they
have accomplished their want of them; and Allah's command shall be
performed.

033.038
Y: There can be no difficulty to the Prophet in what Allah has indicated
to him as a duty. It was the practice (approved) of Allah amongst those
of old that have passed away. And the command of Allah is a decree
determined.

P: There is no reproach for the Prophet in that which Allah maketh his
due. That was Allah's way with those who passed away of old - and the
commandment of Allah is certain destiny -

S: There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has ordained
for him; such has been the course of Allah with respect to those who
have gone before; and the command of Allah is a decree that is made
absolute:

033.039
Y: (It is the practice of those) who preach the Messages of Allah, and
fear Him, and fear none but Allah. And enough is Allah to call (men) to
account.

P: Who delivered the messages of Allah and feared Him, and feared none
save Allah. Allah keepeth good account.

S: Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear
any one but Allah; and Allah is sufficient to take account.

033.040
Y: Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but (he is) the
Messenger of Allah, and the Seal of the Prophets: and Allah has full
knowledge of all things.

P: Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the
messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets; and Allah is ever
Aware of all things.

S: Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the Last of the prophets; and Allah is cognizant
of all things.

033.041
Y: O ye who believe! Celebrate the praises of Allah, and do this often;

P: O ye who believe! Remember Allah with much remembrance.

S: O you who believe! remember Allah, remembering frequently,

033.042
Y: And glorify Him morning and evening.

P: And glorify Him early and late.

S: And glorify Him morning and evening.

033.043
Y: He it is Who sends blessings on you, as do His angels, that He may
bring you out from the depths of Darkness into Light: and He is Full of
Mercy to the Believers.

P: He it is Who blesseth you, and His angels (bless you), that He may
bring you forth from darkness unto light; and He is ever Merciful to
the believers.

S: He it is Who sends His blessings on you, and (so do) His angels, that
He may bring you forth out of utter darkness into the light; and He is
Merciful to the believers.

033.044
Y: Their salutation on the Day they meet Him will be "Peace!"; and He
has prepared for them a generous Reward.

P: Their salutation on the day when they shall meet Him will be: Peace.
And He hath prepared for them a goodly recompense.

S: Their salutation on the day that they meet Him shall be, Peace, and
He has prepared for them an honourable reward.

033.045
Y: O Prophet! Truly We have sent thee as a Witness, a Bearer of Glad
Tidings, and Warner,-

P: O Prophet! Lo! We have sent thee as a witness and a bringer of good
tidings and a warner.

S: O Prophet! surely We have sent you as a witness, and as a bearer of
good news and as a warner,

033.046
Y: And as one who invites to Allah's (grace) by His leave, and as a lamp
spreading light.

P: And as a summoner unto Allah by His permission, and as a lamp that
giveth light.

S: And as one inviting to Allah by His permission, and as a light-giving
torch.

033.047
Y: Then give the Glad Tidings to the Believers, that they shall have
from Allah a very great Bounty.

P: And announce unto the believers the good tidings that they will have
great bounty from Allah.

S: And give to the believers the good news that they shall have a great
grace from Allah.

033.048
Y: And obey not (the behests) of the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and
heed not their annoyances, but put thy Trust in Allah. For enough is
Allah as a Disposer of affairs.

P: And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard
their noxious talk, and put thy trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient as
Trustee.

S: And be not compliant to the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and leave
unregarded their annoying talk, and rely on Allah; and Allah is
sufficient as a Protector.

033.049
Y: O ye who believe! When ye marry believing women, and then divorce
them before ye have touched them, no period of 'Iddat have ye to count
in respect of them: so give them a present. And set them free in a
handsome manner.

P: O ye who believe! If ye wed believing women and divorce them before
ye have touched them, then there is no period that ye should reckon.
But content them and release them handsomely.

S: O you who believe! when you marry the believing women, then divorce
them before you touch them, you have in their case no term which you
should reckon; so make some provision for them and send them forth a
goodly sending forth.

033.050
Y: O Prophet! We have made lawful to thee thy wives to whom thou hast
paid their dowers; and those whom thy right hand possesses out of the
prisoners of war whom Allah has assigned to thee; and daughters of thy
paternal uncles and aunts, and daughters of thy maternal uncles and
aunts, who migrated (from Makka) with thee; and any believing woman who
dedicates her soul to the Prophet if the Prophet wishes to wed her;-
this only for thee, and not for the Believers (at large); We know what
We have appointed for them as to their wives and the captives whom
their right hands possess;- in order that there should be no difficulty
for thee. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: O Prophet! Lo! We have made lawful unto thee thy wives unto whom thou
hast paid their dowries, and those whom thy right hand possesseth of
those whom Allah hath given thee as spoils of war, and the daughters of
thine uncle on the father's side and the daughters of thine aunts on
the father's side, and the daughters of thine uncle on the mother's
side and the daughters of thine aunts on the mother's side who
emigrated with thee, and a believing woman if she give herself unto the
Prophet and the Prophet desire to ask her in marriage - a privilege for
thee only, not for the (rest of) believers - We are Aware of that which
We enjoined upon them concerning their wives and those whom their right
hands possess - that thou mayst be free from blame, for Allah is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: O Prophet! surely We have made lawful to you your wives whom you have
given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses out of
those whom Allah has given to you as prisoners of war, and the
daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters of your paternal
aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and the daughters of
your maternal aunts who fled with you; and a believing woman if she
gave herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet desired to marry her--
specially for you, not for the (rest of) believers; We know what We
have ordained for them concerning their wives and those whom their
right hands possess in order that no blame may attach to you; and Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

033.051
Y: Thou mayest defer (the turn of) any of them that thou pleasest, and
thou mayest receive any thou pleasest: and there is no blame on thee if
thou invite one whose (turn) thou hadst set aside. This were nigher to
the cooling of their eyes, the prevention of their grief, and their
satisfaction - that of all of them - with that which thou hast to
give them: and Allah knows (all) that is in your hearts: and
Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

P: Thou canst defer whom thou wilt of them and receive unto thee whom
thou wilt, and whomsoever thou desirest of those whom thou hast set
aside (temporarily), it is no sin for thee (to receive her again); that
is better; that they may be comforted and not grieve, and may all be
pleased with what thou givest them. Allah knoweth what is in your
hearts (O men), and Allah is ever Forgiving, Clement.

S: You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you whom
you please, and whom you desire of those whom you had separated
provisionally; no blame attaches to you; this is most proper, so that
their eyes may be cool and they may not grieve, and that they should be
pleased, all of them with what you give them, and Allah knows what is
in your hearts; and Allah is Knowing, Forbearing.

033.052
Y: It is not lawful for thee (to marry more) women after this, nor to
change them for (other) wives, even though their beauty attract thee,
except any thy right hand should possess (as handmaidens): and Allah
doth watch over all things.

P: It is not allowed thee to take (other) women henceforth, nor that
thou shouldst change them for other wives even though their beauty
pleased thee, save those whom thy right hand possesseth. And Allah is
ever Watcher over all things.

S: It is not allowed to you to take women afterwards, nor that you
should change them for other wives, though their beauty be pleasing to
you, except what your right hand possesses and Allah is Watchful over
all things.

033.053
Y: O ye who believe! Enter not the Prophet's houses,- until leave is
given you,- for a meal, (and then) not (so early as) to wait for its
preparation: but when ye are invited, enter; and when ye have taken
your meal, disperse, without seeking familiar talk. Such (behaviour)
annoys the Prophet: he is ashamed to dismiss you, but Allah is not
ashamed (to tell you) the truth. And when ye ask (his ladies) for
anything ye want, ask them from before a screen: that makes for greater
purity for your hearts and for theirs. Nor is it right for you that ye
should annoy Allah's Messenger, or that ye should marry his widows
after him at any time. Truly such a thing is in Allah's sight an
enormity.

P: O Ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal
without waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted you.
But if ye are invited, enter, and, when your meal is ended, then
disperse. Linger not for conversation. Lo! that would cause annoyance
to the Prophet, and he would be shy of (asking) you (to go); but Allah
is not shy of the truth. And when ye ask of them (the wives of the
Prophet) anything, ask it of them from behind a curtain. That is purer
for your hearts and for their hearts. And it is not for you to cause
annoyance to the messenger of Allah, nor that ye should ever marry his
wives after him. Lo! that in Allah's sight would be an enormity.

S: O you who believe! do not enter the houses of the Prophet unless
permission is given to you for a meal, not waiting for its cooking
being finished-- but when you are invited, enter, and when you have
taken the food, then disperse-- not seeking to listen to talk; surely
this gives the Prophet trouble, but he forbears from you, and Allah
does not forbear from the truth. And when you ask of them any goods, ask
of them from behind a curtain; this is purer for your hearts and (for)
their hearts; and it does not behove you that you should give trouble
to the Messenger of Allah, nor that you should marry his wives after
him ever; surely this is grievous in the sight of Allah.

033.054
Y: Whether ye reveal anything or conceal it, verily Allah has full
knowledge of all things.

P: Whether ye divulge a thing or keep it hidden, lo! Allah is ever
Knower of all things.

S: If you do a thing openly or do it in secret, then surely Allah is
Cognizant of all things.

033.055
Y: There is no blame (on these ladies if they appear) before their
fathers or their sons, their brothers, or their brother's sons, or
their sisters' sons, or their women, or the (slaves) whom their right
hands possess. And, (ladies), fear Allah; for Allah is Witness to all
things.

P: It is no sin for them (thy wives) (to converse freely) with their
fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or
the sons of their sisters or of their own women, or their slaves. O
women! Keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is ever Witness over all
things.

S: There is no blame on them in respect of their fathers, nor their
brothers, nor their brothers' sons, nor their sisters' sons nor their
own women, nor of what their right hands possess; and be careful of
(your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is a witness of all things.

033.056
Y: Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet: O ye that
believe! Send ye blessings on him, and salute him with all respect.

P: Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O ye who
believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation.

S: Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe!
call for (Divine) blessings on him and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation.

033.057
Y: Those who annoy Allah and His Messenger - Allah has cursed them in
this World and in the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a
humiliating Punishment.

P: Lo! those who malign Allah and His messenger, Allah hath cursed them
in the world and the Hereafter, and hath prepared for them the doom of
the disdained.

S: Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His
Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the here after, and
He has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace.

033.058
Y: And those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly, bear (on
themselves) a calumny and a glaring sin.

P: And those who malign believing men and believing women undeservedly,
they bear the guilt of slander and manifest sin.

S: And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the
believing women without their having earned (it), they are guilty
indeed of a false accusation and a manifest sin.

033.059
Y: O Prophet! Tell thy wives and daughters, and the believing women,
that they should cast their outer garments over their persons (when
abroad): that is most convenient, that they should be known (as such)
and not molested. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: O Prophet! Tell thy wives and thy daughters and the women of the
believers to draw their cloaks close round them (when they go abroad).
That will be better, so that they may be recognised and not annoyed.
Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: O Prophet! say to your wives and your daughters and the women of the
believers that they let down upon them their over-garments; this will
