We must now consider the causes of sin: (1) in general; (2) in
particular. Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether sin has a cause?

(2) Whether it has an internal cause?

(3) Whether it has an external cause?

(4) Whether one sin is the cause of another?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 75, Art. 1]

Whether Sin Has a Cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin has no cause. For sin has the
nature of evil, as stated above (Q. 71, A. 6). But evil has no cause,
as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore sin has no cause.

Obj. 2: Further, a cause is that from which something follows of
necessity. Now that which is of necessity, seems to be no sin, for
every sin is voluntary. Therefore sin has no cause.

Obj. 3: Further, if sin has a cause, this cause is either good or
evil. It is not a good, because good produces nothing but good, for
"a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit" (Matt. 7:18). Likewise
neither can evil be the cause of sin, because the evil of punishment
is a sequel to sin, and the evil of guilt is the same as sin.
Therefore sin has no cause.

_On the contrary,_ Whatever is done has a cause, for, according to
Job 5:6, "nothing upon earth is done without a cause." But sin is
something done; since it a "word, deed, or desire contrary to the law
of God." Therefore sin has a cause.

_I answer that,_ A sin is an inordinate act. Accordingly, so far as
it is an act, it can have a direct cause, even as any other act; but,
so far as it is inordinate, it has a cause, in the same way as a
negation or privation can have a cause. Now two causes may be
assigned to a negation: in the first place, absence of the cause of
affirmation; i.e. the negation of the cause itself, is the cause of
the negation in itself; since the result of removing the cause is the
removal of the effect: thus the absence of the sun is the cause of
darkness. In the second place, the cause of an affirmation, of which
a negation is a sequel, is the accidental cause of the resulting
negation: thus fire by causing heat in virtue of its principal
tendency, consequently causes a privation of cold. The first of these
suffices to cause a simple negation. But, since the inordinateness of
sin and of every evil is not a simple negation, but the privation of
that which something ought naturally to have, such an inordinateness
must needs have an accidental efficient cause. For that which
naturally is and ought to be in a thing, is never lacking except on
account of some impeding cause. And accordingly we are wont to say
that evil, which consists in a certain privation, has a deficient
cause, or an accidental efficient cause. Now every accidental cause
is reducible to the direct cause. Since then sin, on the part of its
inordinateness, has an accidental efficient cause, and on the part of
the act, a direct efficient cause, it follows that the inordinateness
of sin is a result of the cause of the act. Accordingly then, the
will lacking the direction of the rule of reason and of the Divine
law, and intent on some mutable good, causes the act of sin directly,
and the inordinateness of the act, indirectly, and beside the
intention: for the lack of order in the act results from the lack of
direction in the will.

Reply Obj. 1: Sin signifies not only the privation of good, which
privation is its inordinateness, but also the act which is the
subject of that privation, which has the nature of evil: and how this
evil has a cause, has been explained.

Reply Obj. 2: If this definition is to be verified in all cases, it
must be understood as applying to a cause which is sufficient and not
impeded. For it happens that a thing is the sufficient cause of
something else, and that the effect does not follow of necessity, on
account of some supervening impediment: else it would follow that all
things happen of necessity, as is proved in _Metaph._ vi, text. 5.
Accordingly, though sin has a cause, it does not follow that this is
a necessary cause, since its effect can be impeded.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above, the will in failing to apply the rule
of reason or of the Divine law, is the cause of sin. Now the fact of
not applying the rule of reason or of the Divine law, has not in
itself the nature of evil, whether of punishment or of guilt, before
it is applied to the act. Wherefore accordingly, evil is not the
cause of the first sin, but some good lacking some other good.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 75, Art. 2]

Whether Sin Has an Internal Cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin has no internal cause. For that
which is within a thing is always in it. If therefore sin had an
internal cause, man would always be sinning, since given the cause,
the effect follows.

Obj. 2: Further, a thing is not its own cause. But the internal
movements of a man are sins. Therefore they are not the cause of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is within man is either natural or
voluntary. Now that which is natural cannot be the cause of sin, for
sin is contrary to nature, as Damascene states (De Fide Orth. ii, 3;
iv, 21); while that which is voluntary, if it be inordinate, is
already a sin. Therefore nothing intrinsic can be the cause of the
first sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Duabus Anim. x, 10, 11;
Retract. i, 9) that "the will is the cause of sin."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the direct cause of sin must
be considered on the part of the act. Now we may distinguish a
twofold internal cause of human acts, one remote, the other
proximate. The proximate internal cause of the human act is the
reason and will, in respect of which man has a free-will; while the
remote cause is the apprehension of the sensitive part, and also the
sensitive appetite. For just as it is due to the judgment of reason,
that the will is moved to something in accord with reason, so it is
due to an apprehension of the senses that the sensitive appetite is
inclined to something; which inclination sometimes influences the
will and reason, as we shall explain further on (Q. 77, A. 1).
Accordingly a double interior cause of sin may be assigned; one
proximate, on the part of the reason and will; and the other remote,
on the part of the imagination or sensitive appetite.

But since we have said above (A. 1, ad 3) that the cause of sin is
some apparent good as motive, yet lacking the due motive, viz. the
rule of reason or the Divine law, this motive which is an apparent
good, appertains to the apprehension of the senses and to the
appetite; while the lack of the due rule appertains to the reason,
whose nature it is to consider this rule; and the completeness of the
voluntary sinful act appertains to the will, so that the act of the
will, given the conditions we have just mentioned, is already a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: That which is within a thing as its natural power, is
always in it: but that which is within it, as the internal act of the
appetitive or apprehensive power, is not always in it. Now the power
of the will is the potential cause of sin, but is made actual by the
preceding movements, both of the sensitive part, in the first place,
and afterwards, of the reason. For it is because a thing is proposed
as appetible to the senses, and because the appetite is inclined,
that the reason sometimes fails to consider the due rule, so that the
will produces the act of sin. Since therefore the movements that
precede it are not always actual, neither is man always actually
sinning.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not true that all the internal acts belong to the
substance of sin, for this consists principally in the act of the
will; but some precede and some follow the sin itself.

Reply Obj. 3: That which causes sin, as a power produces its act, is
natural; and again, the movement of the sensitive part, from which
sin follows, is natural sometimes, as, for instance, when anyone sins
through appetite for food. Yet sin results in being unnatural from
the very fact that the natural rule fails, which man, in accord with
his nature, ought to observe.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 75, Art. 3]

Whether Sin Has an External Cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin has no external cause. For sin is
a voluntary act. Now voluntary acts belong to principles that are
within us, so that they have no external cause. Therefore sin has no
external cause.

Obj. 2: Further, as nature is an internal principle, so is the will.
Now in natural things sin can be due to no other than an internal
cause; for instance, the birth of a monster is due to the corruption
of some internal principle. Therefore in the moral order, sin can
arise from no other than an internal cause. Therefore it has no
external cause.

Obj. 3: Further, if the cause is multiplied, the effect is
multiplied. Now the more numerous and weighty the external
inducements to sin are, the less is a man's inordinate act imputed
to him as a sin. Therefore nothing external is a cause of sin.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Num. 21:16): "Are not these they,
that deceived the children of Israel by the counsel of Balaam, and
made you transgress against the Lord by the sin of Phogor?" Therefore
something external can be a cause of sin.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), the internal cause of sin is
both the will, as completing the sinful act, and the reason, as
lacking the due rule, and the appetite, as inclining to sin.
Accordingly something external might be a cause of sin in three ways,
either by moving the will itself immediately, or by moving the
reason, or by moving the sensitive appetite. Now, as stated above (Q.
9, A. 6; Q. 10, A. 4), none can move the will inwardly save God
alone, who cannot be a cause of sin, as we shall prove further on (Q.
79, A. 1). Hence it follows that nothing external can be a cause of
sin, except by moving the reason, as a man or devil by enticing to
sin; or by moving the sensitive appetite, as certain external
sensibles move it. Yet neither does external enticement move the
reason, of necessity, in matters of action, nor do things proposed
externally, of necessity move the sensitive appetite, except perhaps
it be disposed thereto in a certain way; and even the sensitive
appetite does not, of necessity, move the reason and will. Therefore
something external can be a cause moving to sin, but not so as to be
a sufficient cause thereof: and the will alone is the sufficient
completive cause of sin being accomplished.

Reply Obj. 1: From the very fact that the external motive causes of
sin do not lead to sin sufficiently and necessarily, it follows that
it remains in our power to sin or not to sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The fact that sin has an internal cause does not
prevent its having an external cause; for nothing external is a cause
of sin, except through the medium of the internal cause, as stated.

Reply Obj. 3: If the external causes inclining to sin be multiplied,
the sinful acts are multiplied, because they incline to the sinful
act in both greater numbers and greater frequency. Nevertheless the
character of guilt is lessened, since this depends on the act being
voluntary and in our power.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 75, Art. 4]

Whether One Sin Is a Cause of Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that one sin cannot be the cause of
another. For there are four kinds of cause, none of which will fit in
with one sin causing another. Because the end has the character of
good; which is inconsistent with sin, which has the character of evil.
In like manner neither can a sin be an efficient cause, since "evil is
not an efficient cause, but is weak and powerless," as Dionysius
declares (Div. Nom. iv). The material and formal cause seems to have
no place except in natural bodies, which are composed of matter and
form. Therefore sin cannot have either a material or a formal cause.

Obj. 2: Further, "to produce its like belongs to a perfect
thing," as stated in _Meteor._ iv, 2 [*Cf. _De Anima_ ii.]. But sin is
essentially something imperfect. Therefore one sin cannot be a cause
of another.

Obj. 3: Further, if one sin is the cause of a second sin, in the
same way, yet another sin will be the cause of the first, and thus we
go on indefinitely, which is absurd. Therefore one sin is not the
cause of another.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says on Ezechiel (Hom. xi): "A sin that is
not quickly blotted out by repentance, is both a sin and a cause of
sin."

_I answer that,_ Forasmuch as a sin has a cause on the part of the
act of sin, it is possible for one sin to be the cause of another, in
the same way as one human act is the cause of another. Hence it
happens that one sin may be the cause of another in respect of the
four kinds of causes. First, after the manner of an efficient or
moving cause, both directly and indirectly. Indirectly, as that which
removes an impediment is called an indirect cause of movement: for
when man, by one sinful act, loses grace, or charity, or shame, or
anything else that withdraws him from sin, he thereby falls into
another sin, so that the first sin is the accidental cause of the
second. Directly, as when, by one sinful act, man is disposed to
commit more readily another like act: because acts cause dispositions
and habits inclining to like acts. Secondly, after the manner of a
material cause, one sin is the cause of another, by preparing its
matter: thus covetousness prepares the matter for strife, which is
often about the wealth a man has amassed together. Thirdly, after the
manner of a final cause, one sin causes another, in so far as a man
commits one sin for the sake of another which is his end; as when a
man is guilty of simony for the end of ambition, or fornication for
the purpose of theft. And since the end gives the form to moral
matters, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 3; Q. 18, AA. 4, 6), it follows
that one sin is also the formal cause of another: because in the act
of fornication committed for the purpose of theft, the former is
material while the latter is formal.

Reply Obj. 1: Sin, in so far as it is inordinate, has the character
of evil; but, in so far as it is an act, it has some good, at least
apparent, for its end: so that, as an act, but not as being
inordinate, it can be the cause, both final and efficient, of another
sin. A sin has matter, not _of which_ but _about which_ it is: and it
has its form from its end. Consequently one sin can be the cause of
another, in respect of the four kinds of cause, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Sin is something imperfect on account of its moral
imperfection on the part of its inordinateness. Nevertheless, as an
act it can have natural perfection: and thus it can be the cause of
another sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Not every cause of one sin is another sin; so there is
no need to go on indefinitely: for one may come to one sin which is
not caused by another sin.
________________________

QUESTION 76

OF THE CAUSES OF SIN, IN PARTICULAR
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the causes of sin, in particular, and (1) The
internal causes of sin; (2) its external causes; and (3) sins which
are the causes of other sins. In view of what has been said above (A.
2), the first consideration will be threefold: so that in the first
place we shall treat of ignorance, which is the cause of sin on the
part of reason; secondly, of weakness or passion, which is the cause
of sin on the part of the sensitive appetite; thirdly, of malice,
which is the cause of sin on the part of the will.

Under the first head, there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether ignorance is a cause of sin?

(2) Whether ignorance is a sin?

(3) Whether it excuses from sin altogether?

(4) Whether it diminishes sin?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 76, Art. 1]

Whether Ignorance Can Be a Cause of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that ignorance cannot be a cause of sin:
because a non-being is not the cause of anything. Now ignorance is a
non-being, since it is a privation of knowledge. Therefore ignorance
is not a cause of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, causes of sin should be reckoned in respect of sin
being a _turning to_ something, as was stated above (Q. 75, A. 1).
Now ignorance seems to savor of _turning away_ from something.
Therefore it should not be reckoned a cause of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every sin is seated in the will. Now the will does
not turn to that which is not known, because its object is the good
apprehended. Therefore ignorance cannot be a cause of sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. lxvii) "that some
sin through ignorance."

_I answer that,_ According to the Philosopher (Phys. viii, 27) a
moving cause is twofold, direct and indirect. A direct cause is one
that moves by its own power, as the generator is the moving cause of
heavy and light things. An indirect cause, is either one that removes
an impediment, or the removal itself of an impediment: and it is in
this way that ignorance can be the cause of a sinful act; because it
is a privation of knowledge perfecting the reason that forbids the
act of sin, in so far as it directs human acts.

Now we must observe that the reason directs human acts in accordance
with a twofold knowledge, universal and particular: because in
conferring about what is to be done, it employs a syllogism, the
conclusion of which is an act of judgment, or of choice, or an
operation. Now actions are about singulars: wherefore the conclusion
of a practical syllogism is a singular proposition. But a singular
proposition does not follow from a universal proposition, except
through the medium of a particular proposition: thus a man is
restrained from an act of parricide, by the knowledge that it is
wrong to kill one's father, and that this man is his father. Hence
ignorance about either of these two propositions, viz. of the
universal principle which is a rule of reason, or of the particular
circumstance, could cause an act of parricide. Hence it is clear that
not every kind of ignorance is the cause of a sin, but that alone
which removes the knowledge which would prevent the sinful act.
Consequently if a man's will be so disposed that he would not be
restrained from the act of parricide, even though he recognized his
father, his ignorance about his father is not the cause of his
committing the sin, but is concomitant with the sin: wherefore such a
man sins, not "through ignorance" but "in ignorance," as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. iii, 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Non-being cannot be the direct cause of anything: but
it can be an accidental cause, as being the removal of an impediment.

Reply Obj. 2: As knowledge, which is removed by ignorance, regards
sin as turning towards something, so too, ignorance of this respect
of a sin is the cause of that sin, as removing its impediment.

Reply Obj. 3: The will cannot turn to that which is absolutely
unknown: but if something be known in one respect, and unknown in
another, the will can will it. It is thus that ignorance is the cause
of sin: for instance, when a man knows that what he is killing is a
man, but not that it is his own father; or when one knows that a
certain act is pleasurable, but not that it is a sin.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 76, Art. 2]

Whether Ignorance Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that ignorance is not a sin. For sin is "a
word, deed or desire contrary to God's law," as stated above (Q. 71,
A. 5). Now ignorance does not denote an act, either internal or
external. Therefore ignorance is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, sin is more directly opposed to grace than to
knowledge. Now privation of grace is not a sin, but a punishment
resulting from sin. Therefore ignorance which is privation of
knowledge is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if ignorance is a sin, this can only be in so far as
it is voluntary. But if ignorance is a sin, through being voluntary,
it seems that the sin will consist in the act itself of the will,
rather than in the ignorance. Therefore the ignorance will not be a
sin, but rather a result of sin.

Obj. 4: Further, every sin is taken away by repentance, nor does any
sin, except only original sin, pass as to guilt, yet remain in act.
Now ignorance is not removed by repentance, but remains in act, all
its guilt being removed by repentance. Therefore ignorance is not a
sin, unless perchance it be original sin.

Obj. 5: Further, if ignorance be a sin, then a man will be sinning,
as long as he remains in ignorance. But ignorance is continual in the
one who is ignorant. Therefore a person in ignorance would be
continually sinning, which is clearly false, else ignorance would be
a most grievous sin. Therefore ignorance is not a sin.

_On the contrary,_ Nothing but sin deserves punishment. But ignorance
deserves punishment, according to 1 Cor. 14:38: "If any man know not,
he shall not be known." Therefore ignorance is a sin.

_I answer that,_ Ignorance differs from nescience, in that nescience
denotes mere absence of knowledge; wherefore whoever lacks knowledge
about anything, can be said to be nescient about it: in which sense
Dionysius puts nescience in the angels (Coel. Hier. vii). On the
other hand, ignorance denotes privation of knowledge, i.e. lack of
knowledge of those things that one has a natural aptitude to know.
Some of these we are under an obligation to know, those, to wit,
without the knowledge of which we are unable to accomplish a due act
rightly. Wherefore all are bound in common to know the articles of
faith, and the universal principles of right, and each individual is
bound to know matters regarding his duty or state. Meanwhile there
are other things which a man may have a natural aptitude to know, yet
he is not bound to know them, such as the geometrical theorems, and
contingent particulars, except in some individual case. Now it is
evident that whoever neglects to have or do what he ought to have or
do, commits a sin of omission. Wherefore through negligence,
ignorance of what one is bound to know, is a sin; whereas it is not
imputed as a sin to man, if he fails to know what he is unable to
know. Consequently ignorance of such like things is called
"invincible," because it cannot be overcome by study. For this reason
such like ignorance, not being voluntary, since it is not in our
power to be rid of it, is not a sin: wherefore it is evident that no
invincible ignorance is a sin. On the other hand, vincible ignorance
is a sin, if it be about matters one is bound to know; but not, if it
be about things one is not bound to know.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 71, A. 6, ad 1), when we say that
sin is a "word, deed or desire," we include the opposite negations,
by reason of which omissions have the character of sin; so that
negligence, in as much as ignorance is a sin, is comprised in the
above definition of sin; in so far as one omits to say what one
ought, or to do what one ought, or to desire what one ought, in order
to acquire the knowledge which we ought to have.

Reply Obj. 2: Although privation of grace is not a sin in itself, yet
by reason of negligence in preparing oneself for grace, it may have
the character of sin, even as ignorance; nevertheless even here there
is a difference, since man can acquire knowledge by his acts, whereas
grace is not acquired by acts, but by God's favor.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as in a sin of transgression, the sin consists not
only in the act of the will, but also in the act willed, which is
commanded by the will; so in a sin of omission not only the act of
the will is a sin, but also the omission, in so far as it is in some
way voluntary; and accordingly, the neglect to know, or even lack of
consideration is a sin.

Reply Obj. 4: Although when the guilt has passed away through
repentance, the ignorance remains, according as it is a privation of
knowledge, nevertheless the negligence does not remain, by reason of
which the ignorance is said to be a sin.

Reply Obj. 5: Just as in other sins of omission, man sins actually
only at the time at which the affirmative precept is binding, so is
it with the sin of ignorance. For the ignorant man sins actually
indeed, not continually, but only at the time for acquiring the
knowledge that he ought to have.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 76, Art. 3]

Whether Ignorance Excuses from Sin Altogether?

Objection 1: It would seem that ignorance excuses from sin
altogether. For as Augustine says (Retract. i, 9), every sin is
voluntary. Now ignorance causes involuntariness, as stated above (Q.
6, A. 8). Therefore ignorance excuses from sin altogether.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is done beside the intention, is done
accidentally. Now the intention cannot be about what is unknown.
Therefore what a man does through ignorance is accidental in human
acts. But what is accidental does not give the species. Therefore
nothing that is done through ignorance in human acts, should be
deemed sinful or virtuous.

Obj. 3: Further, man is the subject of virtue and sin, inasmuch as he
is partaker of reason. Now ignorance excludes knowledge which
perfects the reason. Therefore ignorance excuses from sin altogether.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii, 18) that "some
things done through ignorance are rightly reproved." Now those things
alone are rightly reproved which are sins. Therefore some things done
through ignorance are sins. Therefore ignorance does not altogether
excuse from sin.

_I answer that,_ Ignorance, by its very nature, renders the act which
it causes involuntary. Now it has already been stated (AA. 1, 2) that
ignorance is said to cause the act which the contrary knowledge would
have prevented; so that this act, if knowledge were to hand, would be
contrary to the will, which is the meaning of the word involuntary.
If, however, the knowledge, which is removed by ignorance, would not
have prevented the act, on account of the inclination of the will
thereto, the lack of this knowledge does not make that man unwilling,
but not willing, as stated in _Ethic._ iii, 1: and such like
ignorance which is not the cause of the sinful act, as already
stated, since it does not make the act to be involuntary, does not
excuse from sin. The same applies to any ignorance that does not
cause, but follows or accompanies the sinful act.

On the other hand, ignorance which is the cause of the act, since it
makes it to be involuntary, of its very nature excuses from sin,
because voluntariness is essential to sin. But it may fail to excuse
altogether from sin, and this for two reasons. First, on the part of
the thing itself which is not known. For ignorance excuses from sin,
in so far as something is not known to be a sin. Now it may happen
that a person ignores some circumstance of a sin, the knowledge of
which circumstance would prevent him from sinning, whether it belong
to the substance of the sin, or not; and nevertheless his knowledge
is sufficient for him to be aware that the act is sinful; for
instance, if a man strike someone, knowing that it is a man (which
suffices for it to be sinful) and yet be ignorant of the fact that it
is his father, (which is a circumstance constituting another species
of sin); or, suppose that he is unaware that this man will defend
himself and strike him back, and that if he had known this, he would
not have struck him (which does not affect the sinfulness of the
act). Wherefore, though this man sins through ignorance, yet he is
not altogether excused, because, not withstanding, he has knowledge
of the sin. Secondly, this may happen on the part of the ignorance
itself, because, to wit, this ignorance is voluntary, either
directly, as when a man wishes of set purpose to be ignorant of
certain things that he may sin the more freely; or indirectly, as
when a man, through stress of work or other occupations, neglects to
acquire the knowledge which would restrain him from sin. For such
like negligence renders the ignorance itself voluntary and sinful,
provided it be about matters one is bound and able to know.
Consequently this ignorance does not altogether excuse from sin. If,
however, the ignorance be such as to be entirely involuntary, either
through being invincible, or through being of matters one is not
bound to know, then such like ignorance excuses from sin altogether.

Reply Obj. 1: Not every ignorance causes involuntariness, as stated
above (Q. 6, A. 8). Hence not every ignorance excuses from sin
altogether.

Reply Obj. 2: So far as voluntariness remains in the ignorant person,
the intention of sin remains in him: so that, in this respect, his
sin is not accidental.

Reply Obj. 3: If the ignorance be such as to exclude the use of
reason entirely, it excuses from sin altogether, as is the case with
madmen and imbeciles: but such is not always the ignorance that
causes the sin; and so it does not always excuse from sin altogether.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 76, Art. 4]

Whether Ignorance Diminishes a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that ignorance does not diminish a sin.
For that which is common to all sins does not diminish sin. Now
ignorance is common to all sins, for the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iii, 1) that "every evil man is ignorant." Therefore ignorance does
not diminish sin.

Obj. 2: Further, one sin added to another makes a greater sin. But
ignorance is itself a sin, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore it does
not diminish a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the same thing does not both aggravate and diminish
sin. Now ignorance aggravates sin; for Ambrose commenting on Rom.
2:4, "Knowest thou not that the benignity of God leadeth thee to
penance?" says: "Thy sin is most grievous if thou knowest not."
Therefore ignorance does not diminish sin.

Obj. 4: Further, if any kind of ignorance diminishes a sin, this
would seem to be chiefly the case as regards the ignorance which
removes the use of reason altogether. Now this kind of ignorance does
not diminish sin, but increases it: for the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iii, 5) that the "punishment is doubled for a drunken man." Therefore
ignorance does not diminish sin.

_On the contrary,_ Whatever is a reason for sin to be forgiven,
diminishes sin. Now such is ignorance, as is clear from 1 Tim. 1:13:
"I obtained . . . mercy . . . because I did it ignorantly." Therefore
ignorance diminishes or alleviates sin.

_I answer that,_ Since every sin is voluntary, ignorance can diminish
sin, in so far as it diminishes its voluntariness; and if it does not
render it less voluntary, it nowise alleviates the sin. Now it is
evident that the ignorance which excuses from sin altogether (through
making it altogether involuntary) does not diminish a sin, but does
away with it altogether. On the other hand, ignorance which is not
the cause of the sin being committed, but is concomitant with it,
neither diminishes nor increases the sin.

Therefore sin cannot be alleviated by any ignorance, but only by such
as is a cause of the sin being committed, and yet does not excuse
from the sin altogether. Now it happens sometimes that such like
ignorance is directly and essentially voluntary, as when a man is
purposely ignorant that he may sin more freely, and ignorance of this
kind seems rather to make the act more voluntary and more sinful,
since it is through the will's intention to sin that he is willing to
bear the hurt of ignorance, for the sake of freedom in sinning.
Sometimes, however, the ignorance which is the cause of a sin being
committed, is not directly voluntary, but indirectly or accidentally,
as when a man is unwilling to work hard at his studies, the result
being that he is ignorant, or as when a man willfully drinks too much
wine, the result being that he becomes drunk and indiscreet, and this
ignorance diminishes voluntariness and consequently alleviates the
sin. For when a thing is not known to be a sin, the will cannot be
said to consent to the sin directly, but only accidentally;
wherefore, in that case there is less contempt, and therefore less
sin.

Reply Obj. 1: The ignorance whereby "every evil man is ignorant," is
not the cause of sin being committed, but something resulting from
that cause, viz. of the passion or habit inclining to sin.

Reply Obj. 2: One sin added to another makes more sins, but it does
not always make a sin greater, since, perchance, the two sins do not
coincide, but are separate. It may happen, if the first diminishes
the second, that the two together have not the same gravity as one of
them alone would have; thus murder is a more grievous sin if
committed by a man when sober, than if committed by a man when drunk,
although in the latter case there are two sins: because drunkenness
diminishes the sinfulness of the resulting sin more than its own
gravity implies.

Reply Obj. 3: The words of Ambrose may be understood as referring to
simply affected ignorance; or they may have reference to a species of
the sin of ingratitude, the highest degree of which is that man even
ignores the benefits he has received; or again, they may be an
allusion to the ignorance of unbelief, which undermines the
foundation of the spiritual edifice.

Reply Obj. 4: The drunken man deserves a "double punishment" for the
two sins which he commits, viz. drunkenness, and the sin which
results from his drunkenness: and yet drunkenness, on account of the
ignorance connected therewith, diminishes the resulting sin, and
more, perhaps, than the gravity of the drunkenness implies, as stated
above (ad 2). It might also be said that the words quoted refer to an
ordinance of the legislator named Pittacus, who ordered drunkards to
be more severely punished if they assaulted anyone; having an eye,
not to the indulgence which the drunkard might claim, but to
expediency, since more harm is done by the drunk than by the sober,
as the Philosopher observes (Polit. ii).
________________________

QUESTION 77

OF THE CAUSE OF SIN, ON THE PART OF THE SENSITIVE APPETITE
(In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the cause of sin, on the part of the sensitive
appetite, as to whether a passion of the soul may be a cause of sin:
and under this head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a passion of the sensitive appetite can move or incline
the will?

(2) Whether it can overcome the reason against the latter's knowledge?

(3) Whether a sin resulting from a passion is a sin of weakness?

(4) Whether the passion of self-love is the cause of every sin?

(5) Of three causes mentioned in 1 John 2:16: "Concupiscence of the
eyes, Concupiscence of the flesh," and "Pride of life."

(6) Whether the passion which causes a sin diminishes it?

(7) Whether passion excuses from sin altogether?

(8) Whether a sin committed through passion can be mortal?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 1]

Whether the Will Is Moved by a Passion of the Sensitive Appetite?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not moved by a passion of
the sensitive appetite. For no passive power is moved except by its
object. Now the will is a power both passive and active, inasmuch as
it is mover and moved, as the Philosopher says of the appetitive
power in general (De Anima iii, text. 54). Since therefore the object
of the will is not a passion of the sensitive appetite, but good
defined by the reason, it seems that a passion of the sensitive
appetite does not move the will.

Obj. 2: Further, the higher mover is not moved by the lower; thus the
soul is not moved by the body. Now the will, which is the rational
appetite, is compared to the sensitive appetite, as a higher mover to
a lower: for the Philosopher says (De Anima iii, text. 57) that "the
rational appetite moves the sensitive appetite, even as, in the
heavenly bodies, one sphere moves another." Therefore the will cannot
be moved by a passion of the sensitive appetite.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing immaterial can be moved by that which is
material. Now the will is an immaterial power, because it does not
use a corporeal organ, since it is in the reason, as stated in _De
Anima_ iii, text. 42: whereas the sensitive appetite is a material
force, since it is seated in an organ of the body. Therefore a
passion of the sensitive appetite cannot move the intellective
appetite.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Dan. 13:56): "Lust hath perverted
thy heart."

_I answer that,_ A passion of the sensitive appetite cannot draw or
move the will directly; but it can do so indirectly, and this in two
ways. First, by a kind of distraction: because, since all the soul's
powers are rooted in the one essence of the soul, it follows of
necessity that, when one power is intent in its act, another power
becomes remiss, or is even altogether impeded, in its act, both
because all energy is weakened through being divided, so that, on the
contrary, through being centered on one thing, it is less able to be
directed to several; and because, in the operations of the soul, a
certain attention is requisite, and if this be closely fixed on one
thing, less attention is given to another. In this way, by a kind of
distraction, when the movement of the sensitive appetite is enforced
in respect of any passion whatever, the proper movement of the
rational appetite or will must, of necessity, become remiss or
altogether impeded.

Secondly, this may happen on the part of the will's object, which is
good apprehended by reason. Because the judgment and apprehension of
reason is impeded on account of a vehement and inordinate
apprehension of the imagination and judgment of the estimative power,
as appears in those who are out of their mind. Now it is evident that
the apprehension of the imagination and the judgment of the
estimative power follow the passion of the sensitive appetite, even
as the verdict of the taste follows the disposition of the tongue:
for which reason we observe that those who are in some kind of
passion, do not easily turn their imagination away from the object of
their emotion, the result being that the judgment of the reason often
follows the passion of the sensitive appetite, and consequently the
will's movement follows it also, since it has a natural inclination
always to follow the judgment of the reason.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the passion of the sensitive appetite is not
the direct object of the will, yet it occasions a certain change in
the judgment about the object of the will, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: The higher mover is not directly moved by the lower;
but, in a manner, it can be moved by it indirectly, as stated.

The Third Objection is solved in like manner.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 2]

Whether the Reason Can Be Overcome by a Passion, Against Its
Knowledge?

Objection 1: It would seem that the reason cannot be overcome by a
passion, against its knowledge. For the stronger is not overcome by
the weaker. Now knowledge, on account of its certitude, is the
strongest thing in us. Therefore it cannot be overcome by a passion,
which is weak and soon passes away.

Obj. 2: Further, the will is not directed save to the good or the
apparent good. Now when a passion draws the will to that which is
really good, it does not influence the reason against its knowledge;
and when it draws it to that which is good apparently, but not
really, it draws it to that which appears good to the reason. But
what appears to the reason is in the knowledge of the reason.
Therefore a passion never influences the reason against its knowledge.

Obj. 3: Further, if it be said that it draws the reason from its
knowledge of something in general, to form a contrary judgment about
a particular matter--on the contrary, if a universal and a particular
proposition be opposed, they are opposed by contradiction, e.g.
"Every man," and "Not every man." Now if two opinions contradict one
another, they are contrary to one another, as stated in _Peri Herm._
ii. If therefore anyone, while knowing something in general, were to
pronounce an opposite judgment in a particular case, he would have
two contrary opinions at the same time, which is impossible.

Obj. 4: Further, whoever knows the universal, knows also the
particular which he knows to be contained in the universal: thus who
knows that every mule is sterile, knows that this particular animal
is sterile, provided he knows it to be a mule, as is clear from
_Poster._ i, text. 2. Now he who knows something in general, e.g.
that "no fornication is lawful," knows this general proposition to
contain, for example, the particular proposition, "This is an act of
fornication." Therefore it seems that his knowledge extends to the
particular.

Obj. 5: Further, according to the Philosopher (Peri Herm. i), "words
express the thoughts of the mind." Now it often happens that man,
while in a state of passion, confesses that what he has chosen is an
evil, even in that particular case. Therefore he has knowledge, even
in particular.

Therefore it seems that the passions cannot draw the reason against
its universal knowledge; because it is impossible for it to have
universal knowledge together with an opposite particular judgment.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 7:23): "I see another law
in my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and captivating
me in the law of sin." Now the law that is in the members is
concupiscence, of which he had been speaking previously. Since then
concupiscence is a passion, it seems that a passion draws the reason
counter to its knowledge.

_I answer that,_ As the Philosopher states (Ethic. vii, 2), the
opinion of Socrates was that knowledge can never be overcome by
passion; wherefore he held every virtue to be a kind of knowledge,
and every sin a kind of ignorance. In this he was somewhat right,
because, since the object of the will is a good or an apparent good,
it is never moved to an evil, unless that which is not good appear
good in some respect to the reason; so that the will would never tend
to evil, unless there were ignorance or error in the reason. Hence it
is written (Prov. 14:22): "They err that work evil."

Experience, however, shows that many act contrary to the knowledge
that they have, and this is confirmed by Divine authority, according
to the words of Luke 12:47: "The servant who knew that the will of
his lord . . . and did not . . . shall be beaten with many stripes,"
and of James 4:17: "To him . . . who knoweth to do good, and doth it
not, to him it is a sin." Consequently he was not altogether right,
and it is necessary, with the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 3) to make a
distinction. Because, since man is directed to right action by a
twofold knowledge, viz. universal and particular, a defect in either
of them suffices to hinder the rectitude of the will and of the deed,
as stated above (Q. 76, A. 1). It may happen, then, that a man has
some knowledge in general, e.g. that no fornication is lawful, and
yet he does not know in particular that this act, which is
fornication, must not be done; and this suffices for the will not to
follow the universal knowledge of the reason. Again, it must be
observed that nothing prevents a thing which is known habitually from
not being considered actually: so that it is possible for a man to
have correct knowledge not only in general but also in particular,
and yet not to consider his knowledge actually: and in such a case it
does not seem difficult for a man to act counter to what he does not
actually consider. Now, that a man sometimes fails to consider in
particular what he knows habitually, may happen through mere lack of
attention: for instance, a man who knows geometry, may not attend to
the consideration of geometrical conclusions, which he is ready to
consider at any moment. Sometimes man fails to consider actually what
he knows habitually, on account of some hindrance supervening, e.g.
some external occupation, or some bodily infirmity; and, in this way,
a man who is in a state of passion, fails to consider in particular
what he knows in general, in so far as the passions hinder him from
considering it. Now it hinders him in three ways. First, by way of
distraction, as explained above (A. 1). Secondly, by way of
opposition, because a passion often inclines to something contrary to
what man knows in general. Thirdly, by way of bodily transmutation,
the result of which is that the reason is somehow fettered so as not
to exercise its act freely; even as sleep or drunkenness, on account
of some change wrought on the body, fetters the use of reason. That
this takes place in the passions is evident from the fact that
sometimes, when the passions are very intense, man loses the use of
reason altogether: for many have gone out of their minds through
excess of love or anger. It is in this way that passion draws the
reason to judge in particular, against the knowledge which it has in
general.

Reply Obj. 1: Universal knowledge, which is most certain, does not
hold the foremost place in action, but rather particular knowledge,
since actions are about singulars: wherefore it is not astonishing
that, in matters of action, passion acts counter to universal
knowledge, if the consideration of particular knowledge be lacking.

Reply Obj. 2: The fact that something appears good in particular to
the reason, whereas it is not good, is due to a passion: and yet this
particular judgment is contrary to the universal knowledge of the
reason.

Reply Obj. 3: It is impossible for anyone to have an actual knowledge
or true opinion about a universal affirmative proposition, and at the
same time a false opinion about a particular negative proposition, or
vice versa: but it may well happen that a man has true habitual
knowledge about a universal affirmative proposition, and actually a
false opinion about a particular negative: because an act is directly
opposed, not to a habit, but to an act.

Reply Obj. 4: He that has knowledge in a universal, is hindered, on
account of a passion, from reasoning about that universal, so as to
draw the conclusion: but he reasons about another universal
proposition suggested by the inclination of the passion, and draws
his conclusion accordingly. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii,
3) that the syllogism of an incontinent man has four propositions,
two particular and two universal, of which one is of the son, e.g. No
fornication is lawful, and the other, of passion, e.g. Pleasure is to
be pursued. Hence passion fetters the reason, and hinders it from
arguing and concluding under the first proposition; so that while the
passion lasts, the reason argues and concludes under the second.

Reply Obj. 5: Even as a drunken man sometimes gives utterance to
words of deep signification, of which, however, he is incompetent to
judge, his drunkenness hindering him; so that a man who is in a state
of passion, may indeed say in words that he ought not to do so and
so, yet his inner thought is that he must do it, as stated in
_Ethic._ vii, 3.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 3]

Whether a Sin Committed Through Passion, Should Be Called a Sin of
Weakness?

Objection 1: It would seem that a sin committed through passion
should not be called a sin of weakness. For a passion is a vehement
movement of the sensitive appetite, as stated above (A. 1). Now
vehemence of movements is evidence of strength rather than of
weakness. Therefore a sin committed through passion, should not be
called a sin of weakness.

Obj. 2: Further, weakness in man regards that which is most fragile
in him. Now this is the flesh; whence it is written (Ps. 77:39): "He
remembered that they are flesh." Therefore sins of weakness should be
those which result from bodily defects, rather than those which are
due to a passion.

Obj. 3: Further, man does not seem to be weak in respect of things
which are subject to his will. Now it is subject to man's will,
whether he do or do not the things to which his passions incline him,
according to Gen. 4:7: "Thy appetite shall be under thee [*Vulg.:
'The lust thereof shall be under thee.'], and thou shalt have dominion
over it." Therefore sin committed through passion is not a sin of
weakness.

_On the contrary,_ Cicero (De Quaest. Tusc. iv) calls the passions
diseases of the soul. Now weakness is another name for disease.
Therefore a sin that arises from passion should be called a sin of
weakness.

_I answer that,_ The cause of sin is on the part of the soul, in
which, chiefly, sin resides. Now weakness may be applied to the soul
by way of likeness to weakness of the body. Accordingly, man's body
is said to be weak, when it is disabled or hindered in the execution
of its proper action, through some disorder of the body's parts, so
that the humors and members of the human body cease to be subject to
its governing and motive power. Hence a member is said to be weak,
when it cannot do the work of a healthy member, the eye, for
instance, when it cannot see clearly, as the Philosopher states (De
Hist. Animal. x, 1). Therefore weakness of the soul is when the soul
is hindered from fulfilling its proper action on account of a
disorder in its parts. Now as the parts of the body are said to be
out of order, when they fail to comply with the order of nature, so
too the parts of the soul are said to be inordinate, when they are
not subject to the order of reason, for the reason is the ruling
power of the soul's parts. Accordingly, when the concupiscible or
irascible power is affected by any passion contrary to the order of
reason, the result being that an impediment arises in the aforesaid
manner to the due action of man, it is said to be a sin of weakness.
Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 8) compares the incontinent man to
an epileptic, whose limbs move in a manner contrary to his intention.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as in the body the stronger the movement against
the order of nature, the greater the weakness, so likewise, the
stronger the movement of passion against the order of reason, the
greater the weakness of the soul.

Reply Obj. 2: Sin consists chiefly in an act of the will, which is
not hindered by weakness of the body: for he that is weak in body may
have a will ready for action, and yet be hindered by a passion, as
stated above (A. 1). Hence when we speak of sins of weakness, we
refer to weakness of soul rather than of body. And yet even weakness
of soul is called weakness of the flesh, in so far as it is owing to
a condition of the flesh that the passions of the soul arise in us
through the sensitive appetite being a power using a corporeal organ.

Reply Obj. 3: It is in the will's power to give or refuse its consent
to what passion inclines us to do, and it is in this sense that our
appetite is said to be under us; and yet this consent or dissent of
the will is hindered in the way already explained (A. 1).
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 4]

Whether Self-love Is the Source of Every Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that self-love is not the source of every
sin. For that which is good and right in itself is not the proper
cause of sin. Now love of self is a good and right thing in itself:
wherefore man is commanded to love his neighbor as himself (Lev.
19:18). Therefore self-love cannot be the proper cause of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 7:8): "Sin taking occasion by
the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence"; on which
words a gloss says that "the law is good, since by forbidding
concupiscence, it forbids all evils," the reason for which is that
concupiscence is the cause of every sin. Now concupiscence is a
distinct passion from love, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 2; Q. 23, A.
4). Therefore self-love is not the cause of every sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine in commenting on Ps. 79:17, "Things set on
fire and dug down," says that "every sin is due either to love
arousing us to undue ardor or to fear inducing false humility."
Therefore self-love is not the only cause of sin.

Obj. 4: Further, as man sins at times through inordinate love of
self, so does he sometimes through inordinate love of his neighbor.
Therefore self-love is not the cause of every sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28) that
"self-love, amounting to contempt of God, builds up the city of
Babylon." Now every sin makes man a citizen of Babylon. Therefore
self-love is the cause of every sin.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 75, A. 1), the proper and direct
cause of sin is to be considered on the part of the adherence to a
mutable good; in which respect every sinful act proceeds from
inordinate desire for some temporal good. Now the fact that anyone
desires a temporal good inordinately, is due to the fact that he
loves himself inordinately; for to wish anyone some good is to love
him. Therefore it is evident that inordinate love of self is the
cause of every sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Well ordered self-love, whereby man desires a fitting
good for himself, is right and natural; but it is inordinate
self-love, leading to contempt of God, that Augustine (De Civ. Dei
xiv, 28) reckons to be the cause of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Concupiscence, whereby a man desires good for himself,
is reduced to self-love as to its cause, as stated.

Reply Obj. 3: Man is said to love both the good he desires for
himself, and himself to whom he desires it. Love, in so far as it is
directed to the object of desire (e.g. a man is said to love wine or
money) admits, as its cause, fear which pertains to avoidance of
evil: for every sin arises either from inordinate desire for some
good, or from inordinate avoidance of some evil. But each of these is
reduced to self-love, since it is through loving himself that man
either desires good things, or avoids evil things.

Reply Obj. 4: A friend is like another self (Ethic. ix): wherefore
the sin which is committed through love for a friend, seems to be
committed through self-love.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 5]

Whether Concupiscence of the Flesh, Concupiscence of the Eyes, and
Pride of Life Are Fittingly Described As Causes of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that "concupiscence of the flesh,
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life" are unfittingly
described as causes of sin. Because, according to the Apostle (1 Tim.
6:10), "covetousness [*Douay: 'The desire of money'] is the root of
all evils." Now pride of life is not included in covetousness.
Therefore it should not be reckoned among the causes of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, concupiscence of the flesh is aroused chiefly by
what is seen by the eyes, according to Dan. 13:56: "Beauty hath
deceived thee." Therefore concupiscence of the eyes should not be
condivided with concupiscence of the flesh.

Obj. 3: Further, concupiscence is desire for pleasure, as stated
above (Q. 30, A. 2). Now objects of pleasure are perceived not only
by the sight, but also by the other senses. Therefore "concupiscence
of the hearing" and of the other senses should also have been
mentioned.

Obj. 4: Further, just as man is induced to sin, through inordinate
desire of good things, so is he also, through inordinate avoidance of
evil things, as stated above (A. 4, ad 3). But nothing is mentioned
here pertaining to avoidance of evil. Therefore the causes of sin are
insufficiently described.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 John 2:16): "All that is in the
world is concupiscence of the flesh, or [Vulg.: 'and'] pride of
life." Now a thing is said to be "in the world" by reason of sin:
wherefore it is written (1 John 5:19): "The whole world is seated in
wickedness." Therefore these three are causes of sin.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 4), inordinate self-love is the
cause of every sin. Now self-love includes inordinate desire of good:
for a man desires good for the one he loves. Hence it is evident that
inordinate desire of good is the cause of every sin. Now good is, in
two ways, the object of the sensitive appetite, wherein are the
passions which are the cause of sin: first, absolutely, according as
it is the object of the concupiscible part; secondly, under the
aspect of difficulty, according as it is the object of the irascible
part, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1). Again, concupiscence is twofold,
as stated above (Q. 30, A. 3). One is natural, and is directed to
those things which sustain the nature of the body, whether as regards
the preservation of the individual, such as food, drink, and the
like, or as regards the preservation of the species, such as sexual
matters: and the inordinate appetite of such things is called
"concupiscence of the flesh." The other is spiritual concupiscence,
and is directed to those things which do not afford sustentation or
pleasure in respect of the fleshly senses, but are delectable in
respect of the apprehension or imagination, or some similar mode of
perception; such are money, apparel, and the like; and this spiritual
concupiscence is called "concupiscence of the eyes," whether this be
taken as referring to the sight itself, of which the eyes are the
organ, so as to denote curiosity according to Augustine's exposition
(Confess. x); or to the concupiscence of things which are proposed
outwardly to the eyes, so as to denote covetousness, according to the
explanation of others.

The inordinate appetite of the arduous good pertains to the "pride of
life"; for pride is the inordinate appetite of excellence, as we
shall state further on (Q. 84, A. 2; II-II, Q. 162, A. 1).

It is therefore evident that all passions that are a cause of sin can
be reduced to these three: since all the passions of the
concupiscible part can be reduced to the first two, and all the
irascible passions to the third, which is not divided into two
because all the irascible passions conform to spiritual concupiscence.

Reply Obj. 1: "Pride of life" is included in covetousness according
as the latter denotes any kind of appetite for any kind of good. How
covetousness, as a special vice, which goes by the name of "avarice,"
is the root of all sins, shall be explained further on (Q. 84, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 2: "Concupiscence of the eyes" does not mean here the
concupiscence for all things which can be seen by the eyes, but only
for such things as afford, not carnal pleasure in respect of touch,
but in respect of the eyes, i.e. of any apprehensive power.

Reply Obj. 3: The sense of sight is the most excellent of all the
senses, and covers a larger ground, as stated in _Metaph._ i: and so
its name is transferred to all the other senses, and even to the
inner apprehensions, as Augustine states (De Verb. Dom., serm.
xxxiii).

Reply Obj. 4: Avoidance of evil is caused by the appetite for good,
as stated above (Q. 25, A. 2; Q. 39, A. 2); and so those passions
alone are mentioned which incline to good, as being the causes of
those which cause inordinately the avoidance of evil.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 6]

Whether Sin Is Alleviated on Account of a Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin is not alleviated on account of
passion. For increase of cause adds to the effect: thus if a hot
thing causes something to melt, a hotter will do so yet more. Now
passion is a cause of sin, as stated (A. 5). Therefore the more
intense the passion, the greater the sin. Therefore passion does not
diminish sin, but increases it.

Obj. 2: Further, a good passion stands in the same relation to merit,
as an evil passion does to sin. Now a good passion increases merit:
for a man seems to merit the more, according as he is moved by a
greater pity to help a poor man. Therefore an evil passion also
increases rather than diminishes a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, a man seems to sin the more grievously, according as
he sins with a more intense will. But the passion that impels the
will makes it tend with greater intensity to the sinful act.
Therefore passion aggravates a sin.

_On the contrary,_ The passion of concupiscence is called a
temptation of the flesh. But the greater the temptation that
overcomes a man, the less grievous his sin, as Augustine states (De
Civ. Dei iv, 12).

_I answer that,_ Sin consists essentially in an act of the free will,
which is a faculty of the will and reason; while passion is a
movement of the sensitive appetite. Now the sensitive appetite can be
related to the free-will, antecedently and consequently:
antecedently, according as a passion of the sensitive appetite draws
or inclines the reason or will, as stated above (AA. 1, 2; Q. 10, A.
3); and consequently, in so far as the movements of the higher powers
redound on to the lower, since it is not possible for the will to be
moved to anything intensely, without a passion being aroused in the
sensitive appetite.

Accordingly if we take passion as preceding the sinful act, it must
needs diminish the sin: because the act is a sin in so far as it is
voluntary, and under our control. Now a thing is said to be under our
control, through the reason and will: and therefore the more the
reason and will do anything of their own accord, and not through the
impulse of a passion, the more is it voluntary and under our control.
In this respect passion diminishes sin, in so far as it diminishes
its voluntariness.

On the other hand, a consequent passion does not diminish a sin, but
increases it; or rather it is a sign of its gravity, in so far, to
wit, as it shows the intensity of the will towards the sinful act;
and so it is true that the greater the pleasure or the concupiscence
with which anyone sins, the greater the sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Passion is the cause of sin on the part of that to
which the sinner turns. But the gravity of a sin is measured on the
part of that from which he turns, which results accidentally from his
turning to something else--accidentally, i.e. beside his intention.
Now an effect is increased by the increase, not of its accidental
cause, but of its direct cause.

Reply Obj. 2: A good passion consequent to the judgment of reason
increases merit; but if it precede, so that a man is moved to do
well, rather by his passion than by the judgment of his reason, such
a passion diminishes the goodness and praiseworthiness of his action.

Reply Obj. 3: Although the movement of the will incited by the
passion is more intense, yet it is not so much the will's own
movement, as if it were moved to sin by the reason alone.
________________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 7]

Whether Passion Excuses from Sin Altogether?

Objection 1: It would seem that passion excuses from sin altogether.
For whatever causes an act to be involuntary, excuses from sin
altogether. But concupiscence of the flesh, which is a passion, makes
an act to be involuntary, according to Gal. 5:17: "The flesh lusteth
against the spirit . . . so that you do not the things that you
would." Therefore passion excuses from sin altogether.

Obj. 2: Further, passion causes a certain ignorance of a particular
matter, as stated above (A. 2; Q. 76, A. 3). But ignorance of a
particular matter excuses from sin altogether, as stated above (Q. 6,
A. 8). Therefore passion excuses from sin altogether.

Obj. 3: Further, disease of the soul is graver than disease of the
body. But bodily disease excuses from sin altogether, as in the case
of mad people. Much more, therefore, does passion, which is a disease
of the soul.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle (Rom. 7:5) speaks of the passions as
"passions of sins," for no other reason than that they cause sin:
which would not be the case if they excused from sin altogether.
Therefore passion does not excuse from sin altogether.

_I answer that,_ An act which, in its genus, is evil, cannot be
excused from sin altogether, unless it be rendered altogether
involuntary. Consequently, if the passion be such that it renders the
subsequent act wholly involuntary, it entirely excuses from sin;
otherwise, it does not excuse entirely. In this matter two points
apparently should be observed: first, that a thing may be voluntary
either _in itself,_ as when the will tends towards it directly; or
_in its cause,_ when the will tends towards that cause and not
towards the effect; as is the case with one who wilfully gets drunk,
for in that case he is considered to do voluntarily whatever he does
through being drunk. Secondly, we must observe that a thing is said
to be voluntary "directly" or "indirectly"; directly, if the will
tends towards it; indirectly, if the will could have prevented it,
but did not.

Accordingly therefore we must make a distinction: because a passion
is sometimes so strong as to take away the use of reason altogether,
as in the case of those who are mad through love or anger; and then
if such a passion were voluntary from the beginning, the act is
reckoned a sin, because it is voluntary in its cause, as we have
stated with regard to drunkenness. If, however, the cause be not
voluntary but natural, for instance, if anyone through sickness or
some such cause fall into such a passion as deprives him of the use
of reason, his act is rendered wholly involuntary, and he is entirely
excused from sin. Sometimes, however, the passion is not such as to
take away the use of reason altogether; and then reason can drive the
passion away, by turning to other thoughts, or it can prevent it from
having its full effect; since the members are not put to work, except
by the consent of reason, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 9): wherefore
such a passion does not excuse from sin altogether.

Reply Obj. 1: The words, "So that you do not the things that you
would" are not to be referred to outward deeds, but to the inner
movement of concupiscence; for a man would wish never to desire evil,
in which sense we are to understand the words of Rom. 7:19: "The evil
which I will not, that I do." Or again they may be referred to the
will as preceding the passion, as is the case with the incontinent,
who act counter to their resolution on account of their concupiscence.

Reply Obj. 2: The particular ignorance which excuses altogether, is
ignorance of a circumstance, which a man is unable to know even after
taking due precautions. But passion causes ignorance of law in a
particular case, by preventing universal knowledge from being applied
to a particular act, which passion the reason is able to drive away,
as stated.

Reply Obj. 3: Bodily disease is involuntary: there would be a
comparison, however, if it were voluntary, as we have stated about
drunkenness, which is a kind of bodily disease.
________________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 77, Art. 8]

Whether a Sin Committed Through Passion Can Be Mortal?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin committed through passion cannot
be mortal. Because venial sin is condivided with mortal sin. Now sin
committed from weakness is venial, since it has in itself a motive
for pardon (_venia_). Since therefore sin committed through passion
is a sin of weakness, it seems that it cannot be mortal.

Obj. 2: Further, the cause is more powerful than its effect. But
passion cannot be a mortal sin, for there is no mortal sin in the
sensuality, as stated above (Q. 74, A. 4). Therefore a sin committed
through passion cannot be mortal.

Obj. 3: Further, passion is a hindrance to reason, as explained above
(AA. 1, 2). Now it belongs to the reason to turn to God, or to turn
away from Him, which is the essence of a mortal sin. Therefore a sin
committed through passion cannot be mortal.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 7:5) that "the passions of
the sins . . . work [Vulg.: 'did work'] in our members to bring forth
fruit unto death." Now it is proper to mortal sin to bring forth
fruit unto death. Therefore sin committed through passion may be
mortal.

_I answer that,_ Mortal sin, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 5), consists
in turning away from our last end which is God, which aversion
pertains to the deliberating reason, whose function it is also to
direct towards the end. Therefore that which is contrary to the last
end can happen not to be a mortal sin, only when the deliberating
reason is unable to come to the rescue, which is the case in sudden
movements. Now when anyone proceeds from passion to a sinful act, or
to a deliberate consent, this does not happen suddenly: and so the
deliberating reason can come to the rescue here, since it can drive
the passion away, or at least prevent it from having its effect, as
stated above: wherefore if it does not come to the rescue, there is a
mortal sin; and it is thus, as we see, that many murders and
adulteries are committed through passion.

Reply Obj. 1: A sin may be venial in three ways. First, through its
cause, i.e. through having cause to be forgiven, which cause lessens
the sin; thus a sin that is committed through weakness or ignorance
is said to be venial. Secondly, through its issue; thus every sin,
through repentance, becomes venial, i.e. receives pardon (_veniam_).
Thirdly, by its genus, e.g. an idle word. This is the only kind of
venial sin that is opposed to mortal sin: whereas the objection
regards the first kind.

Reply Obj. 2: Passion causes sin as regards the adherence to
something. But that this be a mortal sin regards the aversion, which
follows accidentally from the adherence, as stated above (A. 6, ad
1): hence the argument does not prove.

Reply Obj. 3: Passion does not always hinder the act of reason
altogether: consequently the reason remains in possession of its
free-will, so as to turn away from God, or turn to Him. If, however,
the use of reason be taken away altogether, the sin is no longer
either mortal or venial.
________________________

QUESTION 78

OF THAT CAUSE OF SIN WHICH IS MALICE
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the cause of sin on the part of the will, viz.
malice: and under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is possible for anyone to sin through certain malice,
i.e. purposely?

(2) Whether everyone that sins through habit, sins through certain
malice?

(3) Whether every one that sins through certain malice, sins through
habit?

(4) Whether it is more grievous to sin through certain malice, than
through passion?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 78, Art. 1]

Whether Anyone Sins Through Certain Malice?

Objection 1: It would seem that no one sins purposely, or through
certain malice. Because ignorance is opposed to purpose or certain
malice. Now "every evil man is ignorant," according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 1); and it is written (Prov. 14:22): "They
err that work evil." Therefore no one sins through certain malice.

Obj. 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "no one works
intending evil." Now to sin through malice seems to denote the
intention of doing evil [*Alluding to the derivation of _malitia_
(malice) from _malum_ (evil)] in sinning, because an act is not
denominated from that which is unintentional and accidental.
Therefore no one sins through malice.

Obj. 3: Further, malice itself is a sin. If therefore malice is a
cause of sin, it follows that sin goes on causing sin indefinitely,
which is absurd. Therefore no one sins through malice.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Job 34:27): "[Who] as it were on
purpose have revolted from God [Vulg.: 'Him'], and would not
understand all His ways." Now to revolt from God is to sin. Therefore
some sin purposely or through certain malice.

_I answer that,_ Man like any other being has naturally an appetite
for the good; and so if his appetite incline away to evil, this is
due to corruption or disorder in some one of the principles of man:
for it is thus that sin occurs in the actions of natural things. Now
the principles of human acts are the intellect, and the appetite,
both rational (i.e. the will) and sensitive. Therefore even as sin
occurs in human acts, sometimes through a defect of the intellect, as
when anyone sins through ignorance, and sometimes through a defect in
the sensitive appetite, as when anyone sins through passion, so too
does it occur through a defect consisting in a disorder of the will.
Now the will is out of order when it loves more the lesser good.
Again, the consequence of loving a thing less is that one chooses to
suffer some hurt in its regard, in order to obtain a good that one
loves more: as when a man, even knowingly, suffers the loss of a
limb, that he may save his life which he loves more. Accordingly when
an inordinate will loves some temporal good, e.g. riches or pleasure,
more than the order of reason or Divine law, or Divine charity, or
some such thing, it follows that it is willing to suffer the loss of
some spiritual good, so that it may obtain possession of some
temporal good. Now evil is merely the privation of some good; and so
a man wishes knowingly a spiritual evil, which is evil simply,
whereby he is deprived of a spiritual good, in order to possess a
temporal good: wherefore he is said to sin through certain malice or
on purpose, because he chooses evil knowingly.

Reply Obj. 1: Ignorance sometimes excludes the simple knowledge that
a particular action is evil, and then man is said to sin through
ignorance: sometimes it excludes the knowledge that a particular
action is evil at this particular moment, as when he sins through
passion: and sometimes it excludes the knowledge that a particular
evil is not to be suffered for the sake of possessing a particular
good, but not the simple knowledge that it is an evil: it is thus
that a man is ignorant, when he sins through certain malice.

Reply Obj. 2: Evil cannot be intended by anyone for its own sake; but
it can be intended for the sake of avoiding another evil, or
obtaining another good, as stated above: and in this case anyone
would choose to obtain a good intended for its own sake, without
suffering loss of the other good; even as a lustful man would wish to
enjoy a pleasure without offending God; but with the two set before
him to choose from, he prefers sinning and thereby incurring God's
anger, to being deprived of the pleasure.

Reply Obj. 3: The malice through which anyone sins, may be taken to
denote habitual malice, in the sense in which the Philosopher (Ethic.
v, 1) calls an evil habit by the name of malice, just as a good habit
is called virtue: and in this way anyone is said to sin through
malice when he sins through the inclination of a habit. It may also
denote actual malice, whether by malice we mean the choice itself of
evil (and thus anyone is said to sin through malice, in so far as he
sins through making a choice of evil), or whether by malice we mean
some previous fault that gives rise to a subsequent fault, as when
anyone impugns the grace of his brother through envy. Nor does this
imply that a thing is its own cause: for the interior act is the
cause of the exterior act, and one sin is the cause of another; not
indefinitely, however, since we can trace it back to some previous
sin, which is not caused by any previous sin, as was explained above
(Q. 75, A. 4, ad 3).
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 78, Art. 2]

Whether Everyone That Sins Through Habit, Sins Through Certain
Malice?

Objection 1: It would seem that not every one who sins through habit,
sins through certain malice. Because sin committed through certain
malice, seems to be most grievous. Now it happens sometimes that a
man commits a slight sin through habit, as when he utters an idle
word. Therefore sin committed from habit is not always committed
through certain malice.

Obj. 2: Further, "Acts proceeding from habits are like the acts by
which those habits were formed" (Ethic. ii, 1, 2). But the acts which
precede a vicious habit are not committed through certain malice.
Therefore the sins that arise from habit are not committed through
certain malice.

Obj. 3: Further, when a man commits a sin through certain malice, he
is glad after having done it, according to Prov. 2:14: "Who are glad
when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked things": and
this, because it is pleasant to obtain what we desire, and to do
those actions which are connatural to us by reason of habit. But
those who sin through habit, are sorrowful after committing a sin:
because "bad men," i.e. those who have a vicious habit, "are full of
remorse" (Ethic. ix, 4). Therefore sins that arise from habit are not
committed through certain malice.

_On the contrary,_ A sin committed through certain malice is one that
is done through choice of evil. Now we make choice of those things to
which we are inclined by habit, as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 2 with
regard to virtuous habits. Therefore a sin that arises from habit is
committed through certain malice.

_I answer that,_ There is a difference between a sin committed by one
who has the habit, and a sin committed by habit: for it is not
necessary to use a habit, since it is subject to the will of the
person who has that habit. Hence habit is defined as being "something
we use when we will," as stated above (Q. 50, A. 1). And thus, even
as it may happen that one who has a vicious habit may break forth
into a virtuous act, because a bad habit does not corrupt reason
altogether, something of which remains unimpaired, the result being
that a sinner does some works which are generically good; so too it
may happen sometimes that one who has a vicious habit, acts, not from
that habit, but through the uprising of a passion, or again through
ignorance. But whenever he uses the vicious habit he must needs sin
through certain malice: because to anyone that has a habit, whatever
is befitting to him in respect of that habit, has the aspect of
something lovable, since it thereby becomes, in a way, connatural to
him, according as custom and habit are a second nature. Now the very
thing which befits a man in respect of a vicious habit, is something
that excludes a spiritual good: the result being that a man chooses a
spiritual evil, that he may obtain possession of what befits him in
respect of that habit: and this is to sin through certain malice.
Wherefore it is evident that whoever sins through habit, sins through
certain malice.

Reply Obj. 1: Venial sin does not exclude spiritual good, consisting
in the grace of God or charity. Wherefore it is an evil, not simply,
but in a relative sense: and for that reason the habit thereof is not
a simple but a relative evil.

Reply Obj. 2: Acts proceeding from habits are of like species as the
acts from which those habits were formed: but they differ from them
as perfect from imperfect. Such is the difference between sin
committed through certain malice and sin committed through passion.

Reply Obj. 3: He that sins through habit is always glad for what he
does through habit, as long as he uses the habit. But since he is
able not to use the habit, and to think of something else, by means
of his reason, which is not altogether corrupted, it may happen that
while not using the habit he is sorry for what he has done through
the habit. And so it often happens that such a man is sorry for his
sin not because sin in itself is displeasing to him, but on account
of his reaping some disadvantage from the sin.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 78, Art. 3]

Whether One Who Sins Through Certain Malice, Sins Through Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that whoever sins through certain malice,
sins through habit. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 9) that "an
unjust action is not done as an unjust man does it," i.e. through
choice, "unless it be done through habit." Now to sin through certain
malice is to sin through making a choice of evil, as stated above (A.
1). Therefore no one sins through certain malice, unless he has the
habit of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Origen says (Peri Archon iii) that "a man is not
suddenly ruined and lost, but must needs fall away little by little."
But the greatest fall seems to be that of the man who sins through
certain malice. Therefore a man comes to sin through certain malice,
not from the outset, but from inveterate custom, which may engender a
habit.

Obj. 3: Further, whenever a man sins through certain malice, his will
must needs be inclined of itself to the evil he chooses. But by the
nature of that power man is inclined, not to evil but to good.
Therefore if he chooses evil, this must be due to something
supervening, which is passion or habit. Now when a man sins through
passion, he sins not through certain malice, but through weakness, as
stated (Q. 77, A. 3). Therefore whenever anyone sins through certain
malice, he sins through habit.

_On the contrary,_ The good habit stands in the same relation to the
choice of something good, as the bad habit to the choice of something
evil. But it happens sometimes that a man, without having the habit
of a virtue, chooses that which is good according to that virtue.
Therefore sometimes also a man, without having the habit of a vice,
may choose evil, which is to sin through certain malice.

_I answer that,_ The will is related differently to good and to evil.
Because from the very nature of the power, it is inclined to the
rational good, as its proper object; wherefore every sin is said to
be contrary to nature. Hence, if a will be inclined, by its choice,
to some evil, this must be occasioned by something else. Sometimes,
in fact, this is occasioned through some defect in the reason, as
when anyone sins through ignorance; and sometimes this arises through
the impulse of the sensitive appetite, as when anyone sins through
passion. Yet neither of these amounts to a sin through certain
malice; for then alone does anyone sin through certain malice, when
his will is moved to evil of its own accord. This may happen in two
ways. First, through his having a corrupt disposition inclining him
to evil, so that, in respect of that disposition, some evil is, as it
were, suitable and similar to him; and to this thing, by reason of
its suitableness, the will tends, as to something good, because
everything tends, of its own accord, to that which is suitable to it.
Moreover this corrupt disposition is either a habit acquired by
custom, or a sickly condition on the part of the body, as in the case
of a man who is naturally inclined to certain sins, by reason of some
natural corruption in himself. Secondly, the will, of its own accord,
may tend to an evil, through the removal of some obstacle: for
instance, if a man be prevented from sinning, not through sin being
in itself displeasing to him, but through hope of eternal life, or
fear of hell, if hope give place to despair, or fear to presumption,
he will end in sinning through certain malice, being freed from the
bridle, as it were.

It is evident, therefore, that sin committed through certain malice,
always presupposes some inordinateness in man, which, however, is not
always a habit: so that it does not follow of necessity, if a man
sins through certain malice, that he sins through habit.

Reply Obj. 1: To do an action as an unjust man does, may be not only
to do unjust things through certain malice, but also to do them with
pleasure, and without any notable resistance on the part of reason,
and this occurs only in one who has a habit.

Reply Obj. 2: It is true that a man does not fall suddenly into sin
from certain malice, and that something is presupposed; but this
something is not always a habit, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: That which inclines the will to evil, is not always a
habit or a passion, but at times is something else. Moreover, there
is no comparison between choosing good and choosing evil: because
evil is never without some good of nature, whereas good can be
perfect without the evil of fault.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 78, Art. 4]

Whether It Is More Grievous to Sin Through Certain Malice Than
Through Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not more grievous to sin
through certain malice than through passion. Because ignorance
excuses from sin either altogether or in part. Now ignorance is
greater in one who sins through certain malice, than in one who sins
through passion; since he that sins through certain malice suffers
from the worst form of ignorance, which according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. vii, 8) is ignorance of principle, for he has a false
estimation of the end, which is the principle in matters of action.
Therefore there is more excuse for one who sins through certain
malice, than for one who sins through passion.

Obj. 2: Further, the more a man is impelled to sin, the less grievous
his sin, as is clear with regard to a man who is thrown headlong into
sin by a more impetuous passion. Now he that sins through certain
malice, is impelled by habit, the impulse of which is stronger than
that of passion. Therefore to sin through habit is less grievous than
to sin through passion.

Obj. 3: Further, to sin through certain malice is to sin through
choosing evil. Now he that sins through passion, also chooses evil.
Therefore he does not sin less than the man who sins through certain
malice.

_On the contrary,_ A sin that is committed on purpose, for this very
reason deserves heavier punishment, according to Job 34:26: "He hath
struck them as being wicked, in open sight, who, as it were, on
purpose, have revolted from Him." Now punishment is not increased
except for a graver fault. Therefore a sin is aggravated through
being done on purpose, i.e. through certain malice.

_I answer that,_ A sin committed through malice is more grievous than
a sin committed through passion, for three reasons. First, because,
as sin consists chiefly in an act of the will, it follows that, other
things being equal, a sin is all the more grievous, according as the
movement of the sin belongs more to the will. Now when a sin is
committed through malice, the movement of sin belongs more to the
will, which is then moved to evil of its own accord, than when a sin
is committed through passion, when the will is impelled to sin by
something extrinsic, as it were. Wherefore a sin is aggravated by the
very fact that it is committed through certain malice, and so much
the more, as the malice is greater; whereas it is diminished by being
committed through passion, and so much the more, as the passion is
stronger. Secondly, because the passion which incites the will to
sin, soon passes away, so that man repents of his sin, and soon
returns to his good intentions; whereas the habit, through which a
man sins, is a permanent quality, so that he who sins through malice,
abides longer in his sin. For this reason the Philosopher (Ethic.
vii, 8) compares the intemperate man, who sins through malice, to a
sick man who suffers from a chronic disease, while he compares the
incontinent man, who sins through passion, to one who suffers
intermittently. Thirdly, because he who sins through certain malice
is ill-disposed in respect of the end itself, which is the principle
in matters of action; and so the defect is more dangerous than in the
case of the man who sins through passion, whose purpose tends to a
good end, although this purpose is interrupted on account of the
passion, for the time being. Now the worst of all defects is defect
of principle. Therefore it is evident that a sin committed through
malice is more grievous than one committed through passion.

Reply Obj. 1: Ignorance of choice, to which the objection refers,
neither excuses nor diminishes a sin, as stated above (Q. 76, A. 4).
Therefore neither does a greater ignorance of the kind make a sin to
be less grave.

Reply Obj. 2: The impulse due to passion, is, as it were, due to a
defect which is outside the will: whereas, by a habit, the will is
inclined from within. Hence the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: It is one thing to sin while choosing, and another to
sin through choosing. For he that sins through passion, sins while
choosing, but not through choosing, because his choosing is not for
him the first principle of his sin; for he is induced through the
passion, to choose what he would not choose, were it not for the
passion. On the other hand, he that sins through certain malice,
chooses evil of his own accord, in the way already explained (AA. 2,
3), so that his choosing, of which he has full control, is the
principle of his sin: and for this reason he is said to sin "through"
choosing.
________________________

QUESTION 79

OF THE EXTERNAL CAUSES OF SIN
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the external causes of sin, and (1) on the part
of God; (2) on the part of the devil; (3) on the part of man.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether God is a cause of sin?

(2) Whether the act of sin is from God?

(3) Whether God is the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of
heart?

(4) Whether these things are directed to the salvation of those who
are blinded or hardened?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 79, Art. 1]

Whether God Is a Cause of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that God is a cause of sin. For the
Apostle says of certain ones (Rom. 1:28): "God delivered them up to a
reprobate sense, to do those things which are not right [Douay:
'convenient']," and a gloss comments on this by saying that "God works
in men's hearts, by inclining their wills to whatever He wills,
whether to good or to evil." Now sin consists in doing what is not
right, and in having a will inclined to evil. Therefore God is to man
a cause of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Wis. 14:11): "The creatures of God
are turned to an abomination; and a temptation to the souls of men."
But a temptation usually denotes a provocation to sin. Since
therefore creatures were made by God alone, as was established in the
First Part (Q. 44, A. 1), it seems that God is a cause of sin, by
provoking man to sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the cause of the cause is the cause of the effect.
Now God is the cause of the free-will, which itself is the cause of
sin. Therefore God is the cause of sin.

Obj. 4: Further, every evil is opposed to good. But it is not
contrary to God's goodness that He should cause the evil of
punishment; since of this evil it is written (Isa. 45:7) that God
creates evil, and (Amos 3:6): "Shall there be evil in the city which
God [Vulg.: 'the Lord'] hath not done?" Therefore it is not
incompatible with God's goodness that He should cause the evil of
fault.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 11:25): "Thou . . . hatest
none of the things which Thou hast made." Now God hates sin,
according to Wis. 14:9: "To God the wicked and his wickedness are
hateful." Therefore God is not a cause of sin.

_I answer that,_ Man is, in two ways, a cause either of his own or of
another's sin. First, directly, namely by inclining his or another's
will to sin; secondly, indirectly, namely by not preventing someone
from sinning. Hence (Ezech. 3:18) it is said to the watchman: "If
thou say not to the wicked: 'Thou shalt surely die' [*Vulg.: "If,
when I say to the wicked, 'Thou shalt surely die,' thou declare it
not to him."] . . . I will require his blood at thy hand." Now God
cannot be directly the cause of sin, either in Himself or in another,
since every sin is a departure from the order which is to God as the
end: whereas God inclines and turns all things to Himself as to their
last end, as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. i): so that it is impossible
that He should be either to Himself or to another the cause of
departing from the order which is to Himself. Therefore He cannot be
directly the cause of sin. In like manner neither can He cause sin
indirectly. For it happens that God does not give some the
assistance, whereby they may avoid sin, which assistance were He to
give, they would not sin. But He does all this according to the order
of His wisdom and justice, since He Himself is Wisdom and Justice: so
that if someone sin it is not imputable to Him as though He were the
cause of that sin; even as a pilot is not said to cause the wrecking
of the ship, through not steering the ship, unless he cease to steer
while able and bound to steer. It is therefore evident that God is
nowise a cause of sin.

Reply Obj. 1: As to the words of the Apostle, the solution is clear
from the text. For if God delivered some up to a reprobate sense, it
follows that they already had a reprobate sense, so as to do what was
not right. Accordingly He is said to deliver them up to a reprobate
sense, in so far as He does not hinder them from following that
reprobate sense, even as we are said to expose a person to danger if
we do not protect him. The saying of Augustine (De Grat. et Lib. Arb.
xxi, whence the gloss quoted is taken) to the effect that "God
inclines men's wills to good and evil," is to be understood as
meaning that He inclines the will directly to good; and to evil, in
so far as He does not hinder it, as stated above. And yet even this
is due as being deserved through a previous sin.

Reply Obj. 2: When it is said the "creatures of God are turned 'to'
an abomination, and a temptation to the souls of men," the
preposition "to" does not denote causality but sequel [*This is made
clear by the Douay Version: the Latin "factae sunt in abominationem"
admits of the translation "were made to be an abomination," which
might imply causality.]; for God did not make the creatures that they
might be an evil to man; this was the result of man's folly,
wherefore the text goes on to say, "and a snare to the feet of the
unwise," who, to wit, in their folly, use creatures for a purpose
other than that for which they were made.

Reply Obj. 3: The effect which proceeds from the middle cause,
according as it is subordinate to the first cause, is reduced to that
first cause; but if it proceed from the middle cause, according as it
goes outside the order of the first cause, it is not reduced to that
first cause: thus if a servant do anything contrary to his master's
orders, it is not ascribed to the master as though he were the cause
thereof. In like manner sin, which the free-will commits against the
commandment of God, is not attributed to God as being its cause.

Reply Obj. 4: Punishment is opposed to the good of the person
punished, who is thereby deprived of some good or other: but fault is
opposed to the good of subordination to God; and so it is directly
opposed to the Divine goodness; consequently there is no comparison
between fault and punishment.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 79, Art. 2]

Whether the Act of Sin Is from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the act of sin is not from God. For
