It follows, therefore, that through the institution of the sacraments
man, consistently with his nature, is instructed through sensible
things; he is humbled, through confessing that he is subject to
corporeal things, seeing that he receives assistance through them:
and he is even preserved from bodily hurt, by the healthy exercise of
the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 1: Bodily exercise, as such, is not very profitable: but
exercise taken in the use of the sacraments is not merely bodily, but
to a certain extent spiritual, viz. in its signification and in its
causality.

Reply Obj. 2: God's grace is a sufficient cause of man's salvation.
But God gives grace to man in a way which is suitable to him. Hence
it is that man needs the sacraments that he may obtain grace.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion is a sufficient cause of man's
salvation. But it does not follow that the sacraments are not also
necessary for that purpose: because they obtain their effect through
the power of Christ's Passion; and Christ's Passion is, so to say,
applied to man through the sacraments according to the Apostle (Rom.
6:3): "All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in His
death."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 61, Art. 2]

Whether Before Sin Sacraments Were Necessary to Man?

Objection 1: It seems that before sin sacraments were necessary to
man. For, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2) man needs sacraments that he
may obtain grace. But man needed grace even in the state of
innocence, as we stated in the First Part  (Q. 95, A. 4; cf. I-II, Q.
109, A. 2; Q. 114, A. 2). Therefore sacraments were necessary in that
state also.

Obj. 2: Further, sacraments are suitable to man by reason of the
conditions of human nature, as stated above (A. 1). But man's nature
is the same before and after sin. Therefore it seems that before sin,
man needed the sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, matrimony is a sacrament, according to Eph. 5:32:
"This is a great sacrament; but I speak in Christ and in the Church."
But matrimony was instituted before sin, as may be seen in Gen. 2.
Therefore sacraments were necessary to man before sin.

_On the contrary,_ None but the sick need remedies, according to
Matt. 9:12: "They that are in health need not a physician." Now the
sacraments are spiritual remedies for the healing of wounds inflicted
by sin. Therefore they were not necessary before sin.

_I answer that,_ Sacraments were not necessary in the state of
innocence. This can be proved from the rectitude of that state, in
which the higher (parts of man) ruled the lower, and nowise depended
on them: for just as the mind was subject to God, so were the lower
powers of the soul subject to the mind, and the body to the soul. And
it would be contrary to this order if the soul were perfected either
in knowledge or in grace, by anything corporeal; which happens in the
sacraments. Therefore in the state of innocence man needed no
sacraments, whether as remedies against sin or as means of perfecting
the soul.

Reply Obj. 1: In the state of innocence man needed grace: not so that
he needed to obtain grace by means of sensible signs, but in a
spiritual and invisible manner.

Reply Obj. 2: Man's nature is the same before and after sin, but the
state of his nature is not the same. Because after sin, the soul,
even in its higher part, needs to receive something from corporeal
things in order that it may be perfected: whereas man had no need of
this in that state.

Reply Obj. 3: Matrimony was instituted in the state of innocence, not
as a sacrament, but as a function of nature. Consequently, however,
it foreshadowed something in relation to Christ and the Church: just
as everything else foreshadowed Christ.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 61, Art. 3]

Whether There Should Have Been Sacraments After Sin, Before Christ?

Objection 1: It seems that there should have been no sacraments after
sin, before Christ. For it has been stated that the Passion of Christ
is applied to men through the sacraments: so that Christ's Passion is
compared to the sacraments as cause to effect. But effect does not
precede cause. Therefore there should have been no sacraments before
Christ's coming.

Obj. 2: Further, sacraments should be suitable to the state of the
human race, as Augustine declares (Contra Faust. xix). But the state
of the human race underwent no change after sin until it was repaired
by Christ. Neither, therefore, should the sacraments have been
changed, so that besides the sacraments of the natural law, others
should be instituted in the law of Moses.

Obj. 3: Further, the nearer a thing approaches to that which is
perfect, the more like it should it be. Now the perfection of human
salvation was accomplished by Christ; to Whom the sacraments of the
Old Law were nearer than those that preceded the Law. Therefore they
should have borne a greater likeness to the sacraments of Christ. And
yet the contrary is the case, since it was foretold that the
priesthood of Christ would be "according to the order of
Melchisedech, and not . . . according to the order of Aaron" (Heb.
7:11). Therefore sacraments were unsuitably instituted before Christ.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix) that "the first
sacraments which the Law commanded to be solemnized and observed were
announcements of Christ's future coming." But it was necessary for
man's salvation that Christ's coming should be announced beforehand.
Therefore it was necessary that some sacraments should be instituted
before Christ.

_I answer that,_ Sacraments are necessary for man's salvation, in so
far as they are sensible signs of invisible things whereby man is
made holy. Now after sin no man can be made holy save through Christ,
"Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His
blood, to the showing of His justice . . . that He Himself may be
just, and the justifier of him who is of the faith of Jesus Christ"
(Rom. 3:25, 26). Therefore before Christ's coming there was need for
some visible signs whereby man might testify to his faith in the
future coming of a Saviour. And these signs are called sacraments. It
is therefore clear that some sacraments were necessary before
Christ's coming.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's Passion is the final cause of the old
sacraments: for they were instituted in order to foreshadow it. Now
the final cause precedes not in time, but in the intention of the
agent. Consequently, there is no reason against the existence of
sacraments before Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 2: The state of the human race after sin and before Christ
can be considered from two points of view. First, from that of faith:
and thus it was always one and the same: since men were made
righteous, through faith in the future coming of Christ. Secondly,
according as sin was more or less intense, and knowledge concerning
Christ more or less explicit. For as time went on sin gained a
greater hold on man, so much so that it clouded man's reason, the
consequence being that the precepts of the natural law were
insufficient to make man live aright, and it became necessary to have
a written code of fixed laws, and together with these certain
sacraments of faith. For it was necessary, as time went on, that the
knowledge of faith should be more and more unfolded, since, as
Gregory says (Hom. vi in Ezech.): "With the advance of time there was
an advance in the knowledge of Divine things." Consequently in the
old Law there was also a need for certain fixed sacraments
significative of man's faith in the future coming of Christ: which
sacraments are compared to those that preceded the Law, as something
determinate to that which is indeterminate: inasmuch as before the
Law it was not laid down precisely of what sacraments men were to
make use: whereas this was prescribed by the Law; and this was
necessary both on account of the overclouding of the natural law, and
for the clearer signification of faith.

Reply Obj. 3: The sacrament of Melchisedech which preceded the Law is
more like the Sacrament of the New Law in its matter: in so far as
"he offered bread and wine" (Gen. 14:18), just as bread and wine are
offered in the sacrifice of the New Testament. Nevertheless the
sacraments of the Mosaic Law are more like the thing signified by the
sacrament, i.e. the Passion of Christ: as clearly appears in the
Paschal Lamb and such like. The reason of this was lest, if the
sacraments retained the same appearance, it might seem to be the
continuation of one and the same sacrament, where there was no
interruption of time.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 61, Art. 4]

Whether There Was Need for Any Sacraments After Christ Came?

Objection 1: It seems that there was no need for any sacraments after
Christ came. For the figure should cease with the advent of the
truth. But "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ" (John 1:17). Since,
therefore, the sacraments are signs or figures of the truth, it seems
that there was no need for any sacraments after Christ's Passion.

Obj. 2: Further, the sacraments consist in certain elements, as
stated above (Q. 60, A. 4). But the Apostle says (Gal. 4:3, 4)  that
"when we were children we were serving under the elements of the
world": but that now "when the fulness of time" has "come," we are no
longer children. Therefore it seems that we should not serve God
under the elements of this world, by making use of corporeal
sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, according to James 1:17 with God "there is no
change, nor shadow of alteration." But it seems to argue some change
in the Divine will that God should give man certain sacraments for
his sanctification now during the time of grace, and other sacraments
before Christ's coming. Therefore it seems that other sacraments
should not have been instituted after Christ.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix) that the
sacraments of the Old Law "were abolished because they were
fulfilled; and others were instituted, fewer in number, but more
efficacious, more profitable, and of easier accomplishment."

_I answer that,_ As the ancient Fathers were saved through faith in
Christ's future coming, so are we saved through faith in Christ's
past birth and Passion. Now the sacraments are signs in protestation
of the faith whereby man is justified; and signs should vary
according as they signify the future, the past, or the present; for
as Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), "the same thing is variously
pronounced as to be done and as having been done: for instance the
word _passurus_ (going to suffer) differs from _passus_ (having
suffered)." Therefore the sacraments of the New Law, that signify
Christ in relation to the past, must needs differ from those of the
Old Law, that foreshadowed the future.

Reply Obj. 1: As Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v), the state of the New
Law. is between the state of the Old Law, whose figures are fulfilled
in the New, and the state of glory, in which all truth will be openly
and perfectly revealed. Wherefore then there will be no sacraments.
But now, so long as we know "through a glass in a dark manner," (1
Cor. 13:12) we need sensible signs in order to reach spiritual
things: and this is the province of the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 2: The Apostle calls the sacraments of the Old Law "weak
and needy elements" (Gal. 4:9) because they neither contained nor
caused grace. Hence the Apostle says that those who used these
sacraments served God "under the elements of this world": for the
very reason that these sacraments were nothing else than the elements
of this world. But our sacraments both contain and cause grace:
consequently the comparison does not hold.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the head of the house is not proved to have a
changeable mind, through issuing various commands to his household at
various seasons, ordering things differently in winter and summer; so
it does not follow that there is any change in God, because He
instituted sacraments of one kind after Christ's coming, and of
another kind at the time of the Law. Because the latter were suitable
as foreshadowing grace; the former as signifying the presence of
grace.
_______________________

QUESTION 62

OF THE SACRAMENTS' PRINCIPAL EFFECT, WHICH IS GRACE
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider the effect of the sacraments. First of their
principal effect, which is grace; secondly, of their secondary
effect, which is a character. Concerning the first there are six
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the sacraments of the New Law are the cause of grace?

(2) Whether sacramental grace confers anything in addition to the
grace of the virtues and gifts?

(3) Whether the sacraments contain grace?

(4) Whether there is any power in them for the causing of grace?

(5) Whether the sacraments derive this power from Christ's Passion?

(6) Whether the sacraments of the Old Law caused grace?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 1]

Whether the Sacraments Are the Cause of Grace?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments are not the cause of grace.
For it seems that the same thing is not both sign and cause: since
the nature of sign appears to be more in keeping with an effect. But
a sacrament is a sign of grace. Therefore it is not its cause.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing corporeal can act on a spiritual thing:
since "the agent is more excellent than the patient," as Augustine
says (Gen. ad lit. xii). But the subject of grace is the human mind,
which is something spiritual. Therefore the sacraments cannot cause
grace.

Obj. 3: Further, what is proper to God should not be ascribed to a
creature. But it is proper to God to cause grace, according to Ps.
83:12: "The Lord will give grace and glory." Since, therefore, the
sacraments consist in certain words and created things, it seems that
they cannot cause grace.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.) that the
baptismal water "touches the body and cleanses the heart." But the
heart is not cleansed save through grace. Therefore it causes grace:
and for like reason so do the other sacraments of the Church.

_I answer that,_ We must needs say that in some way the sacraments of
the New Law cause grace. For it is evident that through the
sacraments of the New Law man is incorporated with Christ: thus the
Apostle says of Baptism (Gal. 3:27): "As many of you as have been
baptized in Christ have put on Christ." And man is made a member of
Christ through grace alone.

Some, however, say that they are the cause of grace not by their own
operation, but in so far as God causes grace in the soul when the
sacraments are employed. And they give as an example a man who on
presenting a leaden coin, receives, by the king's command, a hundred
pounds: not as though the leaden coin, by any operation of its own,
caused him to be given that sum of money; this being the effect of
the mere will of the king. Hence Bernard says in a sermon on the
Lord's Supper: "Just as a canon is invested by means of a book, an
abbot by means of a crozier, a bishop by means of a ring, so by the
various sacraments various kinds of grace are conferred." But if we
examine the question properly, we shall see that according to the
above mode the sacraments are mere signs. For the leaden coin is
nothing but a sign of the king's command that this man should receive
money. In like manner the book is a sign of the conferring of a
canonry. Hence, according to this opinion the sacraments of the New
Law would be mere signs of grace; whereas we have it on the authority
of many saints that the sacraments of the New Law not only signify,
but also cause grace.

We must therefore say otherwise, that an efficient cause is twofold,
principal and instrumental. The principal cause works by the power of
its form, to which form the effect is likened; just as fire by its
own heat makes something hot. In this way none but God can cause
grace: since grace is nothing else than a participated likeness of
the Divine Nature, according to 2 Pet. 1:4: "He hath given us most
great and precious promises; that we may be [Vulg.: 'you may be
made'] partakers of the Divine Nature." But the instrumental cause
works not by the power of its form, but only by the motion whereby it
is moved by the principal agent: so that the effect is not likened to
the instrument but to the principal agent: for instance, the couch is
not like the axe, but like the art which is in the craftsman's mind.
And it is thus that the sacraments of the New Law cause grace: for
they are instituted by God to be employed for the purpose of
conferring grace. Hence Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix): "All
these things," viz. pertaining to the sacraments, "are done and pass
away, but the power," viz. of God, "which works by them, remains
ever." Now that is, properly speaking, an instrument by which someone
works: wherefore it is written (Titus 3:5): "He saved us by the laver
of regeneration."

Reply Obj. 1: The principal cause cannot properly be called a sign of
its effect, even though the latter be hidden and the cause itself
sensible and manifest. But an instrumental cause, if manifest, can be
called a sign of a hidden effect, for this reason, that it is not
merely a cause but also in a measure an effect in so far as it is
moved by the principal agent. And in this sense the sacraments of the
New Law are both cause and signs. Hence, too, is it that, to use the
common expression, "they effect what they signify." From this it is
clear that they perfectly fulfil the conditions of a sacrament; being
ordained to something sacred, not only as a sign, but also as a cause.

Reply Obj. 2: An instrument has a twofold action; one is
instrumental, in respect of which it works not by its own power but
by the power of the principal agent: the other is its proper action,
which belongs to it in respect of its proper form: thus it belongs to
an axe to cut asunder by reason of its sharpness, but to make a
couch, in so far as it is the instrument of an art. But it does not
accomplish the instrumental action save by exercising its proper
action: for it is by cutting that it makes a couch. In like manner
the corporeal sacraments by their operation, which they exercise on
the body that they touch, accomplish through the Divine institution
an instrumental operation on the soul; for example, the water of
baptism, in respect of its proper power, cleanses the body, and
thereby, inasmuch as it is the instrument of the Divine power,
cleanses the soul: since from soul and body one thing is made. And
thus it is that Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii) that it "touches
the body and cleanses the heart."

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers that which causes grace as
principal agent; for this belongs to God alone, as stated above.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 2]

Whether Sacramental Grace Confers Anything in Addition to the Grace
of the Virtues and Gifts?

Objection 1: It seems that sacramental grace confers nothing in
addition to the grace of the virtues and gifts. For the grace of the
virtues and gifts perfects the soul sufficiently, both in its essence
and in its powers; as is clear from what was said in the Second Part
(I-II, Q. 110, AA. 3, 4). But grace is ordained to the perfecting of
the soul. Therefore sacramental grace cannot confer anything in
addition to the grace of the virtues and gifts.

Obj. 2: Further, the soul's defects are caused by sin. But all sins
are sufficiently removed by the grace of the virtues and gifts:
because there is no sin that is not contrary to some virtue. Since,
therefore, sacramental grace is ordained to the removal of the soul's
defects, it cannot confer anything in addition to the grace of the
virtues and gifts.

Obj. 3: Further, every addition or subtraction of form varies the
species (Metaph. viii). If, therefore, sacramental grace confers
anything in addition to the grace of the virtues and gifts, it
follows that it is called grace equivocally: and so we are none the
wiser when it is said that the sacraments cause grace.

_On the contrary,_ If sacramental grace confers nothing in addition
to the grace of the virtues and gifts, it is useless to confer the
sacraments on those who have the virtues and gifts. But there is
nothing useless in God's works. Therefore it seems that sacramental
grace confers something in addition to the grace of the virtues and
gifts.

_I answer that,_ As stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 110, AA. 3,
4), grace, considered in itself, perfects the essence of the soul, in
so far as it is a certain participated likeness of the Divine Nature.
And just as the soul's powers flow from its essence, so from grace
there flow certain perfections into the powers of the soul, which are
called virtues and gifts, whereby the powers are perfected in
reference to their actions. Now the sacraments are ordained unto
certain special effects which are necessary in the Christian life:
thus Baptism is ordained unto a certain spiritual regeneration, by
which man dies to vice and becomes a member of Christ: which effect
is something special in addition to the actions of the soul's powers:
and the same holds true of the other sacraments. Consequently just as
the virtues and gifts confer, in addition to grace commonly so
called, a certain special perfection ordained to the powers' proper
actions, so does sacramental grace confer, over and above grace
commonly so called, and in addition to the virtues and gifts, a
certain Divine assistance in obtaining the end of the sacrament. It
is thus that sacramental grace confers something in addition to the
grace of the virtues and gifts.

Reply Obj. 1: The grace of the virtues and gifts perfects the essence
and powers of the soul sufficiently as regards ordinary conduct: but
as regards certain special effects which are necessary in a Christian
life, sacramental grace is needed.

Reply Obj. 2: Vices and sins are sufficiently removed by virtues and
gifts, as to present and future time, in so far as they prevent man
from sinning. But in regard to past sins, the acts of which are
transitory whereas their guilt remains, man is provided with a
special remedy in the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: Sacramental grace is compared to grace commonly so
called, as species to genus. Wherefore just as it is not equivocal to
use the term "animal" in its generic sense, and as applied to a man,
so neither is it equivocal to speak of grace commonly so called and
of sacramental grace.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 3]

Whether the Sacraments of the New Law Contain Grace?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments of the New Law do not
contain grace. For it seems that what is contained is in the
container. But grace is not in the sacraments; neither as in a
subject, because the subject of grace is not a body but a spirit; nor
as in a vessel, for according to _Phys._ iv, "a vessel is a movable
place," and an accident cannot be in a place. Therefore it seems that
the sacraments of the New Law do not contain grace.

Obj. 2: Further, sacraments are instituted as means whereby men may
obtain grace. But since grace is an accident it cannot pass from one
subject to another. Therefore it would be of no account if grace were
in the sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, a spiritual thing is not contained by a corporeal,
even if it be therein; for the soul is not contained by the body;
rather does it contain the body. Since, therefore, grace is something
spiritual, it seems that it cannot be contained in a corporeal
sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Hugh of S. Victor says (De Sacram. i) that "a
sacrament, through its being sanctified, contains an invisible grace."

_I answer that,_ A thing is said to be in another in various ways; in
two of which grace is said to be in the sacraments. First, as in its
sign; for a sacrament is a sign of grace. Secondly, as in its cause;
for, as stated above (A. 1) a sacrament of the New Law is an
instrumental cause of grace. Wherefore grace is in a sacrament of the
New Law, not as to its specific likeness, as an effect in its
univocal cause; nor as to some proper and permanent form proportioned
to such an effect, as effects in non-univocal causes, for instance,
as things generated are in the sun; but as to a certain instrumental
power transient and incomplete in its natural being, as will be
explained later on (A. 4).

Reply Obj. 1: Grace is said to be in a sacrament not as in its
subject; nor as in a vessel considered as a place, but understood as
the instrument of some work to be done, according to Ezech. 9:1:
"Everyone hath a destroying vessel [Douay: 'weapon'] in his hand."

Reply Obj. 2: Although an accident does not pass from one subject to
another, nevertheless in a fashion it does pass from its cause into
its subject through the instrument; not so that it be in each of
these in the same way, but in each according to its respective nature.

Reply Obj. 3: If a spiritual thing exist perfectly in something, it
contains it and is not contained by it. But, in a sacrament, grace
has a passing and incomplete mode of being: and consequently it is
not unfitting to say that the sacraments contain grace.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 4]

Whether There Be in the Sacraments a Power of Causing Grace?

Objection 1: It seems that there is not in the sacraments a power of
causing grace. For the power of causing grace is a spiritual power.
But a spiritual power cannot be in a body; neither as proper to it,
because power flows from a thing's essence and consequently cannot
transcend it; nor as derived from something else, because that which
is received into anything follows the mode of the recipient.
Therefore in the sacraments there is no power of causing grace.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever exists is reducible to some kind of being
and some degree of good. But there is no assignable kind of being to
which such a power can belong; as anyone may see by running through
them all. Nor is it reducible to some degree of good; for neither is
it one of the goods of least account, since sacraments are necessary
for salvation: nor is it an intermediate good, such as are the powers
of the soul, which are natural powers; nor is it one of the greater
goods, for it is neither grace nor a virtue of the mind. Therefore it
seems that in the sacraments there is no power of causing grace.

Obj. 3: Further, if there be such a power in the sacraments, its
presence there must be due to nothing less than a creative act of
God. But it seems unbecoming that so excellent a being created by God
should cease to exist as soon as the sacrament is complete. Therefore
it seems that in the sacraments there is no power for causing grace.

Obj. 4: Further, the same thing cannot be in several. But several
things concur in the completion of a sacrament, namely, words and
things: while in one sacrament there can be but one power. Therefore
it seems that there is no power of causing grace in the sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.): "Whence
hath water so great power, that it touches the body and cleanses the
heart?" And Bede says that "Our Lord conferred a power of
regeneration on the waters by the contact of His most pure body."

_I answer that,_ Those who hold that the sacraments do not cause
grace save by a certain coincidence, deny the sacraments any power
that is itself productive of the sacramental effect, and hold that
the Divine power assists the sacraments and produces their effect.
But if we hold that a sacrament is an instrumental cause of grace, we
must needs allow that there is in the sacraments a certain
instrumental power of bringing about the sacramental effects. Now
such power is proportionate to the instrument: and consequently it
stands in comparison to the complete and perfect power of anything,
as the instrument to the principal agent. For an instrument, as
stated above (A. 1), does not work save as moved by the principal
agent, which works of itself. And therefore the power of the
principal agent exists in nature completely and perfectly: whereas
the instrumental power has a being that passes from one thing into
another, and is incomplete; just as motion is an imperfect act
passing from agent to patient.

Reply Obj. 1: A spiritual power cannot be in a corporeal subject,
after the manner of a permanent and complete power, as the argument
proves. But there is nothing to hinder an instrumental spiritual
power from being in a body; in so far as a body can be moved by a
particular spiritual substance so as to produce a particular
spiritual effect; thus in the very voice which is perceived by the
senses there is a certain spiritual power, inasmuch as it proceeds
from a mental concept, of arousing the mind of the hearer. It is in
this way that a spiritual power is in the sacraments, inasmuch as
they are ordained by God unto the production of a spiritual effect.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as motion, through being an imperfect act, is not
properly in a genus, but is reducible to a genus of perfect act, for
instance, alteration to the genus of quality: so, instrumental power,
properly speaking, is not in any genus, but is reducible to a genus
and species of perfect act.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as an instrumental power accrues to an instrument
through its being moved by the principal agent, so does a sacrament
receive spiritual power from Christ's blessing and from the action of
the minister in applying it to a sacramental use. Hence Augustine
says in a sermon on the Epiphany (St. Maximus of Turin, Serm. xii):
"Nor should you marvel, if we say that water, a corporeal substance,
achieves the cleansing of the soul. It does indeed, and penetrates
every secret hiding-place of the conscience. For subtle and clear as
it is, the blessing of Christ makes it yet more subtle, so that it
permeates into the very principles of life and searches the innermost
recesses of the heart."

Reply Obj. 4: Just as the one same power of the principal agent is
instrumentally in all the instruments that are ordained unto the
production of an effect, forasmuch as they are one as being so
ordained: so also the one same sacramental power is in both words and
things, forasmuch as words and things combine to form one sacrament.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 5]

Whether the Sacraments of the New Law Derive Their Power from
Christ's Passion?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments of the New Law do not
derive their power from Christ's Passion. For the power of the
sacraments is in the causing of grace which is the principle of
spiritual life in the soul. But as Augustine says (Tract. xix in
Joan.): "The Word, as He was in the beginning with God, quickens
souls; as He was made flesh, quickens bodies." Since, therefore,
Christ's Passion pertains to the Word as made flesh, it seems that it
cannot cause the power of the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, the power of the sacraments seems to depend on
faith. for as Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.), the Divine Word
perfects the sacrament "not because it is spoken, but because it is
believed." But our faith regards not only Christ's Passion, but also
the other mysteries of His humanity, and in a yet higher measure, His
Godhead. Therefore it seems that the power of the sacraments is not
due specially to Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, the sacraments are ordained unto man's
justification, according to 1 Cor. 6:11: "You are washed . . . you
are justified." Now justification is ascribed to the Resurrection,
according to Rom. 4:25: "(Who) rose again for our justification."
Therefore it seems that the sacraments derive their power from
Christ's Resurrection rather than from His Passion.

_On the contrary,_ on Rom. 5:14: "After the similitude of the
transgression of Adam," etc., the gloss says: "From the side of
Christ asleep on the Cross flowed the sacraments which brought
salvation to the Church." Consequently, it seems that the sacraments
derive their power from Christ's Passion.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1) a sacrament in causing grace
works after the manner of an instrument. Now an instrument is
twofold; the one, separate, as a stick, for instance; the other,
united, as a hand. Moreover, the separate instrument is moved by
means of the united instrument, as a stick by the hand. Now the
principal efficient cause of grace is God Himself, in comparison with
Whom Christ's humanity is as a united instrument, whereas the
sacrament is as a separate instrument. Consequently, the saving power
must needs be derived by the sacraments from Christ's Godhead through
His humanity.

Now sacramental grace seems to be ordained principally to two things:
namely, to take away the defects consequent on past sins, in so far
as they are transitory in act, but endure in guilt; and, further, to
perfect the soul in things pertaining to Divine Worship in regard to
the Christian Religion. But it is manifest from what has been stated
above (Q. 48, AA. 1, 2, 6; Q. 49, AA. 1, 3) that Christ delivered us
from our sins principally through His Passion, not only by way of
efficiency and merit, but also by way of satisfaction. Likewise by
His Passion He inaugurated the Rites of the Christian Religion by
offering "Himself--an oblation and a sacrifice to God" (Eph. 5:2).
Wherefore it is manifest that the sacraments of the Church derive
their power specially from Christ's Passion, the virtue of which is
in a manner united to us by our receiving the sacraments. It was in
sign of this that from the side of Christ hanging on the Cross there
flowed water and blood, the former of which belongs to Baptism, the
latter to the Eucharist, which are the principal sacraments.

Reply Obj. 1: The Word, forasmuch as He was in the beginning with
God, quickens souls as principal agent; but His flesh, and the
mysteries accomplished therein, are as instrumental causes in the
process of giving life to the soul: while in giving life to the body
they act not only as instrumental causes, but also to a certain
extent as exemplars, as we stated above (Q. 56, A. 1, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 2: Christ dwells in us "by faith" (Eph. 3:17).
Consequently, by faith Christ's power is united to us. Now the power
of blotting out sin belongs in a special way to His Passion. And
therefore men are delivered from sin especially by faith in His
Passion, according to Rom. 3:25: "Whom God hath proposed to be a
propitiation through faith in His Blood." Therefore the power of the
sacraments which is ordained unto the remission of sins is derived
principally from faith in Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 3: Justification is ascribed to the Resurrection by reason
of the term "whither," which is newness of life through grace. But it
is ascribed to the Passion by reason of the term "whence," i.e. in
regard to the forgiveness of sin.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 62, Art. 6]

Whether the Sacraments of the Old Law Caused Grace?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments of the Old Law caused
grace. For, as stated above (A. 5, ad 2) the sacraments of the New
Law derive their efficacy from faith in Christ's Passion. But there
was faith in Christ's Passion under the Old Law, as well as under the
New, since we have "the same spirit of faith" (2 Cor. 4:13).
Therefore just as the sacraments of the New Law confer grace, so did
the sacraments of the Old Law.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no sanctification save by grace. But men
were sanctified by the sacraments of the Old Law: for it is written
(Lev. 8:31): "And when he," i.e. Moses, "had sanctified them," i.e.
Aaron and his sons, "in their vestments," etc. Therefore it seems
that the sacraments of the Old Law conferred grace.

Obj. 3: Further, Bede says in a homily on the Circumcision: "Under
the Law circumcision provided the same health-giving balm against the
wound of original sin, as baptism in the time of revealed grace." But
Baptism confers grace now. Therefore circumcision conferred grace;
and in like manner, the other sacraments of the Law; for just as
Baptism is the door of the sacraments of the New Law, so was
circumcision the door of the sacraments of the Old Law: hence the
Apostle says (Gal. 5:3): "I testify to every man circumcising
himself, that he is a debtor to the whole law."

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Gal. 4:9): "Turn you again to the
weak and needy elements?" i.e. "to the Law," says the gloss, "which
is called weak, because it does not justify perfectly." But grace
justifies perfectly. Therefore the sacraments of the old Law did not
confer grace.

_I answer that,_ It cannot be said that the sacraments of the Old Law
conferred sanctifying grace of themselves, i.e. by their own power:
since thus Christ's Passion would not have been necessary, according
to Gal. 2:21: "If justice be by the Law, then Christ died in vain."

But neither can it be said that they derived the power of conferring
sanctifying grace from Christ's Passion. For as it was stated above
(A. 5), the power of Christ's Passion is united to us by faith and
the sacraments, but in different ways; because the link that comes
from faith is produced by an act of the soul; whereas the link that
comes from the sacraments, is produced by making use of exterior
things. Now nothing hinders that which is subsequent in point of
time, from causing movement, even before it exists in reality, in so
far as it pre-exists in an act of the soul: thus the end, which is
subsequent in point of time, moves the agent in so far as it is
apprehended and desired by him. On the other hand, what does not yet
actually exist, does not cause movement if we consider the use of
exterior things. Consequently, the efficient cause cannot in point of
time come into existence after causing movement, as does the final
cause. It is therefore clear that the sacraments of the New Law do
reasonably derive the power of justification from Christ's Passion,
which is the cause of man's righteousness; whereas the sacraments of
the Old Law did not.

Nevertheless the Fathers of old were justified by faith in Christ's
Passion, just as we are. And the sacraments of the old Law were a
kind of protestation of that faith, inasmuch as they signified
Christ's Passion and its effects. It is therefore manifest that the
sacraments of the Old Law were not endowed with any power by which
they conduced to the bestowal of justifying grace: and they merely
signified faith by which men were justified.

Reply Obj. 1: The Fathers of old had faith in the future Passion of
Christ, which, inasmuch as it was apprehended by the mind, was able
to justify them. But we have faith in the past Passion of Christ,
which is able to justify, also by the real use of sacramental things
as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: That sanctification was but a figure: for they were
said to be sanctified forasmuch as they gave themselves up to the
Divine worship according to the rite of the Old Law, which was wholly
ordained to the foreshadowing of Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 3: There have been many opinions about Circumcision. For,
according to some, Circumcision conferred no grace, but only remitted
sin. But this is impossible; because man is not justified from sin
save by grace, according to Rom. 3:24: "Being justified freely by His
grace."

Wherefore others said that by Circumcision grace is conferred, as to
the privative effects of sin, but not as to its positive effects. But
this also appears to be false, because by Circumcision, children
received the faculty of obtaining glory, which is the ultimate
positive effect of grace. Moreover, as regards the order of the
formal cause, positive effects are naturally prior to privative
effects, though according to the order of the material cause, the
reverse is the case: for a form does not exclude privation save by
informing the subject.

Hence others say that Circumcision conferred grace also as regards a
certain positive effect, i.e. by making man worthy of eternal life,
but not so as to repress concupiscence which makes man prone to sin.
And so at one time it seemed to me. But if the matter be considered
carefully, this too appears to be untrue; because the very least
grace is sufficient to resist any degree of concupiscence, and to
merit eternal life.

And therefore it seems better to say that Circumcision was a sign of
justifying faith: wherefore the Apostle says (Rom. 4:11) that Abraham
"received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the justice of faith."
Consequently grace was conferred in Circumcision in so far as it was
a sign of Christ's future Passion, as will be made clear further on
(Q. 70, A. 4).
_______________________

QUESTION 63

OF THE OTHER EFFECT OF THE SACRAMENTS, WHICH IS A CHARACTER
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider the other effect of the sacraments, which is
a character: and concerning this there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether by the sacraments a character is produced in the soul?

(2) What is this character?

(3) Of whom is this character?

(4) What is its subject?

(5) Is it indelible?

(6) Whether every sacrament imprints a character?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 1]

Whether a Sacrament Imprints a Character on the Soul?

Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament does not imprint a character
on the soul. For the word "character" seems to signify some kind of
distinctive sign. But Christ's members are distinguished from others
by eternal predestination, which does not imply anything in the
predestined, but only in God predestinating, as we have stated in the
First Part (Q. 23, A. 2). For it is written (2 Tim. 2:19): "The sure
foundation of God standeth firm, having this seal: The Lord knoweth
who are His." Therefore the sacraments do not imprint a character on
the soul.

Obj. 2: Further, a character is a distinctive sign. Now a sign, as
Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii) "is that which conveys
something else to the mind, besides the species which it impresses on
the senses." But nothing in the soul can impress a species on the
senses. Therefore it seems that no character is imprinted on the soul
by the sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the believer is distinguished from the
unbeliever by the sacraments of the New Law, so was it under the Old
Law. But the sacraments of the Old Law did not imprint a character;
whence they are called "justices of the flesh" (Heb. 9:10) by the
Apostle. Therefore neither seemingly do the sacraments of the New Law.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (2 Cor. 1:21, 22): "He . . . that
hath anointed us is God; Who also hath sealed us, and given the
pledge of the spirit in our hearts." But a character means nothing
else than a kind of sealing. Therefore it seems that by the
sacraments God imprints His character on us.

_I answer that,_ As is clear from what has been already stated (Q.
62, A. 5) the sacraments of the New Law are ordained for a twofold
purpose; namely, for a remedy against sins; and for the perfecting of
the soul in things pertaining to the Divine worship according to the
rite of the Christian life. Now whenever anyone is deputed to some
definite purpose he is wont to receive some outward sign thereof;
thus in olden times soldiers who enlisted in the ranks used to be
marked with certain characters on the body, through being deputed to
a bodily service. Since, therefore, by the sacraments men are deputed
to a spiritual service pertaining to the worship of God, it follows
that by their means the faithful receive a certain spiritual
character. Wherefore Augustine says (Contra Parmen. ii): "If a
deserter from the battle, through dread of the mark of enlistment on
his body, throws himself on the emperor's clemency, and having
besought and received mercy, return to the fight; is that character
renewed, when the man has been set free and reprimanded? is it not
rather acknowledged and approved? Are the Christian sacraments, by
any chance, of a nature less lasting than this bodily mark?"

Reply Obj. 1: The faithful of Christ are destined to the reward of
the glory that is to come, by the seal of Divine Predestination. But
they are deputed to acts becoming the Church that is now, by a
certain spiritual seal that is set on them, and is called a character.

Reply Obj. 2: The character imprinted on the soul is a kind of sign
in so far as it is imprinted by a sensible sacrament: since we know
that a certain one has received the baptismal character, through his
being cleansed by the sensible water. Nevertheless from a kind of
likeness, anything that assimilates one thing to another, or
discriminates one thing from another, even though it be not sensible,
can be called a character or a seal; thus the Apostle calls Christ
"the figure" or _charakter_ "of the substance of the Father" (Heb.
1:3).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 62, A. 6) the sacraments of the Old
Law had not in themselves any spiritual power of producing a
spiritual effect. Consequently in those sacraments there was no need
of a spiritual character, and bodily circumcision sufficed, which the
Apostle calls "a seal" (Rom. 4:11).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 2]

Whether a Character Is a Spiritual Power?

Objection 1: It seems that a character is not a spiritual power. For
"character" seems to be the same thing as "figure"; hence (Heb. 1:3),
where we read "figure of His substance," for "figure" the Greek has
_charakter_. Now "figure" is in the fourth species of quality, and
thus differs from power which is in the second species. Therefore
character is not a spiritual power.

Obj. 2: Further, Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. ii): "The Divine
Beatitude admits him that seeks happiness to a share in Itself, and
grants this share to him by conferring on him Its light as a kind of
seal." Consequently, it seems that a character is a kind of light.
Now light belongs rather to the third species of quality. Therefore a
character is not a power, since this seems to belong to the second
species.

Obj. 3: Further, character is defined by some thus: "A character is a
holy sign of the communion of faith and of the holy ordination
conferred by a hierarch." Now a sign is in the genus of _relation,_
not of _power._ Therefore a character is not a spiritual power.

Obj. 4: Further, a power is in the nature of a cause and principle
(Metaph. v). But a _sign_ which is set down in the definition of a
character is rather in the nature of an effect. Therefore a character
is not a spiritual power.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii): "There are three
things in the soul, power, habit, and passion." Now a character is
not a passion: since a passion passes quickly, whereas a character is
indelible, as will be made clear further on (A. 5). In like manner it
is not a habit: because no habit is indifferent to acting well or
ill: whereas a character is indifferent to either, since some use it
well, some ill. Now this cannot occur with a habit: because no one
abuses a habit of virtue, or uses well an evil habit. It remains,
therefore, that a character is a power.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the sacraments of the New
Law produce a character, in so far as by them we are deputed to the
worship of God according to the rite of the Christian religion.
Wherefore Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. ii), after saying that God "by a
kind of sign grants a share of Himself to those that approach Him,"
adds "by making them Godlike and communicators of Divine gifts." Now
the worship of God consists either in receiving Divine gifts, or in
bestowing them on others. And for both these purposes some power is
needed; for to bestow something on others, active power is necessary;
and in order to receive, we need a passive power. Consequently, a
character signifies a certain spiritual power ordained unto things
pertaining to the Divine worship.

But it must be observed that this spiritual power is instrumental: as
we have stated above (Q. 62, A. 4) of the virtue which is in the
sacraments. For to have a sacramental character belongs to God's
ministers: and a minister is a kind of instrument, as the Philosopher
says (Polit. i). Consequently, just as the virtue which is in the
sacraments is not of itself in a genus, but is reducible to a genus,
for the reason that it is of a transitory and incomplete nature: so
also a character is not properly in a genus or species, but is
reducible to the second species of quality.

Reply Obj. 1: Configuration is a certain boundary of quantity.
Wherefore, properly speaking, it is only in corporeal things; and of
spiritual things is said metaphorically. Now that which decides the
genus or species of a thing must needs be predicated of it properly.
Consequently, a character cannot be in the fourth species of quality,
although some have held this to be the case.

Reply Obj. 2: The third species of quality contains only sensible
passions or sensible qualities. Now a character is not a sensible
light. Consequently, it is not in the third species of quality as
some have maintained.

Reply Obj. 3: The relation signified by the word "sign" must needs
have some foundation. Now the relation signified by this sign which
is a character, cannot be founded immediately on the essence of the
soul: because then it would belong to every soul naturally.
Consequently, there must be something in the soul on which such a
relation is founded. And it is in this that a character essentially
consists. Therefore it need not be in the genus "relation" as some
have held.

Reply Obj. 4: A character is in the nature of a sign in comparison to
the sensible sacrament by which it is imprinted. But considered in
itself, it is in the nature of a principle, in the way already
explained.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 3]

Whether the Sacramental Character Is the Character of Christ?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental character is not the
character of Christ. For it is written (Eph. 4:30): "Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are sealed." But a character consists
essentially in something that seals. Therefore the sacramental
character should be attributed to the Holy Ghost rather than to
Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, a character has the nature of a sign. And it is a
sign of the grace that is conferred by the sacrament. Now grace is
poured forth into the soul by the whole Trinity; wherefore it is
written (Ps. 83:12): "The Lord will give grace and glory." Therefore
it seems that the sacramental character should not be attributed
specially to Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, a man is marked with a character that he may be
distinguishable from others. But the saints are distinguishable from
others by charity, which, as Augustine says (De Trin. xv), "alone
separates the children of the Kingdom from the children of
perdition": wherefore also the children of perdition are said to have
"the character of the beast" (Apoc. 13:16, 17). But charity is not
attributed to Christ, but rather to the Holy Ghost according to Rom.
5:5: "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts, by the Holy
Ghost, Who is given to us"; or even to the Father, according to 2
Cor. 13:13: "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the charity of
God." Therefore it seems that the sacramental character should not be
attributed to Christ.

_On the contrary,_ Some define character thus: "A character is a
distinctive mark printed in a man's rational soul by the eternal
Character, whereby the created trinity is sealed with the likeness of
the creating and re-creating Trinity, and distinguishing him from
those who are not so enlikened, according to the state of faith." But
the eternal Character is Christ Himself, according to Heb. 1:3: "Who
being the brightness of His glory and the figure," or character, "of
His substance." It seems, therefore, that the character should
properly be attributed to Christ.

_I answer that,_ As has been made clear above (A. 1), a character is
properly a kind of seal, whereby something is marked, as being
ordained to some particular end: thus a coin is marked for use in
exchange of goods, and soldiers are marked with a character as being
deputed to military service. Now the faithful are deputed to a
twofold end. First and principally to the enjoyment of glory. And for
this purpose they are marked with the seal of grace according to
Ezech. 9:4: "Mark Thou upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and
mourn"; and Apoc. 7:3: "Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the
trees, till we sign the servants of our God in their foreheads."

Secondly, each of the faithful is deputed to receive, or to bestow on
others, things pertaining to the worship of God. And this, properly
speaking, is the purpose of the sacramental character. Now the whole
rite of the Christian religion is derived from Christ's priesthood.
Consequently, it is clear that the sacramental character is specially
the character of Christ, to Whose character the faithful are likened
by reason of the sacramental characters, which are nothing else than
certain participations of Christ's Priesthood, flowing from Christ
Himself.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle speaks there of that sealing by which a man
is assigned to future glory, and which is effected by grace. Now
grace is attributed to the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as it is through love
that God gives us something gratis, which is the very nature of
grace: while the Holy Ghost is love. Wherefore it is written (1 Cor.
12:4): "There are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit."

Reply Obj. 2: The sacramental character is a thing as regards the
exterior sacrament, and a sacrament in regard to the ultimate effect.
Consequently, something can be attributed to a character in two ways.
First, if the character be considered as a sacrament: and thus it is
a sign of the invisible grace which is conferred in the sacrament.
Secondly, if it be considered as a character. And thus it is a sign
conferring on a man a likeness to some principal person in whom is
vested the authority over that to which he is assigned: thus soldiers
who are assigned to military service, are marked with their leader's
sign, by which they are, in a fashion, likened to him. And in this
way those who are deputed to the Christian worship, of which Christ
is the author, receive a character by which they are likened to
Christ. Consequently, properly speaking, this is Christ's character.

Reply Obj. 3: A character distinguishes one from another, in relation
to some particular end, to which he, who receives the character is
ordained: as has been stated concerning the military character (A. 1)
by which a soldier of the king is distinguished from the enemy's
soldier in relation to the battle. In like manner the character of
the faithful is that by which the faithful of Christ are
distinguished from the servants of the devil, either in relation to
eternal life, or in relation to the worship of the Church that now
is. Of these the former is the result of charity and grace, as the
objection runs; while the latter results from the sacramental
character. Wherefore the "character of the beast" may be understood
by opposition, to mean either the obstinate malice for which some are
assigned to eternal punishment, or the profession of an unlawful form
of worship.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 4]

Whether the Character Be Subjected in the Powers of the Soul?

Objection 1: It seems that the character is not subjected in the
powers of the soul. For a character is said to be a disposition to
grace. But grace is subjected in the essence of the soul as we have
stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 110, A. 4). Therefore it seems
that the character is in the essence of the soul and not in the
powers.

Obj. 2: Further, a power of the soul does not seem to be the subject
of anything save habit and disposition. But a character, as stated
above (A. 2), is neither habit nor disposition, but rather a power:
the subject of which is nothing else than the essence of the soul.
Therefore it seems that the character is not subjected in a power of
the soul, but rather in its essence.

Obj. 3: Further, the powers of the soul are divided into those of
knowledge and those of appetite. But it cannot be said that a
character is only in a cognitive power, nor, again, only in an
appetitive power: since it is neither ordained to knowledge only, nor
to desire only. Likewise, neither can it be said to be in both,
because the same accident cannot be in several subjects. Therefore it
seems that a character is not subjected in a power of the soul, but
rather in the essence.

_On the contrary,_ A character, according to its definition given
above (A. 3), is imprinted in the rational soul "by way of an image."
But the image of the Trinity in the soul is seen in the powers.
Therefore a character is in the powers of the soul.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), a character is a kind of
seal by which the soul is marked, so that it may receive, or bestow
on others, things pertaining to Divine worship. Now the Divine
worship consists in certain actions: and the powers of the soul are
properly ordained to actions, just as the essence is ordained to
existence. Therefore a character is subjected not in the essence of
the soul, but in its power.

Reply Obj. 1: The subject is ascribed to an accident in respect of
that to which the accident disposes it proximately, but not in
respect of that to which it disposes it remotely or indirectly. Now a
character disposes the soul directly and proximately to the
fulfilling of things pertaining to Divine worship: and because such
cannot be accomplished suitably without the help of grace, since,
according to John 4:24, "they that adore" God "must adore Him in
spirit and in truth," consequently, the Divine bounty bestows grace
on those who receive the character, so that they may accomplish
worthily the service to which they are deputed. Therefore the subject
should be ascribed to a character in respect of those actions that
pertain to the Divine worship, rather than in respect of grace.

Reply Obj. 2: The essence of the soul is the subject of the natural
power, which flows from the principles of the essence. Now a
character is not a power of this kind, but a spiritual power coming
from without. Wherefore, just as the essence of the soul, from which
man has his natural life, is perfected by grace from which the soul
derives spiritual life; so the natural power of the soul is perfected
by a spiritual power, which is a character. For habit and disposition
belong to a power of the soul, since they are ordained to actions of
which the powers are the principles. And in like manner whatever is
ordained to action, should be attributed to a power.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above, a character is ordained unto things
pertaining to the Divine worship; which is a protestation of faith
expressed by exterior signs. Consequently, a character needs to be in
the soul's cognitive power, where also is faith.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 5]

Whether a Character Can Be Blotted Out from the Soul?

Objection 1: It seems that a character can be blotted out from the
soul. Because the more perfect an accident is, the more firmly does
it adhere to its subject. But grace is more perfect than a character;
because a character is ordained unto grace as to a further end. Now
grace is lost through sin. Much more, therefore, is a character so
lost.

Obj. 2: Further, by a character a man is deputed to the Divine
worship, as stated above (AA. 3, 4). But some pass from the worship
of God to a contrary worship by apostasy from the faith. It seems,
therefore, that such lose the sacramental character.

Obj. 3: Further, when the end ceases, the means to the end should
cease also: thus after the resurrection there will be no marriage,
because begetting will cease, which is the purpose of marriage. Now
the exterior worship to which a character is ordained, will not
endure in heaven, where there will be no shadows, but all will be
truth without a veil. Therefore the sacramental character does not
last in the soul for ever: and consequently it can be blotted out.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Contra Parmen. ii): "The Christian
sacraments are not less lasting than the bodily mark" of military
service. But the character of military service is not repeated, but
is "recognized and approved" in the man who obtains the emperor's
forgiveness after offending him. Therefore neither can the
sacramental character be blotted out.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), in a sacramental character
Christ's faithful have a share in His Priesthood; in the sense that
as Christ has the full power of a spiritual priesthood, so His
faithful are likened to Him by sharing a certain spiritual power with
regard to the sacraments and to things pertaining to the Divine
worship. For this reason it is unbecoming that Christ should have a
character: but His Priesthood is compared to a character, as that
which is complete and perfect is compared to some participation of
itself. Now Christ's Priesthood is eternal, according to Ps. 109:4:
"Thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech."
Consequently, every sanctification wrought by His Priesthood, is
perpetual, enduring as long as the thing sanctified endures. This is
clear even in inanimate things; for the consecration of a church or
an altar lasts for ever unless they be destroyed. Since, therefore,
the subject of a character is the soul as to its intellective part,
where faith resides, as stated above (A. 4, ad 3); it is clear that,
the intellect being perpetual and incorruptible, a character cannot
be blotted out from the soul.

Reply Obj. 1: Both grace and character are in the soul, but in
different ways. For grace is in the soul, as a form having complete
existence therein: whereas a character is in the soul, as an
instrumental power, as stated above (A. 2). Now a complete form is in
its subject according to the condition of the subject. And since the
soul as long as it is a wayfarer is changeable in respect of the
free-will, it results that grace is in the soul in a changeable
manner. But an instrumental power follows rather the condition of the
principal agent: and consequently a character exists in the soul in
an indelible manner, not from any perfection of its own, but from the
perfection of Christ's Priesthood, from which the character flows
like an instrumental power.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Contra Parmen. ii), "even apostates
are not deprived of their baptism, for when they repent and return to
the fold they do not receive it again; whence we conclude that it
cannot be lost." The reason of this is that a character is an
instrumental power, as stated above (ad 1), and the nature of an
instrument as such is to be moved by another, but not to move itself;
this belongs to the will. Consequently, however much the will be
moved in the contrary direction, the character is not removed, by
reason of the immobility of the principal mover.

Reply Obj. 3: Although external worship does not last after this
life, yet its end remains. Consequently, after this life the
character remains, both in the good as adding to their glory, and in
the wicked as increasing their shame: just as the character of the
military service remains in the soldiers after the victory, as the
boast of the conquerors, and the disgrace of the conquered.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 63, Art. 6]

Whether a Character Is Imprinted by Each Sacrament of the New Law?

Objection 1: It seems that a character is imprinted by all the
sacraments of the New Law: because each sacrament of the New Law
makes man a participator in Christ's Priesthood. But the sacramental
character is nothing but a participation in Christ's Priesthood, as
already stated (AA. 3, 5). Therefore it seems that a character is
imprinted by each sacrament of the New Law.

Obj. 2: Further, a character may be compared to the soul in which it
is, as a consecration to that which is consecrated. But by each
sacrament of the New Law man becomes the recipient of sanctifying
grace, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 1). Therefore it seems that a
character is imprinted by each sacrament of the New Law.

Obj. 3: Further, a character is both a reality and a sacrament. But
in each sacrament of the New Law, there is something which is only a
reality, and something which is only a sacrament, and something which
is both reality and sacrament. Therefore a character is imprinted by
each sacrament of the New Law.

_On the contrary,_ Those sacraments in which a character is
imprinted, are not reiterated, because a character is indelible, as
stated above (A. 5): whereas some sacraments are reiterated, for
instance, penance and matrimony. Therefore not all the sacraments
imprint a character.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 62, AA. 1, 5), the sacraments of
the New Law are ordained for a twofold purpose, namely, as a remedy
for sin, and for the Divine worship. Now all the sacraments, from the
fact that they confer grace, have this in common, that they afford a
remedy against sin: whereas not all the sacraments are directly
ordained to the Divine worship. Thus it is clear that penance,
whereby man is delivered from sin, does not afford man any advance in
the Divine worship, but restores him to his former state.

Now a sacrament may belong to the Divine worship in three ways: first
in regard to the thing done; secondly, in regard to the agent;
thirdly, in regard to the recipient. In regard to the thing done, the
Eucharist belongs to the Divine worship, for the Divine worship
consists principally therein, so far as it is the sacrifice of the
Church. And by this same sacrament a character is not imprinted on
man; because it does not ordain man to any further sacramental action
or benefit received, since rather is it "the end and consummation of
all the sacraments," as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii). But it
contains within itself Christ, in Whom there is not the character,
but the very plenitude of the Priesthood.

But it is the sacrament of order that pertains to the sacramental
agents: for it is by this sacrament that men are deputed to confer
sacraments on others: while the sacrament of Baptism pertains to the
recipients, since it confers on man the power to receive the other
sacraments of the Church; whence it is called the "door of the
sacraments." In a way Confirmation also is ordained for the same
purpose, as we shall explain in its proper place (Q. 65, A. 3).
Consequently, these three sacraments imprint a character, namely,
Baptism, Confirmation, and order.

Reply Obj. 1: Every sacrament makes man a participator in Christ's
Priesthood, from the fact that it confers on him some effect thereof.
But every sacrament does not depute a man to do or receive something
pertaining to the worship of the priesthood of Christ: while it is
just this that is required for a sacrament to imprint a character.

Reply Obj. 2: Man is sanctified by each of the sacraments, since
sanctity means immunity from sin, which is the effect of grace. But
in a special way some sacraments, which imprint a character, bestow
on man a certain consecration, thus deputing him to the Divine
worship: just as inanimate things are said to be consecrated
forasmuch as they are deputed to Divine worship.

Reply Obj. 3: Although a character is a reality and a sacrament, it
does not follow that whatever is a reality and a sacrament, is also a
character. With regard to the other sacraments we shall explain
further on what is the reality and what is the sacrament.
_______________________

QUESTION 64

OF THE CAUSES OF THE SACRAMENTS
(In Ten Articles)

In the next place we have to consider the causes of the sacraments,
both as to authorship and as to ministration. Concerning which there
are ten points of inquiry:

(1) Whether God alone works inwardly in the sacraments?

(2) Whether the institution of the sacraments is from God alone?

(3) Of the power which Christ exercised over the sacraments;

(4) Whether He could transmit that power to others?

(5) Whether the wicked can have the power of administering the
sacraments?

(6) Whether the wicked sin in administering the sacraments?

(7) Whether the angels can be ministers of the sacraments?

(8) Whether the minister's intention is necessary in the sacraments?

(9) Whether right faith is required therein; so that it be impossible
for an unbeliever to confer a sacrament?

(10) Whether a right intention is required therein?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 1]

Whether God Alone, or the Minister Also, Works Inwardly Unto the
Sacramental Effect?

Objection 1: It seems that not God alone, but also the minister,
works inwardly unto the sacramental effect. For the inward
sacramental effect is to cleanse man from sin and enlighten him by
grace. But it belongs to the ministers of the Church "to cleanse,
enlighten and perfect," as Dionysius explains (Coel. Hier. v).
Therefore it seems that the sacramental effect is the work not only
of God, but also of the ministers of the Church.

Obj. 2: Further, certain prayers are offered up in conferring the
sacraments. But the prayers of the righteous are more acceptable to
God than those of any other, according to John 9:31: "If a man be a
server of God, and doth His will, him He heareth." Therefore it stems
that a man obtains a greater sacramental effect if he receive it from
a good minister. Consequently, the interior effect is partly the work
of the minister and not of God alone.

Obj. 3: Further, man is of greater account than an inanimate thing.
But an inanimate thing contributes something to the interior effect:
since "water touches the body and cleanses the soul," as Augustine
says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.). Therefore the interior sacramental
effect is partly the work of man and not of God alone.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Rom. 8:33): "God that justifieth."
Since, then, the inward effect of all the sacraments is
justification, it seems that God alone works the interior sacramental
effect.

_I answer that,_ There are two ways of producing an effect; first, as
a principal agent; secondly, as an instrument. In the former way the
interior sacramental effect is the work of God alone: first, because
God alone can enter the soul wherein the sacramental effect takes
place; and no agent can operate immediately where it is not:
secondly, because grace which is an interior sacramental effect is
from God alone, as we have established in the Second Part (I-II, Q.
112, A. 1); while the character which is the interior effect of
certain sacraments, is an instrumental power which flows from the
principal agent, which is God. In the second way, however, the
interior sacramental effect can be the work of man, in so far as he
works as a minister. For a minister is of the nature of an
instrument, since the action of both is applied to something
extrinsic, while the interior effect is produced through the power of
the principal agent, which is God.

Reply Obj. 1: Cleansing in so far as it is attributed to the
ministers of the Church is not a washing from sin: deacons are said
to "cleanse," inasmuch as they remove the unclean from the body of
the faithful, or prepare them by their pious admonitions for the
reception of the sacraments. In like manner also priests are said to
"enlighten" God's people, not indeed by giving them grace, but by
conferring on them the sacraments of grace; as Dionysius explains
(Coel. Hier. v).

Reply Obj. 2: The prayers which are said in giving the sacraments,
are offered to God, not on the part of the individual, but on the
part of the whole Church, whose prayers are acceptable to God,
according to Matt. 18:19: "If two of you shall consent upon earth,
concerning anything whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to
them by My Father." Nor is there any reason why the devotion of a
just man should not contribute to this effect. But that which is the
sacramental effect is not impetrated by the prayer of the Church or
of the minister, but through the merit of Christ's Passion, the power
of which operates in the sacraments, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 5).
Wherefore the sacramental effect is made no better by a better
minister. And yet something in addition may be impetrated for the
receiver of the sacrament through the devotion of the minister: but
this is not the work of the minister, but the work of God Who hears
the minister's prayer.

Reply Obj. 3: Inanimate things do not produce the sacramental effect,
except instrumentally, as stated above. In like manner neither do men
produce the sacramental effect, except ministerially, as also stated
above.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 2]

Whether the Sacraments Are Instituted by God Alone?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments are not instituted by God
alone. For those things which God has instituted are delivered to us
in Holy Scripture. But in the sacraments certain things are done
which are nowhere mentioned in Holy Scripture; for instance, the
chrism with which men are confirmed, the oil with which priests are
anointed, and many others, both words and actions, which we employ in
the sacraments. Therefore the sacraments were not instituted by God
alone.

Obj. 2: Further, a sacrament is a kind of sign. Now sensible things
have their own natural signification. Nor can it be said that God
takes pleasure in certain significations and not in others; because
He approves of all that He made. Moreover, it seems to be peculiar to
the demons to be enticed to something by means of signs; for
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi): "The demons are enticed . . . by
means of creatures, which were created not by them but by God, by
various means of attraction according to their various natures, not
as an animal is enticed by food, but as a spirit is drawn by a sign."
It seems, therefore, that there is no need for the sacraments to be
instituted by God.

Obj. 3: Further, the apostles were God's vicegerents on earth: hence
the Apostle says (2 Cor. 2:10): "For what I have pardoned, if I have
pardoned anything, for your sakes have I done it in the person of
Christ," i.e. as though Christ Himself had pardoned. Therefore it
seems that the apostles and their successors can institute new
sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ The institutor of anything is he who gives it
strength and power: as in the case of those who institute laws. But
the power of a sacrament is from God alone, as we have shown above
(A. 1; Q. 62, A. 1). Therefore God alone can institute a sacrament.

_I answer that,_ As appears from what has been said above (A. 1; Q.
62, A. 1), the sacraments are instrumental causes of spiritual
effects. Now an instrument has its power from the principal agent.
But an agent in respect of a sacrament is twofold; viz. he who
institutes the sacraments, and he who makes use of the sacrament
instituted, by applying it for the production of the effect. Now the
power of a sacrament cannot be from him who makes use of the
sacrament: because he works but as a minister. Consequently, it
follows that the power of the sacrament is from the institutor of the
sacrament. Since, therefore, the power of the sacrament is from God
alone, it follows that God alone can institute the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 1: Human institutions observed in the sacraments are not
essential to the sacrament; but belong to the solemnity which is
added to the sacraments in order to arouse devotion and reverence in
the recipients. But those things that are essential to the sacrament,
are instituted by Christ Himself, Who is God and man. And though they
are not all handed down by the Scriptures, yet the Church holds them
from the intimate tradition of the apostles, according to the saying
of the Apostle (1 Cor. 11:34): "The rest I will set in order when I
come."

Reply Obj. 2: From their very nature sensible things have a certain
aptitude for the signifying of spiritual effects: but this aptitude
is fixed by the Divine institution to some special signification.
This is what Hugh of St. Victor means by saying (De Sacram. i) that
"a sacrament owes its signification to its institution." Yet God
chooses certain things rather than others for sacramental
signification, not as though His choice were restricted to them, but
in order that their signification be more suitable to them.

Reply Obj. 3: The apostles and their successors are God's vicars in
governing the Church which is built on faith and the sacraments of
faith. Wherefore, just as they may not institute another Church, so
neither may they deliver another faith, nor institute other
sacraments: on the contrary, the Church is said to be built up with
the sacraments "which flowed from the side of Christ while hanging on
the Cross."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 3]

Whether Christ As Man Had the Power of Producing the Inward
Sacramental Effect?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ as man had the power of producing
the interior sacramental effect. For John the Baptist said (John
1:33): "He, Who sent me to baptize in water, said to me: He upon Whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is
that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." But to baptize with the Holy
Ghost is to confer inwardly the grace of the Holy Ghost. And the Holy
Ghost descended upon Christ as man, not as God: for thus He Himself
gives the Holy Ghost. Therefore it seems that Christ, as man, had the
power of producing the inward sacramental effect.

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord said (Matt. 9:6): "That you may know that
the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins." But forgiveness
of sins is an inward sacramental effect. Therefore it seems that
Christ as man produces the inward sacramental effect.

Obj. 3: Further, the institution of the sacraments belongs to him who
acts as principal agent in producing the inward sacramental effect.
Now it is clear that Christ instituted the sacraments. Therefore it
is He that produces the inward sacramental effect.

Obj. 4: Further, no one can confer the sacramental effect without
conferring the sacrament, except he produce the sacramental effect by
his own power. But Christ conferred the sacramental effect without
conferring the sacrament; as in the case of Magdalen to whom He said:
"Thy sins are forgiven Thee" (Luke 7:48). Therefore it seems that
Christ, as man, produces the inward sacramental effect.

Obj. 5: Further, the principal agent in causing the inward effect is
that in virtue of which the sacrament operates. But the sacraments
derive their power from Christ's Passion and through the invocation
of His Name; according to 1 Cor. 1:13: "Was Paul then crucified for
you? or were you baptized in the name of Paul?" Therefore Christ, as
man, produces the inward sacramental effect.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine (Isidore, Etym. vi) says: "The Divine
power in the sacraments works inwardly in producing their salutary
effect." Now the Divine power is Christ's as God, not as man.
Therefore Christ produces the inward sacramental effect, not as man
but as God.

_I answer that,_ Christ produces the inward sacramental effect, both
as God and as man, but not in the same way. For, as God, He works in
the sacraments by authority: but, as man, His operation conduces to
the inward sacramental effects meritoriously and efficiently, but
instrumentally. For it has been stated (Q. 48, AA. 1, 6; Q. 49, A. 1)
that Christ's Passion which belongs to Him in respect of His human
nature, is the cause of justification, both meritoriously and
efficiently, not as the principal cause thereof, or by His own
authority, but as an instrument, in so far as His humanity is the
instrument of His Godhead, as stated above (Q. 13, AA. 2, 3; Q. 19,
A. 1).

Nevertheless, since it is an instrument united to the Godhead in
unity of Person, it has a certain headship and efficiency in regard
to extrinsic instruments, which are the ministers of the Church and
the sacraments themselves, as has been explained above (A. 1).
Consequently, just as Christ, as God, has power of _authority_ over
the sacraments, so, as man, He has the power of ministry in chief, or
power of _excellence._ And this consists in four things. First in
this, that the merit and power of His Passion operates in the
sacraments, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 5). And because the power of
the Passion is communicated to us by faith, according to Rom. 3:25:
"Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation through faith in His
blood," which faith we proclaim by calling on the name of Christ:
therefore, secondly, Christ's power of excellence over the sacraments
consists in this, that they are sanctified by the invocation of His
name. And because the sacraments derive their power from their
institution, hence, thirdly, the excellence of Christ's power
consists in this, that He, Who gave them their power, could institute
the sacraments. And since cause does not depend on effect, but rather
conversely, it belongs to the excellence of Christ's power, that He
could bestow the sacramental effect without conferring the exterior
sacrament. Thus it is clear how to solve the objections; for the
arguments on either side are true to a certain extent, as explained
above.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Could Communicate to Ministers the Power Which He Had
in the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ could not communicate to ministers
the power which He had in the sacraments. For as Augustine argues
against Maximin, "if He could, but would not, He was jealous of His
power." But jealousy was far from Christ Who had the fulness of
charity. Since, therefore, Christ did not communicate His power to
ministers, it seems that He could not.

Obj. 2: Further, on John 14:12: "Greater than these shall he do,"
Augustine says (Tract. lxxii): "I affirm this to be altogether
greater," namely, for a man from being ungodly to be made righteous,
"than to create heaven and earth." But Christ could not communicate
to His disciples the power of creating heaven and earth: neither,
therefore, could He give them the power of making the ungodly to be
righteous. Since, therefore, the justification of the ungodly is
effected by the power that Christ has in the sacraments, it seems
that He could not communicate that power to ministers.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to Christ as Head of the Church that
grace should flow from Him to others, according to John 1:16: "Of His
fulness we all have received." But this could not be communicated to
others; since then the Church would be deformed, having many heads.
Therefore it seems that Christ could not communicate His power to
ministers.

_On the contrary,_ on John 1:31: "I knew Him not," Augustine says
(Tract. v) that "he did not know that our Lord having the authority
of baptizing . . . would keep it to Himself." But John would not have
been in ignorance of this, if such a power were incommunicable.
Therefore Christ could communicate His power to ministers.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), Christ had a twofold power
in the sacraments. One was the power of _authority,_ which belongs to
Him as God: and this power He could not communicate to any creature;
just as neither could He communicate the Divine Essence. The other
was the power of _excellence,_ which belongs to Him as man. This
power He could communicate to ministers; namely, by giving them such
a fulness of grace--that their merits would conduce to the
sacramental effect--that by the invocation of their names, the
sacraments would be sanctified--and that they themselves might
institute sacraments, and by their mere will confer the sacramental
effect without observing the sacramental rite. For a united
instrument, the more powerful it is, is all the more able to lend its
power to the separated instrument; as the hand can to a stick.

Reply Obj. 1: It was not through jealousy that Christ refrained from
communicating to ministers His power of excellence, but for the good
of the faithful; lest they should put their trust in men, and lest
there should be various kinds of sacraments, giving rise to division
in the Church; as may be seen in those who said: "I am of Paul, I am
of Apollo, and I of Cephas" (1 Cor. 1:12).

Reply Obj. 2: This objection is true of the power of authority, which
belongs to Christ as God. At the same time the power of excellence
can be called authority in comparison to other ministers. Whence on 1
Cor. 1:13: "Is Christ divided?" the gloss says that "He could give
power of authority in baptizing, to those to whom He gave the power
of administering it."

Reply Obj. 3: It was in order to avoid the incongruity of many heads
in the Church, that Christ was unwilling to communicate to ministers
His power of excellence. If, however, He had done so, He would have
been Head in chief; the others in subjection to Him.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 5]

Whether the Sacraments Can Be Conferred by Evil Ministers?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments cannot be conferred by evil
ministers. For the sacraments of the New Law are ordained for the
purpose of cleansing from sin and for the bestowal of grace. Now evil
men, being themselves unclean, cannot cleanse others from sin,
according to Ecclus. 34:4: "Who [Vulg.: 'What'] can be made clean by
the unclean?" Moreover, since they have not grace, it seems that they
cannot give grace, for "no one gives what he has not." It seems,
therefore, that the sacraments cannot be conferred by wicked men.

Obj. 2: Further, all the power of the sacraments is derived from
Christ, as stated above (A. 3; Q. 62, A. 5). But evil men are cut off
from Christ: because they have not charity, by which the members are
united to their Head, according to 1 John 4:16: "He that abideth in
charity, abideth in God, and God in him." Therefore it seems that the
sacraments cannot be conferred by evil men.

Obj. 3: Further, if anything is wanting that is required for the
sacraments, the sacrament is invalid; for instance, if the required
matter or form be wanting. But the minister required for a sacrament
is one who is without the stain of sin, according to Lev. 21:17, 18:
"Whosoever of thy seed throughout their families, hath a blemish, he
shall not offer bread to his God, neither shall he approach to
minister to Him." Therefore it seems that if the minister be wicked,
the sacrament has no effect.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says on John 1:33: "He upon Whom thou
shalt see the Spirit," etc. (Tract. v in Joan.), that "John did not
know that our Lord, having the authority of baptizing, would keep it
to Himself, but that the ministry would certainly pass to both good
and evil men . . . What is a bad minister to thee, where the Lord is
good?"

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the ministers of the Church
work instrumentally in the sacraments, because, in a way, a minister
is of the nature of an instrument. But, as stated above (Q. 62, AA.
1, 4), an instrument acts not by reason of its own form, but by the
power of the one who moves it. Consequently, whatever form or power
an instrument has in addition to that which it has as an instrument,
is accidental to it: for instance, that a physician's body, which is
the instrument of his soul, wherein is his medical art, be healthy or
sickly; or that a pipe, through which water passes, be of silver or
lead. Therefore the ministers of the Church can confer the
sacraments, though they be wicked.

Reply Obj. 1: The ministers of the Church do not by their own power
cleanse from sin those who approach the sacraments, nor do they
confer grace on them: it is Christ Who does this by His own power
while He employs them as instruments. Consequently, those who
approach the sacraments receive an effect whereby they are enlikened
not to the ministers but to Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's members are united to their Head by charity,
so that they may receive life from Him; for as it is written (1 John
3:14): "He that loveth not abideth in death." Now it is possible for
a man to work with a lifeless instrument, and separated from him as
to bodily union, provided it be united to him by some sort of motion:
for a workman works in one way with his hand, in another with his
axe. Consequently, it is thus that Christ works in the sacraments,
both by wicked men as lifeless instruments, and by good men as living
instruments.

Reply Obj. 3: A thing is required in a sacrament in two ways. First,
as being essential to it: and if this be wanting, the sacrament is
invalid; for instance, if the due form or matter be wanting.
Secondly, a thing is required for a sacrament, by reason of a certain
fitness. And in this way good ministers are required for a sacrament.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 6]

Whether Wicked Men Sin in Administering the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that wicked men do not sin in administering the
sacraments. For just as men serve God in the sacraments, so do they
serve Him in works of charity; whence it is written (Heb. 13:16): "Do
not forget to do good and to impart, for by such sacrifices God's
favor is obtained." But the wicked do not sin in serving God by works
of charity: indeed, they should be persuaded to do so, according to
Dan. 4:24: "Let my counsel be acceptable" to the king; "Redeem thou
thy sins with alms." Therefore it seems that wicked men do not sin in
administering the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever co-operates with another in his sin, is also
guilty of sin, according to Rom. 1:32: "He is [Vulg.: 'They are']
worthy of death; not only he that commits the sin, but also he who
consents to them that do them." But if wicked ministers sin in
