scholars, and half as many attended the evening school for adults.
This school was for the special purpose of studying the Bible, and
the pupils had gone through the historical books of the Old and New
Testaments. Their custom on Saturday and Sabbath evenings was to
read the devotional parts, and hold a prayer meeting.

[1] Vol. i. p. 383.

Mr. Ford made a visit to Hasbeiya in February, 1857, with Mr. Jones,
Secretary of the Turkish Missions Aid Society. He had never before
been in that region, and speaks highly of the native laborers. Of
the church-members he says: "When compared with the rock from which
they were hewn, and the hole of the pit from which they were digged,
they show the genuineness of the work of grace in their hearts."
"The signs of the times," he adds, "in the community around, are
most encouraging. I will only refer now to a remarkable stirring up
of the Maronites to defend themselves against the inroads made by
the gospel upon their hitherto solid ranks. Their ecclesiastics have
always maintained an attitude of proud contempt, as though conscious
of the strength of their hold upon their people, and they have
rarely deigned to come into personal contact with the despised
preachers of the gospel. But the serious diminution of their numbers
in various parts south of us, and the diffusion of spiritual light
among the rest of their flocks, have forced them down from their
assumed elevation, and now they select the ablest of their priests,
ordain him bishop, and send him on a crusade through Deir el-Komr,
Hasbeiya, Merj Aiun, and so on to Alma, where the spirit of Asaad
es-Shidiak, the modern martyr of Syria, seems to be revived in the
hearts of a simple people, preparing them to brave death itself for
the Gospel's sake. This bishop has sought public discussions with
Mr. Bird, at Deir el-Komr, and also with Mr. Wortabet, at Hasbeiya.
In the latter place there had been two such discussions held just
before we arrived. In the first, the bishop was effectually caught
in his own craftiness, and so completely worsted, that he and his
friends came to the second session prepared to regain by violence
the advantage they had lost in argument; and the result was a stormy
debate, terminated abruptly by an assault upon some of the
Protestants present."

Kefr Shema, a promising out-station, became a station by the removal
thither from Aleppo of Mr. and Mrs. Eddy. No objection to their
residence was made by the people, though it was not four years since
they had combined in a desperate attempt to drive all Protestants
from the village. The missionaries were visited and welcomed by
many.

Honorable mention is made of Antonius Yanni, the only native
Protestant in Tripoli, who had been two years connected with the
mission church, and had suffered much for the cause of Christ. He
had refused the honorable and highly lucrative post of vice-consul
for Russia, because its acceptance would necessarily have made him
subservient to the corrupt Greek Church, and an attendant upon its
services.

There had been preaching for several years at Aramon, three miles
from Abeih. But the congregation was broken up in midsummer by a
mob. Mr. Calhoun, who was regarded with great respect by the people,
visited the place, and in a very kind, gentle manner, told the
people that religious freedom was guaranteed to all, and that they
of the mission should be allowed to worship in their own hired
house. The people listened with attention. On Monday Mr. Calhoun
referred the case to the English Consul-general, and to the acting
Consul for the United States. Late in the week, two officials from
the government in Beirut, and two from the governor of the mountain
district, met Mr. Calhoun at Aramon. "When the time for service
arrived, the officials publicly stated, that there is to be perfect
religious freedom for all;--to-day, to-morrow, this year, next year,
and for all time. This they repeated over and over again, as the
will of the Sultan, and then ordered some one to go upon the
house-top and proclaim aloud, after the manner of the Mohammedans,
_that it was time for prayers, and that all who wished to come might
come_. Services were then conducted as usual, with an attentive
audience; and at the close, in a place appointed, the officials
demanded that the persecutors should ask pardon of the persecuted,
which was accordingly done, many kissing the hand of the man whose
house they had entered, and which we had hired. The governor also
called some of the men to his own village, and threatened them with
severe punishment if they should again molest any one on account of
his religion. He then, Mohammedan as he was, repeated, in substance,
the sentiment advanced, in the presence of his officers, by Mr.
Calhoun, that religion pertains to the individual conscience and to
God alone." Henceforward Mr. Aramon, the first teacher in the
seminary, met with no opposition in a regular preaching service.

The number of pupils in the Seminary, at the close of the year, was
twenty-five, and some of them were of unusual promise. A theological
class, of four middle-aged, married men, was kept up during the
summer, and then they went forth preaching the gospel, or laboring
as teachers and colporters. Thoroughly-educated young men, otherwise
qualified to preach the gospel, could only be obtained to a limited
extent. But men of riper age, of good common sense and
simple-hearted piety, could be fitted, by a few months of direct
Biblical training annually, to preach to the uninstructed
peasantry,--a labor for which there was the loudest call.

On the 12th of January, 1858, a deputation of four young men was
received by Mr. Eddy, at Sidon, from a large village east of Tyre,
called Cana. These brought a letter, signed by twenty-six persons,
professing their dissatisfaction with their own corrupt Church, in
connection with which they obtained no knowledge of God or of
heaven, and asking that a preacher might be sent to them at once,
and a teacher for their children. They denied being actuated by any
worldly motive, and were sent back with two New Testaments, and the
assurance that some one would be sent to instruct them as soon as
possible. They were, accordingly, visited by Daher Abud, a faithful
native helper, who was much gratified with the zeal and interest he
found among them. In February, Mr. Eddy went himself, and was warmly
welcomed. About forty men attended his preaching, whose eagerness to
hear and converse detained him over the next day.

From thence he went to Alma, a village of five hundred inhabitants,
a long day from Cana, beautifully situated upon the summit of a high
range of hills, two miles from the sea. The evangelical movement had
commenced there two years before, and there was a Protestant
community of about forty, including nine members of the church.
"This was considered, in some respects," writes Mr. Eddy, "one of
the brightest spots in the Syrian field. The great adversary of
souls tried in vain, by the terrors of persecution and the
seductions of flattery, to recover the people to himself. Failing in
this, he sought to sow discord among brethren, and thus to conquer
them; and for several months past he has rejoiced in seeing this
'house divided against itself.' I felt much anxiety as to the issue
of my visit, and had made it the subject of special prayer. I spent
three days among the people, one of which was the Sabbath. The
conversation and the preaching were mainly directed to the end of
securing peace, and a day of fasting and prayer was observed. On the
morning of the fourth day the clouds parted, and the Saviour
revealed himself in love. Then, amid tears, and confessions, and
promises, and prayers, the covenant of peace was signed, and
thanksgiving offered to God, and we separated."

Mr. Eddy visited Cana twice in the summer, and found the people,
young and old, eager to be instructed in the Word of God. So many
children attended the school from Catholic families, that the priest
sent word to the bishop in Tyre, that if he did not interpose his
authority, all the village would turn Protestant. Accordingly the
bishop came, bringing with him several wealthy and influential men
of the city. The Protestants were all invited to assemble at the
house of the head man of the village, and then these friends of the
bishop, in company with the head man and the priest, labored most of
the night to induce them to return to their church. It would have
been beneath the dignity of the bishop to have interceded directly
with them, especially if he had not succeeded. The effort was a
failure. Next the Prior of all the convents in that part of the
country, hearing of the bishop's ill success, came, and sought to
obtain, by love and promises, what the bishop had failed to
accomplish by threats. But he too returned disappointed; and
coincident with his departure, two persons came out from the
Catholic Church and joined the Protestants.

The month of November found Mr. Eddy again at Alma, to dedicate the
first completed Protestant church in Syria. The enrolled Protestants
numbered then about fifty. Dr. Van Dyck, before leaving Sidon, had
selected a site for the building and seen the foundation laid, and
had since collected from native Christians and foreign residents
nearly the amount required for the church, which was of stone,
thirty-two feet long and twenty-two feet broad, and capable of
holding from one hundred and fifty to two hundred persons. It cost
about three hundred dollars; thirty of which were contributed by the
people of Alma out of their deep poverty, besides a large amount
freely bestowed in labor. No opposition was made by the government
to its erection.

After the dedicatory sermon, the Lord's Supper was administered to
the nine church-members, who renewed their vows to the Lord; and
these, with other appropriate services, made it a Sabbath long to be
remembered.

In the summer of 1859, Mr. Eddy again visited Cana, taking Mrs. Eddy
with him to secure access to the women. He pitched his tent, the
first night, on the banks of the ancient Leontes, six or seven miles
north of Tyre, and the next day at noon they were at Cana. The poor
women, ignorant, yet eager to be taught, had never before enjoyed
such an opportunity, and prized it exceedingly.

The people had passed through severe sufferings. Several of the
women had been beaten, and the men had a bitter tale to tell of
oppression by their governor. He demanded a duplicate payment of
taxes, and when the head man of the Protestants respectfully showed
him a receipt, with his own seal affixed, he ordered him to be
severely beaten and placed in confinement. He then sent officers to
bring others of the Protestants before him, but, suspecting his
intention, all except two fled into the open country. These two,
when brought, were thrown down upon the ground before the governor,
and beaten with staves without mercy upon their backs and feet, he
encouraging his servants to deal harder blows with commands and
threats. Thus beaten till their backs were livid and swollen, they
were wounded also by being kicked and stepped on by those who beat
them, to make them lie still. When hardly left alive, chains were
placed upon their necks and feet, their hands were placed in wooden
stocks, and they were cast into prison, where they spent the night
with companions who had been previously beaten. Next morning they
were brought before the governor, and two of them were again beaten,
when they were dismissed with a threat, that if they left the
village he would pull down their houses. They however, despite his
threats, made their way to Tyre, whence they embarked in a vessel to
Beirut, to seek redress from the Pasha, and sympathy from the
missionaries. When they appeared before the Pasha's court, their
backs were ordered to be uncovered, and their wounds exhibited; and
the greatest indignation was expressed by the members of the council
against him who had so barbarously treated them, in violation of the
laws of the realm."

The governor was sent for, and the indications were, that he would
be expelled from office. But he was not. The Pasha suddenly changed
his tone towards the Protestants, ordered one of them to be cast
into prison on a false charge by the governor, and forbade the
council to proceed further against him. The Cana people were
detained two months from their homes. The proffered interposition of
the English Consul was rudely rejected, and their release, when it
was effected, was with no regard to the claims of justice. The visit
of Mr. and Mrs. Eddy at that time must have been very seasonable and
acceptable.

From Cana they proceeded to Alma, where they remained about a week.
The women here, being more numerous and more enlightened, and some
of them members of the church, were prepared to receive greater
benefit from the instruction of a Christian sister. Three additions
were made to the church. The people, though poor, had here also been
compelled by their governor to pay their taxes twice.

The Seminary at Abeih was now made more directly a training school
for native preachers and helpers; and a female boarding-school was
opened at Suk el-Ghurb, a village six miles north of Abeih, under
the direction of Miss Temple. The training of female helpers was its
leading object, and the removal of Mr. Bliss thither made a home for
the pupils.

Ain Zehalty continued to be a marked village, and the papists made
great efforts to reclaim it. A Maronite bishop at one time, and a
wily Jesuit at another, repaired thither, at the urgent request of
the papal party, to uproot the dangerous exotic. The coming of the
bishop was with great boasting on the part of his adherents, but,
much to their chagrin, he declined commencing a controversy with
Khalil, the native helper there; and was afterwards so hotly plied
with texts of Scripture by some of the church-members whom he
ventured to attack, that he fled for refuge to the more
accommodating "traditions of the elders." It was supposed that the
disciple of Loyola would carry all before him; but the undaunted
Bible-men were more than ready to meet him, which they did
effectively; and his visit was productive of more good than harm.

The report of the mission for 1858, furnishes many striking
evidences of the influence exerted, especially in the department of
education. Soon after the opening of the first Protestant school at
Tripoli, the Greeks opened a school for boys, which soon became
large and prosperous. And when the Protestant girls' school became a
success, a board of directors was organized, under the direction of
the Greek bishop, to break up the other, if possible. Not finding an
educated woman in Syria who was not a Protestant, the Greeks applied
to two Protestant young ladies to take their school, but without
success. To secure the needful pecuniary means, they constrained the
Patriarch to surrender a part of the convent revenues for this
purpose. The Russian government, moreover, took up the subject of
education in Syria, and remitted twelve thousand piasters (four
hundred and eighty dollars) to the Greek school directors in Tripoli
for the city schools; but with the injunction, that the tenets of
the Greek Church should be the chief subject of instruction.

Nineteen persons were added to the churches of the mission during
the first half of the year 1859. This of course involved various
local indications of progress, for which the limits of this history
afford no space. A new place, however, is brought to our notice by
Mr. Eddy, named Deir Mimas, a large village on the river Litany. A
few had here professed Protestantism about two years before, and had
encountered a storm of persecution from members of the Greek Church,
and from the Mohammedan governor of their district. Yet they had
constantly increased in numbers and strength. The missionary
spending several days there, was delighted to find an audience each
evening of more than one hundred, after their severe labors, all
eager to hear. The number of men professing Protestantism was above
sixty, and counting the women and the children, the number was one
hundred and fifty, the largest in Syria. Their enemies were on the
alert, and it was a sad fact, that no competent native teacher could
be found to reside among them. They were then dependent on a native
teacher, who came to them each Sabbath from a distance, having first
preached in his own village.

The annual meeting of the mission in this year was one of unusual
interest. "From the beginning to the end of the meeting, it was
apparent that there was much of a spirit of prayer among the native
brethren. The native female prayer meeting in Beirut was more fully
attended than usual; and the union meetings in Arabic and English,
held in the chapel, in which the missionaries and native brethren
united and large audiences assembled, were occasions of deep
interest. The statements made in the meeting when the annual reports
were read, at which W. A. Booth, Esq., of New York City, and Hon.
Alpheus Hardy, of Boston, a member of the Prudential Committee, were
providentially present, filled the minds of all with the conviction,
that never before in the history of the Syria mission have we had so
much encouragement, or such strong proofs that God is with us, and
that the work is going forward in this land."

Before this meeting, the mission had been favored with a visit from
the Hon. James Williams, United States Ambassador at Constantinople,
whose friendly and most useful agency was duly acknowledged by the
mission. His reply to them may be found in the "Missionary
Herald."[1]

[1] See _Missionary Herald_, 1860, p. 163.

The translation of the New Testament was now completed and published
under the care of Dr. Van Dyck. The pocket edition was admitted to
be one of the most beautiful books, in its typographical execution,
in the Arabic language. It had this advantage, that it could be
carried and read without attracting notice; which was something in a
land where Bible readers met with so much determined opposition.






CHAPTER XXXIX.

SYRIA.

1860-1863.


The year 1860 was noted for a civil war in Syria, and for savage
massacres on Lebanon, at Hasbeiya, Damascus, and elsewhere, which
awakened the indignation of the Christian world. The Druzes were
prominent in these massacres, and so suffered greatly in character;
yet the Turks were believed to have been the instigators. The war
commenced in June; but the government for months had foreborne to
check private assassinations and angry collisions, until the
condition became unbearable.

All the Greek and Papal Christians united against the Druzes, with
the declared purpose of not leaving one of them on Lebanon, but they
had miscalculated their power. The Protestants decided to take the
side of neither party. It was believed at Beirut, that the main
object of the foreign Jesuits and native Catholic clergy was to
exterminate the Protestants, who had their homes chiefly among the
Druzes. The Druzes were aroused to desperation, and thirty or forty
Maronite and Greek villages were burned early in June. The
inhabitants who escaped massacre fled to Beirut. Not one of these
fugitives was a Protestant.

The missionaries at Abeih, Deir el-Komr, and Suk el-Ghurb were not
molested, and Messrs. Calhoun and Bird and their families remained
at their several stations. It was thought best for those at the Suk
to descend to Beirut. Disturbance having arisen at Sidon, an English
war steamer was sent thither to look after the foreigners. The
steamer brought Mrs. Eddy and her children to Beirut, but Mr. Eddy
and Mr. and Mrs. Ford decided to remain at Sidon.

In the country and gardens near that city, hundreds of unarmed men
and defenseless women and children, many of whom had fled thither
for their lives, were afterwards savagely butchered by Moslems and
Druzes. The missionaries then asked for a guard from the city
governor, which he refused until the American Consul in Beirut
demanded it.

Mr. Bird, at Deir el-Komr, supposing that all was quiet around the
city, left home to look after the little company of Protestants in
Ain Zehalty. In his absence, the Druzes attacked Deir el-Komr on
every side, and when Mr. Bird returned towards evening, he saw the
town in flames, but could not enter. One of the more than one
hundred houses burned, was a school-house belonging to the mission.
The Druze Begs declared it was a mistake, and promised to rebuild
it. The Christians had fought until their ammunition was exhausted,
and then surrendered. Mr. Bird found his family unharmed, though the
fighting and burning had been very near them. The Pasha coming up
from Beirut made such arrangements that Mr. Bird and family decided
to remain.

The Druzes were now masters of Mount Lebanon south of the Damascus
road, and there was no power left in that district to oppose them,
save in the town of Zahleh. It was from this town that a company of
horsemen went to Hasbeiya, sixteen years before, to compel the
Protestants there to recant; and from this same town, not many
months before, Mr. Benton and his family had been expelled with
great violence by a mob. Its time had now come. Mr. Lyons passing
that way in October, with relief for the survivors of the massacre,
thus speaks of Zahleh: "It presents one of the saddest spectacles in
all the wide field of desolation. Only a few months before, I had
seen this then flourishing town in all its beauty and pride. Now,
nothing remained but a vast collection of roofless houses, with
blackened, shattered walls, and shapeless heaps of stones and
rubbish. Shops, magazines, costly dwellings, and elegant churches,
all had shared in the common ruin."

The Protestants in Hasbeiya began to be troubled, early in the year,
by premonitions of a coming storm. Mr. Eddy was there in May,
accompanied by Mrs. Eddy and Miss Temple, who devoted themselves to
labor for the spiritual good of the women in that community. Hardly
had they returned to Sidon, when Hasbeiya was surrounded by hostile
Druzes. They were driven off at first, but on the 3d of June the
commander of the Turkish soldiers told the Christians to retire
within the palace, and he would protect them. On the 11th the Druzes
surrounded the palace, and the Turkish commander opened the gates,
and allowed the Druzes to cut them in pieces. Some saved their lives
by crawling under the dead bodies, and others by escaping over the
walls. The Protestant church was partially destroyed, but not
burned; its walls and roof remaining uninjured. At Rasheiya the
Druzes told the Christians to give up their guns, and they would be
safe. In the night, they set fire to the houses, and killed nearly
all of one hundred and thirty men. More than one thousand persons
were murdered in Hasbeiya and the surrounding region. Of these only
nine were Protestants.

At Damascus, on the 9th of July, the wild Moslems, from one of the
suburbs of the city, with Koords, Druzes, and Arabs, burst upon the
Christian quarter, plundering, butchering, and burning; not opposed,
but aided, by the Turkish soldiers, who could have suppressed the
insurrection at any time. The slaughter continued several days, and
the killed were estimated at five thousand. The whole Christian
quarter of the city was plundered of its great wealth, and the
houses and churches were laid in ruins.

Those who escaped these massacres fled towards Beirut and Sidon,
destitute of everything. Appeals were at once made to the Christians
of England and America, and the missionaries, acting for the
"Anglo-American Relief Committee," were the chief almoners. The
expenditure in August for food, clothing, bedding, shelter,
hospital, and soup, was at the rate of about sixty thousand piasters
a week, or two thousand four hundred dollars, and yet it seemed to
make little impression on the mighty mass of misery. Dr. Thomson had
the especial care of the clothing, bedding, shelter, and
soup-kitchen, Dr. Van Dyck of the hospital and the sick in general,
Mr. Jessup of the distribution of bread to about six thousand
persons daily, and Butrus Bistany and Michael Aramon, two of the
native brethren, had the daily distribution among about two thousand
five hundred poor. The funds up to this time had come chiefly from
the people of England, and English merchants at Beirut gave much
time to managing the large financial business connected with so vast
a charity. Dr. Thomson declares that the male children were
generally murdered, and that the killed were largely mere boys; and
who, he asks, were to support the thousands of widows, with their
fatherless daughters? The country had no factories, and scarcely any
kind of business by which such widows could gain a support. The
silk, grape, and wheat harvests had been destroyed, the olive was
likely to perish from neglect, there were no animals for the plough,
no implements for husbandry, nor was life safe in the fields. He
adds: "There was never, perhaps, a darker hour for missions in
Syria; yet we are becoming acquainted with the people more rapidly
than ever, and should we be permitted to visit them months hence, we
shall have a most friendly welcome."

Rasheiya and Deir Mimas were burned. Cana and Alma, being far from
the Druze district, were not invaded. Tripoli was undisturbed. The
destroyers in the neighborhood of Baalbec were not Druzes, but
Moslems and Metawales. It is a remarkable fact that, excepting
perhaps in Damascus, no injury was offered to a missionary; and
Protestants, when recognized as such, were generally safe. The
arrival of ships of war and a detachment of the French army at
Beirut, with apprehensions of an alliance of Christian powers for
the protection of the Christian population, had, at first, a
restraining, and finally, a controlling influence, on the Turkish
government. The Prime Minister was sent to Damascus, and inflicted
terrible justice on one or two hundred of the guilty there.

The direct effects of the war upon the missionary work were
doubtless injurious. Immorality increased, the baser passions were
aroused, and the hearts of many were hardened through suffering. But
priestly and feudal power, the two greatest obstacles to the Gospel,
were weakened, and new civil rights were secured to the Protestants.
The respect for Protestant Christianity was increased, and
prejudices were dissipated by witnessing its beneficent fruits;
while multitudes were brought within the reach of the Gospel, who,
but for these troubles, would never have heard its messages.

The connection of Mr. and Mrs. Benton with the Board and the mission
terminated in June, 1861, though they remained in Syria some time
longer.
