    to exclaim as above.]

  [Illustration]
  See what I am taking.
    [The Mid[-e]/ has pulled up a medicinal root. This denotes his
    possessing a wonderful medicine and appears in the order of an
    advertisement.]

  [Illustration]
  See me, whose head is out of water.

  [Illustration: Plate XXII.
  Mnemonic Songs.]

On Pl. XXII, B, is presented an illustration reproduced from a piece of
birch bark owned by the preceptor of "Little Frenchman," of the import
of which the latter was ignorant. His idea of the signification of the
characters is based upon general information which he has received, and
not upon any pertaining directly to the record. From general appearances
the song seems to be a private record pertaining to the Ghost Society,
the means through which the recorder attained his first degree of the
Mid[-e]/wiwin, as well as to his abilities, which appear to be
boastfully referred to:

  [Illustration]
  I am sitting with my pipe.
    [Mid[-e]/ sitting, holding his pipe. He has been called upon to
    visit a patient, and the filled pipe is handed to him to smoke
    preparatory to his commencing the ceremony of exorcism.]

  [Illustration]
  I employ the spirit, the spirit of the owl.
    [This evidently indicates the Owl Man/id[-o], which has been
    referred to in connection with the Red Lake Mide/ chart, Pl. III,
    No. 113. The Owl man/id[-o] is there represented as passing from the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n to the Dzhibai/ Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, and the drawings
    in that record and in this are sufficiently alike to convey the idea
    that the maker of this song had obtained his suggestion from the old
    Mid[-e]/ chart.]

  [Illustration]
  It stands, that which I am going after.
    [The Mid[-e]/, impersonating the Bear Man/id[-o], is seeking a
    medicinal tree of which he has knowledge, and certain parts of which
    he employs in his profession. The two footprints indicate the
    direction the animal is taking.]

  [Illustration]
  I, who fly.
    [This is the outline of a Thunder bird, who appears to grasp in his
    talons some medical plants.]

  [Illustration]
  Ki/-bi-nan/ pi-zan/. Ki/binan/ is what I use, it flies like an arrow.
    [The Mid[-e]/'s arm is seen grasping a magic arrow, to symbolize the
    velocity of action of the remedy.]

  [Illustration]
  I am coming to the earth.
    [A Man/id[-o] is represented upon a circle, and in the act of
    descending toward the earth, which is indicated by the horizontal
    line, upon which is an Indian habitation. The character to denote
    the sky is usually drawn as a curved line with the convexity above,
    but in this instance the ends of the lines are continued below,
    so as to unite and to complete the ring; the intention being, as
    suggested by several Mid[-e]/ priests, to denote great altitude
    above the earth, i.e., higher than the visible azure sky, which is
    designated by curved lines only.]

  [Illustration]
  I am feeling for it.
    [The Mid[-e]/ is reaching into holes in the earth in search of
    hidden medicines.]

  [Illustration]
  I am talking to it.
    [The Mid[-e]/ is communing with the medicine Man/id[-o]/ with the
    Mid[-e]/ sack, which he holds in his hand. The voice lines extend
    from his mouth to the sack, which appears to be made of the skin of
    an Owl, as before noted in connection with the second character in
    this song.]

  [Illustration]
  They are sitting round the interior in a row.
    [This evidently signifies the Ghost Lodge, as the structure
    is drawn at right angles to that usually made to represent the
    Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, and also because it seems to be reproduced from
    the Red Lake chart already alluded to and figured in Pl. III, No.
    112. The spirits or shadows, as the dead are termed, are also
    indicated by crosses in like manner.]

  [Illustration]
  You who are newly hung; you have reached half, and you are now full.
    [The allusion is to three phases of the moon, probably having
    reference to certain periods at which some important ceremonies
    or events are to occur.]

  [Illustration]
  I am going for my dish.
    [The speaker intimates that he is going to make a feast, the dish
    being shown at the top in the form of a circle; the footprints are
    directed toward, it and signify, by their shape, that he likens
    himself to the Bear man/id[-o], one of the guardians of the
    Mid[-e]wiwin.]

  [Illustration]
  I go through the medicine lodge.
    [The footprints within the parallel lines denote his having passed
    through an unnamed number of degrees. Although the structure is
    indicated as being erected like the Ghost Lodge, i.e., north and
    south, it is stated that Mid[-e]wiwin is intended. This appears to
    be an instance of the non-systematic manner of objective ideagraphic
    delineation.]

  [Illustration]
  Let us commune with one another.
    [The speaker is desirous of communing with his favorite man/id[-o]s,
    with whom he considers himself on an equality, as is indicated by
    the anthropomorphic form of one between whom and himself the voice
    lines extend.]

On Figs. 36-39, are reproduced several series of pictographs from
birch-bark songs found among the effects of a deceased Mid[-e]/ priest,
at Leech Lake. Reference to other relics belonging to the same
collection has been made in connection with effigies and beads employed
by Mid[-e]/ in the endeavor to prove the genuineness of their religion
and profession. These mnemonic songs were exhibited to many Mid[-e]/
priests from various portions of the Ojibwa country, in the hope of
obtaining some satisfactory explanation regarding the import of the
several characters; but, although they were pronounced to be "Grand
Medicine," no suggestions were offered beyond the merest repetition of
the name of the object or what it probably was meant to represent. The
direction of their order was mentioned, because in most instances the
initial character furnishes the guide. Apart from this, the
illustrations are of interest as exhibiting the superior character and
cleverness of their execution.

  [Illustration: Fig. 36.--Leech Lake Mid[-e]/ song.]

The initial character on Fig. 36 appears to be at the right hand upper
corner, and represents the Bear Man/id[-o]. The third figure is that of
the Mid[-e]/wiwin, with four man/id[-o]s within it, probably the
guardians of the four degrees. The owner of the song was a Mid[-e]/ of
the second degree, as was stated in connection with his Mid[-e]/wi-gwas
or "medicine chart," illustrated on Plate III, C.

  [Illustration: Fig. 37.--Leech Lake Mid[-e]/ song.]

Fig. 37 represents what appears to be a mishkiki or medicine song, as is
suggested by the figures of plants and roots. It is impossible to state
absolutely at which side the initial character is placed, though it
would appear that the human figure at the upper left hand corner would
be more in accordance with the common custom.

  [Illustration: Fig. 38.--Leech Lake Mid[-e]/ song.]

Fig. 38 seems to pertain to hunting, and may have been recognized as a
hunter's chart. According to the belief of several Mid[-e]/, it is lead
from right to left, the human figure indicating the direction according
to the way in which the heads of the crane, bear, etc., are turned. The
lower left hand figure of a man has five marks upon the breast, which
probably indicate m[-i]/gis spots, to denote the power of magic
influence possessed by the recorder.

  [Illustration: Fig. 39.--Leech Lake Mid[-e]/ song.]

The characters on Fig. 39 are found to be arranged so as to read from
the right hand upper corner toward the left, the next line continuing to
the right and lastly again to the left, terminating with the figure of a
Mid[-e]/ with the m[-i]/gis upon his breast. This is interesting on
account of the boustrophic system of delineating the figures, and also
because such instances are rarely found to occur.

DRESS AND ORNAMENTS.

While it is customary among many tribes of Indians to use as little
clothing as possible when engaged in dancing, either of a social or
ceremonial nature, the Ojibwa, on the contrary, vie with one another in
the attempt to appear in the most costly and gaudy dress attainable. The
Ojibwa Mid[-e]/ priests, take particular pride in their appearance when
attending ceremonies of the Mid[-e]/ Society, and seldom fail to impress
this fact upon visitors, as some of the Dakotan tribes, who have adopted
similar medicine ceremonies after the custom of their Algonkian
neighbors, are frequently without any clothing other than the
breechcloth and moccasins, and the armlets and other attractive
ornaments. This disregard of dress appears, to the Ojibwa, as a
sacrilegious digression from the ancient usages, and it frequently
excites severe comment.

Apart from facial ornamentation, of such design as may take the actor's
fancy, or in accordance with the degree of which the subject may be a
member, the Mid[-e]/ priests wear shirts, trousers, and moccasins, the
first two of which may consist of flannel or cloth and be either plain
or ornamented with beads, while the latter are always of buckskin, or,
what is more highly prized, moose skin, beaded or worked with colored
porcupine quills.

Immediately below each knee is tied a necessary item of an Ojibwa's
dress, a garter, which consists of a band of beads varying in different
specimens from 2 to 4 inches in width, and from 18 to 20 inches in
length, to each end of which strands of colored wool yarn, 2 feet long,
are attached so as to admit of being passed around the leg and tied in a
bow-knot in front. These garters are made by the women in such patterns
as they may be able to design or elaborate. On Pl. XXIII are
reproductions of parts of two patterns which are of more than ordinary
interest, because of the symbolic signification of the colors and the
primitive art design in one, and the substitution of colors and the
introduction of modern designs in the other. The upper one consists of
green, red, and white beads, the first two colors being in accord with
those of one of the degree posts, while the white is symbolical of the
m[-i]/gis shell. In the lower illustration is found a substitution of
color for the preceding, accounted for by the Mid[-e]/ informants, who
explained that neither of the varieties of beads of the particular color
desired could be obtained when wanted. The yellow beads are substituted
for white, the blue for green, and the orange and pink for red. The
design retains the lozenge form, though in a different arrangement, and
the introduction of the blue border is adapted after patterns observed
among their white neighbors. In the former is presented also what the
Ojibwa term the groundwork or type of their original style of
ornamentation, i.e., wavy or gently zigzag lines. Later art work
consists chiefly of curved lines, and this has gradually become modified
through instruction from the Catholic sisters at various early mission
establishments until now, when there has been brought about a common
system of working upon cloth or velvet, in patterns, consisting of
vines, leaves, and flowers, often exceedingly attractive though not
aboriginal in the true sense of the word.

  [Illustration: Plate XXIII.
  Mid[-e]/ Dancing Garters.]

Bands of flannel or buckskin, handsomely beaded, are sometimes attached
to the sides of the pantaloons, in imitation of an officer's stripes,
and around the bottom. Collars are also used, in addition to necklaces
of claws, shells, or other objects.

Armlets and bracelets are sometimes made of bands of beadwork, though
brass wire or pieces of metal are preferred.

Bags made of cloth, beautifully ornamented or entirely covered with
beads, are worn, supported at the side by means of a broad band or
baldric passing over the opposite shoulder. The head is decorated with
disks of metal and tufts of colored horse hair or moose hair and with
eagle feathers to designate the particular exploits performed by the
wearer.

Few emblems of personal valor or exploits are now worn, as many of the
representatives of the present generation have never been actively
engaged in war, so that there is generally found only among the older
members the practice of wearing upon the head eagle feathers bearing
indications of significant markings or cuttings. A feather which has
been split from the tip toward the middle denotes that the wearer was
wounded by an arrow. A red spot as large as a silver dime painted upon a
feather shows the wearer to have been wounded by a bullet. The privilege
of wearing a feather tipped with red flannel or horse hair dyed red is
recognized only when the wearer has killed an enemy, and when a great
number have been killed in war the so-called war bonnet is worn, and may
consist of a number of feathers exceeding the number of persons killed,
the idea to be expressed being "a great number," rather than a specific
enumeration.

Although the Ojibwa admit that in former times they had many other
specific ways of indicating various kinds of personal exploits, they now
have little opportunity of gaining such distinction, and consequently
the practice has fallen into desuetude.

FUTURE OF THE SOCIETY.

According to a treaty now being made between the United States
Government and the Ojibwa Indians, the latter are to relinquish the
several areas of land at present occupied by them and to remove to
portions of the Red Lake and White Earth Reservations and take lands in
severalty. By this treaty about 4,000,000 acres of land will be ceded to
the Government, and the members of the various bands will become
citizens of the United States, and thus their tribal ties will be broken
and their primitive customs and rites be abandoned.

The chief Mid[-e]/ priests, being aware of the momentous consequences of
such a change in their habits, and foreseeing the impracticability of
much longer continuing the ceremonies of so-called "pagan rites," became
willing to impart them to me, in order that a complete description might
be made and preserved for the future information of their descendants.

There is scarcely any doubt that these ceremonies will still be secretly
held at irregular intervals; but under the watchful care of the national
authorities it is doubtful whether they will be performed with any
degree of completeness, and it will be but a comparatively short time
before the Mid[-e]/wiwin will be only a tradition.




INDEX.


Birch-bark records and songs of the Mid[-e]/wiwin             286-289

Calumet, ceremonial use of, among Algonkian tribes             153
Cross, use of, in Indian ceremonials                           155
Cuchan population                                              188

Dress and ornaments used in Ojibwa dances                 298, 299
Dzhe Manido, the guardian spirit of the Midewiwin         163, 166
Dzhibai midewig[^a]n or "Ghost Lodge"                         278-281

Gatschet, A. S., acknowledgments to                            143
Ghost Lodge ceremonies                                     278-281
Ginseng, Mide tradition relating to origin of             241, 242
Grand Medicine Society. See Midewiwin.

Hawk-leg fetish, description and figure                   220, 221
Hennepin, Louis, cited on practices of
    Algonkian medicine men                                152, 154
Hennepin, Louis, cited on ceremonial use
    of Calumet by Algonkian tribes                             153
"Hunter's medicine" of Midewiwin                           221-223
Hunting, Mide "medicine" practiced in                      221-223

Jessakid class of Shamans, relative importance of              156
  practices of                                    157-158, 251-255
Jones, Peter, cited on medicine men of the Ojibwa              162
  cited on witchcraft beliefs of Ojibwa Indians                237
  cited on Ojibwa love charm or powder                         258
Jugglery among Ojibwa Indians                              276-277

Kitshi Manido, the principal Ojibwa deity                      163

La Hontan, A. L. de D., cited on practices
    of Algonkian medicine men                              151-152
Leech Lake record, how obtained                                171
Love powder of Ojibwa Indians                                  258

Magical practices of Midewiwin                             205-206
Mallery, Garrick, cited on Schoolcraft's
    account of the Ojibwa hieroglyphs                          156
  cited on Indian jugglery                                 276-277
  cited on character and use of Algonkian pictographs      287-288
Marquette, Jaques, cited on practices of
    Algonkian medicine men                                 152-153
  cited on use of the cross in Indian ceremonials              155
Medical prescriptions of the Midewiwin       197-201, 226, 241-242
Medicine men, practices of,
    among Algonkian tribes                      151, 152, 154, 159
Mid[-e] class of Shamans, relative importance of                  156
  how elected                                         160, 163-164
  charts of, described                       165, 174-183, 185-187
  therapeutics of                                          197-202
Mid[-e] Society. See Midewiwin.
Midewig[^a]n, or Grand Medicine Lodge,
    described                           187-189, 224, 240, 255-257
Midewiwin or Grand Medicine Society of the Ojibwa
  purposes of                                                  151
  origin of                                                    160
  degrees in                                                   164
  records of                                               164-165
  ceremonies of first degree                               189-224
  songs of                          193-196, 202-203, 207-214, 216,
                                218-219, 227-230, 232-233, 239-240,
                                243-244, 246-251, 253-254, 259-261,
                                263-264, 266-273, 282-286, 289-297
  ceremony of initiation into                     187-196, 202-286
  magical practices of                                     204-206
  ceremonies of second degree                              224-240
  payments made to priests of                                  225
  use of tobacco in ceremonials of                    231, 248-249
  drums used in ceremonies of                                  238
  ceremonies of third degree                               240-255
  ceremonies of fourth degree                              255-278
  initiation into, by substitution                         281-286
  pictography of                                           286-289
  dress and ornaments used in dances of                    298-299
  future of                                                299-300
Migis (Indian charm or token),
    forms and uses of   191, 192, 215, 217-218, 220, 236, 251, 265
Minabozho, an Ojibwa deity                                     166
Music of Midewiwin described                               289-290

Ojibwa
  area inhabited by                                        149-150
  belief of, respecting spirits                                163
  mythology of                                                 163

Pictography of Midewiwin                                   286-289
Plants used for medical purposes
    by the Midewiwin                        197-201, 226, 241, 242

Red Lake Mid[-e] Chart described                                  165

Schoolcraft, H. R., cited on Wabeno                            156
  initiation into Mid[-e]wiwin                                    161
Shamans, classes of                                        156-159
Sikassige (Ojibwa Indian) furnishes account
    of origin of the Indians                               172-173
Sikassige's explanation of Mille Lacs chart                174-181
Songs used in ceremonies of the Midewiwin         193-196, 203-203,
                           207-214, 216, 218-219, 227-230, 232-233,
                                239-240, 243-244, 246-251, 253-254,
                       259-261, 263-264, 266-273, 282-286, 289-297
  mode of writing                                          286-289
  mode of singing described                                289-290
Sorcerers, practice of, among Algonkian tribes       151, 152, 154
Sweat lodge of Midewiwin, use of                          204, 258

Therapeutics of the Mid['e]wiwin                197-201, 226, 241-242
Tobacco, use of, in ceremonies of the Mid['e]wiwin      231, 260, 262

Wabeno class of Shamans, relative importance of                156
  practices of                                             156-157
Warren, W. W., cited on Society of the Mid[-e]           160-161, 162
  cited on Indian traditions                               183-184
Weather imploration of Midewiwin                           207-209

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors and Anomalies noted by transcriber:

Variant spellings (unchanged):

Ojibwa : Ojibway
  _throughout text_
Man/ido(s) : Man/id[-o](s)
  _throughout text_
INDEX:
  _all spellings unchanged_
sacred objects which Minab[-o]/zho had deposited
