The Takbir-i-Sijdar--Allahu Akbar!--is said as the worshipper drops on his
knees.

The Musalli then kneeling down, places his hands, with the fingers close to
each other, upon the ground. He must rest upon his toes, not on the side of
the feet which must be kept straight behind him. The elbow must not touch
the side, nor the stomach the thigh, nor the thigh the calf of the leg. The
eyes must be kept bent downwards. Then he touches the ground first with his
nose, and then with his forehead, taking care that the thumbs just touch
the lobe of the ears.[196] All this being carefully attended to, the
Musalli can say the Tasbih-i-Sijda thus:--

 "I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Most High!
  I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Most High!
  I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Most High!"

He then raises his head and body, sinks backwards upon his heels, places
his hands a little above his knees, and whilst doing so says the
Takbir-i-Jalsa[197]--"Allahu Akbar!"

After a slight pause, a second prostration, or Sijda is made and the
Takbir-i-Sijda and the Tasbih-i-Sijda are repeated as before. Then when in
the act of rising up the Musalli says the Takbir-i-Qiam--"Allahu Akbar!"

This concludes one rak'at. The second rak'at begins with the Fatiha, so
that after saying the Takbir-i-Qiam a Musalli would have to begin again at
that place (p. 195) and repeat all that he had just finished; the only
change being that after the Fatiha, he recites different verses of the
Quran to those he said in the first rak'at. After two rak'ats have been
said, and after the last, though it be an odd number, the {197} Musalli,
unless he is a Shia'h, places his left foot under him and sits upon it. He
then places his hands above his knees, as for the Takbir-i-Jalsa, and with
his eyes directed towards his lap says the Attahiyat:--

"The adorations of the tongue are for God, and also the adorations of the
body, and almsgiving! Peace be on thee O Prophet! with the mercy of God and
His blessing. Peace be on us and upon God's righteous servants!"

Then raising the first finger of the right hand he says the
Tashahhud[198]:--

"I testify that there is no deity but God; and I testify that Muhammad is
the servant of God and the messenger of God."

Then at the end of all the rak'ats the Musalli, whilst in the same posture,
says the Darud:--

"O God! have mercy on Muhammad and his descendants[199]; as Thou didst have
mercy on Abraham and his descendants, Thou art to be praised and Thou art
great. O God! bless Muhammad and his descendants, as Thou didst bless
Abraham and his descendants. Thou art to be praised and Thou art great."

Then comes the Du'a, which may be in the worshipper's own words though he
usually says[200]:--

"O God our Lord, give us the blessings of this life, and also the blessings
of life everlasting. Save us from the torments of hell."

Then turning the head to the right the Musalli repeats the Salam:--

"The peace and mercy of God be with you."

Then turning the head to the left he says:--

"The peace and mercy of God be with you."

At the close of the whole ceremony, the worshipper raises {198} his hands
as high as his shoulders, with the palm towards heaven, or towards his own
face, and offers up a Munajat, or supplication, either in Arabic or in the
vernacular. The hands are then drawn over the face, as if to convey the
blessing received from above to every part of the body.

The appointed periods of prayer are five in number, in proof of which the
following text is quoted: "Glorify God when ye reach the evening (masa),
and when ye rise at morn (subh); and to Him be praise in the heavens and in
the earth,--and at twilight ('ashi) and when ye rest at noon (zuhr)." (Sura
xxx. 17). The Commentators say that masa includes both sunset and the
period after sunset; that is both the Salat-ul-Maghrib and the
Salat-ul-'Isha. There is also a reference to a stated period of prayer in
the following verse: "Observe prayer at early morning, at the close of the
day, and at the approach of night." (Sura xi. 116).

These daily Namaz are farz, sunnat, witr and nafl prayers. Farz are those
distinctly ordained by God, such as the five stated periods of prayer.

Sunnat, a certain number of rak'ats which are added, because it is said the
Prophet repeated them.

Witr rak'ats are an odd number of rak'ats, 3, 5 or 7, which may be said
after the last prayer at night, and before the dawn of day. Usually they
are added to the Salat-ul-'Isha. Imam Abu Hanifa says they are wajib, that
is ordered by God. They are not authorised by any text in the Quran, but by
Traditions each of which is generally received as a Hadis-i-Sahih, and so
witr rak'ats are regarded as being of divine authority. Imam Shafa'i,
however, considers them to be sunnat only, a term already explained.

The Traditions referred to are: "God has added to your Namaz one Namaz
more: know that it is witr, say it between the Salat-ul-'Isha and dawn." On
the authority of Buzar, a Traditionist, it is recorded that the Prophet
{199} said: "Witr is wajib upon Muslims," and in order to enforce the
practice he added: "Witr is right, he who does not observe it is not my
follower." The Prophet, the Companions, the Taba'in and the Taba-i-Taba'in
all observed it. The word witr literally means "odd number." A Tradition
says: "God is odd, He loves the odd." (Allahu witrun yuhibbu'l-witra).
Musalmans pay the greatest respect to an odd number. It is considered
unlucky to begin any work, or to commence a journey on a day, the date of
which is an even number. The number of lines in a page of a book is nearly
always an odd number.

Nafl are voluntary prayers the performance of which is considered mustahab,
or meritorious, but they are not of divine obligation. It must be
understood that all these prayers are precisely the same in form. They
simply consist in the repetition of a number of rak'ats, of which I have
already given a single illustration in full. A Muslim who says the five
daily prayers with the full number of rak'ats will repeat the Service I
have described fifty times in one day. If in addition to these he observes
the three voluntary periods of prayers, he must add twenty-five more
rak'ats, making a grand total of seventy-five. It is, however, usual to
omit some of the Sunnat rak'ats; still there is a vast amount of
repetition, and as the whole must be said in Arabic it becomes very
mechanical.

A Muslim who ventured to say that a Namaz might be recited in Hindustani
was publicly excommunicated in the principal Mosque at Madras on Friday,
February 13th, 1880.[201]

The table on the next page will make the matter clear.[202] The optional
Sunnat rak'ats are called {200} 'Sunnat-i-ghair-i-maukadda'; the Sunnat
rak'ats before the farz are 'Sun-nat-i-maukadda' and should be said.

---+------------------+-----------------------------------+----------------
No.| Time.            |  THE NAMES OF THE TIME OF PRAYER. | THE NUMBER OF
   |                  |                                   | RAK'ATS SAID.
   |                  +-----------+-----------------------+----------------
   |                  |           |                                    Witr
   |                  |           |--------------------------------------+
   |                  |           |                                  Nafl|
   |                  |           |-----------------------------------+  |
   |                  |           |                  Sunnat after Farz|  |
   |                  |           |--------------------------------+  |  |
   |                  |           |                            Farz|  |  |
   |                  |           |-----------------------------+  |  |  |
   |                  |           |          Sunnat-i-mau-kadda'|  |  |  |
   |                  |           |--------------------------+  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |  Sunnat-i-ghair-maukadda'|  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |-----------+-----------+  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  | Arabic    | Persian   | Urdu      |  |  |  |  |  |
---+------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+--+--+--+--+--+-
 1 | From dawn to     | Salat-ul- | Namaz-i-  | Fajr Ki   |  | 2|  |  |  |
   | sunrise.         |  Fajr.    |  Subh.    | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 2 | When the sun     | Salat-uz- | Namaz-i-  | Zuhr Ki   |  | 4| 4| 2| 2|
   | has begun to     |  Zuhr.    |  Peshin.  | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  |  |
   | decline.         |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 3 | Midway between   | Salat-ul- | Namaz-i-  | 'Asr Ki   | 4|  | 4|  |  |
   | No. 2 and 4.     |   'Asr.   |  Digar.   | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 4 | A few minutes    | Salat-ul- | Namaz-i-  | Maghrib   |  |  | 3| 2| 2|
   | after sunset.    |  Maghrib. |  Sham.    | Ki Namaz. |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 5 | When the night   | Salat-ul- | Namaz-i-  | 'Isha Ki  | 4|  | 4| 2| 2|7
   | has closed in.   |  'Isha.   |  Khuftan. | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  [203]
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 1 | When the sun     | Salat-ul- | Namuz-i-  | Ishraq Ki |  |  |  |  | 8|
   | has well risen.  |  Ishraq.  |  Ishraq.  | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 2 | About 11 o'clock | Salat-uz- | Namaz-i-  | Zuha Ki   |  |  |  |  | 8|
   | A.M.             |  Zuha.    |  Chast.   | Namaz.    |  |  |  |  |  |
   |                  |           |           |           |  |  |  |  |  |
 3 | After mid-night. | Salat-ut- | Namaz-i-  | Tahajjud  |  |  |  |  | 9|
   |                  |  Tahajjud.|  Tahajjud.| Ki Namaz. |  |  |  |  |  |
---+------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+--+--+--+--+--+-

In addition to these there are several kinds of Namaz which have to be said
at different times, or under special circumstances.

(i). Salat-ul-Juma'--The Friday Namaz. This is a farz duty. It has the
threefold authority of the Quran, the Sunnat, and the Ijma'. Thus: "O ye
who believe! When ye are summoned to prayer on the _day of the assembly_
(Friday), haste ye to the commemoration of God, and quit your traffic."
(Sura lxii. 9.) The Prophet also said: "Juma' is farz," and, "God will make
a mark on the heart of him who misses the Salat-ul-Juma'[204]." There are,
however, eight kind of persons on whom it is not incumbent, _viz_: a
traveller, a sick person, a slave, a woman, a young child, a mad {201}
person, a blind or a lame person. The conditions which make this Namaz
obligatory are:--

(1). That the place in which it is said be a town in which a Qazi (judge)
dwells.

(2). There must be in the town a ruler or his deputy.

(3). It must take the place of the Salat-uz-Zuhr, with which it agrees,
except that two farz rak'ats instead of four are recited. The nafl rak'ats
are omitted. The four sunnat rak'ats which precede, and the two which
follow the farz ones are said.

(4). One, or according to the followers of Imam Shafa'i two Khutbas, or
sermons are preached. These are delivered by the Imam after the four sunnat
rak'ats are recited, and before the two farz ones. The Khutba should
consist of the praise of God, prayer and injunctions to piety.

(5). There must be a congregation of three persons besides the Imam. The
Shafa'ites say there should be at least forty worshippers.

(6). The Azan, or call to prayers, must be made to all without distinction
of rank.

Any person who is qualified to act as Imam at the other prayers can conduct
this Namaz. The Imam and Khatib (preacher) is usually, but not necessarily,
one and the same person. The Khutbas should not be long, for Muhammad said
that long sermons and short prayers would be a sign of the degeneracy of
the latter days. When two Khutbas are said, the Imam sits down to rest
before the delivery of the second. The worshippers may then offer up a
Du'a, or private prayer. Some, however, say that this practice is bid'at,
(innovation) and consider it a very bad act. According to the
Traditionists, Bukhari, Abu Daud and Tirmizi, it is a mustahab act to wear
clean clothes on Friday.

The preacher standing on the second step of the Mimbar, or pulpit, with a
large club or staff in his hand, delivers his sermon.[205]

{202}

The following is a specimen of the Khutbas.

    SERMON ON THE EXCELLENCE OF FRIDAY.

    In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

    Praise be to God, the King, the Holy, the Great, the Knower. He has
    opened our hearts through the blessing of Islam. He has made Friday the
    best of days. We testify that there is no God but God, the One, without
    partner. This confession saves those who make it from danger and from
    darkness. We testify that our Lord Muhammad is His servant and His
    Apostle sent to all mankind. May the mercy and peace of God be on him,
    his descendants and on his Companions. O men! O believers of God! I
    advise you and my own soul thus: "Obey God!" Know, O servants of God!
    that when Friday commences the angels assemble in the fourth heaven,
    and Gabriel, (on whom be peace) is the Mu,azzin, Mika,il the Khatib,
    Israfil the Imam and 'Izra,il the Mukabbir[206] and all the angels join
    in the Namaz. When it is over Gabriel says: "I give the reward due to
    me as Mu,azzin to the Mu,azzins of the sect of Islam;" Mika,il: "I give
    mine to the Khatibs;" Israfil: "I give mine to the Imams;" 'Izra,il: "I
    give mine to the Mukabbirs." The angels say: "We give ours to the
    company of the Muslims." The Prophet said: "The night and day of Friday
    last twenty-four hours, and each hour God releases a thousand souls
    from hell. Whosoever makes 'ghusl' on Friday, God will give him for
    every hair on his body the reward of ten good deeds. Whosoever dies on
    a Friday meets with the reward of a martyr."

    Certainly the best and most eloquent speech is the Holy Quran, the Word
    of God,--the King, the Great, the Knower. His word is true and
    righteous. When thou readest the Quran say: "O God! protect me from
    cursed Satan."

    In the name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful.

    "When ye are summoned to prayer on the day of the assembly, haste to
    the commemoration of God and quit your traffic. This, if ye knew it,
    will be best for you. And when the prayer is ended, then disperse
    yourselves abroad and go in quest of the bounties of God; and that it
    may be well with you, oft remember God. But when they get a sight of
    merchandize or sport, they disperse after, and leave thee standing
    alone. Say: 'God hath in reserve what is better than sport or wares.
    God is the best provider.'" (Sura lxii. 9-11.) God {203} by means of
    the Holy Quran will bless us and you. And by its verses and teaching
    will reward us and you. God is Almighty, Generous, Merciful, Eternal,
    Holy, Clement.

Here ends the first sermon; after a short pause the preacher commences the
second.

    In the name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful.

    Praise be to God, the Creator of the earth and heavens, the Maker of
    light and darkness. I testify that there is no God but God. He is one.
    He has no partner. Know, O believers! that this confession will save
    you from trouble and calamity. I testify that Muhammad, who wipes out
    error and infidelity, is the servant and Apostle of God. The mercy of
    God be on our Lord Muhammad, the Lord of Creation; and on his
    descendants; and on his Companions be grace and honour. O servants of
    God! I advise you and my own soul thus: Obey God! Fear God, who created
    life and death and who scrutinizes our good actions. O God! be pleased
    with Abu Bakr, the righteous, the Sahib-ul-Ghar,[207] and with Omar
    Ibn-ul-Khattab, the chief of the holy men; and with Osman the possessor
    of two lights, who was martyred when reading the Holy Quran, and upon
    'Ali Murtuza, the destroyer of infidels and sinners. O God! be pleased
    with the great Imams Hasan and Husain. Be pleased with their mother
    Fatimat-uz-Zuhra, the chief of women, and with Hamza and 'Abbas, the
    uncles of the Prophet. Also be pleased with all the Ashab (Companions).
    O God! help those who help the religion of Muhammad, and make us of
    their number. Make those wretched who corrupt it, and keep us aloof
    from all such. O believers! truly God orders you to do justice and to
    show kindness to your kindred. He orders you to abstain from infidelity
    and from the greater and the lesser sins. God warns you. God is the
    Most High, the Most Glorious. God is Great!"

The collection of Khutbas from which the above have been translated
contains a considerable number on a variety of subjects, such as prayer,
the resurrection, worldliness, the various feast and fast days, &c. The
form in all is very similar. The exordium and the conclusion are
practically the same. A few sentences in the middle refer to the special
subject of the sermon. The second of the two {204} sermons is always the
same; it is practically an invocation of blessings on certain persons. Both
are said in Arabic. What would answer to our idea of a sermon, such as an
explanation of some doctrine, or an exposition of some passages in the
Quran, is not part of the public worship in the mosque, but would be done
in an ordinary assembly, in any convenient place, by a Moolla, or any
learned man who could collect an audience.

(ii). Salat-ul-Musafir.--Prayers said by a traveller. A person who makes a
journey which lasts three days or three nights is, for this purpose,
considered a traveller.[208] The length of a day's journey is estimated at
the distance a camel can march in that period of time. If a traveller
intends to stay in a certain place fifteen days, he must repeat the usual
Namaz; if less than fifteen days, or when actually on the journey, he can
shorten it. He is then permitted to say only two farz rak'ats. He may omit
the sunnat and nafl rak'ats if he chooses; but the three witr rak'ats he
must recite at the Salat-ul-'Isha. If a traveller passing through a place
is, for the time being, the most suitable person to act as Imam, he being a
traveller will only recite two rak'ats. The rest of the worshippers then
complete the Namaz. In the case where a permanent resident of the place is
the Imam and the traveller only a worshipper, the Imam is bound to recite
the whole number of rak'ats and the traveller must also repeat the whole
after him. The principle on which this is based is that the worshippers
must not recite less than the Imam.[209]

(iii). Salat-ul-Khauf.--Prayers of fear. This is a Namaz said during the
time of war. When there is imminent danger from the approach of an enemy
the Imam should divide the army into two bodies; one of which should be
placed in a position towards the enemy, the other should recite, if they
are on the march, one rak'at; if stationary {205} in a place, two rak'ats.
This division will then march towards the enemy and the first division will
recite as many rak'ats as may be required to complete the Namaz. The Salam
(Ante. p. 197) will be recited by the Imam alone. The first division of
troops will not say the qir,at, _i.e._ the Fatiha and the other verses of
the Quran recited after it (Ante. p. 195); but the second division will
