graciously; if not in this life, yet certainly in that which is to come.
As many prayers as thou offerest up here, so many blessings shalt thou
receive hereafter; for then "we shall reap if we faint not." Gal. 6:9.
Then will the Lord say to the believing soul, "Behold thy prayer which
thou offeredst to me. See, here is that for which thou didst pray, and a
thousand times more than thou didst desire." And for this time of
retribution we must patiently wait.

29. That man would be a very foolish husbandman, who would expect to reap
as soon as he had sown; and who, when he had done this, would cry out with
tears, that he had sown much seed, but could see no sign of harvest. Thou
fool! wait till the season of harvest arrives, and then thou shalt receive
the fruits of thy labor with a blessed increase. These are the complaints
which many people make: "I have prayed," says one, "so often; I have so
often sighed from the bottom of my soul; but I see no prospect of being
heard, so that all my prayers, and sighs, and tears, are in vain." Ah,
impatient soul! Thou hast scarcely sowed, and dost thou already talk of
harvest? Wait for the precious harvest of eternal life, and thou shalt
reap an abundant crop of glory! "For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap." Gal. 6:7. There thou shalt gather with joy the fruit of the
numerous prayers, which, as so many precious seeds, thou hast sown in
tears. Psalm 126:5. This is the word and promise of God, which shall
certainly be fulfilled, either here or in the other world. Thus, when thou
art taking thy last sad farewell of a dying child, husband, wife, or
friend, thou must consider that this is the season in which the bodies of
thy friends, and thine own also, are, as it were, to be sown and committed
to the earth; but that the harvest of the resurrection is at hand, when
"the angels, the reapers, shall gather the sheaves, and put them into
barns." Matt. 13:30, 39. There we shall find that our prayers, sighs, and
tears were not lost, but only sent beforehand, to be received again with
usury, finding all things in God that ever our souls could conceive or
desire. So the promises of God, and the arguments produced to sustain
them, shall stand firm and unshaken in Christ Jesus, to be eternally
fulfilled to all believing souls, to their everlasting joy and salvation,
for which we shall render eternal thanks and praises to God.




Chapter XXXVIII.


            Seven Helps Or Aids For Our Infirmities In Prayer.


    _Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
    what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh
    intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he
    that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit,
    because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
    will of God._--ROM. 8:26, 27.


Since our prayers are, alas! very weak and imperfect, let us see what
assistance God has given us in his holy word, in order to help us in that
duty.

2. The _first_ help is our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, the
Son of God. 1 John 2:2. He is our advocate, and pleads our cause before
God, when we are hardly able to express what we want. He is therefore
called the _Logos_, or the eternal _Word_ of the Father, because God by
him has discovered his will to us; as He is also called the Mediator,
because He pleads our cause before God. A type of Him we have in Moses,
the mediator of the Old Testament; to whom the people, flying from the
face of God in Mount Sinai, said, "Speak thou with us" (Exod. 20:19). And
when Moses complained that he was slow of speech, and of a slow tongue,
when he was commanded to appear before Pharaoh; God tells him, "Aaron, thy
brother, can speak well. He shall be to thee instead of a mouth." Exod.
4:10, 14, 16. So we also, when we should pray, are dull and slow of
speech, and therefore we must fly to Christ, our heavenly Aaron, who is to
us instead of a mouth. The same thing is expressed to us by the
mercy-seat. Exod. 25:17, 21. Therefore Christ commands us to pray in his
name (John 16:23), who is our eternal High Priest, having an everlasting
priesthood (Heb. 7:16), interceding for us (Rom. 8:34), "in whom we have
boldness, and access with confidence by the faith of him." Eph. 3:12.

3. The _second_ help is God the Holy Ghost. "I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and of
supplication." Zech. 12:10. This spirit is given us as a testimony of the
divine grace, and of our adoption. Hence St. John says, "Hereby know we
that we dwell in him, because he hath given us of his Spirit." 1 John
4:13. And St. Paul, "Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God." Rom.
8:15, 16. He was also typified by the anointing of the priests under the
law. Exod. 28:41; 29:7. Thus God has anointed us with the Spirit of Christ
(1 John 2:20); that we should offer to him daily the fruit of our lips.
Ps. 69:30, 31; Heb. 13:15. This Spirit of God is the author of all those
devout aspirations which we meet with, such as: "O Lord, hear; O Lord,
forgive; O Lord, hearken and do." Dan. 9:19.

4. The _third_ help to strengthen us in prayer, is found in _the promises
of God_. "Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee."
Ps. 50:15. "He shall call upon me, and I will answer him." Ps. 91:15. See
also Ps. 145:19; Luke 11:11, 13, and 18. "Before they call, I will hear."
Isa. 60:24. "The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open to their prayers." Ps. 34:16. "Whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be delivered." Joel 2:32. "Ask, seek, knock." Matt. 7:7.
"The Lord is rich (in mercy, Eph. 2:4) to all that call upon him." Rom.
10:12. See also Luke 11:11-13; 18:6, 7.

5. The _fourth_ help in prayer, is _the remembrance of the saints_, whose
prayers God has heard. Look at the examples of the ancients, and be
strengthened. And, indeed, we must needs be so, when we seasonably call to
mind instances of God's providence and divine assistance. Upon this
foundation all the prophets of old built their prayers. Thus, when God was
angry with Israel for the sin of the golden calf, and said to Moses: "Let
me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them" (Ex. 32:10); "then Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach,"
as the Psalmist expresses it (Ps. 106:23), putting God in mind of his
former mercies, saying, "Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy
people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt, with great
power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and
say, For mischief did he bring them out to slay them in the mountains, and
to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath,
and repent of this evil against thy people, etc. And the Lord repented of
the evil which he thought to do unto his people." Exod. 32:11-14.

6. David had recourse to the same remedy in almost all his Psalms; putting
God in mind, as it were, of his former mercies, goodness, and
faithfulness. So Ps. 25:6, "Remember thy tender mercies." Ps. 77:5, etc.,
"I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times," etc. Ps.
85:1-6, "Lord, thou hast been favorable unto thy land: thou hast brought
back the captivity of Jacob. Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy
people; thou hast covered all their sin. Thou hast taken away all thy
wrath; thou hast turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger. Turn
us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease. Wilt
thou be angry with us forever? Wilt thou draw out thine anger to all
generations? Wilt thou not revive us again; that thy people may rejoice in
thee?"

7. How admirably does the prophet Isaiah use the same form of supplication
(chap. 63:10-16), putting God in mind of his former mercies, and opening,
as it were, by this key, the immense treasures of his compassion. "Where
is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the shepherd of his flock?
where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him? That led them by the
right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing the water before
them, to make himself an everlasting name? That led them through the deep,
as a horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? As a beast
goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so
didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. Look down
from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy
glory; where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels,
and of thy mercies towards me? Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not:
thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting."

8. This prayer of the prophet is founded upon these arguments: (1.)
Because the love of God is _eternal_, therefore it will not be withheld
from _me_. (2.) I acknowledge myself to be a sinner but, at the same time,
I remember that thy grace has been extended to sinners who repented.
"Remember not the sins of my youth." Ps. 25:7. (3.) My sins have been very
great, but let thy mercy also be great. (4.) Remember that I am the work
of thine own hands. "Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as
the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? Thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit." Job 10:9, 12.

9. The _fifth_ comfort in prayer is, _the tender love of God_ to mankind,
and his promises to help the afflicted. "Look upon mine affliction and my
pain; and forgive all my sins." Ps. 25:18. Again, "This poor man cried,
and the Lord heard him." Ps. 34:6. Thus we are assured that God does not
despise the miseries of the distressed, although proud men may do it. For
God judges not as corrupt man judges; he has not eyes of flesh, nor doth
he see as man seeth. Job 10:4. And as it generally happens among us, that
the more need a man has of friends, the fewer he finds; so, on the other
hand, God has a more tender and particular regard for him that is
destitute and afflicted. "The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart, and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit." Ps. 34:18. "Thou hast
seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy
hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the
fatherless." Ps. 10:14. And, indeed, such are the proper objects of divine
mercy. To enhance the comfort and certainty of these promises, the
Psalmist mentions various classes of the afflicted; so that none who are
in distress may despair: "The Lord executeth judgment for the oppressed;
which giveth food to the hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners; the Lord
openeth the eyes of the blind; the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down;
the Lord loveth the righteous; the Lord preserveth the strangers; he
relieveth the fatherless and widows." Ps. 146:7-9. To this may be referred
what the prophet Isaiah says, "To this man will I look, even to him that
is poor, and of contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word." Isa.
66:2. And "The expectation of the poor shall not perish forever." Ps.
9:18. And "He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer." Ps. 102:17.

10. The _sixth_ help is, the consideration of _God's unspeakable
compassion_. He puts a better construction upon our prayers than we
intended, and understands our necessities more perfectly than we can
express them. He makes merciful allowance for our infirmities in prayer;
according to the words of Abraham, "Let not the Lord be angry, and I will
speak." Gen. 18:30. Hence St. Paul says, "Blessed be God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation." 2 Cor. 1:3. Compare
this with Ps. 103:8. By virtue of this compassion of God, none of our
prayers are in vain. God keeps an exact account of all our sighs and tears
(Ps. 56:8), for the sake of those tears which Christ our blessed Saviour
shed, who, in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications
with strong crying and tears. Heb. 5:7.

11. The _seventh_ help in prayer, is the remembrance of the _covenant of
grace_, which God has made with us. "This shall be the covenant," etc.
Jer. 31:33. And, "The covenant of my peace shall not be removed, saith the
Lord, that hath mercy on thee." Isa. 54:10. "Ho, every one that thirsteth,
come! I will make an everlasting covenant with you." Isa. 55:1, 3. In this
covenant of grace the assurance that our prayers shall be heard is
contained. "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while
he is near." Isa. 55:6.

12. What we have said upon this head, is most happily exemplified in the
prayer of Daniel. "O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
commandments.--And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth
out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown,
as at this day." (Here is the putting God in mind of his former mercies.)
"Hear, O our God, the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the
Lord's sake." (This is pleading the name and merits of Jesus the Messiah.)
"O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do." (These are the
groans of the Holy Spirit.) "O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open
thine eyes, and behold our desolations" (in regard of his promise);
"because for our sins, and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and
thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us." (Here is a
confession of sin, and an acknowledgment of misery.) "For we do not
present our supplications before thee, for our righteousnesses, but for
thy great mercies" (this is an acknowledgment of man's unworthiness, and
of God's mercy, which is followed with a remembrance of the covenant);
"For thy city and thy people are called by thy name." Dan. 9:4, 15, 17,
18, 19, 16.




Chapter XXXIX.


              The Conversation Of A Believing Soul With God.


    _Wilt thou be angry with us forever? Wilt thou draw out thine
    anger to all generations? Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy
    people may rejoice in thee? Shew us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant
    us thy salvation._--PS. 85:5-7.


These words contain the familiar discourse of the devout and faithful soul
with God. Who would venture to talk so freely to an offended prince? But
so indulgent is God to a believing soul, that he gives liberty to come
freely and without restraint into his presence. As soon as the believer
enters, God asks, "What is thy desire? come near, and be not afraid." This
is represented to us in the case of Bathsheba (1 Kings 1:16), going into
the presence-chamber of king David, and making her petition. Upon which,
the king sware unto her with an oath. So also in that of Esther, whom, so
soon as she came into his presence, the king touched with his golden
sceptre. Est. 5:1.

2. It is held to be an act of singular grace and favor, if a king
vouchsafe to talk familiarly with his subjects. It was upon this account
that the Roman emperor Titus was called _The delight of mankind_, for his
gracious treatment of all who were near him, filled them with joy. But how
much greater favor and happiness is it, that God, the Lord of lords, and
King of kings (whom the Psalmist calls, "The most high and terrible Lord,
a great King over all the earth"), (Ps. 47:2), should not only talk with
miserable men, who, as Abraham says, "are but dust and ashes" (Gen.
18:27); but should even converse kindly with rebellious sinners, who are
at enmity with him through sin. Isa. 59:2. So that when a Christian
considers, on the one hand, the greatness and majesty of God; and the
impurity, corruption, misery, and vileness of human nature on the other
hand, he cannot but cry out with David, "What is man that thou art mindful
of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?" Ps. 8:4. The most
righteous man living must acknowledge himself to be unworthy to converse
with God. This was the sentiment of the devout Abraham, who therefore
excuses his presuming to intercede with God for the Sodomites, saying,
"Let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak" (Gen. 18:30, 32): and yet
every time that Abraham speaks, God vouchsafes to answer. And as he is the
father of "them which are of faith" (Gal. 3:7), he gives us a notable
example of the devout soul's conversation with God.

3. It is therefore a most certain and undoubted truth, that whensoever the
faithful soul calls upon God by prayer, he never fails to answer by the
divine consolations of his Spirit. An instance of this we have, where the
Psalmist calls upon God in these words: "Lord, thou hast been favorable
unto thy land. Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people; thou hast
turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger. Wilt thou not revive us
again? Shew us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation. I will hear
what God the Lord will speak." Ps. 85:1, etc. The answer he received in
his heart; therefore he says: "His salvation is nigh them that fear him."
Ver. 9. And as he here prays, that he may hear what the Lord God will say
concerning him; God answers him, "Hear, O my people, and I will testify
unto thee." Ps. 50:7. The afflicted soul prays, "O Lord, rebuke me not in
thine anger." Ps. 6:1. To which God answers, "The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy." Ps. 103:8. The soul
says, "Whither shall I flee from thy presence?" Ps. 139:7. To which the
Lord answers, "Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest." Matt. 11:28. The soul says, "I know, O Lord, that the
way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walketh, to direct his
steps." Jer. 10:23. To which it is answered, "I will instruct thee, and
teach thee in the way in which thou shalt go; I will guide thee with mine
eye." Ps. 32:8. The believing soul prays, "Teach me thy way, O Lord; I
will walk in thy truth." Ps. 86:11. To which the Lord answers, "I am the
way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6); the _way_, if thou wouldest not
wander; the _truth_, if thou wouldest not be deceived; the _life_, if thou
wouldest avoid eternal death. The believing soul complains, "There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest
in my bones, because of my sin. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because
of my foolishness." Ps. 38:3, 5. To which it is answered, "The
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are
healed." Isa. 53:5. The devout soul says, "Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be
healed: save me, and I shall be saved." Jer. 17:14. It is answered, "Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases." Ps. 103:3.
The soul complains, and cries out: I have sinned above the number of the
sands of the sea. To which God answers by the prophet Isaiah, "I have
blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins." Isa. 43:25; 44:22. The soul cries out, Alas! I am a grievous
sinner. And Jesus Christ answers, "I am not come to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance." Matt. 9:13. The soul prays, "Remember not the
sins of my youth, nor my transgressions." Ps. 25:7. To which God answers,
"If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and
keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him." Ezek. 18:21, 22. The
soul cries out, "Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me
from my sin." Ps. 51:3. To which God answers, "Though your sins be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool." Isa. 1:18. "Lord, enter not into
judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified." Ps. 143:2. To which it is answered, "God sent not his Son into
the world, to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be
saved. He that believeth on him is not condemned." John 3:17, 18. The soul
prays, "Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within
me." Ps. 51:10. To which it is answered, "A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes." Ezek. 36:26, 27. The soul says, "I am bowed down greatly; I go
mourning all the day long." Ps. 38:6. To which it is answered, "The Lord
hath sent me to comfort all that mourn." Isa. 61:2. It is said, "Look upon
mine affliction and my pain." Ps. 25:18. And it is answered, "To him will
I look, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit." Isa. 66:2. "Thou tellest
my wanderings." Ps. 56:8. To which the Lord answers, "The very hairs of
your head are all numbered." Matt. 10:30. The soul cries out, "When shall
I come and appear before God?" Ps. 42:2. To which is answered, "Where I
am, there shall also my servant be." John 12:26. The soul complains, "How
long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me? forever? How long wilt thou hide thy
face from me? How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in
my heart daily? How long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?" Ps. 13:1,
2. To which is answered, "For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee." Isa. 54:7, 8.
Compare thy present suffering with God's eternal grace. Wait for the
promise, which, though late, will surely be fulfilled at last. Hab. 2:3.
The soul says, "Thou art my God; be not far from me; for trouble is near;
for there is none to help." Ps. 22:10, 11. To which it is answered, "I
will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him." Ps.
91:15. The soul prays, "Lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death."
Ps. 13:3. To which it is answered, "I will ransom them from the power of
the grave; I will redeem them from death." Hosea, 13: 14. The soul says,
"I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ." Phil. 1:23. To which
Christ answers, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise." Luke 23:43.

4. In a word, the Holy Scripture is nothing else but a conversation of the
devout soul with God. Whenever the soul raises itself to God, and spreads
its misery and complaints before him, then God answers it by some internal
comfort, or by the words and promises of the Holy Scriptures.




Chapter XL.


            A Conversation Between Faith And The Mercy Of God.


    _Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
    kissed each other._--PS. 85:10.


The goodness of God comes forth to meet us, and gives merciful answers to
the prayers of faith; "for mercy shall compass us about." Ps. 32:10. It
calls to us: "Return, saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you: for I am merciful, and I will not keep anger forever. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the Lord
thy God." Jer. 3:12, 13. To which faith answers, "Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy lovingkindness; according unto the multitude of thy
tender mercies, blot out my transgressions." Ps. 51:1. Mercy calls, "Him
that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out." John 6:37. Faith answers,
"Draw me; we will run after thee." Cant. 1:4. Mercy says, "The Lord hath
sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to comfort all that mourn." Isa.
61:1, 2. Faith answers out of Psalm 51:12: "Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation; and uphold me with thy free Spirit." Mercy says, out of Isaiah
43:25 and 44:22, "I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions,
and, as a cloud, thy sins." Faith answers out of Psalm 25:18, "Look upon
mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins." Mercy comforts us
and says, out of Psalm 103:13, "Like as a father pitieth his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him." To which faith answers, out of
Isaiah 64:8, "But now, O Lord, thou art our Father." Mercy says, "Come
unto me." Matt. 11:28. Faith answers, "Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul." Ps. 25:1. Mercy says, "Thou hast played the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord." Jer. 3:1. Faith answers,
"I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him: Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants." Luke 15:18, 19. Mercy
says, "This my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found." Luke 15:24. To which faith answers, "I have trusted in thy mercy;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation." Ps. 13:5. Mercy proclaims, out
of Isaiah 55:1, "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." To
which faith answers, "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so
panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the
living God; when shall I come and appear before God?" Ps. 42:1, 2. Mercy
says, "Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases."
Ps. 103:3. Faith exclaims, "Enter not into judgment with thy servant." Ps.
143:2. Mercy says, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." John 14:6.
Faith answers, "Shew me thy way, O Lord; teach me thy paths. Lead me in
thy truth, and teach me." Ps. 25:4, 5. Mercy promises, "I will ransom them
from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death: O death, I
will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction." Hosea 13:14.
Faith answers, "He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God
the Lord belong the issues from death." Ps. 68:20. Mercy says, "I am the
resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live." John 11:25. To which faith answers, "I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God." Job 19:25, 26. Mercy says, "Fear thou not; behold, I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands." Isa. 41:10; 49:16. "Thou art mine;
neither shall any man pluck thee out of my hand." John 10:28. To which
faith answers, "Into thine hand I commit my spirit; thou hast redeemed me,
O Lord God of truth." Ps. 31:5.




Chapter XLI.


   The Great Benefits, And The Great Efficacy Of Praise Offered To God.


    _In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. I call to remembrance
    my song in the night; I commune with mine own heart._--PS. 77:2.


This passage is an excellent rule of life, teaching every man how to
conduct himself under the cross. As the word of God is the rule of our
life in prosperity, according to the Psalmist: "I will instruct thee and
teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine
eye" (Ps. 32:8); and "Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory" (Ps. 73:24): yea, moreover, as the word of God ought
to be the rule of our faith, as the Psalmist tells us, "Thy word is a lamp
unto my feet, and a light unto my path" (Ps. 119:105): and "Hold up my
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not" (Ps. 17:5)--so also ought
it to be our rule and direction in bearing the cross, as David teaches us,
saying, "In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord;" that is, I will look
up to God, who has laid this cross upon me, and beg of him comfort and
assistance in the day of my trouble.

2. Hence may every Christian learn, when he is in affliction, not to fix
his thoughts too much upon the immediate causes or instruments of his
sufferings; but to lift up his heart to God; to apply to himself the
divine promises; to pray and sing praises to his God: and these are the
true and certain consolations of an afflicted soul. David says, "In the
day of my trouble I sought the Lord." As a mind oppressed with grief eases
itself by communicating its troubles to a faithful friend, so is our
afflicted spirit refreshed and comforted when we offer prayer and
thanksgiving to God. Thus David "called to remembrance his song in the
night, and communed with his own heart" (Ps. 77:6); that is, when it was
night he longed earnestly for the morning, that he might rise and comfort
his weary soul by prayers and thanksgiving unto God his Comforter: in the
mean time, he communed with his own heart, and poured out his soul in
secret; and God, who saw and heard in secret, who understood even the most
secret sighs and breathings of his dejected spirit, comforted,
strengthened, and refreshed him.

3. Amongst other things that may be learned from this beautiful passage of
the Psalmist, this is one, that the singing of holy hymns and praises to
God, proceeding from a truly devout soul, are attended with great
advantages and spiritual blessings.

4. The truth of this appears, 1. From nature itself. 2. From the efficacy
of prayer. 3. From the examples found in the Old Testament. 4. From the
examples in the New. 5. From the examples of holy men in both, who were by
this means filled with the Holy Ghost. 6. From the nature and properties
of the Psalms. 7. From the frequent use of the blessed Psalms among the
ancients, whenever they were under any adversity. All these considerations
prove that there is a great virtue or efficacy in psalms and hymns of
praise. By this I would not be understood to mean nothing but bare words
and empty sounds, void of faith and devotion; but rather such a vigorous
faith, such an ardent devotion, as may break forth into holy hymns and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in the heart unto the Lord. Let
us briefly describe this subject.

5. As to the first, namely, the book of the world, or nature, it is clear
that the praise of God is the great end of the whole creation. That this
is the grand employment of the angelical choirs, appears from many
passages in the Revelation of St. John, as also from Isaiah 6:3 and the
148th Psalm; which, inviting all creatures to praise God, for whose glory
they were created, begins with the angels (ver. 2), "Praise ye him, all
his angels; praise ye him, all his hosts." From the angelical he descends
to the sidereal world, saying, "Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him,
all ye stars of light." To which may be referred the words of Job (chap.
38:7): "When the morning stars sang together." Thence he descends to the
sea, calling on the waters, and all the numerous inhabitants of the
waters, to praise the God that made them. Thence looking up to the regions
of the air, he calls to "the fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind
fulfilling his word." Thence he passes to the earth: "mountains and all
hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars." Thence to the living creatures:
"beasts, and all cattle; creeping things and flying fowl." Thence to men,
beginning with the rulers of the world: "kings of the earth, and all
people; princes, and all judges of the earth. Both young men and maidens,
old men and children, praise the name of the Lord." And lastly, to the
church of God, "his saints, a people near unto him--praise ye the Lord."

6. The second argument was the efficacy of the prayer of faith. This is
attested by the word of God, the examples of holy men, and daily
experience. For we are assured by all the promises of God, that not one
devout prayer, not one sigh or tear, comes from us in vain. "Put thou my
tears into thy bottle." Ps. 6:9; 56:8. "They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy." Ps. 126:5. "The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to
all that call upon him in truth." Ps. 145:18. Nothing, indeed, in this
world can be successful without prayer; forasmuch as every good and every
perfect gift cometh down from God, and must be asked of him. Without
constant prayer a man can neither live nor die in peace. Now, as the
offering of praise to God is nothing else but the prayer of a devout soul
overflowing with divine joy, in which holy men of God have celebrated and
conveyed to posterity the mercies and wonders of God their Creator; it is
plain that the singing of praises to God is an act of devotion, full of
spiritual comfort and advantage.

7. Thirdly, this is confirmed by many examples found in the Old Testament.
Exod. 15; Deut. 32; 1 Sam. 2; Isa. 12; 26; 38; 64; Jon. 2; Hab. 3; and the
whole Book of Psalms.

8. Fourthly, this is confirmed by the examples of the New Testament;
especially those two divine hymns of Mary and Zacharias (Luke 1:46, 68),
of which the Christian Church has appointed one to be sung in the morning,
and the other in the evening, as a morning and evening sacrifice unto God;
thereby instructing us, that singing psalms and praises unto God ought to
begin and end the day. Such, too, is the exhortation of the Psalmist, "It
is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O Most High: to shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and
thy faithfulness every night." Ps. 92:1, 2. But why such lovingkindness
"in the morning"? Because "it is new every morning." Lam. 3:23. And why
such "faithfulness every night"? Because "the Lord, that neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth," is our guardian by night. Ps. 121:3. To this we
may add what we are told by St. Matthew (chap. 26: 30), that Jesus Christ
himself at his last Supper, sung a hymn with his disciples. And St. Paul
says to the Ephesians (chap. 5:18, 19), "Be filled with the Spirit;
speaking to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody in your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always, etc."
And again: "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom;
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord." Col. 3:16, 17. And
St. James says, "Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry?
let him sing psalms." James 5:13.

9. Fifthly, by the praises offered to God by the holy men of the Old
Testament and the New, who were filled with the Holy Ghost. Of this we
have two instances. First, when Samuel had anointed Saul to be king, he
gave him a sign, saying, "Thou shalt meet a company of prophets with a
psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they
shall prophesy. And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou
shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man." 1 Sam.
10:5, 6. The second is, when Saul had sent messengers to take David, they
met several companies of prophets, and both they and Saul himself began to
prophesy. 1 Sam. 19:19-24. Similar to this is that which we read
concerning Elisha (2 Kings 3:15), that when the minstrel began to play,
that holy man prophesied.

10. In the Old Testament there were several kinds of divine music; some of
trumpets, some of psalteries and harps, some of cymbals, and other kinds
of musical instruments. From this some imagine that the _Songs of
Degrees_, as some of the Psalms are called, took their names. For they did
not sing all the Psalms to the same instrument, but adapted their
instruments to their subject, whether it were cheerful or sorrowful. All
these various kinds of music with which, under the Old Testament, they
sang praises unto God, being a part of the external ceremonial service,
have now ceased; and our spirit, soul, mind, and mouth are become the
trumpet, psaltery, harp, and cymbal of God. To which St. Paul alludes,
when he says, "Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord." Col. 3:16.
By which expression we are by no means forbidden, either in public or
private, to praise God with voices or instruments of music; but it
requires that all this be done with true devotion, in the spirit, and from
the heart, lest religion should be thought to consist in empty sounds and
the external pomp of divine service. For the New Testament, see, for
example, Acts 4:24-31.

11. Sixthly, the nature and properties of the Psalms prove the same thing.
Some of them are supplicatory, others consolatory; some penitential,
others doctrinal; and, lastly, others prophetical: from which variety of
style and intention the devout soul may reap a correspondent variety of
comforts and benefits.

12. Seventhly, we are instructed by the examples of Moses and David that
songs of praise were used upon different occasions. As (1) _Against
enemies_. These may be called prayers for protection. Such is Psalm 68,
which the man of God sang when he was advancing against his enemies: "Let
God arise, let his enemies be scattered." Some think that Psalm 91 was
composed by David in the time of that great pestilence, which, in the
space of three days, swept away 70,000 men. 2 Sam. 24:15. And I doubt not
that many a man has been protected in national calamities by a proper use
of this Psalm. (2) _In time of victory over enemies._ These we may call
Psalms of victory. Thus David, when he had gained six victories, composed
the 18th Psalm, as may be gathered from 2 Sam. 22: 1. So Jehoshaphat
marched against the Moabites with singers going before him, who were to
bless and praise the Lord with a loud voice; and he conquered. 2 Chron.
20:21, etc. (3) _In great calamities._ Thus we read (1 Sam. 21:13) that
David, when he changed his behavior before Achish, composed the 34th
Psalm, as appears by the title. So he sang Psalm 3, when he fled from
Absalom. So when the apostles, in great difficulties, prayed in the words
of the 2d Psalm, "the place was shaken where they were assembled
together." Acts 4:31. And these are Psalms of mourning or lamentation. (4)
There are also eucharistical Psalms. So David sung the 105th Psalm before
the ark of the covenant. 1 Chron. 17:16. (5) There are complaining Psalms,
as the 102d appears to be by the inscription; also some against
calumniators, as the 4th, 7th, 52d; also against diseases, as the 30th.

13. Thus much concerning the efficacy and admirable benefits of divine
hymns and thanksgivings. Whence it appears that it is the duty of a
Christian to praise God as well as to pray to him every day. For (1), it
being the constant employment of the holy angels to bless and praise God,
when the Church on earth does the same, there arises thence a divine and
heavenly communion betwixt the Church on earth and the Church in heaven;
fulfilling, in some measure, that petition of the Lord's prayer, "Thy will
be done in earth, as it is in heaven." Matt. 6:10. Come, then, ye devout
souls, and when ye retire into your closets to pour out your souls before
God in secret, remember also to praise him with a Psalm of thanksgiving.
(2) Moreover, it would be quite proper, and becoming a Christian, to
accustom children, from their infancy, to sing psalms and praises unto
God, according to the Psalmist, "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies" (Ps. 8:2): the
advantage of which, is expressed in the following words--"that thou
mightest still the enemy and the avenger." (3) We are encouraged to this
duty by God's gracious acceptance of it, and delight in it; upon which
account the Psalmist calls upon him, saying, "Thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the praises of Israel." Ps. 22:3. (4) Experience itself teaches
us that by divine hymns we kindle flames of devotion in our souls, and
receive rich returns of spiritual joy, lively comfort, solid peace, and
rest in God.




Chapter XLII.


      The Reasons For Which We Ought Daily To Offer Praises To God.


    _Praise ye the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
    for his mercy endureth forever._ PS. 106:1; 107:1; 118:1.


Thus saith the devout David, "Seven times a day do I praise thee, because
of thy righteous judgments" (Ps. 119:164); that is, many times in a day do
I sing praises in honor of thy holy name. By this he teaches us, that a
man cannot spend his time better than by retiring at least once a day into
his closet, and praising God in secret. Yea, though his hands be employed
in labor and business, yet may he, in the quiet stillness of his heart,
offer up his praises unto God wheresoever he is. For the prayer of a true
Christian is not confined to any certain time or place, since he worships
"in spirit and in truth" (John 4:23); and the Spirit is not circumscribed
by any limits of time or place. To which also relates the admonition of
St. Paul, when he commands us "to sing with grace in our hearts to the
Lord" (Col. 3:16); that being, indeed, the fittest place wherein God may
be praised.

2. But as we are by nature dull and inactive in the discharge of this
duty, therefore God has given us, in his Word, certain helps to quicken
us.

3. The first of these is _his own command_. He made us, his servants and
creatures, for his own glory, as we ourselves appoint servants to manage
business for us. He, therefore, who does not daily praise God, was created
by him in vain, and cannot be his servant. Hence we are commanded, over
and over again, in Holy Scripture, above all things, to praise God. Thus,
"Praise ye the Lord. Praise him, O ye servants of the Lord." Ps. 113:1. "O
give thanks unto the Lord." Ps. 118:1. "Thou shalt glorify me." Ps. 50:15.
This is an argument to us, that the chief part of our religious worship,
our chief service in this world, and our happiness in the next, consist in
the exercise of praise and thanksgiving; upon which account we ought to
esteem it our greatest happiness and most honorable employment. So the
holy Psalmist says, "My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips." Ps. 63:4. And
again, "Delight thyself in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart." Ps. 37:4. O how truly happy, then, and blessed is he who is
come to such perfection of divine worship as to delight in the Lord, and
to be continually offering praises and thanks! "He shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple." Ps. 65:5. If we think
it an honorable thing to be employed in the service of any earthly prince,
how much more ought a man to rejoice when he considers that he may be
admitted to the service of the Lord of lords, and King of kings, being, in
his own nature, no better than dust and ashes, and a poor sinner! This
single consideration ought to be of sufficient weight to encourage him to
praise God daily.

4. Secondly, _the advantages that a man derives from this exercise_, is
another argument. For since God has no need of our praises, and is neither
the better nor the worse for our obedience or neglect; and since the most
acceptable praise which we can offer him is, at best, but the fruit of
"unclean lips" (Isa. 6:5), as the prophet Isaiah speaks, it follows that
the advantage redounds only to ourselves, as being the means of drawing
down upon us the favor and blessings of heaven: a thankful heart being the
proper receptacle of divine grace. This, in short, is that which brings
God down into our souls, and makes us truly the living temples of the Holy
Ghost; and where God is, _there_ is the fulness of divine blessing.
Moreover, by the daily exercise of thanksgiving, we keep up communion with
the blessed choirs of triumphant saints and angels in heaven. They are
incessantly singing the praises of God above; whilst we below, by the same
exercise, are conquering, by degrees, the enemies of our salvation (Ps.
18:29), till at length, by a constant practice of this divine duty, we are
filled with an immovable assurance that we are united to God, and that we
shall be for ever happy with him in heaven, according to the promise of
our blessed Lord, "Where I am, there shall also my servant be." John
12:26. And now, would to God that wretched man would so lay these
considerations to heart, and so sincerely endeavor to practise them, that
every soul might become, in truth, a house of prayer!

5. Thirdly, we are encouraged to the daily practice of thanksgiving, from
the consideration of _the compassion, the lovingkindness, and everlasting
goodness of God_. This is an argument continually inculcated in the Book
of Psalms, to teach us that the chief and fundamental reason why we ought
continually to bless and praise God, is, because he is good and gracious,
and "his mercy endureth for ever." No heart of man can conceive, nor
tongue express, the height and depth of that love which disposes the great
and mighty God to show himself thus loving and merciful to wretched
mankind, who are dust and ashes, laden with iniquities, and ungrateful to
God; and that he not only continues his wonted mercies to them,
notwithstanding their repeated provocations; but is also perpetually
dispensing fresh showers of blessings upon the whole rebellious race. And
this is what every man must needs experience in himself. Look into thine
own soul, whosoever thou art; what canst thou find there but misery and
sin? Yet God continues merciful and long-suffering, is slow to anger, and
not willing to punish thee as thy sins have deserved. This is a degree of
mercy which, as thy own heart must confess, no man living does or can
exercise towards his brethren. We cannot so long forbear to punish those
that have offended us; and when we punish, mercy seldom pleads for the
criminal, till we are satiated with vengeance; whereas the rod of God is
often lifted up, but his mercy averts the impending stroke, and rescues
the sinner from punishment. So that every man must confess that the
punishments of heaven are not only less than we deserve, but are always
qualified with a double portion of mercy. Whence it follows, that God is
essentially and truly LOVE, which every man daily experiences in himself.

6. Read the Holy Scriptures and see how tenderly, yea, how affectionately
God vouchsafes to deal with mankind, so that no father or mother upon
earth can be more indulgent to their darling child. Thus, "Is Ephraim my
dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spake against him, I do
earnestly remember him still; therefore, my bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord." Jer. 31:20.

7. God not only bestows his favors plentifully both on our souls and
bodies, but also does it with so much tenderness and good will, that, as
he himself says, "He rejoices over us to do us good" (Jer. 32:41); as if
he were glad to find men willing to be happy in the blessed manifestations
of his love; which is, indeed, the truest demonstration that it is
sincere. Were not God thus merciful, our very being would soon be at an
end, which nothing but his infinite mercy can sustain; yea, "His
lovingkindness is better than life itself" (Ps. 63:3), which "compasseth
us about" (Ps. 32:10), as tender mothers embrace their helpless infants.

8. The same goodness of God discovers itself in all his creatures; in
which, as in a glass, we may contemplate the wonderful riches of divine
mercy: "The earth is full of the riches of God." Ps. 104:24. For whose
sake was all that is good, both in heaven and earth, created? Not for Him
certainly, who is Himself all-sufficient, and stands not in need of any
creature. The sun, moon, and stars serve not to enlighten him; the fire,
the air, the earth, and water do him no service, but us. And when he
"fills our hearts with food and gladness" (Acts 14:17), it is his goodness
that we taste, it is his bounty that feeds and nourishes us. He it is that
gives us healthy and sound bodies, which are more valuable to us than an
empire. If it should please God to turn the water into blood, as he did in
Egypt (Exod. 7:20), we could not, with all our boasted treasure, purchase
one single drop to relieve our greatest necessities. Or should he, as he
did once (Exod. 10:22), cover the earth with thick darkness, no prince
upon earth could, with all his riches, purchase one single gleam of light.
Or what would all the world signify to him that should but for one moment
be deprived of the benefit of the air? All these are very great blessings
of God, but because they are common, few are so sensible of them as to be
thankful for them. Reflect, moreover, on the mercies of redemption and
sanctification, in which the goodness and grace of God so transcendently
appear, that eternity itself would be too short to praise and magnify
these blessings as we ought. To redeem a lost world is much more glorious
than to create it at first; and to regenerate a man by a spiritual new
birth, more wondrous than at first to produce him by a natural birth.
Lastly, whosoever will carefully consider the works and providence of God,
may read the plain characters of his mercy and love in every part of the
creation.

9. Dull, ungrateful creatures that we are, how apt are we to forget our
benefactor, and despise the hand that blesses us! God is thus led in mere
mercy to use the rod of discipline, and to take away our worldly comforts
from us, in order thereby to reduce us to a sober sense of ourselves, and
of our dependence on him, to whom all our thanks are due. Thus God speaks
by the prophet Hosea, "She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine,
and oil, and multiplied her silver and her gold: therefore will I return,
and take them from her." Hosea 2:8. So that the _cross_ is, as it were,
the light by which we see and discover the true value of divine blessings,
and who it is that bestows them. For ingratitude is the greatest degree of
blindness, and the highest affront against God. And since the whole world
is full of the glory of God, much more ought the heart of man to be full
of it.

10. Indeed the excellency of the divine love discovers itself chiefly in
this, that he bestows his favors even upon rebels and enemies. "For he
maketh his sun to rise, and sendeth his rain on the just and on the
unjust." Matt. 5:45.

11. The goodness and mercy of God herein appear still more illustrious,
that though we continue ungrateful, and our hearts "cast forth wickedness
as a fountain casteth forth her waters" (Jer. 6:7), yet he still strives
to conquer our ingratitude by his goodness, and does not take his mercy
from us; as the Psalmist says, "His mercy endureth forever." Ps. 136:1. So
that as the heart of man is, as it were, an abyss of iniquity (Jer. 17:9),
so God is an abyss of mercy, an ever-flowing fountain of goodness, so much
superior in kind, as well as in degree, to that of any created being, that
he doeth nothing but good, and receives nothing in return but evil; which
the uncreated and infinite Good alone could do or suffer. And when,
provoked by our wickedness, he seems sometimes to lay aside his mercy, and
"in anger to shut up his tender mercies" (Ps. 77:10), yet even that is
nothing but paternal resentment, not tending to destruction, but so
tempered with compassion, that mercy triumphs over judgment. So, "If his
children forsake my law, I will visit their transgressions with the rod:
nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him." Ps.
89:30-33. And, "In wrath remember mercy." Hab. 3:2. So, too, we read, "He
doth not afflict willingly the children of men." Lam. 3:33. For punishment
is, as it were, contrary to his nature and essential goodness. For though
the Scriptures often speak of _God's being angry_, yet such expressions
are used, after the manner of men, only in compliance with the weakness of
human capacities. Yea, God is never angry with his faithful servants; but
only with wicked and obstinate sinners; and when he corrects the former in
mercy, he punishes the latter in his wrath; for "the wrath of God abideth
on them." John 3:36. Hence David prays, "O Lord, rebuke me not in thine
anger." Ps. 6:1. As if he had said, "Lord, chasten me with mercy, as a
tender father corrects his beloved child." Wherefore, it is as impossible
that the mercy and goodness of God should fail or cease towards mankind
(though he sometimes afflicts us), as that the sun should actually be
extinguished by a cloud, or the vast ocean be absorbed by a sponge. "For
his mercy endureth forever." Ps. 136:1. And this is the reason of God's
reconciliation and forgiveness, not once or twice, but as often as the
sinner begins to repent and sue for mercy. This mercy does not last for a
few hours, or a few days only, but forever; so that the entire nature and
essence of God, infinite as it is, is nothing else but LOVE. No sooner
does the sinner sincerely pray for pardon, but the merciful God freely
bestows it, yea, he is more willing and ready to pardon, than we to ask
it.

12. Now if God pours his blessings upon us so plentifully in this life,
that we taste and enjoy them by all our senses; how much more fully shall
we be convinced, in the other world, by most blessed experience, that his
mercy endureth forever? If we receive so many mercies from him now in this
vale of sin and misery, as that "in him we live, and move, and have our
being" (Acts 17:28), how much more glorious will his mercy appear
hereafter, when we shall be cleansed from all sin, and rendered capable of
the purest enjoyments?

13. Fourthly, the praises of God have been the special employment of all
holy men. Most of the prophets of the Old Testament composed holy hymns,
to the praise and honor of God. Thus did Moses (Exod. 15; Deut. 32),
Hannah (1 Sam. 2), Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. 20), Hezekiah (Isa. 38), and
Jeremiah (Lam. 3). David was, however, the most eminent, who is so fervent
in the praise of God, as to say, that "His praise shall continually be in
his mouth." Ps. 34:1. In the New Testament, the Virgin Mary (Luke
1:46-55), and Zacharias (Luke 1:68-79); also St. Paul and St. Peter, in
many places of their Epistles. These examples sufficiently show that they
believed acts of thanksgiving and praise to be the most noble services
which we can possibly perform in this valley of misery. And, therefore, if
we are desirous to be partakers with the saints in glory, it is necessary
that we should imitate their examples in praising and magnifying God.

14. Fifthly, all creatures invite us to praise God. Thus David speaks to
them all, "Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion."
Ps. 103:22. And, indeed, every creature, in its way, gives glory to its
Creator; for he has stamped such illustrious characters of his glory and
goodness on them all, that they cannot conceal them. "The heavens declare
the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork." Ps. 19:1. And
Job says, "Where wast thou, when the morning stars sang together?" Chap.
38:4, 7. For even the sun, the moon, and all the host of heaven, when they
give their light, bear witness at the same time to the majesty and
goodness of Him that made them. The earth praises God when it is fruitful
and flourishing. The herbs and flowers, by their fragrance, beauty, and
variety of colors, show forth the might and wisdom of their Maker. The
birds with their songs; the trees with their fruits; the sea with its
inhabitants (Ps. 104:25); in short, all the creatures in their several
places, praise the God that made them, whilst they fulfil his will, and
answer the end for which they were created. Ps. 148:1, etc. And not only
so, but they call upon mankind, by the virtues and powers which God has
implanted in them, as witnesses of his wisdom and goodness, to praise and
glorify God. Whatever way we turn our eyes, we see so many marks of divine
goodness, that one would think that nature was nothing but one great
history of the glory of its Maker. But forasmuch as God has been more
gracious and bountiful unto man than to any other of his creatures,
mankind are certainly obliged to furnish larger and more frequent returns
of gratitude than they.

15. Sixthly, we must know, that when we have done all that we can to set
forth the greatness and majesty of God, the best and most devout of men
must fall short of the dignity of a subject, which no tongue, either of
men or angels, can worthily express. For "Who can utter the mighty acts of
the Lord? who can show forth all his praise?" Ps. 106:2. The most exalted
praises of holy men are more properly acts of admiration and wonder, than
attempts to express to the full the infinite love and majesty of God. They
have the will, but not the ability, to praise God in adequate terms. Thus
holy David in many Psalms stirs up his soul, and all the powers thereof,
to praise his God with thanksgiving. So Moses, "The Lord is my strength
and song, and he is become my salvation. He is my God, and I will prepare
him a habitation; my father's God, and I will exalt him." Exod. 15:2.
Observe, he calls God _his strength_; and were not that strength with us,
in us, and above us, we should quickly be turned into dust, and vanish
like a shadow. Therefore it is said: "Every man at his best state is
altogether vanity." Ps. 39:5. Moses also calls God _his salvation_; for he
is our righteousness against sin; our strength against infirmities; our
refuge in persecution; our joy in sadness; and lastly our life in death.

16. And now, what is there in heaven or in earth that may be compared unto
our God, with whom is such abundant salvation; who, by his power, sustains
the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein (Isa. 40:12); who is so
holy that all the angels adore him (Isa. 6:3), so "fearful in praises"
(Exod. 15:11) that the heaven, the earth, and all that is under the earth,
bow and tremble? He is so praiseworthy that all his works ought to be had
in honor, and every creature ought to praise his Maker: so wise, so
powerful, as to create all things out of nothing; to bring light out of
darkness; righteousness out of sin; and life out of death. Should we now
pass to the great work of our redemption, who can express it? He suffers
his only Son to become man, that we might become the children of God. He
suffers all pain as man, that we might enjoy everlasting felicity; he took
upon him the form of a servant, that we might be partakers of his heavenly
kingdom; lastly, he underwent death for us, that we, through him, might
have life eternal. Such works, such love, who can worthily celebrate?
Where is he that can explain how the infinite God, "whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain" (1 Kings 8:27), can yet dwell in us, and we in
him? Or how he made our immortal souls, and will receive them to himself
after their separation from the body? Or how he shall raise our dead
bodies from the dust of the earth unto eternal life? It is, indeed,
wonderful and strange, that that which is "mortal should put on
immortality." 1 Cor. 15:53. Wherefore, praise the Lord, O my soul.

17. If any man, then, desires to answer the end of his creation, and not
to be thought the only ingrate among all the works of God; if he desires
to walk worthy of his Christian calling, and after death to be partaker
with the saints of light and everlasting glory, let his soul praise the
Lord, and let him beseech God that He would never suffer his soul to be
unmindful or negligent of this duty. And those things which we cannot
sufficiently praise in this world shall be worthily celebrated in the
next, when "that which is in part shall be done away. For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face." 1 Cor. 13:10, 12. Which
may God grant, for Jesus Christ's sake.




Chapter XLIII.


    To Praise God Is The Highest And Most Honorable Employment Of Men.


    _It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord--upon an
    instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp
    with a solemn sound. For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy
    work; I will triumph in the works of thy hands. O Lord, how great
    are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man
    knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this._ PS. 92:1-6.


There are six Psalms which have been distinguished by the name of Golden
Songs, namely, 16, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, to show us that the praise of God
and prayer are the spiritual and heavenly treasure of a believing heart.
And that this is the greatest honor man is capable of, appears hence. (1.)
That a cheerful confidence in God is that which procures the soul the
greatest liberty of access to him. Hence it is said, "Honor and majesty
are before him; strength and beauty are in his sanctuary." Ps. 96:6. And
that this freedom of access is the highest honor of man, the very angels
themselves confess, who glory in that exalted privilege. "I am Gabriel,
