fixed and settled." Among his words of wisdom and kindness to Dr.
Smith were these: "My ground is taken, and I wish not to extend my
authority beyond its present limits. But I do most earnestly wish
to have our Church in all the States so settled that it may be one
Church, united in government, doctrine, and discipline--that there
may be no divisions among us--no opposition of interests--no
clashing of opinions. And permit me to hope that you will at your
approaching Convention so far recede in the points I have
mentioned as to make this practicable. Your Convention will be
large and very much to be respected. Its determinations will
influence many of the American States, and posterity will be
materially affected by them. These considerations are so many
arguments for calm and cool deliberation. Human passions and
prejudices, and, if possible, infirmities, should be laid aside. A
wrong step will be attended with dreadful consequences. Patience
and prudence must be exercised; and should there be some
circumstances that press hard for a remedy, hasty decisions will
not mend them. In doubtful cases they will probably have a bad
effect."

The action of the Convention in setting forth what is known in
American ecclesiastical history as "The Proposed Book" only made
him adhere more resolutely to the convictions of his intelligent
mind; and his clergy stood by him, and supported him in the sound
principles which he maintained. "Depend not on rumors," said one
of them, writing to a friend; "the clergy in Connecticut are well
pleased with their bishop, and will run the risk of a disunion
with the Southern gentry rather than forsake him, if he will stay
with us. We hope, however, better things than that." And better
things did come to pass. Attempts to cast discredit upon the
validity of his consecration, initiated and persisted in mainly by
those opposed to him on political grounds, were met in a manly and
Christian spirit, and he took the necessary steps to frustrate
them without using harsh words or doing more than state simple
facts. His second and last formal Charge to his clergy, delivered
September, 1786, whether considered in reference to the unbelief
of the times, or to the movement of the clergy and laity in the
Southern States to revise and alter the liturgy and government of
the Church, is a production of remarkable forecast and wisdom. At
this time he set forth a Communion-office, agreeably to the terms
of the Concordate made with the Scottish bishops, which gradually
went into use in the diocese, and traces of this particular office
lingered in Connecticut for half a century. When the union of the
Church in all the States was consummated in 1789, and the first
real General Convention held in that year, consisting of a House
of Bishops and a House of Clerical and Lay Deputies, entered upon
a review of the Book of Common Prayer, the proposition to insert
the Scottish form of consecration was accepted and approved, the
words only "That they may become the Body and Blood of Thy most
dearly beloved Son," being omitted, and those in the English
office substituted.

There were now three bishops in the American Church, and efforts
were made to bring them together in the consecration of a fourth,
but without avail. Bishops White and Provoost considered
themselves under an implied obligation not to join in any
consecration until there should be the actual number of three in
the English line of succession. Provoost was absent from the
Convention of 1789, when the Prayer-Book was revised, and Seabury,
being the senior, was made the President of the Upper House. He
and Bishop White spent no time in speeches, but looked carefully
at each point as it came into view. With minds and characters
differently constituted and moulded, they were just the men to be
brought together in such an emergency. One was frank and fearless
in adhering to his settled convictions, and resolute in upholding
the faith and preserving the ancient landmarks of the Church, but
not so self-willed and tenacious of his opinions that he could not
gracefully relinquish them where no essential principle was
involved. The other had a less rigid temperament, and from natural
kindness of heart, and perhaps personal inclination, he might have
been led without this check to yield to the pressure of
circumstances at the expense of a true conservatism. Bishop White,
however, was not more gentle and generous than capable of
appreciating the character of his Episcopal brother; and the
testimony which he bore long years after was that he "had ever
retained a pleasing recollection of the interviews of that period,
and of the good sense and Christian temper of the person with whom
he was associated."

In 1792 another General Convention was held, and Bishop Seabury
preached the sermon, which was printed by the request of both
Houses, and glowed with the true spirit of Christian love, with
that perfect and comprehensive charity which tends to preserve the
peace and unity of the Church under all possible circumstances.

By this time James Madison had been sent over and consecrated, in
the Chapel of Lambeth Palace, Bishop of Virginia; and thus the
question of having three bishops in America of the English
succession before proceeding to consecrate, was put to rest.

The Church in Maryland elected the Rev. Dr. Thomas John Claggett
its bishop, and deputies from that State appeared with him at this
General Convention, and, with the necessary documents in hand,
presented him to the House of Bishops, "requesting that his
consecration might be expedited." It was a movement intended to
unite Episcopalians more closely together by blending the two
lines of succession and for ever preventing the possibility of a
question arising in the American Church as to the relative
validity of the English and Scotch Episcopacy. For the application
to consecrate Dr. Claggett was not made to those only who received
their authority in the Chapel at Lambeth, but the whole four were
requested to join in the act, which was solemnized in Trinity
Church, New York, Monday, September 17, 1792; and from that day
not a bishop has been consecrated in this Church who cannot claim
the succession, in part at least, through the Scottish Episcopate.

An incident connected with the consecration ought not to be
withheld here, for it shows the man and his Christian spirit. It
had been agreed at the last General Convention that the eldest
bishop present--to be reckoned from his consecration--should be
President of the House, and this rule, if unchanged, would have
left Seabury to preside at the consecration. But the agreement
seemed to be displeasing to Bishops Provoost and Madison, and it
was proposed by them that the presidency should go by rotation,
beginning from the north, which would take it away from him and
give it to Provoost. "I had no inclination," says Seabury, "to
contend who should be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
therefore readily consented to relinquish the presidency into the
hands of Bishop Provoost. I thank God for His grace on this
occasion, and beseech Him that no self-exaltation or envy of
others may ever lead me into debate and contention, but that I may
ever be willing to be the least when the peace of His Church
requires it."

Great duties were now resting upon him, for besides Connecticut he
virtually had the oversight of all the Episcopal parishes in New
England; and in 1790 those in Rhode Island met in Convention and
formally declared him to be the bishop of the Church in that
State. This necessitated long journeys and long absences from his
home, and the only compensation for lack of speed and comfort in
the modes of conveyance at that period was the cheerful
hospitality which everywhere awaited him. In moving about from
place to place he was the Christian bishop and the agreeable
companion as well. His familiarity with subjects outside of
theology, and his ready retort upon those who attempted now and
then to draw the Church or his office into ridicule, were pleasant
features of his life, treasured and handed down to us by the
generation to which he belonged.

On the occasion of his first visit to Boston he called on Dr.
Mather Byles, then living in retirement, who, though a Congregational
divine, was yet a sturdy loyalist during the Revolution,
and had a son who entered the ministry of the Church of
England and was proscribed and banished for entertaining the
political views of his father. Dr. Byles was a noted wit, and so
ready with his puns and sarcasms that seldom did anyone try to
match him in this line without coming off the worse for the
conflict. When Seabury paid him the compliment of a visit, he
received him very cordially, and said, with a mixture of irony: "I
am happy to see in my old age a bishop on this side the Atlantic,
and I hope you will not refuse to give me the right hand of
fellowship." To which the Bishop replied: "As you are a
_left_-handed brother, I think fit to give you my _left_
hand," which he accordingly did. The conversation soon turned upon
the general subject of the Church, and it being St. Mark's day,
and public service as usual, the doctor inquired: "Why is it that
you churchmen still keep up the old Romish practice of worshipping
saints?" "We do not worship saints," was the quick reply; "we only
thank God that the Church has had such worthy advocates, and pray
Him to give us hearts and strength to follow their example."
"Aye," exclaimed the other, "I know you are fond of traditions;
but I trust we have now many good saints here in our Church, and,
for my part, I would rather have one living saint than half-a-
dozen dead ones." "Maybe so," rejoined the Bishop, "for I suppose
you are of the same mind with Solomon, who said that 'a living dog
is better than a dead lion.'"

Enough has been said in this paper to show the admirable spirit of
Seabury all through his Episcopate. "Forgetting those things which
were behind, he reached forth to those before"; and if assailed
for the part he took in the war of the Revolution, he let his
conscientious pursuit of what he believed to be right at the time
pass into history without apology or vindication. He aimed to
promote peace among his brethren, and was lenient in dealing with
their prejudices. One venerable presbyter of his diocese,
supported by his people, was reluctant to adopt the revised
Prayer-Book, and he wrote him a kind letter, and said in it: "The
question is not which book is the best in itself, but which will
best promote the peace and unity of the Church. Such was the
temper of the people to the southward, that unity could not be had
with the old book. Is not, then, the unity of the whole Church
through the States a price sufficient to justify the alterations
which have been made, supposing (and in this I believe you will
join with me) that there is no alteration made but what is
consistent with the analogy of the Christian faith? Let me,
therefore, _entreat you as a father_ to review this matter,
and I have no doubt but that you will join with your brethren, and
_walk by the same rule_ in your public ministrations. This
will rejoice their hearts, and mine also. May God be your director
in all things, and grant that we may meet together in His own
heavenly kingdom."

Signs of failing health began to appear, and symptoms of a
paralytic nature came upon him, without seriously interrupting his
duties. His sound and vigorous constitution, and his unimpaired
mental faculties, afforded encouragement to believe that his life
might be prolonged for years. This was in 1795. Late in the month
of February of the next year, "Mr. Jarvis of Middletown was
sitting before the fire," so says an eye-witness, "his wife near
him, engaged in some domestic employment, and his little son
playing about the room. A messenger entered with a letter, sealed
with black wax, and handed it to Mr. Jarvis in silence. He opened
it, and his hand shook like an aspen-leaf. His wife, in great
alarm, hastened to him, and his son crept between his knees and
looked up inquiringly into his face. He could not speak for some
moments. At last he said, slowly and convulsively: 'Bishop Seabury
is dead.'"

In the evening of Thursday, the 25th of February, he walked with
his daughter to the house of one of his wardens. He complained,
when there, of an extreme pain in his breast, and at the moment of
rising and retiring from the tea-table, fell in an apoplectic fit,
and expired in forty minutes after entering the house.

He was buried from the church on Sunday; and this circumstance,
and the impediments of travelling at that season of the year,
joined with the few facilities for conveying intelligence,
prevented the clergy of the diocese from gathering in mourning and
sorrow around his grave. A single clergyman attended his funeral
and preached a sermon.

Thus one who was a little more than eleven years a bishop, and who
has filled the American Church and your Scottish Church with the
memory of his worth, rises and stands before us in history to-day.
What would he have thought and said, if he could have cast his
vision forward a century, and comprehended the contrast between
the gathering in the upper room in Longacre and the vastly greater
gathering here now, to express devout thankfulness for an act
which has been blessed of God to the good of so many souls! From
the then poor see of Connecticut, to which he was going in faith
and hope, have come his third successor in that see and a company
of clerical brethren, to represent its present strength and zeal,
and at the same time to show that we keep ever fresh in our
remembrance the gift that we received, and are glad to join with
others in congratulating you most heartily on the prospect of yet
brighter days for your own Scottish Church.

Professor George Grub, LL.D., then read a paper on The Relations
of the American and Scottish Churches; after which Bishop Williams
and others spoke.

The exercises of the commemoration were concluded with a large and
enthusiastic meeting in the evening at the Music Hall.

After his return to Connecticut, the Bishop received from the
Clergy and Trustees of St. Andrew's Church, Aberdeen, a letter,
beautifully engrossed upon parchment and illuminated, in the
following words:

_The Clergy and Trustees of St. Andrew's Church, Aberdeen, to
the Right Reverend John Williams, D.D., Bishop of Connecticut.
Right Reverend Father in God:_

It would have given us unfeigned pleasure, as the representatives
of the congregation in which your great predecessor was
consecrated and in which the centenary commemoration of that happy
event was celebrated, to have expressed to you and your
accompanying delegates, on the occasion of your memorable visit in
October, the pride with which we cherish the links that bind us to
the Church of America. Sensible, however, of the incessant demands
made upon your time on every day of the festival, we postponed the
expression of our feelings until the approach of Christmas, when
we might add to the salutations of the season our congratulations
upon your safe arrival in your own diocese, a prosperous
termination of your visit to Scotland for which we both publicly
prayed and gave thanks to Almighty God.

Right Reverend Father, we beg you now to accept the assurance of
veneration and respect with which your presence inspired us, and
of gratitude for your fatherly counsel and encouragement to us and
our fellow-churchmen; and we further pray you to receive the
accompanying photographs of St. Andrew's, to remind you of a
church so closely associated with the history of your own See.

We beg to subscribe ourselves, Right Reverend Father,

Your faithful servants in Christ,

J. M. DANSON, M. A., Incumbent of St. Andrew's;

ROBERT MACKAY, M. A., Curate;

JAMES CHIVAS, Church-warden and Canonical Lay Representative;

JAMES THOMSON, Church-warden and Trustee;

R. B. HORNE, Trustee and Lay Representative;

H. T. PATERSON, Trustee;

ALEX'R WALKER, Trustee;

JAS. TURREFF, Trustee;

JAMES TAYLOR, Secretary.

_Advent_, 1884.

_SIT DOMINUS DEUS NOSTER NOBISCUM, SICUT FUIT CUM PATRIBUS
NOSTRIS._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Report Of Commemorative Services With
