and new lines of action. Innovators aged eighty are not too numerous.

Nor need I say more than one word about the other part of the ideal,
'hating covetousness.' The giver of peerages by the bushel died a
commoner. The man that had everything at his command made no money, nor
anything else, out of his long years of office, except the satisfaction
of having been permitted to render what he believed to be the highest
of service to the nation that he loved so well. Like our whilom
neighbour, the other great commoner, John Bright, he lived among his
own people; and like Samuel, of whom I have already spoken, he could
stretch out his old hands and say, 'They are clean.' One scarcely feels
as if, to such a life, a State funeral in Westminster Abbey was
congruous. One had rather have seen him laid among the humble villagers
who were his friends and companions, and in the quiet churchyard which
his steps had so often traversed. But at all events the ideal was
realised, and we all know what it was.

Might I say one word more? As this great figure passes out of men's
sight to nobler work, be sure, on widened horizons corresponding to his
tutored and exercised powers, does he leave no lessons behind for us?
He leaves one very plain, homely one, and that is, 'Work while it is
called to-day.' No opulence of endowment tempted this man to indolence,
and no poverty of endowment will excuse us for sloth. Work is the law
of our lives; and the more highly we are gifted, the more are we bound
to serve.

He leaves us another lesson. Follow convictions as they open before
you, and never think that you have done growing, or have reached your
final stage.

He leaves another lesson. Do not suppose that the Gospel of Jesus
Christ cannot satisfy the keenest intellect, nor dominate the strongest
will. It has come to be a mark of narrowness and fossilhood to be a
devout believer in Christ and His Cross. Some of you young men make an
easy reputation for cleverness and advanced thought by the short and
simple process of disbelieving what your mother taught you. Here is a
man, probably as great as you are, with as keen an intellect, and he
clung to the Cross of Christ, and had for his favourite hymn--

  'Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
   Let me hide myself in Thee.'

He leaves another lesson. If you desire to make your characters all
that it is in them to be made, you must, like him, go to Jesus Christ,
and get your teaching and your inspiration from that great Lord. We
cannot all be great men. Never mind. It is character that tells; we can
all be good men, and we can all be Christian men. And whether we build
cottages or palaces, if we build on one foundation, and only if we do,
they will stand.

Moses leaves another lesson, as he glides into the past. 'This man,
having served his generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was
gathered to his fathers, and saw corruption'; but He 'whom God hath
raised up saw no corruption.' The lamps are quenched, the sun shines.
Moses dies, 'The prophets, do they live for ever?' but when Moses and
Elias faded from the Mount of Transfiguration 'the apostles saw no man
any more, save Jesus only,' and the voice said, 'This is My beloved
Son; hear ye Him.'




THE DECALOGUE: I--MAN AND GOD


    'And God spake all these words, saying, 2. I am the Lord
    thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
    Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 3. Thou shalt have
    no other gods before me. 4. Thou shalt not make unto
    thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing
    that is in the heaven above, or that is in the earth
    beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: 5.
    Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them:
    for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
    iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third
    and fourth generation of them that hate me; 6. And
    shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and
    keep my commandments. 7. Thou shalt not take the name of
    the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him
    guiltless that taketh his name in vain. 8. Remember the
    sabbath-day, to keep it holy. 9. Six days shalt thou
    labour, and do all thy work: 10. But the seventh day is
    the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do
    any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
    man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor
    thy stranger that is within thy gates: 11. For in six
    days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
    that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
    the Lord blessed the sabbath-day, and hallowed it.'
    --EXODUS xx. 1-11.

An obscure tribe of Egyptian slaves plunges into the desert to hide
from pursuit, and emerges, after forty years, with a code gathered into
'ten words,' so brief, so complete, so intertwining morality and
religion, so free from local or national peculiarities, so close
fitting to fundamental duties, that it is to-day, after more than three
thousand years, authoritative in the most enlightened peoples. The
voice that spoke from Sinai reverberates in all lands. The Old World
had other lawgivers who professed to formulate their precepts by divine
inspiration: they are all fallen silent. But this voice, like the
trumpet on that day, waxes louder and louder as the years roll. Whose
voice was it? The only answer explaining the supreme purity of the
commandments, and their immortal freshness, is found in the first
sentence of this paragraph, 'God spake all these words.'

I. We have first the revelation, which precedes and lays the foundation
for the commandments; 'I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt.' God speaks to the nation as a whole,
establishing a special relation between Himself and them, which is
founded on His redeeming act, and is reciprocal, requiring that they
should be His people, as He is their God. The manifestation in act of
His power and of His love precedes the claim for reverence and
obedience. This is a universal truth. God gives before He asks us to
give. He is not a hard taskmaster, 'gathering where He has not strawn.'
Even in that system which is eminently 'the law,' the foundation is a
divine act of deliverance, and only when He has won the people for
Himself by redeeming them from bondage does He call on them for
obedience. His rule is built on benefits. He urges no mere right of the
mightier, nor cares for service which is not the glad answer of
gratitude. The flashing flames which ran as swift heralds before His
descending chariot wheels, the quaking mountain, the long-drawn blasts
of the trumpet, awed the gathered crowd. But the first articulate words
made a tenderer appeal, and sought to found His right to command on His
love, and their duty to obey on their gratitude. The great gospel
principle, that the Redeemer is the lawgiver, and the redeemed are
joyful subjects because their hearts are touched with love, underlies
the apparently sterner system of the Old Testament. God opens His heart
first, and then asks for men's.

This prelude certainly confines the Decalogue to the people of Israel.
Their deliverance is the ground on which the law is rested, therefore,
plainly, the obligation can be no wider than the benefit. But though we
are not bound to obey any of the Ten Commandments, because they were
given to Israel, they are all, with one exception, demonstrably, a
transcript of laws written on the heart of mankind; and this fact
carries with it a strong presumption that the law of the Sabbath, which
is the exception referred to, should be regarded as not an exception,
but as a statute of the primeval law, witnessed to by conscience,
republished in wondrous precision and completeness in these venerable
precepts. The Ten Commandments are binding on us; but they are not
binding as part, though the fundamental part, of the Jewish law.

Two general observations may be made. One is on the negative character
of the commandments as a whole. Law prohibits because men are sinful.
But prohibitions pre-suppose as their foundation positive commands. We
are forbidden to do something because we are inclined to do it, and
because we ought to do the opposite. Every 'thou shalt not' implies a
deeper 'thou shalt.' The cold negation really rests on the converse
affirmative command.

The second remark on the law as a whole is as to the relation which it
establishes between religion and morality, making the latter a part of
the former, but regarding it as secured only by the prior discharge of
the obligations of the former. Morality is the garb of religion;
religion is the animating principle of morality. The attempts to build
up a theory of ethics without reference to our relations to God, or to
secure the practice of righteousness without such reference, or to
substitute, with a late champion of unbelief, 'the service of man' for
the worship of God, are all condemned by the deeper and simpler wisdom
of this law. Christians should learn the lesson, which the most Jewish
of the New Testament writers had drawn from it, that, 'pure and
undefiled service' of God is the service of man, and should beware of
putting asunder what God has joined so closely.

II. The first commandment bears in its negative form marks of the
condition of the world when it was spoken, and of the strong temptation
to polytheism which the Israelites were to resist. Everywhere but in
that corner among the wild rocks of Sinai, men believed in 'gods many.'
Egypt swarmed with them; and, no doubt, the purity of Abraham's faith
had been sadly tarnished in his sons. We cannot understand the strange
fascination of polytheism. It is a disease of humanity in an earlier
stage than ours. But how strong it was and is, all history shows. All
these many gods were on amicable terms with one another, and ready to
welcome newcomers. But the monotheism, which was here laid at the very
foundation of Israel's national life, parted it by a deep gulf from all
the world, and determined its history.

The prohibition has little force for us; but the positive command which
underlies it is of eternal force. We should rather think of it as a
revelation and an invitation than as a mere command. For what is it but
the declaration that at the centre of things is throned, not a rabble
of godlings, nor a stony impersonal somewhat, nor a hypothetical
unknowable entity, nor a shadowy abstraction, but a living Person, who
can say 'Me,' and whom we can call on as 'Thou,' and be sure that He
hears? No accumulation of finite excellences, however fair, can satisfy
the imagination, which feels after one Being, the personal ideal of all
perfectness. The understanding needs one ultimate Cause on which it can
rest amid the dance of fleeting phenomena; the heart cannot pour out
its love to be shared among many. No string of goodly pearls will ever
give the merchantman assurance that his quest is complete. Only when
human nature finds all in One, and that One a living Person, the Lover
and Friend of all souls, does it fold its wings and rest as a bird
after long flight.

The first commandment enjoins, or rather blesses us by showing us that
we may cherish, supreme affection, worship, trust, self-surrender,
aspiration, towards one God. After all, our God is that which we think
most precious, for which we are ready to make the greatest sacrifices,
which draws our warmest love; which, lost, would leave us desolate;
which, possessed, makes us blessed. If we search our hearts with this
'candle of the Lord,' we shall find many an idol set up in their dark
corners, and be startled to discover how much we need to bring
ourselves to be judged and condemned by this commandment It is the
foundation of all human duty. Obedience to it is the condition of peace
and blessedness, light and leading for mind, heart, will, affections,
desires, hopes, fears, and all the world within, that longs for one
living Person even when it least knows the meaning of its longings and
the reason of its unrest.

III. The second commandment forbids all representations, whether of the
one God or of false deities. The golden calf, which was a symbol of
Jehovah, is condemned equally with the fair forms that haunted the
Greek Olympus, or the half-bestial shapes of Egyptian mythology. The
reasons for the prohibition may be considered as two,--the
impossibility of setting forth the glory of the Infinite Spirit in any
form, and the certainty that the attempt will sink the worshipper
deeper in the mire of sense. An image degrades God and damages men. By
it religion reverses its nature, and becomes another clog to keep the
soul among the things seen, and an ally of all fleshly inclinations. We
know how idolatry seemed to cast a spell over the Israelites from Egypt
to Babylon, and how their first relapse into it took place almost
before the voice which 'spake all these words' had ceased.

In its grosser form, we have no temptation to it. But there are other
ways of breaking the commandment than setting up an image. All sensuous
worship in which the treacherous aid of art is called in to elevate the
soul, comes perilously near to contradicting its spirit, if not its
letter. The attempt to make of the senses a ladder for the soul to
climb to God by, is a great deal more likely to end in the soul's going
down the ladder than up it. The history of public worship in the
Christian Church teaches that the less it has to do with such slippery
help the better. There is a strong current running in England, at all
events, in the direction of bringing in a more artistic, or, as it is
called, a 'less bare,' form of service. We need to remember that the
God who is a Spirit is worshipped 'in spirit,' and that outward forms
may easily choke, and outward aids hinder, that worship.

The especial difficulty of obedience to this commandment is marked by
the reason or sanction annexed. That opens a wide field, on which it
would be folly to venture here. There is a glimpse of God's character,
and a statement of a law of His working. He is a 'jealous' God, We need
not be afraid of the word. It means nothing but what is congruous with
the loftiest conception of a loving God. It means that He allows of no
rival in our hearts' affection, or in our submission for love's sake to
Him. A half trust in God is no trust. How can worship be shared, or
love be parted out, among a pantheon? Our poor hearts ask of one
another and get from one another, wherever a man and a woman truly
love, just what God asks,--'All in all, or not at all.' His jealousy is
but infinite love seeking to be known as such, and asking for a whole
heart.

The law of His providence sounds hard, but it is nothing more than
stating in plain words the course of the world's history, which cannot
be otherwise if there is to be any bond of human society at all. We
hear a great deal in modern language about solidarity (and sometimes it
is spelled with a final 'e,' to look more philosophical) and heredity.
The teaching of this commandment is simply a statement of the same
facts, with the addition that the Lawgiver is visible behind the law.
The consequences of conduct do not die with the doers. 'The evil that
men do, lives after them.' The generations are so knit together, and
the full results of deeds are often so slow-growing, that one
generation sows and another reaps. Who sowed the seed that fruited in
misery, and was gathered in a bitter harvest of horrors and crimes in
the French Revolution? Who planted the tree under which the citizens of
the United States sit? Did not the seedling go over in the _Mayflower_?
As long as the generations of men are more closely connected than those
of sheep or birds, this solemn word must be true. Let us see that we
sow no tares to poison our children when we are in our graves. The
saying had immediate application to the consequences of idolatry in the
history of Israel, and was a forecast of their future. But it is true
evermore and everywhere.

IV. The third commandment must be so understood as to bring it into
line with the two preceding, as of equal breadth and equally
fundamental. It cannot, therefore, be confined to the use of the name
of God in oaths, whether false or trivial. No doubt, perjury and
profane swearing are included in the sweep of the prohibition; but it
reaches far beyond them. The name of God is the declaration of His
being and character. We take His name 'in vain' when we speak of Him
unworthily. Many a glib and formal prayer, many a mechanical or
self-glorifying sermon, many an erudite controversy, comes under the
lash of this prohibition. Professions of devotion far more fervid than
real, confessions in which the conscience is not stricken, orthodox
teachings with no throb of life in them, unconscious hypocrisies of
worship, and much besides, are gibbeted here. The most vain of all
words are those which have become traditional stock in trade for
religious people, which once expressed deep convictions, and are now a
world too wide for the shrunk faith which wears them.

The positive side underlying the negative is the requirement that our
speech of God shall fit our thought of God, and our thought of Him
shall fit His Name; that our words shall mirror our affections, and our
affection be a true reflection of His beauty and sweetness; that
cleansed lips shall reverently utter the Name above every name, which,
after all speech, must remain unspoken; and that we shall feel it to be
not the least wonderful or merciful of His condescensions that He 'is
extolled with our tongues.'

V. The series of commandments referring to Israel's relations with God
is distinctly progressive from the first to the fourth, which deals
with the Sabbath. The fact that it appears here, side by side with
these absolutely universal and first principles of religion and
worship, clearly shows that the giver of the code regarded it as of
equal comprehensiveness. If we believe that the giver of the code was
God, we seem shut up to the conclusion that, though the Sabbath is a
positive institution, and in so far unlike the preceding commandments,
it is to be taken as not merely a temporary or Jewish ordinance. The
ground on which it is rested here points to the same conclusion. The
version of the Decalogue in Deuteronomy bases it on the Egyptian
deliverance, but this, on the divine rest after creation. As we have
already said, we do not regard the Decalogue as binding on us because
given to Israel; but we do regard it as containing laws universally
binding, which are written by God's finger, not on tables of stone, but
on 'the fleshly tables of the heart.' All the others are admittedly of
this nature. Is not the Sabbath law likewise? It is not, indeed,
inscribed on the conscience, but is the need for it not stamped on the
physical nature? The human organism requires the seventh-day rest,
whether men toil with hand or brain. Historically, it is not true that
the Sabbath was founded by this legislation. The traces of its
observance in Genesis are few and doubtful; but we know from the
inscriptions that the seventh, fourteenth, twenty-first, and
twenty-eighth days of the moon were set apart by the Assyrians, and
scholars can supply other instances. The 'Remember' of this commandment
can scarcely be urged as establishing this, for it may quite as
naturally be explained to mean 'Remember, as each successive seventh
day comes round, to consecrate it.' But apart from that, the law
written on body, mind, and soul says plainly to all men, 'Rest on the
seventh day.' Body and mind need repose; the soul needs quiet communion
with God. No vigorous physical, intellectual, or religious life will
long be kept up, if that need be disregarded. The week was meant to be
given to work, which is blessed and right if done after the pattern of
God's. The Sabbath was meant to lift to a share in His rest, to bring
eternity into time, to renew wasted strength 'by a wise passiveness,'
and to draw hearts dissipated by contact with fleeting tasks back into
the stillness where they can find themselves in fellowship with God.

We have not the Jewish Sabbath, nor is it binding on us. But as men we
ought to rest, and resting, to worship, on one day in the week. The
unwritten law of Christianity, moulding all outward forms by its own
free spirit, gradually, and without premeditation, slid from the
seventh to the first day, as it had clear right to do. It was the day
of Christ's resurrection, probably of His ascension, and of Pentecost.
It is 'the Lord's Day.' In observing it, we unite both the reasons for
the Sabbath given in Exodus and Deuteronomy,--the completion of a
higher creation in the resurrection rest of the Son of God, and the
deliverance from a sorer bondage by a better Moses. The Christian
Sunday and its religious observance are indispensable to the religious
life of individuals and nations. The day of rest is indispensable to
their well-being. Our hard-working millions will bitterly rue their
folly, if they are tempted to cast it away on the plea of obtaining
opportunities for intellectual culture and enjoyment. It is

  'The couch of time, care's balm and bay,'

and we shall be wise if we hold fast by it; not because the Jews were
bid to hallow the seventh day, but because we need it for repose, and
we need it for religion.




THE DECALOGUE: II.--MAN AND MAN


    'Honour thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be
    long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.
    13. Thou shalt not kill. 14. Thou shalt not commit
    adultery. 15. Thou shalt not steal. 16. Thou shalt not
    bear false witness against thy neighbour. 17. Thou
    shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not
    covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor
    his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
    that is thy neighbour's. 18. And all the people saw the
    thunderings and the lightnings, and the noise of the
    trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and, when the people
    saw it, they removed, and stood afar off. 19. And they
    said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear:
    but let not God speak with us, lest we die. 20. And Moses
    said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove
    you, and that His fear may be before your faces, that ye
    sin not. 21. And the people stood afar off: and Moses
    drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.'
    --EXODUS xx. 12-21.

I. The broad distinction between the two halves of the Decalogue is
that the former deals with man's relations to God, and the latter with
His relations to men. This double division is recognised in the New
Testament summary of 'all the law,' as found in two commandments, and
is probably implied in the two tables on which it was inscribed.
Commentators have been much exercised, however, about how to divide the
commandments between these two parts. The fifth, which is the first in
this division, belongs in substance to the second half, but its form
connects it with the first table. It is like the preceding ones in
having a reason appended, and in naming 'the Lord thy God'; while the
following are all bare, curt prohibitions. The fact seems to be that it
is a transition commandment, and meant to cast special sacredness round
the parental relationship, by paralleling it, in some sense, with that
to God, of which it is a reflection. Other duties to other men stand on
a different level from duties to parents. 'Honour,' which is to be
theirs, is not remote from the reverence due to God. They are, as it
were, His shadows to the child. The fatherhood of God is dimly revealed
in that parting off the commandment from the second table, and
assimilating it in form to the laws of the first.

II. The connection of the two halves of the Decalogue teaches some
important truth. Josephus said a wise thing when he remarked that,
'whereas other legislators had made religion a department of virtue,
Moses made virtue a department of religion.' No theory of morals is
built upon the deepest foundation which does not recognise the final
ground of the obligation of duty in the voice of God. Duty is
_debitum_-debt. Who is the creditor? Myself? An impersonal law?
Society? No, God. The practice of morality depends, like its theory, on
religion. In the long-run, and on the wide scale, nations and periods
which have lost the latter will not long keep the former in any vigour
or purity. He who begins by erasing the first commandment will sooner
or later make a clean sweep of all the ten. And, on the other hand,
wherever there is true worship of the one God, there all fair charities
between man and man will flourish and fruit. The two tables are one
law. Duties to God come first, and those to man, who is made in the
image of God, flow from these.

III. The order of these human duties is significant. We have, next
after the law of parental reverence, three commandments, which, in a
descending series of importance, forbid crimes against life, marriage,
and property. Then the law passes from deeds to the more subtle, and,
as men think, less grave, offences of the tongue. Next it crosses the
boundary which divides human from divine law, and crimes from sins, to
take cognisance of unspoken and unacted desires. So the order of
progress in the first table is exactly the reverse of that in the
second. There we begin with inward devotion, and travel outwards by
deed and word to the sabbatical institution; here we begin with overt
acts, and travel inwards, through words, to the hidden desire. The end
touches the beginning. For that which we 'covet' is our God; and the
first commandment is only obeyed when our hearts hunger after Him, and
not after earth. The sequence here corresponds to the order of progress
in our knowledge and practice of our human duties. The first thing that
the rudest state of society has to do is to establish some kind of
security for life and property and woman's honour. The worst men know
that much as their duty, however foul may be their lips, and hot their
passions. Then the recognition of the sanctity of the great gift of
speech, and the supreme obligations of veracity, grow upon men as they
get above the earlier stage. Most children pass through a phase when
they tell lies as pastime, and most rude societies and half-moralised
men have a similar epoch. Last of all, when actions have been bridled
and the tongue taught the law of truth, comes the full recognition that
the work is not done till the silent longing of a hungry heart is
stilled, and that unselfish love of our neighbour is only perfect when
we can rejoice in his good and wish none of it for ourselves. The
second table is a chart of moral progress.

IV. The scope of these laws has often been violently stretched so as to
include all human duty; but without tugging at them so as to make them
cover everything, we may note briefly how far they extend. We are
scarcely warranted in taking any of them but the last, as going deeper
than overt acts, for, though our Lord has taught in the Sermon on the
Mount that hatred is murder, and impure desire adultery, that is His
deepening of the commandment. But it is quite fair to bring out the
positive precept which, in each case, underlies the stern, short
prohibition.

The fifth commandment shares with the fourth the distinction of being a
positive command. It enjoins 'honour,' not 'love,' partly because, in
olden times, the father was a prince in his house in a sense that has
long since ceased to be true, partly because there was less need to
enjoin the affection which is in some degree instinctive, than the
submission and respect which the children are tempted to withhold,
partly in order to suggest the analogy with reverence to God. A strange
change has passed over the relations of parents and children, even
within a generation. There is more, perhaps, of frank familiar
intercourse, which, no doubt, is an improvement on the old style. But
there is a great deal less of what the commandment enjoins. City life,
education, the general impairing of the idea of authority, which we see
everywhere, have told upon many families; and many a father who, by
indulgence or by too much engrossment in business, lets the children
twitch the reins out of his hands, might lament, as his grown-up
children spurn control, 'If then I be a father, where is mine honour?'
There is no one of the commandments which it is more needful to preach
in England than this.

The promise attached to it has another side of threatening. It is a
plain fact that when the paternal relation is corrupted, a powerful
solvent has been introduced which rapidly tends to disintegrate
society. The most ancient empire in the world today, China, has, amid
many vices and follies, been preserved mainly by the profound reverence
to ancestors which is largely its real working religion. The most
vigorous power in the old world, Rome, owed its iron might not only to
its early simplicity of life and its iron tenacity, but to the strength
of paternal authority and the willingness of filial obedience. No more
serious damage can be inflicted on society or on individuals than the
weakening of the honour paid to fathers and mothers.

'Thou shalt not kill' forbids not only the act of murder, but all that
endangers life. It enjoins all care, diligence, and effort to preserve
it. A man who looks on while another drowns, or who sends a ship out
half manned and overloaded, breaks it as really as a red-handed
murderer. But the commandment was not intended to touch the questions
of capital punishment or of war. These were allowed under the Jewish
code, and cannot therefore be supposed to be prohibited here. How far
either is consistent with the deepest meaning of the law, as expanded
and reconsecrated in Christianity, is another question. Their defenders
have to execute some startling feats of gymnastics to harmonise either
with the New Testament.

  'Curus kind o' Christian dooty,
   This 'ere cuttin' folks's throats.'

The ground of the commandment is not given, seeing that conscience is
expected to admit its force as soon as stated. But its place at the
head of the second table brings it into connection with the first
commandment, and suggests that man's life is sacred because he is the
image of God. As Christians, we are bound to interpret it on the lines
which Christ has laid down; according to which, hatred is murder, and
love is the fulfilling of this as of all other laws. So Luther's
comprehensive summing up of the duties enjoined may be accepted:
'Patience, gentleness, kindliness, peaceableness, pity, and, of all
things, a sweet, friendly heart, without any hate, anger, bitterness,
toward any, even enemies.'

In like manner, the seventh commandment sanctifies wedded life, and is
the first step in that true reverence of woman which marked the Jewish
people through all their history, and was in such contrast to her
position in all other ancient societies. Purity in all the relations of
the sexes, the control of passion, the reverence for marriage, are
subjects difficult to speak of in public. But modern society sorely
needs some plain speaking on these subjects--abundance of bread and
idleness, facilities for divorce, the filth which newspapers lay down
on every breakfast-table, the insidious sensuality of much fiction and
art, the licence of the stage. The opportunities for secret profligacy
in great cities conspire to loosen the bonds of morality. I would
venture to ask public teachers seriously to consider their duty in this
matter, and to seek for opportunities wisely to warn budding youth of
the pitfalls in its path.

What is 'stealing'? As Luther says, 'It is the smallest part of the
thieves that are hung. If we are to hang them all, where shall we get
rope enough? We must make all our belts and straps into halters.'

Theft is the taking or keeping what is not 'mine.' But what do we mean
by 'mine'? Communists tell us that 'property is theft.' But that is the
exaggeration of the scriptural teaching that all property is trust
property, that possessions are 'mine' on conditions and for purposes,
that I cannot 'do what I will with mine own,' but am a steward, set to
dispense it to those who want. The Christian doctrine of stewardship
extends this commandment over much ground which we seldom think of as
affected by it. All sharp practice in business, the shopkeeper's false
weights and the merchant's equivalents of these, adulterations,
pirating trademarks, imitating a rival's goods, infringing patents, and
the like, however disguised by fine names, are neither more nor less
than stealing. Many a prosperous gentleman says solemnly every Sunday
of his life, 'Incline our hearts to keep this law,' who would have to
live in a much more modest fashion if his prayer were, by any
unfortunate accident, answered.

False witness is not only given in court. The sins of the tongue
against the law of love are more subtle and common than those of act.
'Come, let us enjoy ourselves, and abuse our neighbours,' is the real
meaning of many an invitation to social intercourse. If some fairy
could treat our newspapers as the Russian censors do, and erase all the
lies about the opposite side, which they report and coin, how many
blank columns there would be! If all the words of ill-natured calumny,
of uncharitable construction of their friends which people speak, could
be made inaudible, what stretches of silence would open out in much
animated talk! 'A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour
is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.'

But deed and word will not be right unless the heart be right; and the
heart will be wrong unless it be purged of the bitter black drop of
covetousness. The desire to make my neighbour's goods mine is the
parent of all breaches of neighbourly duty, even as its converse 'love'
is the fulfilling of it all; for such desire implies that I am ruled by
selfishness, and that I would willingly deprive another of goods, for
my own gratification. Such a temper, like a wild boar among vineyards,
will trample down all the rich clusters in order to slake its own
thirst. Find a man who yields to his desires after his neighbour's
goods, and you find a man who will break all commandments like a hornet
in a spider's web. Be he a Napoleon, and glorified as a conqueror and
hero, or be he some poor thief in a jail, he has let his covetousness
get the upper hand, and so all wrong-doing is possible. Nor is it only
the second table which covetousness dashes to fragments. It serves the
first in the same fashion; for, as St. Paul puts it, the covetous man
'is an idolater,' and is as incapable of loving God as of loving his
neighbour. This final commandment, overleaping the boundary between
conduct and character, and carrying the light of duty into the dark
places of the heart, where deeds are fashioned, sets the whole flock of
bats and twilight-loving creatures in agitation. It does what is the
main work of the law, in compelling us to search our hearts, and in
convincing of sin. It is the converse of the thought that all the law
is contained in love; for it closes the list of sins with one which
begets them all, and points us away from actions and words which are
its children to selfish desire as in itself the transgression of all
the law, whether it be that which prescribes our relations to God or
that which enjoins our duties to man,




THE FEAST OF INGATHERING IN THE END OF THE YEAR


    'And the feast of harvest, the first-fruits of thy
    labours, which them hast sown In thy field: and the
    feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year,
    when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.'
    --EXODUS xxiii. 16.

The Israelites seem to have had a double beginning of the year--one in
spring, one at the close of harvest; or it may only be that here the
year is regarded from the natural point of view--a farmer's year. This
feast was at the gathering in of the fruits, which was the natural
close of the agricultural year.

This festival of ingathering was the Feast of Tabernacles. It is
remarkable that the three great sacred festivals, the Passover,
Pentecost, Tabernacles, had all a reference to agriculture, though two
of them also received a reference to national deliverances. This fact
may show that they were in existence before Moses, and that he simply
imposed a new meaning on them.

Be that as it may, I take these words now simply as a starting-point
for some thoughts naturally suggested by the period at which we stand.
We have come to the end of another year--looked for so long, passed so
swiftly, and now seeming to have so utterly departed!

I desire to recall to you and to myself the solemn real sense in which
for us too the end of the year is a 'time of ingathering' and
'harvest.' We too begin the new year with the accumulated consequences
of these past days in our 'barns and garners.'

Now, in dealing with this thought, let me put it in two or three forms.

I. Think of the past as still living in and shaping the present.

It is a mere illusion of sense that the past is gone utterly. 'Thou
carriest them away, as with a flood.' We speak of it as irrevocable,
unalterable, that dreadful past. It is solemnly true that 'ye shall no
more return that way.'

But there is a deeper truth in the converse thought that the apparently
transient is permanent, that nothing human ever dies, that the past is
present. 'The grass withereth, the flower fadeth,'--yes, but only its
petals drop, and as they fall, the fruit which they sheltered swells
and matures.

The thought of the present as the harvest from the past brings out in
vivid and picturesque form two solemn truths.

The first is the passing away of all the external, but of it only. It
has all gone where the winter's cold, the spring rains, the summer's
heats have gone. But just as these live in the fruitful results that
have accrued from them, just as the glowing sunshine of the departed
ardent summer is in the yellow, bending wheat-ear or glows in the
cluster, so, in a very solemn sense, 'that which hath been is now' in
regard to every life. The great law of continuity makes the present the
inheritor of the past. That law operates in national life, in which
national characteristics are largely precipitates, so to speak, from
national history. But it works even more energetically, and with yet
graver consequences, in our individual lives. 'The child is father of
the man.' What we are depends largely on what we have been, and what we
have been powerfully acts in determining what we shall be. Life is a
mystic chain, not a heap of unconnected links.

And there is another very solemn way in which the past lives on in each
of us. For not only is our present self the direct descendant of our
past selves, but that past still subsists in that we are responsible
for it, and shall one day have to answer for it. The writer of
Ecclesiastes followed the statement just now quoted as to the survival
of the past, with another, which is impressive in its very vagueness:
'God seeketh again that which is passed away.'

So the undying past lives in its results in ourselves, and in our being
answerable for it to God.

This metaphor is insufficient in one respect. There is not one epoch
for sowing and another for reaping, but the two processes are
simultaneous, and every moment is at once a harvest and a seed-time.

This fact masks the reality of the reaping here, but it points on to
the great harvest when God shall say, 'Gather the wheat into My barns!'

II. Notice some specific forms of this reaping and ingathering.

(1) Memory.

It is quite possible that in the future it may embrace all the life.

'Chambers of imagery.'

(2) Habits and character. Like the deposit of a flood. 'Habitus' means
clothing, and cloth is woven from single threads.

(3) Outward consequences, position, reputation, etc.

III. Make a personal reference to ourselves.

What sort of harvest are we carrying over from this year? Lay this to
heart as certain, that we enter on no new year--or new
day--empty-handed, but always 'bearing our sheaves with us.' 'Be not
deceived! God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he
also reap.'

But remember, that while this law remains, there is also the law of
forgiveness, 'Go in peace!' and there may be a new beginning, 'Sin no
more!'




'THE LOVE OF THINE ESPOUSALS'


    'And He said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou,
    and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders
    of Israel; and worship ye afar off. 2. And Moses alone
    shall come near the Lord; but they shall not come nigh,
    neither shall the people go up with him. 3. And Moses
    came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and
    all the judgments: and all the people answered with one
    voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath said
    will we do. 4. And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord,
    and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar
    under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the
    twelve tribes of Israel. 5. And he sent young men of the
    children of Israel, which offered burnt-offerings, and
    sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen unto the Lord. 6. And
    Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and
    half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 7. And he
    took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience
    of the people: and they said, All that the Lord hath said
    will we do, and be obedient. 8. And Moses took the blood,
    and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the
    blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you
    concerning all these words. 9. Then went up Moses and
    Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
    Israel; 10. And they saw the God of Israel: and there
    was under His feet as it were a pared work of a sapphire-stone,
    and as it were the body of heaven in His clearness.
    11. And upon the nobles of the children of Israel He laid
    not His hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.
    12. And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to Me into the
    mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of
    stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written;
    that thou mayest teach them,'--EXODUS xxiv. 1-12.

An effort is needed to feel what a tremendous and unique fact is
narrated in these words. Next to the incarnation, it is the most
wonderful and far-reaching moment in history. It is the birthday of a
nation, which is God's son. It is the foundation stone of all
subsequent revelation. Its issues oppress that ancient people to-day,
and its promises are not yet exhausted. It is history, not legend, nor
the product of later national vanity. Whatever may come of analysing
'sources' and of discovering 'redactors,' Israel held a relation to God
all its own; and that relation was constituted thus.
