long arms, having thus pledged themselves to virtuous promises
approached king Dhritarashtra.


SECTION LXXVII

"Yudhishthira said,--'I bid farewell unto all the Bharatas, unto my old
grand-sire (Bhishma), king Somadatta, the great king Vahlika, Drona,
Kripa, all the other kings, Aswathaman, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, all the
sons of Dhritarashtra, Yayutsu, Sanjaya, and all the courtiers, I bid
fare well, all of ye and returning again I shall see you.""

Vaisampayana continued,--"Overcome with shame none of those that were
present there, could tell Yudhishthira anything. Within their hearts,
however, they prayed for the welfare of that intelligent prince.

"Vidura then said,--'The reverend Pritha is a princess by birth. It
behoveth her not to go into the woods. Delicate and old and ever known
to happiness the blessed one will live, respected by me, in my abode.
Known this, ye sons of Pandu. And let safety be always yours.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"The Pandavas thereupon said,--'O sinless one,
let it be as thou sayest. Thou art our uncle, and, therefore like as
our father. We also are all obedient to thee. Thou art, O learned one,
our most respected superior. We should always obey what thou choosest
to command. And, O high-souled one, order thou whatever else there is
that remaineth to be done.'

"Vidura replied,--'O Yudhishthira, O bull of the Bharata race, know
this to be my opinion, that one that is vanquished by sinful means need
not be pained by such defeat. Thou knowest every rule of morality;
Dhananjaya is ever victorious in battle; Bhimasena is the slayer of
foes; Nakula is the gatherer of wealth; Sahadeva hath administrative
talents, Dhaumya is the foremost of all conversant with the vedas; and
the well-behaved Draupadi is conversant with virtue and economy. Ye are
attached to one another and feel delight at one another's sight and
enemies can not separate you from one another, and ye are contented.
Therefore, who is there that will not envy ye? O Bharata, this patient
abstraction from the possession of the world will be of great benefit
to thee. No foe, even if he were equal to sakra himself, will be able
to stand it. Formerly thou wert instructed on the mountains of Himavat
by Meru Savarni; in the town of Varanavata by Krishna Dwaipayana; on
the cliff of Bhrigu by Rama; and on the banks of the Dhrishadwati by
Sambhu himself. Thou hast also listened to the instruction of the great
Rishi Asita on the hills of Anjana; and thou becamest a disciple of
Bhrigu on the banks of the Kalmashi. Narada and this thy priest Dhaumya
will now become thy instructors. In the matter of the next world,
abandon not these excellent lessons thou hast obtained from the Rishis.
O son of Pandu, thou surpassest in intelligence even Pururavas, the son
of Ila; in strength, all other monarchs; and in virtue, even the
Rishis. Therefore, resolve thou earnestly to win victory, which
belongeth to Indra; to control thy wrath, which belongeth to Yama; to
give in charity, which belongeth to Kuvera; and to control all
passions, which belongeth to Varuna. And, O Bharata, obtain thou the
power of gladdening from the moon, the power of sustaining all from
water; forbearance from the earth; energy from the entire solar disc;
strength from the winds, and affluence from the other elements. Welfare
and immunity from ailment be thine; I hope to see thee return. And, O
Yudhishthira, act properly and duly in all seasons,--in those of
distress--in those of difficulty,--indeed, in respect of everything, O
son of Kunti, with our leave go hence. O Bharata, blessing be thine. No
one can say that ye have done anything sinful before. We hope to see
thee, therefore, return in safety and crowned with success.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Thus addressed by Vidura, Yudhishthira the
son of Pandu, of prowess incapable of being baffled, saying, 'So be
it,' bowing low unto Bhishma and Drona, went away."


SECTION LXXVIII

Vaisampayana said,--"Then when Draupadi was about to set out she went
unto the illustrious Pritha and solicited her leave. And she also asked
leave of the other ladies of the household who had all been plunged
into grief. And saluting and embracing every one of them as each
deserved, she desired to go away. Then there arose within the inner
apartments of the Pandavas a loud wail of woe. And Kunti, terribly
afflicted upon beholding Draupadi on the eve of her journey, uttered
these words in a voice choked with grief,--

"'O child, grieve not that this great calamity hath overtaken thee.
Thou art well conversant with the duties of the female sex, and thy
behaviour and conduct also are as they should be. It behoveth me not, O
thou of sweet smiles, to instruct thee as to thy duties towards thy
lords. Thou art chaste and accomplished, and thy qualities have adorned
the race of thy birth as also the race into which thou hast been
admitted by marriage. Fortunate are the Kauravas that they have not
been burnt by thy wrath. O child, safely go thou blest by my prayers.
Good women never suffer their hearts to the unstung at what is
inevitable. Protected by virtue that is superior to everything, soon
shalt thou obtain good fortune. While living in the woods, keep thy eye
on my child Sahadeva. See that his heart sinketh not under this great
calamity.'

"Saying 'So be it!' the princess Draupadi bathed in tears, and clad in
one piece of cloth, stained with blood, and with hair dishevelled left
her mother-in-law. And as she went away weeping and wailing Pritha
herself in grief followed her. She had not gone far when she saw her
sons shorn of their ornaments and robes, their bodies clad in
deerskins, and their heads down with shame. And she beheld them
surrounded by rejoicing foes and pitied by friends. Endued with excess
of parental affection, Kunti approached her sons in that state, and
embracing them all, and in accents choked by woe, She said these
words,--

"'Ye are virtuous and good-mannered, and adorned with all excellent
qualities and respectful behaviour. Ye are all high-minded, and engaged
in the service of your superiors. And ye are also devoted to the gods
and the performance of sacrifices. Why, then, hath this calamity
overtaken you. Whence is this reverse of fortune? I do not see by whose
wickedness this sin hath overtaken you. Alas I have brought you forth.
All this must be due to my ill fortune. It is for this that ye have
been overtaken by this calamity, though ye all are endued with
excellent virtues. In energy and prowess and strength and firmness and
might, ye are not wanting. How shall ye now, losing your wealth and
possessions, live poor in the pathless woods? If I had known before
that ye were destined to live in the woods, I would not have on Pandu's
death come from the mountains of Satasringa to Hastinapore. Fortunate
was your father, as I now regard, for he truly reaped the fruit of his
asceticism, and he was gifted with foresight, as he entertained the
wish of ascending heaven, without having to feel any pain on account of
his sons. Fortunate also was the virtuous Madri, as I regard her today,
who had, it seems, a fore-knowledge of what would happen and who on
that account, obtained the high path of emancipation and every blessing
therewith. Ah, Madri looked upon me as her stay, and her mind and her
affections were ever fixed on me. Oh, fie on my desire of life, owing
to which suffer all this woe. Ye children, ye are all excellent and
dear unto me. I have obtained you after much suffering. I cannot leave
you. Even I will go with you. Alas, O Krishna, (Draupadi), why dost
thou leave me so? Everything endued with life is sure to perish. Hath
Dhata (Brahma) himself forgotten to ordain my death? Perhaps, it is so,
and, therefore, life doth not quit me. O Krishna, O thou who dwellest
in Dwaraka, O younger brother of Sankarshana, where art thou? Why dost
thou not deliver me and these best of men also from such woe? They say
that thou who art without beginning and without end deliverest those
that think of thee. Why doth this saying become untrue. These my sons
are ever attached to virtue and nobility and good fame and prowess.
They deserve not to suffer affliction. Oh, show them mercy. Alas, when
there are such elders amongst our race as Bhishma and Drona and Kripa,
all conversant with morality and the science of worldly concerns, how
could such calamity at all come? O Pandu, O king, where art thou? Why
sufferest thou quietly thy good children to be thus sent into exile,
defeated at dice? O Sahadeva, desist from going. Thou art my dearest
child, dearer, O son of Madri, than my body itself. Forsake me not. It
behoveth thee to have some kindness for me. Bound by the ties of
virtue, let these thy brothers go. But then, earn thou that virtue
which springeth from waiting upon me.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"The Pandavas then consoled their weeping
mother and with hearts plunged in grief set out for the woods. And
Vidura himself also much afflicted, consoling the distressed Kunti with
reasons, and led her slowly to his house. And the ladies of
Dhritarashtra's house, hearing everything as it happened, viz., the
exile (of the Pandavas) and the dragging of Krishna into the assembly
where the princes had gambled, loudly wept censuring the Kauravas. And
the ladies of the royal household also sat silent for a long time,
covering their lotus-like faces with their fair hands. And king
Dhritarashtra also thinking of the dangers that threatened his sons,
became a prey to anxiety and could not enjoy peace of mind. And
anxiously meditating on everything, and with mind deprived of its
equanimity through grief, he sent a messenger unto Vidura, saying, 'Let
Kshatta come to me without a moment's delay.'

"At this summons, Vidura quickly came to Dhritarashtra's palace. And as
soon as he came, the monarch asked him with great anxiety how the
Pandavas had left Hastinapore."


SECTION LXXIX

Vaisampayana said,--"As soon as Vidura endued with great foresight came
unto him king Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, timidly asked his
brother,--'How doth Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, proceed along? And
how Arjuna? And how the twin sons of Madri? And how, O Kshatta, doth
Dhaumya proceed along? And how the illustrious Draupadi? I desire to
hear everything, O Kshatta; describe to me all their acts.'

"Vidura replied,--'Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, hath gone away
covering his face with his cloth. And Bhima, O king, hath gone away
looking at his own mighty arms. And Jishnu (Arjuna) hath gone away,
following the king spreading sand-grains around. And Sahadeva, the son
of Madri, hath gone away besmearing his face, and Nakula, the
handsomest of men, O king, hath gone away, staining himself with dust
and his heart in great affliction. And the large-eyed and beautiful
Krishna hath gone away, covering her face with her dishevelled hair
following in the wake of the king, weeping and in tears. And O monarch,
Dhaumya goeth along the road, with kusa grass in hand, and uttering the
aweful mantras of Sama Veda that relate to Yama.'

"Dhritarashtra asked,--'Tell me, O Vidura, why is it that the Pandavas
are leaving Hastinapore in such varied guise.'

"Vidura replied,--'Though persecuted by thy sons and robbed of his
kingdom and wealth the mind of the wise king Yudhishthira the just hath
not yet deviated from the path of virtue. King Yudhishthira is always
kind, O Bharata, to thy children. Though deprived (of his kingdom and
possessions) by foul means, filled with wrath as he is, he doth not
open eyes. "I should not burn the people by looking at them with angry
eyes,"--thinking so, the royal son of Pandu goeth covering his face.
Listen to me as I tell thee, O bull of the Bharata race, why Bhima
goeth so. "There is none equal to me in strength of arms," thinking so
Bhima goeth repeatedly stretching forth his mighty arms. And, O king,
proud of the strength of his arms, Vrikodara goeth, exhibiting them and
desiring to do unto his enemies deeds worthy of those arms. And Arjuna
the son of Kunti, capable of using both his arms (in wielding the
Gandiva) followeth the footsteps of Yudhishthira, scattering
sand-grains emblematical of the arrows he would shower in battle. O
Bharata, he indicateth that as the sand-grains are scattered by him
with ease, so will he rain arrows with perfect ease on the foe (in time
of battle). And Sahadeva goeth besmearing his face, thinking "None may
recognise me in this day of trouble." And, O exalted one, Nakula goeth
staining himself with dust thinking, "Lest otherwise I steal the hearts
of the ladies that may look at me." And Draupadi goeth, attired in one
piece of stained cloth, her hair dishevelled, and weeping,
signifying--"The wives of those for whom I have been reduced to such a
plight, shall on the fourteenth year hence be deprived of husbands,
sons and relatives and dear ones and smeared all over with blood, with
hair dishevelled and all in their feminine seasons enter Hastinapore
having offered oblations of water (unto the manes of those they will
have lost)." And O Bharata, the learned Dhaumya with passions under
full control, holding the kusa grass in his hand and pointing the same
towards the south-west, walketh before, singing the mantras of the Sama
Veda that relate to Yama. And, O monarch, that learned Brahamana goeth,
also signifying, "When the Bharatas shall be slain in battle, the
priests of the Kurus will thus sing the Soma mantras (for the benefit
of the deceased)." And the citizens, afflicted with great grief, are
repeatedly crying out, "Alas, alas, behold our masters are going away!
O fie on the Kuru elders that have acted like foolish children in thus
banishing heirs of Pandu from covetousness alone. Alas, separated from
the son of Pandu we all shall become masterless. What love can we bear
to the wicked and avaricious Kurus?" Thus O king, have the sons of
Kunti, endued with great energy of mind, gone away,--indicating, by
manner and signs, the resolutions that are in their hearts. And as
those foremost of men had gone away from Hastinapore, flashes of
lightning appeared in the sky though without clouds and the earth
itself began to tremble. And Rahu came to devour the Sun, although it
was not the day of conjunction. And meteors began to fall, keeping the
city to their right. And jackals and vultures and ravens and other
carnivorous beasts and birds began to shriek and cry aloud from the
temples of the gods and the tops of sacred trees and walls and
house-tops. And these extraordinary calamitous portents, O king, were
seen and heard, indicating the destruction of the Bharatas as the
consequence of thy evil counsels.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"And, O monarch, while king Dhritarashtra and
the wise Vidura were thus talking with each other, there appeared in
that assembly of the Kauravas and before the eyes of all, the best of
the celestial Rishis. And appearing before them all, he uttered these
terrible words, On the fourteenth year hence, the Kauravas, in
consequence of Duryodhana's fault, will all be destroyed by the might
of Bhima and Arjuna. And having said this, that best of celestial
Rishis, adorned with surpassing Vedic grace, passing through the skies,
disappeared from the scene. Then Duryodhana and Karna and Sakuni, the
son of Suvala regarding Drona as their sole refuge, offered the kingdom
to him. Drona then, addressing the envious and wrathful Duryodhana and
Dussasana and Karna and all the Bharata, said, 'The Brahamanas have
said that the Pandavas being of celestial origin are incapable of being
slain. The sons of Dhritarashtra, however, having, with all the kings,
heartily and with reverence sought my protection, I shall look after
them to the best of my power. Destiny is supreme, I cannot abandon
them. The sons of Pandu, defeated at dice, are going into exile in
pursuance of their promise. They will live in the woods for twelve
years. Practising the Brahmacharyya mode of life for this period, they
will return in anger and to our great grief take the amplest vengeance
on their foes. I had formerly deprived Drupada of his kingdom in a
friendly dispute. Robbed of his kingdom by me, O Bharata, the king
performed a sacrifice for obtaining a son (that should slay me). Aided
by the ascetic power of Yaja and Upayaja, Drupada obtained from the
(sacrificial) fire a son named Dhrishtadyumna and a daughter, viz., the
faultless Krishna, both risen from the sacrificial platform. That
Dhrishtadyumna is the brother-in-law of the sons of Pandu by marriage,
and dear unto them. It is for him, therefore that I have much fear. Of
celestial origin and resplendent as the fire, he was born with bow,
arrows, and encased in mail. I am a being that is mortal. Therefore it
is for him that I have great fear. That slayer of all foes, the son of
Parshatta, hath taken the side of the Pandavas. I shall have to lose my
life, if he and I ever encounter each other in battle. What grief can
be greater to me in this world than this, ye Kauravas that
Dhrishtadyumna is the destined slayer of Drona--this belief is general.
That he hath been born for slaying me hath been heard by me and is
widely known also in the world. For thy sake, O Duryodhana, that
terrible season of destruction is almost come. Do without loss of time,
what may be beneficial unto thee. Think not that everything hath been
accomplished by sending the Pandavas into exile. This thy happiness
will last for but a moment, even as in winter the shadow of the top of
the palm tree resteth (for a short time) at its base. Perform various
kinds of sacrifices, and enjoy, and give O Bharata, everything thou
likest. On the fourteenth year hence, a great calamity will overwhelm
thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Drona, Dhritarashtra
said,--'O Kshatta, the preceptor hath uttered what is true. Go thou and
bring back the Pandavas. If they do not come back, let them go treated
with respect and affection. Let those my sons go with weapons, and
cars, and infantry, and enjoying every other good thing.'"


SECTION LXXX

Vaisampayana said,--"defeated at dice, after the Pandavas had gone to
the woods, Dhritarashtra, O king, was overcome with anxiety. And while
he was seated restless with anxiety and sighing in grief, Sanjaya
approaching him said, 'O lord of the earth having now obtained the
whole earth with all its wealth and sent away the sons of Pandu into
exile, why is it, O king, that thou grievest so?'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'What have they not to grieve for who will have
to encounter in battle those bulls among warriors--the sons of
Pandu--fighting on great cars and aided by allies?'

"Sanjaya said,--'O king, all this great hostility is inevitable on
account of thy mistaken action, and this will assuredly bring about the
wholesale destruction of the whole world. Forbidden by Bhishma, by
Drona, and by Vidura, thy wicked-minded and shameless son Duryodhana
sent his Suta messenger commanding him to bring into court the beloved
and virtuous wife of the Pandavas. The gods first deprive that man of
his reason unto whom they send defeat and disgrace. It is for this that
such a person seeth things in a strange light. When destruction is at
hand, evil appeareth as good unto the understanding polluted by sin,
and the man adhereth to it firmly. That which is improper appeareth as
proper, and that which is proper appeareth as improper unto the man
about to be overwhelmed by destruction, and evil and impropriety are
what he liketh. The time that bringeth on destruction doth not come
with upraised club and smash one's head. On the other hand the
peculiarity of such a time is that it maketh a man behold evil in good
and good in evil. The wretches have brought on themselves this
terrible, wholesale, and horrible destruction by dragging the helpless
princess of Panchala into the court. Who else than Duryodhana--that
false player of dice could bring into the assembly, with insults, the
daughter of Drupada, endued with beauty and intelligence, and
conversant with every rule of morality and duty, and sprung not from
any woman's womb but from the sacred fire? The handsome Krishna, then
in her season, attired in one piece of stained cloth when brought into
the court cast her eyes upon the Pandavas. She beheld them, however,
robbed of their wealth, of their kingdom, of even their attire, of
their beauty, of every enjoyment, and plunged into a state of bondage.
Bound by the tie of virtue, they were then unable to exert their
prowess. And before all the assembled kings Duryodhana and Karna spake
cruel and harsh words unto the distressed and enraged Krishna
undeserving of such treatment. O monarch, all this appeareth to me as
foreboding fearful consequences.'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'O Sanjaya, the glances of the distressed
daughter of Drupada might consume the whole earth. Can it be possible
that even a single son of mine will live? The wives of the Bharatas,
uniting with Gandhari upon beholding virtuous Krishna, the wedded wife
of the Pandavas, endued with beauty and youth, dragged into the court,
set up frightful wail. Even now, along with all my subjects, they weep
every day. Enraged at the ill treatment of Draupadi, the Brahmanas in a
body did not perform that evening their Agnihotra ceremony. The winds
blew mightily as they did at the time of the universal dissolution.
There was a terrible thunder-storm also. Meteors fell from the sky, and
Rahu by swallowing the Sun unseasonably alarmed the people terribly.
Our war-chariots were suddenly ablaze, and all their flagstaffs fell
down foreboding evil unto the Bharatas. Jackals began to cry
frightfully from within the sacred fire-chamber of Duryodhana, and
asses from all directions began to bray in response. Then Bhishma and
Drona, and Kripa, and Somadatta and the high-souled Vahlika, all left
the assembly. It was then that at the advice of Vidura I addressed
Krishna and said, "I will grant thee boons, O Krishna, indeed, whatever
thou wouldst ask?" The princess of the Panchala there begged of me the
liberation of the Pandavas. Out of my own motion I then set free the
Pandavas, commanding them to return (to their capital) on their cars
and with their bows and arrows. It was then that Vidura told me, "Even
this will prove the destruction of the Bharata race, viz., this
dragging of Krishna into the court. This daughter of the King of
Panchala is the faultless Sree herself. Of celestial origin, she is the
wedded wife of the Pandavas. The wrathful sons of Pandu will never
forgive this insult offered unto her. Nor will the mighty bowmen of the
Vrishni race, nor the mighty warriors amongst the Panchalas suffer this
in silence. Supported by Vasudeva of unbaffled prowess, Arjuna will
assuredly come back, surrounded by the Panchala host. And that mighty
warrior amongst them, Bhimasena endued with surpassing strength, will
also come back, whirling his mace like Yama himself with his club.
These kings will scarcely be able to bear the force of Bhima's mace.
Therefore, O king, not hostility but peace for ever with the sons of
Pandu is what seemeth to me to be the best. The sons of Pandu are
always stronger than the Kurus. Thou knowest, O king, that the
illustrious and mighty king Jarasandha was slain in battle by Bhima
