beyond my judgment. These things are good.' Jesus Christ does not
say that they are not, but sense regards them as far better than
they are. They are near us, and a very small object near us, by the
laws of perspective, shuts out a mightier one beyond us. We in
Manchester live in a community which is largely based on, and
actuated and motived in its diligence by the lie that material good
is better than spiritual good, that it is better to be a rich man
and a successful merchant than to be a poor and humble and honest
student; that it is better to have a balance at your bankers than to
have great and pure and virginal thoughts in a clean heart; that a
man has done better for himself when he has made a fortune than when
he has God in his heart. And so we need, and God knows it was never
more needed in Manchester than to-day, that we should preach and
preach and preach, over and over again, this old-fashioned
threadbare truth, which is so threadbare and certain that it has
lost its power over the lives of many of us, that all that, at its
mightiest, is very little, and that this, at its least, is very
much. Dear brethren, you and I know how hard it is always,
especially how hard it is in business lives, to keep this as our
practical working faith. We say we believe, and then we go away and
live as if we believed the opposite. I beseech you listen to the
scale laid down by Him who knew all things in their measure and
degree, and let us settle it in our souls, and live as if we had
settled it, that it is better to be wise and good than to be rich
and prosperous, and that God is more than a universe of worlds, if
we have Him for our own.

But to talk about a contrast in degree degrades the reality, for it
is no matter of difference of measurement, but it is a matter of
difference of kind. And so our Lord goes on to a deeper phase of the
contrast, when He pits against one another 'the unrighteous mammon'
and 'the true riches.' Now, there is some difficulty in that
contrast. The two significant terms do not seem to be precise
opposites, and possibly they are not intended to be logically
accurate counterparts of each other. But what is meant by 'the
unrighteous mammon'? I do not suppose that the ordinary explanation
of that verse is quite adequate. We usually suppose that by so
stigmatising the material good, He means to suggest how hard it is
to get it--and you all know that--and how hard it is to keep it, and
how hard it is to administer it, without in some measure falling
into the sin of unrighteousness. But whilst I dare say that may be
the signification intended, if we were to require that the word here
should be a full and correct antithesis to the other phrase, 'the
true riches,' we should need to suppose that 'unrighteous' here
meant that which falsely pretended to be what it was not. And so we
come to the contrast between the deceitfulness of earthly good and
the substantial reality of the heavenly. Will any fortune, even
though it goes into seven figures, save a man from the miseries, the
sorrows, the ills that flesh is heir to? Does a great estate make a
man feel less desolate when he stands by his wife's coffin? Will any
wealth 'minister to a mind diseased'? Will a mountain of material
good calm and satisfy a man's soul? You see faces just as
discontented, looking out of carriage windows, as you meet in the
street. 'Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.' There is no
proportion between abundance of external good of any kind and happy
hearts. We all know that the man who is rich is not happier than the
poor man. And I, for my part, believe that the raw material of
happiness is very equally distributed through the world, and that it
is altogether a hallucination by which a poor man thinks, 'If I were
wealthy like that other man, how different my life would be.' No, it
would not; you would be the same man. The rich man that fancies that
because he is rich he is 'better off,' as they say, than his poor
brother, and the poor man who thinks that he would be 'better off'
if he were richer than he is now, are the same man turned inside
out, so to speak; and common to both of them is that fallacy, that
wealth and material good contribute much to the real blessedness and
nobleness of the man who happens to own it.

But then, perhaps, we have rather to regard this unrighteous mammon
as so designated from another point of view. You will remember that
all through the context our Lord has been insisting on the notion of
stewardship. And I take it that what He means here is to remind us
that whenever we claim any of our possessions, especially our
external ones, as our own, we thereby are guilty of defrauding both
God and man, and are unrighteous, and it is unrighteous thereby.
Stewardship is a word which describes our relation to all that we
have. Forget that, and then whatever you have becomes 'the
unrighteous mammon.' There is the point in which Christ's teaching
joins hands with a great deal of unchristian teaching in this
present day which is called Socialism and Communism. Christianity is
not communistic. It asserts as against other men your right of
property, but it limits that right by this, that if you interpret
your right of property to mean the right to 'do what you like with
your own,' ignoring your stewardship to God, and the right of your
fellows to share in what you have, then you are an unfaithful
steward, and your mammon is unrighteous. And that principle, the
true communism of Christianity, has to be worked into modern society
in a way that some of us do not dream of, before modern society will
be organised on Christian principles. These words of my text are no
toothless words which are merely intended to urge Christian people
on to a sentimental charity, and to a niggardly distribution of part
of their possessions: but they underlie the whole conception of
ownership, as the New Testament sets it forth. Wherever the
stewardship that we owe to God, and the participation that we owe to
men, are neglected in regard to anything that we have, there God's
good gifts are perverted and have become 'unrighteous mammon.'

And, then, on the other hand, our Lord sets forth here the contrast
in regard to 'the true riches', which are such, inasmuch as they
really correspond to the idea of wealth being a true good to a man,
and making him rich to all the intents of bliss. He that has the
treasures of a pure mind, of a lofty aim, of a quiet conscience, of
a filled and satisfied and therefore calmed heart; he that has the
treasure of salvation; he that has the boundless wealth of God---he
has the bullion, while the poor rich people that have the material
good have the scrip of an insolvent company, which is worth no more
than the paper on which it is written. There are two currencies--one
solid metal, the other worthless paper. The one is 'true riches,'
and the other the 'unrighteous mammon.'

Then there is a last contrast, and that is with regard to the
reality of our possession. On the one hand, that which I fondly call
my own is by our Lord stamped with the proprietor's mark, of
somebody else, 'that which is Another's.' It was His before He gave
it, it was His when He gave it, it is His after He has given it. My
name is never to be written on my property so as to erase the name
of the Owner. I am a steward; I am a trustee; it all belongs to Him.
That is one rendering of this word. But the phrase may perhaps point
in another direction. It may suggest how shadowy and unreal, as
being merely external, and how transitory is our ownership of wealth
and outward possessions. A man says, 'It is mine.' What does he mean
by that? It is not his own in any real sense. I get more good out of
a rich man's pictures, or estate, if I look at them with an eye that
loves them, than he does. The world belongs to the man that can
enjoy it and rightly use it. And the man that enjoys it and uses it
aright is the man who lives in God. Nothing is really yours except
that which has entered into the substance of your soul, and become
incorporated with your very being, so that, as in wool dyed in the
grain, the colour will never come out. What I am, that I have; what
I only have, that, in the deepest sense, I have not. 'Shrouds have
no pockets,' says the Spanish proverb. 'His glory will not descend
after him,' says the psalm. That is a poor possession which only is
outward whilst it lasts, and which ends so soon. But there is wealth
that comes into me. There are riches that cannot be parted from me.
I can make my own a great inheritance, which is wrought into the
very substance of my being, and will continue so inwrought, into
whatsoever worlds or states of existence any future may carry me.
So, and only so, is anything my own. Let these contrasts dominate
our lives.

I see our space is gone; I must make this sermon a fragment, and
leave what I intended to have made the last part of it for possible
future consideration. Only let me press upon you in one closing word
this, that the durable riches are only found in God, and the riches
that can be found in God are brought to every one of us by Him 'in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,' of goodness
and grace. If we will make ourselves poor, by consciousness of our
need, and turn with faith to Jesus, then we shall receive from Him
those riches which are greatest, which are true, which are our own
in that they pass into our very being, in that they were destined
for us from all eternity by the love of God; and in having them we
shall be rich indeed, and for ever.




THE GAINS OF THE FAITHFUL STEWARD


    'If ye have not been faithful in that which is another
    man's, who shall give you that which is your own?'
    --LUKE xvi. 12.

In a recent sermon on this context I dealt mainly with the threefold
comparison which our Lord runs between the higher and the lower kind
of riches. The one is stigmatised as 'that which is least,' the
unrighteous mammon,' 'that which is another's'; whilst the higher is
magnified as being 'that which is most,' 'the true riches,' 'your
own.' What are these two classes? On the one hand stand all
possessions which, in and after possession, remain outside of a man,
which may survive whilst he perishes, or perish while he survives.
On the other hand are the riches which pass into him, and become
inseparable from him. Noble aims, high aspirations, pure thoughts,
treasures of wisdom, treasures of goodness--these are the real
wealth corresponding to man's nature, destined for his enrichment,
and to last with him for ever. But we may gather the whole contrast
into two words: the small, the 'unrighteous,' the wealth which being
mine is not mine but remains another's, and foreign to me, is the
world. The great riches, the 'true riches,' the good destined for
me, and for which I am destined, is God. In these two words you have
the antithesis, the real antithesis, God _versus_ the world.

Now let us turn rather to the principle which our Lord here lays
down, in reference to these two classes of good, or of possessions.
He tells us that the faithful use of the world helps us to the
possession of God; or, to put it into other words, that how we
handle money and what money can buy, has a great deal to do with our
religious enjoyment and our religious life, and that that is true,
both in regard to our partial possession of God here and now, and to
our perfect possession of Him in the world to come.

Now I wish to say one or two very plain things about this matter,
and I hope that you will not turn away from them because they are
familiar and trite. Considering how much of your lives, especially
as regards men of business, is taken up with money, its acquisition,
its retention, its distribution, there are few things that have more
to do with the vigour or feebleness of your Christian life than the
way in which you handle these perishable things.

I wish to say a word or two, first, about

I. What our Lord means by this faithfulness to which He attaches
such tremendous issues.

Now, you will remember, that the starting point of my text is that
parable of the unjust steward, whose conduct, knavish as it was, is
in some sense presented by our Lord to His disciples, and to us, as
a pattern. But my text, and the other two verses which are parallel
with it, seem to have amongst their other purposes this: to put in a
caveat against supposing that it is the unfaithfulness of the
steward which is recommended for our imitation. And so the first
point that is suggested in regard to this matter of faithfulness
about the handling of outward good is that we have to take care that
it is rightly acquired, for though the unjust steward was commended
for the prudent use that he made of dishonestly acquired gain, it is
the prudent use, and not the manner of the acquisition which we are
to take as our examples. Initial unfaithfulness in acquisition is
not condoned or covered over by any pious and benevolent use
hereafter. Mediaeval barons left money for masses. Plenty of
Protestants do exactly the same thing. Brewers will build
cathedrals, and found picture galleries, and men that have made
their money foully will fancy that they atone for that by leaving it
for some charitable purpose. The caustic but true wit of a Scottish
judge said about a great bequest which was supposed to be--whether
rightly or wrongly, I know not--of that sort, that it was 'the
heaviest fire insurance premium that had been paid in the memory of
man.' 'The money does not stink,' said the Roman Emperor, about the
proceeds of an unsavoury tax. But the money unfaithfully won does
stink when it is thrown into God's treasury. 'The price of a dog
shall not come into the sanctuary of the Lord.' Do not think that
money doubtfully won is consecrated by being piously spent.

But there are more things than that here, for our Lord sums up the
whole of a Christian man's duties in regard to the use of this
external world and all its good, in that one word 'faithful,' which
implies discharge of responsibility, recognition of obligation, the
continual consciousness that we are not proprietors but stewards.
Unless we carry that consciousness with us into all the phases of
our connection with perishable goods they become--as I shall have to
show you in a moment,--hindrances instead of helps to our possession
of God.

I am not going to talk revolutionary socialism, or anything of that
sort, but I am bound to reiterate my own solemn conviction that
until, practically as well as theoretically, the Christian Church in
all its branches brings into its creed, and brings out in its
practice, the great thought of stewardship, especially in regard to
material and external good, but also in regard to the durable riches
of salvation, the nations will be full of unrest, and thunder-clouds
heavily boding storm and destruction will lower on the horizon. What
we have, we have that we may impart; what we have in all forms of
having, we have because we have received. We are distributing
centres, that is all--I was going to say like a nozzle, perforated
with many holes, at the end of the spout of a watering-can. That is
a Christian man's relation to his possessions. We are stewards.
'It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful'

Now let me ask you to notice--

II. The bearing of this faithfulness in regard to the lower wealth
on our possession of the higher.

Jesus says in this context, twice over, that faithfulness with
regard to the former is the condition of our being entrusted with
the latter. Now, remember, by way of illustration of this thought,
what all this outward world of goodness and beauty is mainly meant
for. What? It is all but scaffolding by which, and within the area
of which, the building may arise. The meaning of the world is to
make character. All that we have, aye! and all that we do, and the
whole of the events and circumstances with which we come in contact
here on earth, are then lifted to their noblest function, and are
then understood in their deepest meaning when we look upon them as
we do upon the leaping-poles and bars and swings of a gymnasium,--as
meant to develop thews and muscles, and make men of us. That is what
they are here for, and that is what we are here for. Not enjoyment,
and not sorrow, except in so far as these two are powers in
developing character, not plunging ourselves in the enjoyments of
sense. Wealth and poverty, gain and loss, love gratified and love
marred, possessions sweet, when preserved, and possessions that
become sweeter by being removed; all these are simply meant as
whetstones on which the keen blade may be sharpened, as forces
against which, trying ourselves, our deftness and strength may be
increased. They are all meant to make us men, and if we faithfully
use these externals with a recognition of their source, with a wise
estimate of their subordination so as that our desires shall not
cleave to them solely, and with a fixed determination to use them as
ministers to make ourselves nobler, wiser, stronger, liker to God
and His Christ, then the world will minister to our possession of
God, and being 'faithful in that which is least,' we shall thereby
be more capable of receiving that which is greatest. But if, on the
other hand, we so forget our true wealth, and become so besotted and
absorbed in our adhesion to, and our desires after, fleeting good,
then the capacities that were noble will fade and shrivel, being
unused; aims and purposes that were elevated and pure will die out
unsatisfied; windows in our souls which commanded a wide, glorious
prospect will gradually be bricked up; burdens which hinder our
running will be piled upon our backs, and the world will have
conquered us, whilst we are dreaming that we have conquered the
world. You look at a sea anemone in a pool on the rocks when the
tide is out, all its tendrils outstretched, and its cavity wide
open. Some little bit of seaweed, or some morsel of half-putrefying
matter, comes in contact with it, and instantly every tentacle is
retracted, and the lips are tightly closed, so that you could not
push a bristle in. And when your tentacles draw themselves in to
clutch the little portion of worldly good, of whatever sort it is,
that has come into your hold, there is no room to get God in there,
and being 'unfaithful in that which is least' you have made it
impossible that you should possess 'that which is most.' Ah! there
are some of us that were far better Christians long ago, when we
were poorer men, than we are to-day, and there are some of us that
know what it is to have the heart so filled with baser liquors that
there is no room for the ethereal nectar. If the world has filled my
soul, where is God to dwell?

There is another way in which we may look at this matter. I have
said that the main use of these perishable and fragmentary good
things around us is to develop character, by our administration of
them. Another way of putting the same thought is that their main use
is to show us God. If we faithfully use the lesser good it will
become transparent, and reveal to us the greater. We hear a great
deal about deepening the spiritual life by prayers, and conventions,
and Bible readings and the like. I have no word to say except in
full sympathy with all such. But I do believe that the best means,
the most powerful means, by which the great bulk of Christian men
could deepen their spiritual lives would be a more honest and
thoroughgoing attempt to 'be faithful in that which is least.' We
have so much to do with it necessarily, that few, if any, things
have more power in shaping our whole characters than our manner of
administering the wealth, the material good, that comes to our
hands.

And so, dear brethren, I beseech you remember that the laws of
perspective are such as that a minute thing near at hand shuts out
the vision of a mighty thing far off, and a hillock by my side will
hide the Himalayas at a distance, and a sovereign may block out God;
and 'that which is least' has the diabolical power of seeming
greater to us than, and of obscuring our vision of, 'that which is
most.'

May I remind you that all these thoughts about the bearing of
faithfulness in administering the lower of our possessions, on the
attainment of higher, apply to us whatever be the amount of these
outward goods that we have? I suppose there were not twelve poorer
men in all Palestine that day than the twelve to whom my text was
originally addressed. Three of them had left their nets and their
fishing-boats, one of them we know had left his counting-house, as a
publican, and all his receipts and taxes behind him. What they had
we know not, but at all events they were the poor of this world. Do
not any of you that happen to be modestly or poorly off think that
my sermon is a sermon for rich men. It is not what we have, but how
we handle it, that is in question. 'The cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches,' were bracketed together by Jesus Christ as
the things that 'choke the word,' and make it unfruitful. The poor
man who wants, and the rich man who uses unfaithfully, are alike hit
by the words of my text.

Now, further, let me ask you to look at

III. The bearing of faithfulness in this life on the fuller
possession of our true riches in the life hereafter.

There lies under this whole context a striking conception of life
here in its relation to the life hereafter, A father sets his son,
or a master sets his apprentice, to some small task, an experiment
made upon a comparatively worthless body, supplies him with material
which it does not much matter whether he spoils or not, and then if
by practice the hand becomes deft, he is set to better work. God
sets us to try our 'prentice hands here in the world, and if we
administer that rightly, not necessarily perfectly, but so as to
show that there are the makings of a good workman in us by His
gracious help, then the next life comes, with its ampler margin,
with its wider possibilities, with its nobler powers, and there we
are set to use in loftier fashion the powers which we made our own
being here. 'Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make
thee ruler over many things.'

I have said that the great use of the world and all its wealth is to
make character. I have said that that character determines our
capacity for the possession of God. I have said that our
administration of worldly wealth is one chief factor in determining
our character. Now I say that that character persists. There are
great changes, changes the significance and the scope and the
consequences of which we can never know here. But the man remains,
in the main direction of his being, in the character which he has
made for himself by his use of God's world and of Christ's Spirit.
And so the way in which we handle the trivialities and temporalities
here has eternal consequences. We sit in a low room with the
telegraph instrument in front of us, and we click off our messages,
and they are recorded away yonder, and we shall have to read them
one day. Transient causes produce permanent effects. The seas which
laid down the great sandstone deposits that make so large a portion
of the framework of this world have long since evaporated. But the
footprints of the seabird that stalked across the moist sand, and
the little pits made by the raindrops that fell countless
millenniums ago on the red ooze, are there yet, and you may see them
in our museums. And so our faithfulness, or our unfaithfulness, here
has made the character which is eternal, and on which will depend
whether we shall, in the joys of that future life, possess God in
fullness, or whether we shall lose Him, as our portion and our
Friend.

Now, dear brethren, do not forget that all this that I have been
saying is the second page in Christ's teaching; and the first page
is an entirely different one. I have been saying that we make
character, and that character determines our possession of God and
His grace. But there is another thing to be said. The central
thought of Christ's gospel is that God, in His sweetness, in His
pardoning mercy, in His cleansing Spirit, is given to the very men
whose characters do not deserve it. And the same Lord who said, 'If
ye have not been faithful in that which is least, who shall give you
that which is greatest?' says also from the heavens,' I counsel thee
to buy of Me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich.' My
text, and the principle that is involved in it, do not contradict
the great truth that we are saved by simple faith, however unworthy
we are. That is the message to begin with. And unless you have
received it you are not standing in the place where the message that
I have been insisting upon has a personal bearing on you. But if you
have taken Christ for your salvation, remember, Christian brother
and sister, that it is not the same thing in regard either to your
Christian life on earth, or to your heavenly glory, whether you have
been living faithfully as stewards in your handling of earth's
perishable good, or whether you have clung to it as your real
portion, have used it selfishly, and by it have hidden God from your
hearts. To Christian men is addressed the charge that we trust not
in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God, and that we be
'rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate,
that we lay up in store for ourselves a good foundation against the
time to come'; and so 'lay hold on the life that is life indeed.'




DIVES AND LAZARUS


    'There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in
    purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every
    day: 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus,
    which was laid at his gate, full of sores, 21. And
    desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the
    rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked
    his sores. 22. And it came to pass, that the beggar
    died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's
    bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; 23. And
    in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and
    seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
    24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy
    on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of
    his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am
    tormented in this flame. 25, But Abraham said, Son,
    remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
    things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is
    comforted, and thou art tormented. 26. And besides all
    this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed:
    so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot;
    neither can they pass to us, that would come from
    thence. 27. Then he said, I pray thee therefore,
    father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's
    house: 28. For I have five brethren; that he may
    testify unto them lest they also come into this place
    of torment. 29. Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses
    and the prophets; let them hear them. 30. And he said,
    Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the
    dead, they will repent. 31. And he said unto him, If
    they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they
    be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.'
    --Luke xvi. 19-31.

This, the sternest of Christ's parables, must be closely connected
with verses 13 and 14. Keeping them in view, its true purpose is
plain. It is meant to rebuke, not the possession of wealth, but its
heartless, selfish use. Christ never treats outward conditions as
having the power of determining either character or destiny. What a
man does with his conditions settles what he is and what becomes of
him. Nor does the parable teach that the use of wealth is the only
determining factor, but, as every parable must do, it has to isolate
the lesson it teaches in order to burn it into the hearers.

There are three parts in the story--the conduct of the rich man, his
fate, and the sufficiency of existing warnings to keep us from his
sin and his end.

I. Properly speaking, we have here, not a parable--that is, a
representation of physical facts which have to be translated into
moral or religious truths--but an imaginary narrative, embodying a
normal fact in a single case. The rich man does not stand for
something else, but is one of the class of which Jesus wishes to set
forth the sin and fate. It is very striking that neither he nor the
beggar is represented as acting, but each is simply described. The
juxtaposition of the two figures carries the whole lesson.

It has sometimes been felt as a difficulty that the one is not said
to have done anything bad, nor the other to have been devout or
good; and some hasty readers have thought that Jesus was here
teaching the communistic doctrine that wealth is sin, and that
poverty is virtue. No such crude trash came from His lips. But He
does teach that heartless wallowing in luxury, with naked, starving
beggars at the gate, is sin which brings bitter retribution. The
fact that the rich man does nothing is His condemnation. He was not
damned because he had a purple robe and fine linen undergarments,
nor because he had lived in abundance, and every meal had been a
festival, but because, while so living, he utterly ignored Lazarus,
and used his wealth only for his own gratification. Nothing more
needs to be said about his character; the facts sufficiently show
it.

Still less needs to be said about that of Lazarus. In this part of
the narrative he comes into view simply as the means of bringing out
the rich man's heartlessness and self-indulgence. For the purposes
of the narrative his disposition was immaterial; for it is not our
duty to help only deserving or good people. Manhood and misery are
enough to establish the right to sympathy and succour. There may be
a hint of character in the name 'Lazarus,' which probably means 'God
is help.' Since this is the only name in the parables, it is natural
to give it significance, and it most likely suggests that the beggar
clung to God as his stay. It may glance, too, at the riddle of life,
which often seems to mock trust by continued trouble. Little outward
sign had Lazarus of divine help, yet he did not cast away his
confidence. No doubt, he sometimes got some crumbs from Dives'
table, but not from Dives. That the dogs licked his sores does not
seem meant as either alleviation or aggravation, but simply as
vividly describing his passive helplessness and utterly neglected
condition. Neither he nor any one drove them off.

But the main point about him is that he was at Dives' gate, and
therefore thrust before Dives' notice, and that he got no help. The
rich man was not bound to go and hunt for poor people, but here was
one pushed under his nose, as it were. Translate that into general
expressions, and it means that we all have opportunities of
beneficence laid in our paths, and that our guilt is heavy if we
neglect these. 'The poor ye have always with you.' The guilt of
selfish use of worldly possessions is equally great whatever is the
amount of possessions. Doing nothing when Lazarus lies at our gate
is doing great wickedness. These truths have a sharp edge for us as
well as for the 'Pharisees who were covetous'; and they are wofully
forgotten by professing Christians.

II. In the second part of the narrative, our Lord follows the two,
who had been so near each other and yet so separated, into the land
beyond the grave. It is to be especially noticed that, in doing so,
He adopts the familiar Rabbinical teaching as to Hades. He does not
thereby stamp these conceptions of the state of the dead with His
assent; for the purpose of the narrative is not to reveal the
secrets of that land, but to impress the truth of retribution for
the sin in question. It would not be to a group of Pharisaic
listeners that He would have unveiled that world.

He takes their own notions of it--angel bearers, Abraham's bosom,
the two divisions in Hades, the separation, and yet communication,
between them. These are Rabbis' fancies, not Christ's revelations.
The truths which He wished to force home lie in the highly
imaginative conversation between the rich man and Abraham, which
also has its likeness in many a Rabbinical legend.

The difference between the ends of the two men has been often
noticed, and lessons, perhaps not altogether warranted, drawn from
it. But it seems right to suppose that the omission of any notice of
the beggar's burial is meant to bring out that the neglect and
pitilessness, which had let him die, left his corpse unburied.
Perhaps the dogs that had licked his sores tore his flesh. A fine
sight that would be from the rich man's door! The latter had to die
too, for all his purple, and to be swathed in less gorgeous robes.
His funeral is mentioned, not only because pomp and ostentation went
as far as they could with him, but to suggest that he had to leave
them all behind. 'His glory shall not descend after him.'

The terrible picture of the rich man's torments solemnly warns us of
the necessary end of a selfish life such as his. The soul that lives
to itself does not find satisfaction even here; but, when all
externals are left behind, it cannot but be in torture. That is not
drapery. Character makes destiny, and to live to self is death.
Observe, too, that the relative positions of Dives and Lazarus are
reversed--the beggar being now the possessor of abundance and
delights, while the rich man is the sufferer and the needy.

Further note that the latter now desires to have from the former the
very help which in life he had not given him, and that the
retribution for refusing succour here is its denial hereafter. There
had been no sharing of 'good things' in the past life, but the rich
man had asserted his exclusive rights to them. They had been 'thy
good things' in a very sinful sense, and Lazarus had bean left to
carry his evil things alone. There shall be no communication of good
now. Earth was the place for mutual help and impartation. That world
affords no scope for it; for there men reap what they have sown, and
each character has to bear its own burden.

Finally, the ineffaceableness of distinctions of character, and
therefore of destiny, is set forth by the solemn image of the great
gulf which cannot be crossed. It is indeed to be remembered that our
Lord is speaking of 'the intermediate state,' before resurrection
and final judgment, and that, as already remarked, the intention of
the narrative is not to reveal the mysteries of the final state. But
still the impression left by the whole is that life here determines
life hereafter, and that character, once set and hardened here,
cannot be cast into the melting-pot and remoulded there.

III. The last part of the narrative teaches that the fatal sin of
heartless selfishness is inexcusable. The rich man's thought for his
brethren was quite as much an excuse for himself. He thought that,
if he had only known, things would have been different. He shifts
blame from himself on to the insufficiency of the warnings given
him. And the two answers put into Abraham's mouth teach the
sufficiency of 'Moses and the prophets,' little as these say about
the future, and the impossibility of compelling men to listen to a
divine message to which they do not wish to listen.

The fault lies, not in the deficiency of the warnings, but in the
aversion of the will. No matter whether it is Moses or a spirit from
Hades who speaks, if men do not wish to hear, they will not hear.
They will not be persuaded--for persuasion has as much, or more, to
do with the heart and inclination than with the head. We have as
much witness from heaven as we need. The worst man knows more of
duty than the best man does. Dives is in torments because he lived
for self; and he lived for self, not because he did not know that it
was wrong, but because he did not choose to do what he knew to be
right.




MEMORY IN ANOTHER WORLD


    'Abraham said, Son, remember!'--LUKE xvi. 25.

It is a very striking thought that Christ, if He be what we suppose
Him to be, knew all about the unseen present which we call the
future, and yet was all but silent in reference to it. Seldom is it
on His lips at all. Of arguments drawn from another world He has
very few. Sometimes He speaks about it, but rather by allusion than
in anything like an explicit revelation. This parable out of which
my text is taken, is perhaps the most definite and continuous of His
words about the invisible world; and yet all the while it lay there
before Him; and standing on the very verge of it, with it spread out
clear before His gaze, He reads off but a word or two of what He
sees, and then shuts it in in darkness, and says to us, in the spirit
of a part of this parable, 'You have Moses and the prophets--hear
them: if these are not enough, it will not be enough for you if all
the glories of heaven and all the ghastliness of hell are flashed and
flamed before you.' We, too, if we are to 'prophesy according to the
proportion of faith,' must not leave out altogether references to a
future life in its two departments, and such motives as may be based
upon them; only, I think, we ought always to keep them in the same
relative amount to the whole of our teaching in which Christ kept them.

This parable, seeing that it _is_ a parable, of course cannot
be trusted as if it were a piece of simple dogmatic revelation, to
give us information, facts, so as to construct out of it a theory of
the other world. We are always in the double danger in parables, of
taking that for drapery which was meant to be essence, and taking
that for essence which was meant to be drapery. And so I do not
profess to read from this narrative any very definite and clear
knowledge of the future; but I think that in the two words which I
have ventured to take as a text, we get the basis of very impressive
thoughts with regard to the functions of memory in another world.

'Son, remember!' It is the voice, the first voice, the perpetual
voice, which meets every man when he steps across the threshold of
earth into the presence chamber of eternity. All the future is so
built upon and interwoven with the past, that for the saved and for
the lost alike this word might almost be taken as the motto of their
whole situation, as the explanation of their whole condition. Memory
in another world is indispensable to the gladness of the glad, and
strikes the deepest note in the sadness of the lost. There can be no
need to dwell at any length on the simple introductory thought, that
there must be memory in a future state. Unless there were
remembrance, there could be no sense of individuality. A man cannot
have any conviction that he is himself, but by constant, though
often unconscious, operation of this subtle act of remembrance.
There can be no sense of personal identity except in proportion
as there is clearness of recollection. Then again, if that future
state be a state of retribution, there must be memory. Otherwise,
there might be joy, and there might be sorrow, but the why and the
wherefore of either would be entirely struck out of a man's
consciousness, and the one could not be felt as reward, nor the
other as punishment. If, then, we are to rise from the grave the
same men that we are laid in it, and if the future life has this for
its characteristic, that it is a state either of recompense and
reward, or of retribution and suffering, then, for both, the
clearness and constant action, of memory are certainly needed. But
it is not to the simple fact of its existence that I desire to
direct your attention now. I wish, rather, to suggest to you one or
two modifications under which it must apparently work in another
world. When men remember _there_, they will remember very
differently from the way in which they remember _here_. Let us
look at these changes-constituting it, on the one hand, an
instrument of torture; and, on the other, a foundation of all our
gladness.

I. First, in another state, memory will be so widened as to take in
the whole life.

We believe that what a man is in this life, he is more in another,
that tendencies here become results yonder, that his sin, that his
falsehood, that his whole moral nature, be it good or bad, becomes
there what it is only striving to be here. We believe that in this
present life our capacities of all sorts are hedged in, thwarted,
damped down, diluted, by the necessity which there is for their
working through this material body of ours. We believe that death is
the heightening of a man's stature--if he be bad, the intensifying
of his badness; if he be good, the strengthening of his goodness. We
believe that the contents of the intellectual nature, the capacities
of that nature also, are all increased by the fact of having done
with earth and having left the body behind. It is, I think, the
teaching of common-sense, and it is the teaching of the Bible. True,
that for some, that growth will only be a growth into greater power
of feeling greater sorrow. Such an one grows up into a Hercules; but
it is only that the Nessus shirt may wrap round him more tightly,
and may gnaw him with a fiercer agony. But whether saved or lost--he
that dies is greater than when yet living; and all his powers are
intensified and strengthened by that awful experience of death and
by what it brings with it.

Memory partakes in the common quickening. There are not wanting
analogies and experiences in our present life to let us see that, in
fact, when we talk about forgetting we ought to mean nothing more
than the temporary cessation of conscious remembrance. Everything
which you do leaves its effect with you for ever, just as long-forgotten
meals are in your blood and bones to-day. Every act that a man performs
is there. It has printed itself upon his soul, it has become a part of
himself: and though, like a newly painted picture, after a little while
the colours sink in, why is that? Only because they have entered into
the very fibre of the canvas, and have left the surface because they
are incorporated with the substance, and they want but a touch of
varnish to flash out again! We forget _nothing_, in the sense of not
being able, some time or another, to recall it; we forget much in the
sense of ceasing for a time to have it in our thoughts.

For we know, in our own case, how strangely there come swimming up
before us, out of the depths of the dim waters of oblivion--as one
has seen some bright shell drawn from the sunless sea-caves, and
gleaming white and shapeless far down before we had it on the
surface--past thoughts, we know not whence or how. Some one of the
million of hooks, with which all our life is furnished, has laid
hold of some subtle suggestion which has been enough to bring them
up into consciousness. We said we had forgotten them. What does it
mean? Only that they had sunk into the deep, beneath our
consciousness, and lay there to be brought up when needful. There is
nothing more strange than the way in which some period of my life,
that I supposed to be an entire blank--if I will think about it for
a little while, begins to glimmer into form. As the developing
solution brings out the image on the photographic plate, so the mind
has the strange power, by fixing the attention, as we say (a short
word which means a long, mysterious thing) upon that past that is
half-remembered and half-forgotten, of bringing it into clear
consciousness and perfect recollection. And, there are instances,
too, of a still more striking kind, familiar to some of us how in
what people call morbid states, men remember their childhood, which
they had forgotten for long years. You may remember that old story
of the dying woman beginning to speak in a tongue unknown to all
that stood around her bed. When a child she had learned some
northern language, in a far-off land. Long before she had learned to
shape any definite remembrances of the place, she had been taken
away, and not having used, had forgotten the speech. But at last
there rushed up again all the old memories, and the tongue of the
dumb was loosed, and she spake! People would say, 'the action of
disease.' It may be, but that explains nothing. Perhaps in such
states the spirit is working in a manner less limited by the body
than in health, and so showing some slight prelude of its powers
when it has shuffled off this mortal coil. But be that as it may,
these morbid phenomena, and the other more familiar facts already
referred to, unite to show us that the sphere of recollection is
much wider than that occupied at any given moment by memory.
Recollection is the servant of Memory, as our great poet tells us in
his wise allegory, and

  'does on him still attend,
  To reach whenever he for ought does send.'

We cannot lay aside anything that we have ever done or been so
utterly but that that servant can find it and bring it to his lord.
We forget nothing so completely but that we shall be able to recall
it. Of that awful power we may say, without irreverence, 'Thou hast
set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance.'

The fragmentary remembrances which we have now, lift themselves
above the ocean of forgetfulness like islands in some Archipelago,
the summits of sister hills, though separated by the estranging sea
that covers their converging sides and the valleys where their roots
unite. The solid land is there, though hidden. Drain off the sea,
and there will be no more isolated peaks, but continuous land. In
this life we have but the island memories heaving themselves into
sight, but in the next the Lord shall 'cause the sea to go back by
the breath of His mouth,' and the channels of the great deep of a
human heart's experiences and actions shall be laid bare. 'There
shall be no more sea'; but the solid land of a whole life will
appear when God says, 'Son, remember!'

So much, then, for my first consideration--namely, that memory in a
future state will comprehend the whole of life. Another thing is,
that memory in a future state will probably be so rapid as to
embrace all the past life at once. We do not know, we have no
conception of, the extent to which our thinking, and feeling, and
remembrance, are made tardy by the slow vehicle of this bodily
organisation in which the soul rides. But we have in our own lives
instances enough to make us feel that there lie in us dormant,
mysterious powers by which the rapidity of all our operations of
thought and feeling will be enhanced marvellously, like the
difference between a broad-wheeled waggon and an express train! At
some turning point of your life, when some great joy flashed, or
some great shadow darkened upon you all at once; when some crisis
that wanted an instantaneous decision appeared--why, what regions of
thought, purpose, plan, resolution; what wilderness of desolate
sorrow, and what paradises of blooming gladness, your soul has gone
through in a moment. Well, then, take another illustration: A
sleeper, feeling a light finger laid upon his shoulder, does not
know what it is; in an instant he awakes and says, 'Is it you?' but
between that touch and that word there may be a whole life run
through, a whole series of long events dreamt and felt. As on the
little retina of an eye there can be painted on a scale
inconceivably minute, every tree and mountain-top in the whole wide
panorama--so, in an instant, one may run through almost a whole
lifetime of mental acts. Then, again, you remember that
illustration, often used on this subject, about the experience of
those who have been brought face to face with sudden death, and
escaped it. The drowning man, when he comes to himself, tells us,
that in the interval betwixt the instant when he felt he was going
and the passing away of consciousness, all his life stood before
him; as if some flash in a dark midnight had lighted up a whole
mountain country--there it all was! Ah, brethren! we know nothing
yet about the rapidity with which we may gather before us a whole
series of events; so that although we have to pass from one to
another, the succession may be so swift, as to produce in our own
minds the effect of all being co-existent and simultaneous. As the
child flashing about him a bit of burning stick, may seem to make a
circle of flame, because the flame-point moves so quickly--so
memory, though it does go from point to point, and dwells for some
inconceivably minute instant on each part of the remembrance, may
yet be gifted with such lightning speed, with such rapidity and
awful quickness of glance, as that to the man himself the effect
shall be that his whole life is spread out there before him in one
instant, and that he, Godlike, sees the end and the beginning side
by side. Yes; from the mountain of eternity we shall look down, and
behold the whole plain spread before us. Down here we get lost and
