give to its vassal nations was inflexible justice and a sovereign law;
but in Pilate's action there was not even the pretence of legality.
Tricks and expedients run through it all, and never once does he say,
This is the law, this is justice, and by it I stand or fall.

The cruel scourging, which, in Roman hands, was a much more severe
punishment than the Jewish 'beating with rods' and often ended in
death, was inflicted on the silent, unresisting Christ, not because His
judge thought that it was deserved, but to please accusers whose charge
he knew to be absurd. The underlings naturally followed their betters'
example, and after they had executed Pilate's orders to scourge,
covered the bleeding wounds with some robe, perhaps ragged, but of the
royal colour, and crushed the twisted wreath of thorn-branch down on
the brows, to make fresh wounds there. The jest of crowning such a
poor, helpless creature as Jesus seemed to them, was exactly on the
level of such rude natures, and would be the more exquisite to them
because it was double-barrelled, and insulted the nation as well as the
'King.' They came in a string, as the tense of the original word
suggests, and offered their mock reverence. But that sport became tame
after a little, and mockery passed into violence, as it always does in
such natures. These rough legionaries were cruel and brutal, and they
were unconscious witnesses to His Kingship as founded on suffering; but
they were innocent as compared with the polished gentleman on the
judgment-seat who prostituted justice, and the learned Pharisees
outside who were howling for blood.

II. In verses 4-8 the scene changes again to without the palace, and
shows us Pilate trying another expedient, equally in vain. The
hesitating governor has no chance with the resolute, rooted hate of the
rulers. Jesus silently and unresistingly follows Pilate from the hall,
still wearing the mockery of royal pomp. Pilate had calculated that the
sight of Him in such guise, and bleeding from the lash, might turn hate
into contempt, and perhaps give a touch of pity. 'Behold the man!' as
he meant it, was as if he had said, 'Is this poor, bruised, spiritless
sufferer worth hate or fear? Does He look like a King or a dangerous
enemy?' Pilate for once drops the scoff of calling Him their King, and
seeks to conciliate and move to pity. The profound meanings which later
ages have delighted to find in his words, however warrantable, are no
part of their design as spoken, and we gain a better lesson from the
scene by keeping close to the thoughts of the actors. What a contrast
between the vacillation of the governor, on the one hand, afraid to do
right and reluctant to do wrong, and the dogged malignity of the rulers
and their tools on the other, and the calm, meek endurance of the
silent Christ, knowing all their thoughts, pitying all, and fixed in
loving resolve, even firmer than the rulers' hate, to bear the utmost,
that He might save a world!

Some pity may have stirred in the crowd, but the priests and their
immediate dependants silenced it by their yell of fresh hate at the
sight of the prisoner. Note how John gives the very impression of the
fierce, brief roar, like that of wild beasts for their prey, by his
'Crucify, crucify!' without addition of the person. Pilate lost
patience at last, and angrily and half seriously gives permission to
them to take the law into their own hands. He really means, 'I will not
be your tool, and if my conviction of "the Man's" innocence is to be of
no account, _you_ must punish Him; for _I_ will not.' How far he meant
to abdicate authority, and how far he was launching sarcasms, it is
difficult to say. Throughout he is sarcastic, and thereby indicates his
weakness, indemnifying himself for being thwarted by sneers which sit
so ill on authority.

But the offer, or sarcasm, whichever it was, missed fire, as the appeal
to pity had done, and only led to the production of a new weapon. In
their frantic determination to compass Jesus' death, the rulers
hesitate at no degradation; and now they adduced the charge of
blasphemy, and were ready to make a heathen the judge. To ask a Roman
governor to execute their law on a religious offender, was to drag
their national prerogative in the mud. But formal religionists,
inflamed by religious animosity, are often the degraders of religion
for the gratification of their hatred. They are poor preservers of the
Church who call on the secular arm to execute their 'laws.' Rome went a
long way in letting subject peoples keep their institutions; but it was
too much to expect Pilate to be the hangman for these furious priests,
on a charge scarcely intelligible to him.

What was Jesus doing while all this hell of wickedness and fury boiled
round Him? Standing there, passive and dumb, 'as a sheep before her
shearers,' Himself is the least conspicuous figure in the history of
His own trial. In silent communion with the Father, in silent
submission to His murderers, in silent pity for us, in silent
contemplation of 'the joy that was set before Him,' He waits on their
will.

III. Once more the scene changes to the interior of the praetorium (vs.
9-11). The rulers' words stirred a deepened awe in Pilate. He 'was the
more afraid'; then he had been already afraid. His wife's dream, the
impression already produced by the person of Jesus, had touched him
more deeply than probably he himself was aware of; and now this charge
that Jesus had 'made Himself the Son of God' shook him. What if this
strange man were in some sense a messenger of the gods? Had he been
scourging one sent from them? Sceptical he probably was, and therefore
superstitious; and half-forgotten and disbelieved stories of gods who
had 'come down in the likeness of men' would swim up in his memory. If
this Man were such, His strange demeanour would be explained. Therefore
he carried Jesus in again, and, not now as judge, sought to hear from
His own lips His version of the alleged claim.

Why did not Jesus answer such a question? His silence was answer; but,
besides that, Pilate had not received as he ought what Jesus had
already declared to him as to His kingdom and His relation to 'the
truth,' and careless turning away from Christ's earlier words is
righteously and necessarily punished by subsequent silence, if the same
disposition remains. That it did remain, Christ's silence is proof. Had
there been any use in answering, Pilate would not have asked in vain.
If Jesus was silent, we may be sure that He who sees all hearts and
responds to all true desires was so, because He knew that it was best
to say nothing. The question of His origin had nothing to do with
Pilate's duty then, which turned, not on whence Jesus had come, but on
what Pilate believed Him to have done, or not to have done. He who will
not do the plain duty of the moment has little chance of an answer to
his questions about such high matters.

The shallow character of the governor's awe and interest is clearly
seen from the immediate change of tone to arrogant reminder of his
absolute authority. 'To me dost Thou not speak?' The pride of offended
dignity peeps out there. He has forgotten that a moment since he half
suspected that the prisoner, whom he now seeks to terrify with the
cross, and to allure with deliverance, was perhaps come from some misty
heaven. Was that a temper which would have received Christ's answer to
his question?

But one thing he might be made to perceive, and therefore Jesus broke
silence for the only time in this section, and almost the only time
before Pilate. He reads the arrogant Roman the lesson which he and all
his tribe in all lands and ages need--that their power is derived from
God, therefore in its foundation legitimate, and in its exercise to be
guided by His will and used for His purposes. It was God who had
brought the Roman eagles, with their ravening beaks and strong claws,
to the Holy City. Pilate was right in exercising jurisdiction over
Jesus. Let him see that he exercised justice, and let him remember that
the power which he boasted that he 'had' was 'given.' The truth as to
the source of power made the guilt of Caiaphas or of the rulers the
greater, inasmuch as they had neglected the duties to which they had
been appointed, and by handing over Jesus on a charge which they
themselves should have searched out, had been guilty of 'theocratic
felony.' This sudden flash of bold rebuke, reminding Pilate of his
dependence, and charging him with the lesser but yet real 'sin,' went
deeper than any answer to his question would have done, and spurred him
to more earnest effort, as John points out. He 'sought to release Him,'
as if formerly he had been rather simply unwilling to condemn than
anxious to deliver.

IV. So the scene changes again to outside. Pilate went out alone,
leaving Jesus within, and was met before he had time, as would appear,
to speak, by the final irresistible weapon which the rulers had kept in
reserve. An accusation of treason was only too certain to be listened
to by the suspicious tyrant who was then Emperor, especially if brought
by the authorities of a subject nation. Many a provincial governor had
had but a short shrift in such a case, and Pilate knew that he was a
ruined man if these implacable zealots howling before him went to
Tiberius with such a charge. So the die was cast. With rage in his
heart, no doubt, and knowing that he was sacrificing 'innocent blood'
to save himself, he turned away from the victorious mob, apparently in
silence, and brought Jesus out once more. He had no more words to say
to his prisoner. Nothing remained but the formal act of sentence, for
which he seated himself, with a poor assumption of dignity, yet feeling
all the while, no doubt, what a contemptible surrender he was making.

Judgment-seats and mosaic pavements do not go far to secure reverence
for a judge who is no better than an assassin, killing an innocent man
to secure his own ends. Pilate's sentence fell most heavily on himself.
If 'the judge is condemned when the guilty is acquitted,' he is tenfold
condemned when the innocent is sentenced.

Pilate returned to his sarcastic mood when he returned to his
injustice, and found some satisfaction in his old jeer, 'your King.'
But the passion of hatred was too much in earnest to be turned or even
affected by such poor scoffs, and the only answer was the renewed roar
of the mob, which had murder in its tone. The repetition of the
governor's taunt, 'Shall I crucify your King?' brought out the answer
in which the rulers of the nation in their fury blindly flung away
their prerogative. It is no accident that it was 'the chief priests'
who answered, 'We have no king but Caesar.' Driven by hate, they
deliberately disown their Messianic hope, and repudiate their national
glory. They who will not have Christ have to bow to a tyrant. Rebellion
against Him brings slavery.



AN EYE-WITNESS'S ACCOUNT OF THE CRUCIFIXION

'And He bearing His cross went forth into a place called the place of a
skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha: Where they crucified
Him, and two other with Him, on either side one, and Jesus in the
midst. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the
writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. This title then
read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh
to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Then
said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of
the Jews; but that He said, I am King of the Jews. Pilate answered,
What I have written I have written. Then the soldiers, when they had
crucified Jesus, took His garments, and made four parts, to every
soldier a part; and also His coat: now the coat was without seam, woven
from the top throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let us
not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the
scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted My raiment among
them, and for My vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the
soldiers did. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus His mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When
Jesus therefore saw His mother, and the disciple standing by, whom He
loved, He saith unto His mother, Woman, behold Thy Son! Then saith He
to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple
took her unto his own home. After this, Jesus knowing that all things
were now accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I
thirst. Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a
spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to His mouth.
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, He said, It is finished:
and He bowed His head, and gave up the ghost.'--JOHN xix. 17-30.

In great and small matters John's account adds much to the narrative of
the crucifixion. He alone tells of the attempt to have the title on the
Cross altered, of the tender entrusting of the Virgin to his care, and
of the two 'words' 'I thirst' and 'It is finished.' He gives details
which had been burned into his memory, such as Christ's position 'in
the midst' of the two robbers, and the jar of 'vinegar' standing by the
crosses. He says little about the act of fixing Jesus to the Cross, but
enlarges what the other Evangelists tell as to the soldiers 'casting
lots.' He had heard what they said to one another. He alone distinctly
tells that when He went forth, Jesus was bearing the Cross which
afterwards Simon of Cyrene had to carry, probably because our Lord's
strength failed.

Who appointed the two robbers to be crucified at the same time? Not the
rulers, who had no such power but probably Pilate, as one more shaft of
sarcasm which was all the sharper both because it seemed to put Jesus
in the same class as they, and because they were of the same class as
the man of the Jews' choice, Barabbas, and possibly were two of his
gang. Jesus was 'in the midst,' where He always is, completely
identified with the transgressors, but central to all things and all
men. As He was in the midst on the Cross, with a penitent on one hand
and a rejecter on the other, He is still in the midst of humanity, and
His judgment-seat will be as central as His Cross was.

All the Evangelists give the title written over the Cross, but John
alone tells that it was Pilate's malicious invention. He thought that
he was having a final fling at the priests, and little knew how truly
his title, which was meant as a bitter jest, was a fact. He had it put
into the three tongues in use--'Hebrew,' the national tongue; 'Greek,'
the common medium of intercourse between varying nationalities; and
'Latin' the official language. He did not know that he was proclaiming
the universal dominion of Jesus, and prophesying that wisdom as
represented by Greece, law and imperial power as represented by Rome,
and all previous revelation as represented by Israel, would yet bow
before the Crucified, and recognise that His Cross was His throne.

The 'high-priests' winced, and would fain have had the title altered.
Their wish once more denied Jesus, and added to their condemnation, but
it did not move Pilate. It would have been well for him if he had been
as firm in carrying out his convictions of justice as in abiding by his
bitter jest. He was obstinate in the wrong place, partly because he was
angry with the rulers, and partly to recover his self-respect, which
had been damaged by his vacillation. But his stiff-necked speech had a
more tragic meaning than he knew, for 'what he had written' on his own
life-page on that day could never be erased, and will confront him. We
are all writing an imperishable record, and we shall have to read it
out hereafter, and acknowledge our handwriting.

John next sets in strong contrast the two groups round the Cross--the
stolid soldiers and the sad friends. The four legionaries went through
their work as a very ordinary piece of military duty. They were well
accustomed to crucify rebel Jews, and saw no difference between these
three and former prisoners. They watched the pangs without a touch of
pity, and only wished that death might come soon, and let them get back
to their barracks. How blind men may be to what they are gazing at! If
knowledge measures guilt, how slight the culpability of the soldiers!
They were scarcely more guilty than the mallet and nails which they
used. The Sufferer's clothes were their perquisite, and their division
was conducted on cool business principles, and with utter disregard of
the solemn nearness of death. Could callous indifference go further
than to cast lots for the robe at the very foot of the Cross?

But the thing that most concerns us here is that Jesus submitted to
that extremity of shame and humiliation, and hung there naked for all
these hours, gazed on, while the light lasted, by a mocking crowd. He
had set the perfect Pattern of lowly self-abnegation when, amid the
disciples in the upper room, He had 'laid aside His garments,' but now
He humbles Himself yet more, being clothed only 'with shame.' Therefore
should we clothe Him with hearts' love. Therefore God has clothed Him
with the robes of imperial majesty.

Another point emphasised by John is the fulfilment of prophecy in this
act. The seamless robe, probably woven by loving hands, perhaps by some
of the weeping women who stood there, was too valuable to divide, and
it would be a moment's pastime to cast lots for it. John saw, in the
expedient naturally suggested to four rough men, who all wanted the
robe but did not want to quarrel over it, a fulfilment of the cry of
the ancient sufferer, who had lamented that his enemies made so sure of
his death that they divided his garments and cast lots for his vesture.
But he was 'wiser than he knew,' and, while his words were to his own
apprehension but a vivid metaphor expressing his desperate condition,
'the Spirit which was in' him 'did signify' by them 'the sufferings of
Christ.' Theories of prophecy or sacrifice which deny the correctness
of John's interpretation have the New Testament against them, and
assume to know more about the workings of inspiration than is either
modest or scientific.

What a contrast the other group presents! John's enumeration of the
women may be read so as to mention four or three, according as 'His
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas,' is taken to mean one woman
or two. The latter is the more probable supposition, and it is also
probable that the unnamed sister of our Lord's mother was no other than
Salome, John's own mother. If so, entrusting Mary to John's care would
be the more natural. Tender care, joined with consciousness that
henceforth the relation of son and mother was to be supplanted, not
merely by Death's separating fingers, but by faith's uniting bond,
breathed through the word, so loving yet so removing, 'Woman, behold
thy son!' Dying trust in the humble friend, which would go far to make
the friend worthy of it, breathed in the charge, to which no form of
address corresponding to 'Woman' is prefixed. Jesus had nothing else to
give as a parting gift, but He gave these two to each other, and
enriched both. He showed His own loving heart, and implied His faithful
discharge of all filial duties hitherto. And He taught us the lesson,
which many of us have proved to be true, that losses are best made up
when we hear Him pointing us by them to new offices of help to others,
and that, if we will let Him, He will point us too to what will fill
empty places in our hearts and homes.

The second of the words on the Cross which we owe to John is that
pathetic expression, 'I thirst.' Most significant is the insight into
our Lord's consciousness which John, here as elsewhere, ventures to
give. Not till He knew 'that all things were accomplished' did He give
heed to the pangs of thirst, which made so terrible a part of the
torture of crucifixion. The strong will kept back the bodily cravings
so long as any unfulfilled duty remained. Now Jesus had nothing to do
but to die, and before He died He let flesh have one little
alleviation. He had refused the stupefying draught which would have
lessened suffering by dulling consciousness, but He asked for the
draught which would momentarily slake the agony of parched lips and
burning throat.

The words of verse 28 are not to be taken as meaning that Jesus said 'I
thirst' with the mere intention of fulfilling the Scripture. His
utterance was the plaint of a real need, not a performance to fill a
part. But it is John who sees in that wholly natural cry the fulfilment
of the psalm (Ps. lxix. 21). All Christ's bodily sufferings may be said
to be summed up in this one word, the only one in which they found
utterance. The same lips that said, 'If any man thirst, let him come
unto Me, and drink,' said this. Infinitely pathetic in itself, that cry
becomes almost awful in its appeal to us when we remember who uttered
it, and why He bore these pangs. The very 'Fountain of living water'
knew the pang of thirst that every one that thirsteth might come to the
waters, and might drink, not water only, but 'wine and milk, without
money or price.'

John's last contribution to our knowledge of our Lord's words on the
Cross is that triumphant 'It is finished,' wherein there spoke, not
only the common dying consciousness of life being ended, but the
certitude, which He alone of all who have died, or will die, had the
right to feel and utter, that every task was completed, that all God's
will was accomplished, all Messiah's work done, all prophecy fulfilled,
redemption secured, God and man reconciled. He looked back over all His
life and saw no failure, no falling below the demands of the occasion,
nothing that could have been bettered, nothing that should not have
been there. He looked upwards, and even at that moment He heard in His
soul the voice of the Father saying, 'This is My beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased!'

Christ's work is finished. It needs no supplement. It can never be
repeated or imitated while the world lasts, and will not lose its power
through the ages. Let us trust to it as complete for all our needs, and
not seek to strengthen 'the sure foundation' which it has laid by any
shifting, uncertain additions of our own. But we may remember, too,
that while Christ's work is, in one aspect, finished, when He bowed His
head, and by His own will 'gave up the ghost,' in another aspect His
work is not finished, nor will be, until the whole benefits of His
incarnation and death are diffused through, and appropriated by, the
world. He is working to-day, and long ages have yet to pass, in all
probability, before the voice of Him that sitteth on the throne shall
say 'It is done!'



THE TITLE ON THE CROSS

'Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross.'--JOHN xix. 19.

This title is recorded by all four Evangelists, in words varying in
form but alike in substance. It strikes them all as significant that,
meaning only to fling a jeer at his unruly subjects, Pilate should have
written it, and proclaimed this Nazarene visionary to be He for whom
Israel had longed through weary ages. John's account is the fullest, as
indeed his narrative of all Pilate's shufflings is the most complete.
He alone records that the title was tri-lingual (for the similar
statement in the Authorised Version of Luke is not part of the original
text). He alone gives the Jews' request for an alteration of the title,
and Pilate's bitter answer. That angry reply betrays his motive in
setting up such words over a crucified prisoner's head. They were meant
as a savage taunt of the Jews, not as an insult to Jesus, which would
have been welcome to them. He seems to have regarded our Lord as a
harmless enthusiast, to have had a certain liking for Him, and a
languid curiosity as to Him, which came by degrees to be just tinged
with awe as he felt that he could not quite make Him out. Throughout,
he was convinced that His claim to be a king contained no menace for
Caesar, and he would have let Jesus go but for fear of being
misrepresented at Rome. He felt that the sacrifice of one more Jew was
a small price to pay to avert his accusation to Caesar; he would have
sacrificed a dozen such to keep his place. But he felt that he was
being coerced to do injustice, and his anger and sense of humiliation
find vent in that written taunt. It was a spurt of bad temper and a
measure of his reluctance.

Besides the interest attaching to it as Pilate's work, it seems to John
significant of much that it should have been fastened on the Cross, and
that it should have been in the three languages, Hebrew (Aramaic),
Greek, and Latin.

Let us deal with three points in succession.

