
Believing that the earth was the only world, that it was a vast
circular plane, and that it was the fixed and immovable center around
which revolved the celestial luminaries, the ancient Astronomers, in
conformity to the requirement of the doctrine of future rewards and
punishments, as inculcated in the Egyptian Version of the Exoteric
Creed, divided it into an upper and an under, or nether world, which
they connected by a sinuous and tenebrious passage.


The Firmament.

The azure dome, called the firmament in the book of Genesis, was
believed to be a solid transparency, which we find described, in the
fourth chapter and sixth verse, of that collection of Astronomical
Allegories, called the Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation, "as a sea of
glass like unto crystal." It was represented as being supported by four
pillars, resting upon the earth, one at each of the cardinal points,
which were designated as "the pillars of heaven." Conceiving the idea
that there were windows in the firmament, the ancient Astronomers
called them "the windows of heaven" and taught that they were opened
when it rained, and closed when it ceased to rain. Hence it is evident
that the ancient Astronomers did not refer to these pillars and windows
in a figurative sense, but as real appurtenances to a solid firmament,
as will be seen by reference to Gen. vii. 11, and viii. 2, Job xxvi.
11, and Malachi iii. 10.


The Planets.

Believing that the stars were but mere flambeaux, suspended beneath the
firmament, and revolving round the earth, for the sole purpose of
giving it light and heat; and observing that seven of these, answering
to the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, had
perceptible movements, in relation to the other luminaries, the ancient
astronomers designated them as planets or wandering stars.


The Constellations.

Perceiving that the other celestial luminaries maintained the same
relation to each other, and designating them as fixed stars, the
ancient astronomers grouped those visible to them into forty-eight
Constellations; and giving names to these, they also attached names to
the stars of larger magnitude, which was done for the purpose of
locating and distinguishing them with greater ease.


The Zodiac.

Through twelve of these Constellations, mostly contained within a belt
of 16 degrees in width, and within which the planets appeared to
revolve, the ancient astronomers inscribed a central line representing
the Ecliptic, or apparent orbit of the sun, which they divided into 360
degrees; and quartering these to denote the seasons, they named the
cardinal points the Summer and Winter Solstices, and the Vernal and
Autumnal Equinoxes; the former referring to the longest and shortest
days of the year; and the latter to the two periods when the days and
nights are equal. An abbreviatory sign having been attached to each of
these constellations, the great celestial belt containing them was
called "the wheel of the signs," or "a wheel in the middle of a wheel,"
as designated by that old Astrologer, Ezekiel the Prophet, in chap. i.
and 16th verse. But for the reason that, with only one exception, the
forms of living things, either real or mythical, were given to them,
this belt, ultimately, wad designated as the Zodiac; or Circle of
living Creatures, see Ezekiel, chap. i. Constituting the essential
feature of the ancient Astronomy, we present, in our frontispiece, a
diagram of the Zodiac, as anciently represented, to which, as well as
to Burritts' Celestial Atlas, our readers will be necessitated to make
frequent reference.

[See plate1.gif]

Recent researches among the ruins of ancient cities have developed the
fact that several centuries before the beginning of our era the
astronomers had invented the telescope, and discovered the true or
heliocentric system of nature; but for the reason that religion had
been based upon the false, or geocentric system, it was deemed prudent
not to teach it to the masses. Hence, hiding it away among the other
secrets of the Esoteric philosophy, the knowledge of it was lost during
the Middle Ages; and when rediscovered, the hierarchy of the Church of
Rome, upon the plea that it was contrary to the teachings of Scripture,
resorted to inquisitorial tortures to suppress its promulgation; but,
in spite of all their efforts, it has been universally accepted; and,
in this otherwise enlightened age, we have presented to us the anomaly
of a religion based upon a false system of Astronomy, while its
votaries believe in the true system.



THE SACRED NUMBERS 7 AND 12.

In reference to the planets, and the signs of the Zodiac, the numbers
seven and twelve were recognized as sacred by the ancient Astrologers,
and dedications were made to them in all kinds and sorts of forms. In
the allegories, the genii of the planets were designated as spirits or
messengers to the Supreme Deity, imaginarily enthroned above the
firmament, which we find described in Revelations iv. 5, as "Seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of
God;" and which were represented by lights burning in seven branched
candlesticks set before the altars in the temples; the central light
for the Sun; the Moon, Mercury and Venus on one side; and Mars, Jupiter
and Saturn on the other. The seven branched candlesticks seen in all
Catholic churches, and in some Protestant ones, are intended to
represent the same planetary system.

Among the numerous dedications to the genii of the planets we mention
the seven days of the week, the seven stories of the tower of Babylon,
the seven gates of Thebes, the seven piped flute of Pan, the seven
stringed lyre of Apollo, the seven books of fate, the book of seven
seals, the seven castes into which the Egyptians and East Indians were
divided, and the jubilee of seven times seven years. Among the
dedications to the twelve signs we mention the twelve months of the
year, the grand cycle of 12,000 years, the twelve altars of James, the
twelve labors of Hercules, the twelve divisions of the Egyptian
Labyrinth, the twelve shields of Mars, the twelve precious stones,
ranged in threes to denote the seasons, in the breastplate of High
Priest, the twelve foundations of the Sacred City, referred to in the
Book of Revelation, the twelve sons of Jacob, the twelve tribes of
Israel, and the twelve Disciples. In the Book of Revelation alone the
number 7 is repeated twenty-four times, and the number 12 fourteen
times.



THE TWELVE THOUSAND YEAR CYCLE.

In determining the duration of the period within which were to occur
the events taught in the doctrines of the Exoteric Creed, the ancient
Astrologers dedicated a thousand years to each of the signs of the
Zodiac, and thus inaugurating the cycle of twelve thousand years,
taught that, at its conclusion, the heaven and the earth, which they
believed to be composed of the indestructible elements of fire, air,
earth and water, would, through the agency of the first of these, be
reduced to chaos, as a preliminary to the reorganization of a new
heaven and a new earth at the beginning of the succeeding cycle. Such
was the origin of the grand cycle of the ancient Astrolatry, and it
must be borne in mind that its authors made its conclusion to
correspond in time and circumstance to the doctrines relating to the
finale of the plan of redemption.



THE ANCIENT TRIAD.

After conceiving the idea of a primeval chaos, constituted of four
indestructible elements of which fire was the leading one, the Oriental
astrologers began to indulge in speculations relative to the agencies
which were engaged in its organization. Having no knowledge of the
forces inherent in nature, they imputed this work to three
intelligences, which, embodying the All in All, they personified by the
figure of a man with three heads, and to this trinity gave the names of
Brahma, Vishnu and Siva. Such a figure, carved in stone, may be seen in
the island Cave of Elephanta, near Bombay, India, and is popularly
believed to represent the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer; but, in
determining their true signification, we must be governed by the
ancient teachings that "All things were made by one god-head with three
names, and this God is all things." Hence the conclusion is
irresistible that the first person represents neither the creator nor
organizer of chaos, but chaos itself; the second person, its organizer
and governor; and the third person, the agent in nature which impresses
all her parts with life and motion; the latter being the imaginary
great soul or spirit inculcated in the Esoteric philosophy. In support
of this opinion it will be found that the Egyptian Triad of Father, Son
and Spirit is virtually the same we have assigned to its Oriental
prototype. Thus we see that to the ancient Astrolatry Christendom is
indebted for the Trinity of

            "God the Father, God the Son,
             God the Spirit--three in one."

But, having ascribed supreme intelligence or reason to its second
person, under the name of the Logos, or Word, and designating its third
person as the Holy Ghost, the ancient Triad was usually formulated as
the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, as may be seen by reference to
the text in the allegories which we find recorded in I John v. 7, which
reads that "There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one."

Considered in some forms of Astrolatry as too sacred to attach a name
to the triune Deity, he was called "the One," and we find him thus
designated in the 4th chapter of Revelation, where, like Zeus and
Jupiter, of the Grecian and Roman mythologies, he is represented as
seated above the firmament, upon a throne from which "proceeded
lightnings and thunderings," and to whom all, the subordinate
divinities were made to pay homage. As the hurler of thunderbolts he
was called "the Thunderer," and as the opener of the windows of heaven,
when it rained, he was designated "Jupiter Pluvius." Such was the
ancient Triad made to say of himself, in an inscription found in the
ruins of the temple at Sais in Egypt, "I am all that has been, all that
is, and all that shall be, and no mortal has lifted yet the veil that
covers me;" and such was the Triunity referred to as the God Universe
by Pliny, the Roman philosopher and naturalist, who, flourishing in the
first century of the Christian era, wrote that he is "An infinite God
which has never been created, and which shall never come to an end. To
look for something else beyond it is useless labor for man and out of
his reach. Behold that truly sacred Being, eternal and immense, which
includes within itself everything; it is All in All, or rather itself
is All. It is the work of nature, and itself is nature."

Thus we see that, although inculcating homage to a multitude of
subordinate divinities, the ancient Astrolatry was only an apparent
Polytheism; its enlightened votaries, recognizing the dogma of the
unity of God, were in reality Monotheists, paying supreme adoration to
the mythical genius of the Sun, to whom we will now direct attention.



GOD SOL.

In determining the characteristics of the supreme divinity of astral
worship, it must be borne in mind that its founders taught that he was
evolved or engendered by the Father, or first person in the sacred
Triad, from his pure substance, which as we have shown was constituted
of chaos or the primeval fire into which they supposed all things were
reduced through the agency of that element at the conclusion of 12,000
year cycles. Hence, designating that mythical being as the only
begotten of the Father, they personified him as God the Son, or second
person in the sacred Triad; and recognizing the Sun as the ruling star,
very appropriately made him the presiding genius of that luminary,
under the title of God Sol. According homage to light as his chief
attribute, he is referred to in the allegories as "The true Light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," John i., 9; and,
although designated as the only begotten of the Father, his
co-existence with him, under the title of the Logos or Word, is shown
in the text which reads, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God," John i., 1.

Personifying the principles of Good and Evil in God Sol, the ancient
Astrologers consecrated the six divisions of the 12,000 year cycle,
corresponding to the reproductive months of Spring and Summer, to him
as Lord of Good, and symbolizing him by the constellation of the Zodiac
in which the Vernal Equinox successively occurred, as explained
hereafter, they dedicated the six divisions of that cycle,
corresponding to the destructive months of Autumn and Winter, to him as
Lord of Evil, and as such, symbolizing him by the serpent, marked the
beginning of his reign by the constellation "Serpens," placed in
conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox. Personifying in him the opposing
principles of Good and Evil, he was to the ancients both God and Devil,
or the varied God, who, in relation to the seasons, was described as
beautiful in Spring, powerful in Summer, beneficent in Autumn and
terrible in Winter. Thus under various names, intended to represent God
Sol in relation to the diversified seasons, we find recorded in the
Scriptures, or solar fables, numerous portrayals of imaginary
conflicts, in which the Evil principle, triumphing during Autumn and
Winter, is conquered at the Vernal Equinox by the Good principle, who,
bringing back equal days and nights, restores the harmony of nature.

The eternal enmity between the principles of Good and Evil, as
manifested in the diversity of the seasons, we find portrayed in the
Constellations Hercules and Draco, placed in the northern heavens, in
which the heel of the former, representing one of the most ancient of
the imaginary incarnations of God Sol, to which we will refer
hereafter, is resting upon the head of the latter, as referred to in
Genesis iii., 15, which makes God Sol, or the Lord God, say to the
serpent, "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his
heel." The woman alluded to in this text is the Virgo of the Zodiac, as
will be made apparent hereafter.

[See plate2.gif]

Of all the divinities of the ancient mythology God Sol was the only one
distinguished by the exalted title of Lord or Lord God, for the reason
that he was made the organizer of chaos and governor of heaven and
earth. Hence, having constituted him the lord of light and darkness, as
well as good and evil, the ancient astrologers in composing the solar
fables made him say of himself, "I form the light and create darkness;
I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things," Isaiah
xlv., 7. "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done
it?" Amos iii., 6. Besides the title of Lord or Lord God, the solar
divinity is also designated in the allegories as the Lord of Lords and
the King of Kings, the Invincible, the Mighty God, etc.

Subjecting the mythical genius of the sun, in his apparent annual
revolution round the earth, to the four stages of human life from
infancy to old age, the ancient Magi fixed the natal day of the young
God Sol at the winter solstice, the Virgo of the Zodiac was made his
mother, and the constellation in conjunction with her, which is now
known as Bootes, but anciently called Arcturus, his foster father. He
is represented as holding in leash two hunting dogs and driving Ursa
Major, or the Great Bear, around the north pole, thus showing that the
original occupation of the celestial foster father of the young God Sol
was that of a bear driver, and that his sons, referred to in job
xxxviii., 32, are the dogs Asterion and Chara. It will be observed that
Virgo is represented in our illustration with a child in her arms, for
the reason that she is so represented in the ancient Zodiacs, and the
fact will be readily conceded that she is the only Virgin who could
give birth to a child and be a virgin still.

[See plate3.gif]
