Simple designs they were to be at first,--floral emblems and the symbols
used for ages by the Church, but later Te-filo was to essay much
more ambitious things, perhaps even the archangels, and San Juan, the
soldier-saint, himself.

It was the winter of 1812, and Te-filo and Magdalena had loved each
other for over a year, when Te-filo one day spoke to the Father of
Magdalena, and said that he wished to marry her. For months Magdalena
had tried to be dutiful and to engage the Father's interest, on her
side, in their favor, in preparation for Te-filo's broaching of
the subject to him. But she felt always that he remembered her old
hostility, and that he still considered her a mere disaffected Indian
of his flock. They had often talked of this, but Te-filo, who loved the
Father for the special kindness he had always shown him, believed that
he would agree to the marriage. Why should he not? he said. It would
make no difference to him, and he, Te-filo, would work better than ever,
to show his gratitude.

When at last he spoke of the matter, the Father peremptorily denied his
request. Agust'n's daughter was an obstinate, perverse child, and would
only lead Te-filo away too. He would give thought to the matter, and
would see what girl there was suitable for him, and then, if he wished
to marry, well and good. He would give them two rooms in the corridor,
near his own, and would allow him pay as his body servant and for
his work, and perhaps other privileges as well. And that was all; for
Te-filo knew that he would not be moved from his decision. Good man as
the Father was, he had the Spaniard's failing in dealing with a subject
race a certain hardness arising from a position of authority not allied
with responsibility--except to God, and that, indeed, the Father felt,
but he conceived that his duty to his Indians, apart from his spiritual
ministrations, was entirely comprised in the teaching, feeding, and just
governing of them.

When Te-filo told Magdalena, at their next meeting, what the Father had
said, the girl was enraged. "So he thinks I am not good enough for you!"
she cried: "And I have done everything to please him. But he is only a
priest, and has no heart. Ah! those Spaniards, I hate them!" And then,
with a woman's illogical turn--"Well, he shall see that I am Spanish
too. We will go away to the Mission at San Diego, Te-filo. My father's
brother is there, and I have heard my father say that he has influence
with the priest. He will marry us, and you can work there as well as
here."

But Te-filo was in doubt. His love for Magdalena and his love and
reverence for the Father contended. He was a simple, guileless soul, and
the thought of ingratitude to his benefactor was a misery to him. Some
other way must be found: the saints would help them; he would pray to
San Lucas, who, the Father had told him, was his patron, for he had been
born on his day and christened by his name: and Magdalena must pray,
too.

Magdalena, however, took up now an attitude of open rebellion, and
absented herself entirely from the services of the Church. This was
another trouble to Te-filo, and daily over his work he prayed to San
Lucas, and pondered what was best to do. But days and weeks went on, and
his inward disquiet began to take effect in his appearance and behavior.
The Father, busy with the multitudinous affairs of the Mission, had
entirely forgotten the matter of Te-filo's request: but one day he
chanced to notice his favorite's listless air, and it recalled the
affair to his mind. A day or two afterwards he said to Te-filo, as the
latter was with him in the sacristy, "Te-filo, you are dull and not
yourself. You were right, it is time you were married, and I have the
very one for you. It is Ana, the daughter of Manuel, who works in the
smith's shop. She is a good girl. I will speak of it to her father."

"Padre," said Te-filo, "I cannot marry Ana, nor any one else but
Magdalena, for I love her. Oh, Padre,"--and he dropped on his knees
before the priest,--"let us be married. You do not know, she has tried
hard to be good, and to please you. And I will work for you all my life.
I have been praying to San Lucas ever since I told you, but he has not
done anything."

The priest was moved by the earnestness of the boy--for boy he had
always considered him, and indeed he was little more in age. "Well, hijo
mio," he said, "I do not know about that. The saints always hear us,
as I have told you, and perhaps--who knows?--San Lucas may do something
yet. Or, perhaps," he added with a smile, "it is because we changed your
name, and he does not look on you as his son. Well, that was my fault.
But you say that Magdalena has tried to please me? Good, then we will
see. I will set her a penance, for she has not behaved well; then
I shall see if she wishes to please me. To-morrow will be a day of
observance, and there will be early mass in the church. Tell Magdalena,
Te-filo, that she must come to mass and carry a penitent's candle. Let
her be in the front row of the women. If I see her there I shall know
she is obedient, and perhaps, yes, perhaps,--well, we will see about the
rest."

"Oh, Padre," Te-filo exclaimed, "you are my padre, indeed;" and he put
the priest's hand to his forehead. "I know she will come, and I know she
wishes to please you. And Padre," he said, "I have made a picture of the
angels of La Navidad. I did it to please you" (he was about to add, "and
Magdalena," but prudence stopped him in time). "I thought--I thought--"

"Well, what did you think, hijo mio?" asked the priest.

"I thought, Padre, that if you liked it, and said it was done well, it
would be fine on the high roof, Padre, the angels, four of them, in the
middle of the roof: like this, Padre, see!" An he raised his hands in
the attitude in which he had seen Magdalena when she met him in the
Father's room. "I could do it, Padre, if you like it."

"Angels, Te-filo!" said the Father. "Hm! I do not know. It is hard to
paint the holy angels, and diligent as you have been, I hardly think you
are an Angelico. But go and bring what you have done, and I will see.
Indeed, it is just what I would have, but it must be well done, or it
will spoil the rest."

The boy ran off, and returned quickly with a large sheepskin on which
he had drawn in colors a really fine design: four angels in attitudes of
worship, with uplifted hands, and eyes that expressed, crudely yet well,
the wonder that the Holy Ones might well feel at the Miracle of the
Manger.

"Ah, and did you really draw this?" asked the priest. "It is excellent,
Te-filo; we must make a painter of you in earnest; perhaps we might even
send you to Mexico to be taught by a good artist. There is one of the
Brothers at the College of San Fernando who would train you well. I
think this is what San Lucas has been doing for you, after all. But how
did you do it, Te-filo? What did you draw from?"

"Padre," said Te-filo tremblingly, "I will tell you, but do not be
angry. It was Magdalena. I saw her once, at first, and she was like
that, yes, exactly like that, with her hands up, so. She was like one of
the angels in your new missal, and I remembered, and drew it many times
over, and do you really think it will do for the church, Padre?" he
finished eagerly, his face aflush with excitement.

"Yes, it is certainly good enough, Te-filo," said the Father. "We will
have gold round the heads and golden stars on the robes, and San Juan's
church shall be the finest in California. Though how it comes that the
girl Magdalena can have been your model passes my understanding. Indeed,
I think it is the good San Lucas, or San Juan himself, who has helped
you. Well, you deserve praise, Te-filo, and perhaps some reward. But go
now, and tell Magdalena to come to first mass to-morrow, as I said. You
may take a candle from the sacristy and give it to her."

That evening Te-filo told Magdalena all that had happened. But her
Spanish blood was in hot rebellion, and in spite of her love and
Te-filo's entreaties, she would not give in. To carry a candle, as if
she were one of the Indian girls, caught in disgrace! No, it was too
much. Why, the whole pueblo would see her, and laugh (which, indeed, was
true for she had held herself above the girls of the Mission, and was
not loved by them). In vain Te-filo told her of the Father's words
about sending him to Mexico to become a real painter. No, it would be
a victory for the Father if she gave in, and he should see that she was
Spanish as well as he. And contemptuously she tossed the candle aside
into the chia bushes in the courtyard, where they talked in the shadow
of the arches.

It was with a heavy heart that Te-filo left her, yet with a faint hope
that she might repent and come to mass in the morning. It was a dull,
oppressive night, such as comes rarely in California, even in the summer
heats. Te-filo slept but little, and twice during the night he got up
from his bench bed and prayed to San Lucas, for this seemed to be the
final chance for his and Magdalena's happiness, and after his interview
with the Father all had seemed so bright that it was hard now to give
up hope. Magdalena, on her part, slept not at all, but she did not
pray. Instead, she lay with wide-open eyes in the darkness of her little
windowless room, looking up at the low ceiling and fighting over in her
heart the old battle of love and pride. One might say that love stood
for the Indian and pride for the Spaniard in her, and that it was an
incident in the old feud that began with Cortes and Malinche. And then
she thought of what Te-filo had told her, how he had told the Father
about painting the angels for the church because he had seen her
standing with upraised hands, like an angel, that day. Poor Te-filo! how
he loved her! and how she loved him, too! It was hard, very hard,
that there was so much trouble. How happy they might be! And he was so
clever, and might be a real painter, not working in the fields or at the
workshops, but only painting angels and beautiful things. And she was
the cause, in a way, of his being so clever she was proud of that, and
the thought made her glow, simple Indian girl as she was, with a woman's
sweetest thrill--he was clever because of her! Yet now she must spoil it
all, and all for the Father's hardness.

But then, must she?--for she knew that it lay with her, after all. She
could make all so happy why not? Ah, but the humiliation! No, she could
not. But could she not? The humiliation would soon be over, and the
prize was so great. They might be married, and even at once. Yes and
no, yes and no--so the fight went on, as the hours dragged past and the
heavy air pressed upon her restless nerves and forbade sleep.

It would soon be dawn, and now she must decide. Then the thought came
to her, should she pray to San Lucas, as Te-filo had been doing? Perhaps
after all he would help them. She got up, and creeping quietly into the
adjoining room, where her father and mother were asleep, she knelt at
the little crucifix that hung on the wall, and tried to pray. But no
words would come, and she was about to rise and go back to her bed when
it seemed as if words were whispered in her ear, echoes carried in the
brain from something she had once heard, no doubt, in the church--". . .
levant--a los humildes . . . raised up the humble. . ." She had noticed
the words, because they were so averse to her ways of thought: the
humble, why, that was like the Indians whom she had always despised.
But, after all, perhaps that was San Lucas's answer; for she saw that it
would settle all her trouble. Well, be it so she would be humble, if San
Lucas told her; and she would obey the Father, and then, at last, all
would be well.

She rose, and, remembering the hateful candle, went into the quadrangle
and searched for it. There it lay among the chias, and she picked it up
and carried it to her room. Light was dawning in the east, and she did
not lie down again, but stood in her door, making up her mind to the
humiliation she was to undergo for the sake of Te-filo and their love.
She did not waver now; indeed, in her young, strong passion she gloried
in the sacrifice she would make for love's sake. She dressed herself
with care. They ate no meal that day before mass, which was to be at six
in the morning. If only, she thought, she could tell Te-filo that she
had resolved to do the penance, it would make it so much easier; but
there would be no way of seeing him until they were at the service,
and then the men would be on one side and the women on the other; so he
would not know until he saw her, and perhaps he would not look, for she
had said she would not go. Then a thought came to her with delicious
joy: she would make up to him, and punish herself, for having refused,
by waiting till the people were all in the church, and then going in
alone, so that everybody would see her, and Te-filo would see what she
could do for him.

Solemnly the great bell sounded out the summons to prayer. It was
a special day, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, and all were
expected to come to mass, old and young. The morning was heavy and
airless, and the people, rising from sleepless or restless beds, moved
languidly and in hardly broken silence toward the church, and, entering,
ranged themselves, men and women separately, on either side of the
building, facing the altar. Te-filo was in his usual place, near the
front, and on the margin of the open aisle that divided the sexes. All
had gathered before the bell ceased to sound, but Magdalena was not
there. With a sinking heart Te-filo had watched, hoping against hope
that she would repent and come. He saw Agust'n and Juana come in, and
Agust'n go to the place near the altar which he held as mayordomo, while
Juana merged in the crowd of undistinguished Indian women. So Magdalena
was obstinate, and the prospect of happiness that had looked so bright
yesterday was all over and spoiled. But he must not blame her: she was
not just an Indian, like him. And with a sigh he ceased to watch the
doorway and turned to face the altar.

The Father entered, and bent the knee before the altar in view of the
congregation, who also had knelt on his appearing. The church was in
darkness but for the illumination of candles about the altar and a gray
and sickly daylight that came in at the open door. As the Father turned
to the people there was a stir among the women who had taken places near
the entrance, and a figure appeared, carrying a lighted candle. It was
Magdalena. She walked steadily up the passageway between the men and the
women toward the priest, who stood facing her. A black shawl was thrown
