wiser and a better man than I shall ever be, and that not of noble music, 
but of such as we may hear any day in any street?  "Even that vulgar 
music," he says, "which makes one man merry, another mad, strikes in me a 
deep fit of devotion, and a profound contemplation of God, the first 
composer.  There is something more of divinity in it than the ear 
discovers.  It is an hieroglyphical and shadowed lesson of the whole 
world, and of the creatures of God.  Such a melody to the ear as the 
whole world, well understood, would afford to the understanding."  That 
man, I insist, was indeed recompensed on the earth, when music, which is 
to the ungodly and unrighteous the most earthly of all arts, which to the 
heathens and the savages, to frivolous and profligate persons, only 
tempts to silly excitement or to brutal passion, was to him as the speech 
of angels, a remembrancer to him of that eternal and ever-present heaven, 
from which all beauty, truth, and goodness are shed forth over the 
universe, from the glory of the ever-blessed Trinity--Father, Son, and 
Holy Spirit.

Does any one say--These things are too high for me; I cannot understand 
them?  My dear friends, are they not too high for me likewise?  Do you 
fancy that I understand them, though my reason, as well as Holy 
Scripture, tells me that they are true?  I understand them no more than I 
understand how I draw a single breath, or think a single thought.  But it 
is good for you, and for me, and for every man, now and then, to hear 
things which we do NOT understand; that so we may learn our own 
ignorance, and be lifted up above ourselves, and renounce our fancied 
worldly wisdom, and think within ourselves:--Would it not be wiser to 
confess ourselves fools, and take our Lord's advice, and be converted, 
and become as little children?  For otherwise, our Lord says, we shall in 
nowise enter into this very kingdom of heaven of which I have been 
telling you.  For this is one of the things which God hides from the wise 
and prudent, and yet revealeth unto babes.  Yes, that is the way to 
understand all things, however deep--to become as little children.  A 
little child proves that all I say is true, and that it knows that all I 
say is true.  Though it cannot put its feelings into words, it acts on 
them by a mere instinct, which is the gift of God.  Why does a little 
child pick flowers?  Why does a little child dance when it hears a strain 
of music?  And deeper still, why does a little child know when it has 
done wrong?  Why does it love to hear of things beautiful and noble, and 
shrink from things foul and mean, if what I say is not true?  The child 
does so, because it is nearer heaven, not further off, than we grown 
folk.

Ah! that we would all lay to heart what one said of old, who walked with 
God:--


"Dear soul, could'st thou become a child,
Once more on earth, meek, undefiled,
Then Paradise were round thee here,
And God Himself for ever near."



SERMON XXX.  THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN



Chapel Royal, St James'. 1873.

St. Matt. xxii. 2-7.  "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, 
which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants to call 
them that were bidden to the wedding:  and they would not come.  Again, 
he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, 
I have prepared my dinner:  my oxen and fatlings are killed, and all 
things are ready:  come unto the marriage.  But they made light of it, 
and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:  And 
the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew 
them.  But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth:  and he sent forth 
his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city."

This parable, if we understand it aright, will help to teach us theology-
-that is, the knowledge of God, and of the character of God.  For it is a 
parable concerning the kingdom of heaven, and the laws and customs of the 
kingdom of heaven--that is, the spiritual and eternal laws by which God 
governs men.

Now, what any kingdom or government is like must needs depend on what the 
king or governor of it is like; at least if that king is all-powerful, 
and can do what he likes.  His laws will be like his character.  If he be 
good, he will make good laws.  If he be bad, he will make bad laws.  If 
he be harsh and cruel--if he be careless and indulgent--so will his laws 
be.  If he be loving and generous, delighting in seeing his subjects 
happy, then his laws will be so shaped that his subjects will be happy, 
if they obey those laws.  But also--and this is a very serious matter, 
and one to which foolish people in all ages have tried to shut their 
eyes, and false preachers in all ages have tried to blind men's eyes--
also, I say, if his laws be good, and bountiful, and sure to make men 
happy, then the good king will have those laws obeyed.  He will not be an 
indulgent king, for in his case to be indulgent will be cruelty, and 
nothing less.  The good king will not say,--I have given you laws by 
which you may live happy; but I do not care whether you obey them or not.  
I have, as it were, set you up, in life, and given you advantages by 
which you may prosper if you use them; but I do not care whether you use 
them or not.  For to say that would be as much as to say that I do not 
care if you make yourselves miserable, and make others miserable 
likewise.  The good king will say,--You shall obey my laws, for they are 
for your good.  You shall use my gifts, for they are for your good.  And 
if you do not, I will punish you.  You shall respect my authority.  And 
if you do not--if you go too far, if you become wanton and cruel, and 
destroy your fellow-subjects unjustly off the face of the earth; then I 
will destroy you off the face of he earth, and burn up your city.  I will 
destroy any government or system of society which you set up in 
opposition to my good and just laws.  And if you merely despise the 
gifts, and refuse to use them--then I will cast you out of my kingdom, 
inside which is freedom and happiness, and light and knowledge, into the 
darkness outside, bound hand and foot, into the ignorance and brutal 
slavery which you have chosen, where you may reconsider yourself, weeping 
and gnashing your teeth as you discover what a fool you have been.

Our Lord's parable has fulfilled itself again and again in history, and 
will fulfil itself as long as foolish and rebellious persons exist on 
earth.  This is one of the laws of the kingdom of heaven.  It must be so, 
for it arises by necessity out of the character of Christ, the king of 
heaven.--Infinite bounty and generosity; but if that bounty be despised 
and insulted, or still more, if it be outraged by wanton tyranny or 
cruelty, then--for the benefit of the rest of mankind--awful severity.  
So it is, and so it must be; simply because God is good.

At least, this is the kind of king which the parable shows to us.  The 
king in it begins, not by asking his subjects to pay him taxes, or even 
to do him service, but to come to a great feast--a high court ceremonial-
-the marriage of his son.  Whatsoever else that may mean, it certainly 
means this--that the king intended to treat these men, not as his slaves, 
but as his guests and friends.  They will not come.  They are too busy; 
one over his farm, another over his merchandise.  They owe, remember, 
safe possession of their farm, and safe transit for their merchandise, to 
the king, who governs and guards the land.  But they forget that, and 
refuse his invitation.  Some of them, seemingly out of mere insolence, 
and the spirit of rebellion against authority, just because it is 
authority, go a step too far.  To show that they are their own masters, 
and intend to do what they like, they take the king's messengers, and 
treat them spitefully, and kill them.

Then there arises in that king a noble indignation.  We do not read that 
the king sentimentalised over these rebels, and said,--"After all, their 
evil, like all evil, is only a lower form of good.  They had a fine 
instinct of freedom and independence latent in them, only it was in this 
case somewhat perverted.  They are really only to be pitied for knowing 
no better; but I trust, by careful education, to bring them to a clearer 
sense of their own interests.  I shall therefore send them to a 
reformatory, where, in consideration of the depressing circumstances of 
their imprisonment, they will be better looked after, and have lighter 
work, than the average of my honest and peaceable subjects."  If the king 
had spoken thus, he would have won high applause in these days; at least 
till the farms and the merchandise, the property and the profits of the 
rest of his subjects, were endangered by these favoured objects of his 
philanthropy; who, having found that rebellion and even murder was 
pardonable in one case, would naturally try whether it was not pardonable 
in other cases likewise.  But what we read of the king--and we must 
really remember, in fear and trembling, who spoke this parable, even our 
Lord Himself,--is this--He sent forth his armies, soldiers, men 
disciplined to do their duty at all risks, and sworn to carry out the 
law, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.

Yes, the king was very angry, as he had a right to be.  Yes, let us lay 
that to heart, and tremble, from the very worst of us all to the very 
best of us all.  There is an anger in God.  There is indignation in God.  
Our highest reason ought to tell us that there must be anger in God, as 
long as sin and wrong exist in any corner of the universe.  For all that 
is good in man is of the likeness of God.  And is it not a good feeling, 
a noble feeling, in man, to be indignant, or to cry for vengeance on the 
offender, whenever we hear of cruelty, injustice, or violence?  Is that 
not noble?  I say it is.  I say that the man whose heart does not burn 
within him at the sight of tyranny and cruelty, of baseness and deceit, 
who is not ready to say, Take him, and do to him as he has done to 
others; that man's heart is not right with God, or with man either.  His 
moral sense is stunted.  He is on the way to become, first, if he can, a 
tyrant, and then a slave.

And shall there be no noble indignation in God when He beholds all the 
wrong which is done on earth?  Shall the just and holy God look on 
carelessly and satisfied at injustice and unholiness which vexes even 
poor sinful man?  God forbid!  To think that, would, to my mind, be to 
fancy God less just, less merciful, than man.  And if any one says, Anger 
is a passion, a suffering from something outside oneself, and God can 
have no passions; God cannot be moved by the sins and follies of such 
paltry atoms as we human beings are:  the answer is, Man's anger--even 
just anger--is, too often, a passion; weak-minded persons, ill-educated 
persons, especially when they get together in mobs, and excite each 
other, are carried away when they hear even a false report of cruelty or 
injustice, by their really wholesome indignation, and say and do foolish, 
and cruel, and unjust things, the victims of their own passion.  But even 
among men, the wiser a man is, the purer, the stronger-minded, so much 
the more can he control his indignation, and not let it rise into 
passion, but punish the offender calmly, though sternly, according to 
law.  Even so, our reason bids us believe, does God, who does all things 
by law.  His eternal laws punish of themselves, just as they reward of 
themselves.  The same law of God may be the messenger of His anger to the 
bad, while it is the messenger of His love to the good.  For God has not 
only no passions, but no parts; and therefore His anger and His love are 
not different, but the same.  And His love is His anger, and His anger is 
His love.

An awful thought and yet a blessed thought.  Think of it, my friends--
think of it day and night.  Under God's anger, or under God's love, we 
must be, whether we will or not.  We cannot flee from His presence.  We 
cannot go from His spirit.  If we are loving, and so rise up to heaven, 
God is there--in love.  If we are cruel, and wrathful, and so go down to 
hell, God is there also--in wrath:  with the clean He will be clean, with 
the froward man He will be froward.  In God we live and move, and have 
our being.  On us, and on us alone, it depends, what sort of a life we 
shall live, and whether our being shall be happy or miserable.  On us, 
and on us alone, it depends, whether we shall live under God's anger, or 
live under God's love.  On us, and on us alone, it depends whether the 
eternal and unchangeable God shall be to us a consuming fire, or light, 
and life, and bliss for evermore.

We never had more need to think of this than now; for there has spread 
over the greater part of the civilised world a strong spirit of disbelief 
in the living God.  Men do not believe that God punishes sin and wrong-
doing, either in this world or in the world to come.  And it is not 
confined to those who are called infidels, who disbelieve in the 
incarnation and kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Would to God it were 
so!  Everywhere we find Christians of all creeds and denominations alike, 
holding the very same ruinous notion, and saying to themselves, God does 
not govern this present world.  God does not punish or reward in this 
present life.  This world is all wrong, and the devil's world, and 
therefore I cannot prosper in the world unless I am a little wrong 
likewise, and do a little of the devil's work.  So one lies, another 
cheats, another oppresses, another neglects his plainest social duties, 
another defiles himself with base political or religious intrigues, 
another breaks the seventh commandment, or, indeed, any and every one of 
the commandments which he finds troublesome.  And when one asks in 
astonishment--You call yourselves Christians?  You believe in God, and 
the Bible, and Christianity?  Do you not think that God will punish YOU 
for all this?  Do you not hear from the psalmists, and prophets, and 
apostles, of a God who judges and punishes such generations as this?  Of 
a wrath of God which is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness 
of men, who, like you, hold down the truth in unrighteousness, knowing 
what is right and yet doing what is wrong?  Then they answer, at least in 
their hearts, Oh dear no!  God does not govern men now, or judge men now.  
He only did so, our preachers tell us, under the old Jewish dispensation; 
and such words as you quote from our Lord, or St Paul, have only to do 
with the day of judgment, and the next life, and we have made it all 
right for the next life.  I, says one, regularly perform my religious 
duties; and I, says another, build churches and chapels, and give large 
sums in charity; and I, says another, am converted, and a member of a 
church; and I, says another, am elect, and predestined to everlasting 
life--and so forth, and so forth.  Each man turning the grace of God into 
a cloak for licentiousness, and deluding himself into the notion that he 
may break the eternal laws of God, and yet go to heaven, as he calls it, 
when he dies:  not knowing, poor foolish man, that as the noble 
commination service well says, the dreadful judgments of God are not 
waiting for certain people at the last day, thousands of years hence, but 
hanging over all our heads already, and always ready to fall on us.  Not 
knowing that it is as true now as it was two thousand years ago, that 
"God is a righteous judge, strong and patient."  "If a man will not turn, 
He will whet His sword; He hath bent His bow, and made it ready," against 
those who travail with mischief, who conceive sorrow, and bring forth 
ungodliness.  They dig up pits for their neighbours, and fall themselves 
into the destruction which they have made for others; not knowing that it 
is as true now as it was two thousand years ago, that God is for ever 
saying to the ungodly, "Why dost thou preach my laws, and takest my 
covenant in thy mouth; whereas thou hatest to be reformed, and hast cast 
my words behind thee?  Thou hast let thy mouth speak wickedness, and with 
thy tongue thou hast set forth deceit.  These things hast thou done, and 
I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest, wickedly, that I am even such a 
one as thyself.  But I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things 
which thou hast done.  O consider this, ye that forget God:  lest I pluck 
you away, and there be none to deliver you."

Let us lay this to heart, and say, there can be no doubt--I at least have 
none--that there is growing up among us a serious divorce between faith 
and practice; a serious disbelief that the kingdom of heaven is about us, 
and that Christ is ruling us, as He told us plainly enough in His 
parables, by the laws of the kingdom of heaven; and that He does, and 
will punish and reward each man according to those laws, and according to 
nothing else.

We pride ourselves on our superior light, and our improved civilisation, 
and look down on the old Roman Catholic missionaries, who converted our 
forefathers from heathendom in the Middle Ages.  Now, I am a Protestant, 
if ever there was one, and I know well that these men had their 
superstitions and false doctrines.  They made mistakes, and often worse 
than mistakes, for they were but men.  But this I tell you, that if they 
had not had a deep and sound belief that they were in the kingdom of God, 
the kingdom of heaven; and that they and all men must obey the laws of 
the kingdom of heaven; and that the first law of it was, that wrongdoing 
would be punished, and rightdoing rewarded, in this life, every day, and 
all day long, as sure as Christ the living Lord reigned in righteousness 
over all the earth; if they had not believed that, I say, and acted on 
it, we should probably have been heathen at this day.  As it is, unless 
we Protestants get back the old belief, that God is a living God, and 
that His judgments are abroad in the earth, and that only in keeping His 
commandments can we get life, and not perish, we shall be seriously in 
danger of sinking at last into that hopeless state of popular feeling, 
into which more than one nation in our own time has fallen,--that, as the 
prophet of old says, a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the 
land; the prophets--that is, the preachers and teachers--prophesy 
falsely; and the priests--the ministers of religion--bear rule by their 
means; and my people love to have it so--love to have their consciences 
drugged by the news that they may live bad lives, and yet die good 
deaths.

"And what will ye do in the end thereof?" asks Jeremiah.  What indeed!  
What the Jews did in the end thereof you may read in the book of the 
prophet Jeremiah.  They did nothing, and could do nothing--with their 
morality their manhood was gone.  Sin had borne its certain fruit of 
anarchy and decrepitude.  The wrath of God revealed itself as usual, by 
no miracle, but through inscrutable social laws.  They had to submit, 
cowardly and broken-hearted, to an invasion, a siege, and an utter ruin.  
I do not say, God forbid, that we shall ever sink so low, and have to 
endure so terrible a chastisement:  but this I say, that the only way in 
which any nation of which I ever read in history, can escape, sooner or 
later, from such a fate, is to remember every day, and all day long, that 
the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ill-doing of men, 
who hold the truth in unrighteousness, knowing what is true and what is 
right, yet telling lies, and doing wrong.

Let us lay this to heart, with seriousness and godly fear.  For so we 
shall look up with reverence, and yet with hope, to Christ the ascended 
king, to whom all power is given in heaven and earth; for ever asking Him 
for His Holy Spirit, to put into our minds good desires, and to enable us 
to bring these desires to good effect.  And so we shall live for ever 
under our great taskmaster's eye, and find out that that eye is not 
merely the eye of a just judge, not merely the eye of a bountiful king, 
but more the eye of a loving and merciful Saviour, in whose presence is 
life even here on earth; and at whose right hand, even in this sinful 
world, are pleasures for evermore.



SERMON XXXI.  THE UNCHANGEABLE CHRIST



Eversley. 1845.

Hebrews xiii. 8.  "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to-day, and for 
ever."

Let me first briefly remind you, as the truth upon which my whole 
explanation of this text is built, that man is not meant either for 
solitude or independence.  He is meant to live WITH his fellow-men, to 
live BY them, and to live FOR them.  He is healthy and godly, only when 
he knows all men for his brothers; and himself, in some way or other, as 
the servant of all, and bound in ties of love and duty to every one 
around him.

It is not, however, my intention to dwell upon this truth, deep and 
necessary as it is, but to turn your attention to one of its 
consequences; I mean to the disappointment and regret of which so many 
complain, who try, more or less healthily, to keep that truth before 
them, and shew it forth in their daily life.

It has been, and is now, a common complaint with many who interest 
themselves about their fellow-creatures, and the welfare of the human 
race, that nothing in this world is sure,--nothing is permanent; a 
continual ebb and flow seems to be the only law of human life.  Men 
change, they say; their friendships are fickle; their minds, like their 
bodies, alter from day to day.  The heart whom you trust to-day, to-
