also, O king, is that sacred river known by the name of the
merit-bestowing Brahmasara, whose banks are inhabited by persons whose
sins have been washed away, and whose sight alone produceth merit. In
that direction also lieth the high-souled Matanga's excellent asylum,
called Kedara which is sacred and auspicious and celebrated over the
world. And there also is the mountain called Kundoda, which is so
delightful and abounding in fruits and roots and waters, and where the
king of the Nishadhas (Nala) had slaked his thirst and rested for a
while. In that quarter also is the delightful Deva-vana which is graced
by ascetics. There also are the rivers Vahuda and Nanda on the
mountain's crest. O mighty king, I have described unto thee all the
_tirthas_ and sacred spots in the Eastern quarter. Do thou now hear of
the sacred _tirthas_, and rivers and mountains and holy spots in the
other three quarters!'"


SECTION LXXXVIII

"Dhaumya continued, 'Listen, O Bharata, I shall now narrate to thee in
detail according to my knowledge, the sacred _tirthas_ of the south. In
that quarter lieth the sacred and auspicious river Godavari, full of
water abounding in groves and frequented by ascetics. In that direction
also are the rivers Venna and Bhimarathi, both capable of destroying sin
and fear, and abounding in birds and deer, and graced with abodes of
ascetics. In that region also, O bull of the Bharata race, is the
_tirtha_ of the royal ascetic, Nriga _viz_., the river Payoshni, which
is delightful and full of waters and visited by Brahmanas. There the
illustrious Markandeya, of high ascetic merit sang the praises in verse
of king Nriga's line. We have heard respecting the sacrificing king
Nriga that which really took place while he was performing a sacrifice
in the excellent _tirtha_ called Varaha on the Payoshni. In that
sacrifice Indra became intoxicated with quaffing the _Soma_, and the
Brahmanas, with the gifts they received. The water of the Payoshni,
taken up (in vessel), or flowing along the ground, or conveyed by the
wind, can cleanse a person from whatever sins he may commit till the day
of his death. Higher than heaven itself, and pure, and created and
bestowed by the trident-bearing god, there in that _tirtha_ is an image
of Mahadeva beholding which a mortal goeth to the region of Siva.
Placing on one scale Ganga and the other rivers with their waters, and
on the other, the Payoshni, the latter, in my opinion would be superior
to all the _tirthas_, together, in point of merit! Then, O foremost of
the Bharata race, on the mountain called Varunasrotasa is the sacred and
auspicious wood of Mathara abounding in fruits and roots, and containing
a sacrificial stake. Then, O king, it is said that in the region on the
north of the Praveni, and about the sacred asylum of Kanwa, are many
woody retreats of ascetics. And, O child, in the _tirtha_ called
Surparaka are two sacrificial platforms of the illustrious Jamadagni,
called Pashana and Punaschandra, O Bharata! And, O son of Kunti, in that
spot is the _tirtha_ called Asoka abounding in woody retreats of
ascetics. And, O Yudhishthira, in the country of the Pandyas are the
_tirthas_ named Agastya and Varuna! And, O bull among men, there,
amongst the Pandavas, is the _tirtha_ called the Kumaris. Listen, O son
of Kunti, I shall now describe Tamraparni. In that asylum the gods had
undergone penances impelled by the desire of obtaining salvation. In
that region also is the lake of Gokarna which is celebrated over the
three worlds, hath an abundance of cool waters, and is sacred,
auspicious, and capable, O child, of producing great merit. That lake is
extremely difficult of access to men of unpurified souls. Near to that
_tirtha_ is the sacred asylum of Agastya's disciple, the mountain
Devasabha, which abounds in trees and grass, and fruits and roots. And
there also is the Vaiduryya mountain, which is delightful abounding in
gems and capable of bestowing great merit. There on that mountain is the
asylum of Agastya abounding in fruits and roots and water.

"'I shall now, O lord of men, describe the sacred spots, and asylums,
and rivers and lakes belonging to the Surashtra country! O Yudhishthira,
the Brahmanas say that on the sea-coast is the Chamasodbheda, and also
Prabhasa, that _tirtha_ which is much regarded by the gods. There also
is the _tirtha_ called Pindaraka, frequented by ascetics and capable of
producing great merit. In that region is a mighty hill named Ujjayanta
which conduceth to speedy success. Regarding it the celestial _Rishi_
Narada of great intelligence hath recited an ancient _sloka_. Do thou
listen to it, O Yudhishthira! By performing austerities on the sacred
hill of Ujjayanta in Surashtra, that abounds in birds and animals, a
person becometh regarded in heaven. There also is Dwaravati, producing
great merit, where dwelleth the slayer of Madhu, who is the Ancient one
in embodied form, and eternal virtue. Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, and
persons acquainted with the philosophy of the soul say that the
illustrious Krishna is eternal Virtue. Govinda is said to be the purest
of all pure things, the righteous of the righteous and the auspicious of
the auspicious. In all the three worlds, He of eyes like lotus-leaves is
the God of gods, and is eternal. He is the pure soul and the active
principle of life, is the Supreme _Brahma_ and is the lord of all. That
slayer of Madhu, Hari of inconceivable soul, dwelleth there!'"


SECTION LXXXIX

"Dhaumya continued, 'I shall describe to thee those sacred spots capable
of producing merit that lie on the west. In the country of the Anarttas,
O Bharata, there flows in a westward course the sacred river Narmada,
graced by _Priyangu_ and mango trees, and engarlanded with thickest of
canes. All the _tirthas_ and sacred spots, and rivers and woods and
foremost of mountains that are in the three worlds, all the gods with
the Grandsire, along with the Siddhas, the Rishis and the Charanas, O
best of the Kurus, always come, O Bharata, to bathe in the sacred waters
of the Narmada. And it hath been heard by us that the sacred asylum of
the Muni Visravas, had stood there, and that there was born the lord of
treasures, Kuvera, having men for his vehicles. There also is that
foremost of hills, the sacred and auspicious Vaidurya peak abounding
with trees that are green and which are always graced with fruit and
flowers. O lord of the earth, on the top of that mountain is a sacred
tank decked with full-blown lotus and resorted to by the gods and the
Gandharvas. Many are the wonders, O mighty monarch, that may be seen on
that sacred mountain which is like unto heaven itself and which is
visited by celestial Rishis. There, O subjugator of hostile cities, is
the sacred river called Viswamitra belonging to the royal sage of that
name and which abounds, O king, in many sacred _tirthas_. It was on the
banks of this river, that Yayati, the son of Nahusha, (fell from heaven)
among the virtuous, and obtained once more the eternal regions of the
righteous. Here also are the well-known lake called _Punya_, the
mountain called Mainaka, and that other mountain called Asita abounding
in fruits and roots. And here also is the sacred asylum of Kakshasena,
and O Yudhishthira, the asylum of Chyavana also, which is famed over
every country, O son of Pandu! In that spot, O exalted one, men attain
to (ascetic) success without severe austerities. Here also, O mighty
king, is the region called Jamvumarga, inhabited by birds and deer, and
which constitutes the retreat of ascetics with souls under control, O
thou foremost of those that have subdued their senses! Next lie the
exceedingly sacred Ketumala, and Medhya ever graced with ascetics, and,
O lord of earth, Gangadwara, and the well-known woods of Saindhava which
are sacred and inhabited by the regenerate ones. There also is the
celebrated tank of the Grandsire, called Pushkara, the favourite abode
of the Vaikanasas, and Siddhas and Rishis. Moved by the desire of
obtaining its protection, the Creator sang this verse at Pushkara, O
chief of the Kurus and foremost of virtuous men! If a person of pure
soul purposes a pilgrimage to the Pushkaras in imagination even, he
becometh purged from all his sins and rejoiceth in heaven!'"


SECTION XC

"Dhaumya continued, 'O tiger among kings, I shall now describe those
_tirthas_ and sacred spots that lie to the north. Do thou, O exalted
one, listen to me attentively. By hearing this narration, O hero, one
acquireth a reverential frame of mind, which conduceth to much good. In
that region is the highly sacred Saraswati abounding in _tirthas_ and
with banks easy of descent. There also, O son of Pandu, is the
ocean-going and impetuous Yamuna, and the _tirtha_ called
Plakshavatarana, productive of high merit and prosperity. It was there
that the regenerate ones having performed the _Saraswata_ sacrifice,
bathed on the completion thereof, O sinless one, in the well-known
celestial _tirtha_ called Agnisiras, which is productive of great merit.
There king Sahadeva had celebrated a sacrifice measuring out the ground
by a throw of the _Samya_. It is for this reason, O Yudhishthira, that
Indra sang the praises of Sahadeva in verse. Those verses are still
current in this world, being recited by the regenerate ones, e.g., _on
the Yamuna Sahadeva worshipped the sacrificial fire, with gifts in a
hundred thousands to Brahmanas_. There the illustrious king, the
imperial Bharata, performed five and thirty horse-sacrifices. O child,
we have heard that Sarabhanga of yore used to fully gratify the desires
of the regenerate ones. There in this region is his celebrated asylum
productive of great merit. In that region also, O son of Pritha, is the
river Saraswati, which is ever worshipped by the god, where, in days of
yore, the Valikhilyas, O great king, performed sacrifices. In that
region also, O Yudhishthira, is the well-known river Drisadwati, which
is productive of great merit. Then, O chief of men, are Nyagrodhakhya,
and Panchalya, and Punyaka and Dalbhyaghosha, and Dalbhya, which are, O
son of Kunti, the sacred asylum in the world of illustrious Anandayasas
of excellent vows and great energy, and which are celebrated over the
three worlds. Here also, O lord of men, the illustrious Etavarna and
Avavarana versed in the Vedas, learned in Vedic lore, and proficient in
the knowledge of Vedic rites, performed meritorious sacrifices, O chief
of the Bharata race! There also is Visakhayupa to which, in days of
yore, came the gods with Varuna and Indra, and practised ascetic
austerities. And therefore is that spot so eminently sacred. Here also
is Palasaka, where the great and illustrious and highly blessed Rishi
Jamadagni performed sacrifices. There all the principal rivers in their
embodied forms taking their respective waters stood surrounding that
best of sages. And there also, O monarch, Vibhavasu (fire) himself,
beholding that high-souled one's initiation, sang the following _sloka:
"The river coming to the illustrious Jamadagni while sacrificing unto
the gods gratified the Brahmanas with offerings of honey."_ O
Yudhishthira, the spot where Ganga rusheth past, cleaving the foremost
of mountains which is frequented by Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas
and Apsaras, and inhabited by hunters, and Kinnaras, is called
Gangadwara. O king, Sanatkumara regardeth that spot visited by
Brahmarshis, as also the _tirtha_ Kanakhala (that is near to it), as
sacred. There also is the mountain named Puru which is resorted to by
great Rishis and where Pururavas was born, and Bhrigu practised ascetic
austerities. For this it is, O king, that asylum hath become known as
the great peak of Bhrigutunga. Near that peak is the sacred and
extensive Vadari, that highly meritorious asylum, famed over the three
worlds, of him, O bull of the Bharata race, who is the Present, the Past
and the Future, who is called Narayana and the lord Vishnu, who is
eternal and the best of male beings, and who is pre-eminently
illustrious. Near Vadari, the cool current of Ganga was formerly warm,
and the banks there were overspread with golden sands. There the gods
and Rishis of high fortune and exceeding effulgence, approaching the
divine lord Narayana, always worship him. The entire universe with all
its _tirthas_ and holy spots is there where dwelleth the divine and
eternal Narayana, the Supreme soul, for he is Merit, he is the Supreme
_Brahma_, he is _tirtha_, he is the ascetic retreat, he is the First, he
is the foremost of gods, and he is the great Lord of all creatures. He
is eternal, he is the great Creator, and he is the highest state of
blessedness. Learned persons versed in the scriptures attain to great
happiness by knowing him. In that spot are the celestial Rishis, the
Siddhas, and, indeed, all the Rishis,--where dwelleth the slayer of
Madhu, that primeval Deity and mighty Yogin! Let no doubt enter thy
heart that that spot is the foremost of all holy spots. These, O lord of
earth, are the _tirthas_ and sacred spots on earth, that I have recited,
O best of men! These all are visited by the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the
Adityas, the Marutas, the Aswins and the illustrious Rishis resembling
the celestials themselves. By journeying, O son of Kunti, to those
places, with the Brahmanas and ascetics that are with thee and with thy
blessed brothers, thou wilt be freed from anxiety!'"


SECTION XCI

Vaisampayana continued, "O son of the Kuru race, while Dhaumya was
speaking thus, there arrived at the spot the Rishi Lomasa of great
energy. And the king, who was the eldest of Pandu's sons, with his
followers and those Brahmanas sat round the highly righteous one, like
celestials in heaven sitting round Sakra. And having received him duly,
Yudhishthira the just enquired after the reason of his arrival, and the
object also of his wanderings. Thus asked by Pandu's son, the
illustrious ascetic, well-pleased, replied in sweet words delighting the
Pandayas, 'Travelling at will, O Kaunteya, over all the regions, I came
to Sakra's abode, and saw there the lord of the celestials. There, I saw
thy heroic brother capable of wielding the bow with his left hand,
seated on the same seat with Sakra. And beholding Partha on that seat I
was greatly astonished, O tiger among men! And the lord of the
celestials then said unto me, "_Go thou unto the sons of Pandu_." At the
request, therefore, of Indra as also of the high-souled son of Pritha
have I come hither with speed, desiring to see thee with thy younger
brothers. O child, I will relate what will please thee highly, O son of
Pandu! Do thou listen to it, O king, with Krishna and the Rishis that
are with thee. O bull of the Bharata race, Partha hath obtained from
Rudra that incomparable weapon for the acquisition of which thou hadst
sent him to heaven. That fierce weapon, known by the name of
_Brahma-sira_ which arose after _Amrila_, and which Rudra had obtained
by means of ascetic austerities, hath been acquired by Arjuna together
with the _Mantras_ for hurling and withdrawing it, and the rites of
expiation and revival. And, O Yudhishthira, Arjuna of immeasurable
prowess hath also acquired Vajras and _Dandas_ and other celestial
weapons from Yama and Kuvera and Varuna and Indra, O son of the Kuru
race! And he hath also thoroughly learnt music, both vocal and
instrumental, and dancing and proper recitation of the _Saman_ (Veda)
from Vishwavasu's son. And having thus acquired weapons and mastered the
_Gandhama Veda_, thy third brother Vibhatsu liveth happily (in heaven).
Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, for I shall now deliver to thee the
message of that foremost of celestials. He hath commanded me saying,
"Thou wilt, no doubt, go to the world of men. O best of Brahmanas, tell
thou Yudhishthira these words of mine. Soon will thy brother Arjuna come
to thee, having acquired arms and accomplished a great deed for the
celestials that is incapable of being accomplished by themselves. Do
thou meanwhile devote thyself to ascetic austerities, with thy brothers.
There is nothing superior to asceticism, and it is by asceticism that a
person achieveth great results. And, O bull of the Bharata race, well do
I know that Karna is endued with great ardour and energy and strength
and prowess that is incapable of being baffled. Well do I know that,
skilled in fierce conflict, he hath not his rival in battle; that he is
a mighty bowman, a hero deft in the use of fierce weapons and cased in
the best of mail. Well do I know that that exalted son of Aditya
resembleth the son of Maheswara himself. Well do I also know the high
natural prowess of the broad-shouldered Arjuna. In battle Karna is not
equal unto even a sixteenth part of Pritha's son. And as for the fear of
Karna which is in thy heart, O repressor of foes, I shall dispel when
Savyasachin will have left heaven. And as regards thy purpose, O hero,
to set out on a pilgrimage to _tirthas_, the great Rishi Lomasa will,
without doubt, speak unto thee. And whatever that regenerate Rishi will
relate unto thee touching the merits of asceticism and _tirthas_, thou
shouldst receive with respect and not otherwise!"'"


SECTION XCII

"Lomasa continued, 'Listen now, O Yudhishthira, to what Dhananjaya hath
said: "Cause my brother Yudhishthira to attend to the practice of virtue
which leadeth to prosperity. Endued with wealth of asceticism, thou art
conversant with the highest morality, with ascetic austerities of every
kind, with the eternal duties of kings blessed with prosperity, and the
high and sanctifying merit that men obtain from _tirthas_. Persuade thou
the sons of Pandu to acquire the merit attaching to _tirthas_. Do thou
with thy whole soul persuade the king to visit the _tirthas_ and give
away kine." This is what Arjuna said unto me. Indeed he also said, "Let
him visit all the _tirthas_ protected by thee. Thou wilt also protect
him from Rakshasas, and watch over him in inaccessible regions and
rugged mountain breasts. And as Dadhichi had protected Indra, and
Angiras had protected the Sun, so do thou, O best of regenerate ones,
protect the sons of Kunti from Rakshasas. Along the way are many
Rakshasas, huge as mountain-cliffs. But protected by thee these will not
be able to approach the sons of Kunti." Obedient to the words of Indra
and at the request of Arjuna also protecting thee from dangers, I shall
wander with thee. Before this, O son of the Kuru race, I have twice
visited the _tirthas_. With thee I shall repair to them for the third
time. O Yudhishthira, Manu and other royal _Rishis_ of meritorious deeds
had undertaken journeys to _tirthas_. Indeed, a trip to them is capable
of dispelling all fear, O king! They that are crooked-minded, they that
have not their souls under control, they that are illiterate and
perverse, do not, O Kauravya, bathe in _tirthas_. But thou art ever of a
virtuous disposition and conversant with morality and firm in thy
promises. Thou wilt surely be able to free thyself from the world. For,
O son of Pandu, thou art even as king Bhagiratha, or Gaya, or Yayati, or
any one, O son of Kunti, that is like them.'

"Yudhishthira answered, 'I am so overwhelmed with delight, O Brahmana,
that I cannot find words to answer thee. Who can be more fortunate than
he who is remembered even by the lord of the celestials? Who can be more
fortunate than he who hath been favoured with thy company, who hath
Dhananjaya for a brother, and who is thought of by Vasava himself? As to
thy words, O illustrious one, in respect of a trip to the _tirthas_, my
mind had already been made up at the words of Dhaumya. O Brahmana, I
shall start, at whatever hour thou mayst be pleased to appoint, on the
proposed journey to _tirthas_. Even this is my firm resolve!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Lomasa then said unto Yudhishthira, who had
made up his mind to start on the proposed journey, 'O mighty king, be
thou light as regards thy retinue, for by this thou wilt be able to go
more easily!'

"Yudhishthira then said, 'Let those mendicants and Brahmanas and _Yogis_
that are incapable of bearing hunger and thirst, the fatigues of travel
and toil, and the severity of winter, desist. Let those Brahmanas also
desist that live on sweetmeats, and they also that desire cooked viands
and food that is sucked or drunk as well as meat. And let those also
remain behind that are dependent on cooks. Let those citizens that have
followed me from motives of loyalty, and whom I have hitherto kept on
proper stipends, repair to king Dhritarashtra. He will give them their
allowances in due time. If, however, that king refuses to grant them
proper allowances, the king of the Panchalas will, for our satisfaction
and welfare, give them these.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And thereupon oppressed with grief, the
citizens and the principal Brahmanas and Yatis set out for Hastinapura.
And out of affection for Yudhishthira the just, the royal son of Amvika
received them properly, and gratified them with proper allowances. And
the royal son of Kunti, with only a small number of Brahmanas, abode for
three nights at Kamyaka, cheered by Lomasa."


SECTION XCIII

Vaisampayana said, "Those Brahmanas then, that had been dwelling (with
him) in the woods, beholding the son of Kunti about to set out (on the
pious pilgrimage), approached him, O king, and said, 'Thou art about to
set out, O king, on thy journey to the sacred _tirthas_, along with thy
brothers and accompanied by the illustrious Rishi Lomasa. O king, it
behoveth thee, O son of Pandu, to take us with thee. Without thee, we
shall not be able, O son of the Kuru race, to visit them at any time.
Surrounded by dangers and difficult of access, they are infested by
beasts of prey. Those _tirthas_, O lord of men, are inaccessible to
persons in small parties. Foremost of all wielders of the bow, thy
brothers are ever brave. Protected by your heroic selves, we also would
proceed to them. Permit us to acquire, O lord of earth, through thy
grace the blessed fruit of _tirthas_. Protected by thy energy, let us, O
king, be cleansed of all our sins by visiting those _tirthas_ and
purified by baths therein. Bathing in those _tirthas_, thou also, O
Bharata, wilt acquire without doubt the regions difficult of acquisition
that Kartavirya and Ashtaka, the royal sage Lomapada and the imperial
and heroic Bharata only had earned. In thy company, O king, we desire to
behold Prabhasa and other _tirthas_, Mahendra and other hills, Ganga and
other rivers, and Plaksha and other gigantic trees. If, O lord of men,
thou hast any regard for the Brahmanas, do thou our bidding. Thou wilt
surely have prosperity from this. O thou of mighty arms, the _tirthas_
are infested by Rakshasas that ever obstruct ascetic penances. It
behoveth thee to protect us from them. Protected by Lomasa and taking us
with thee, go thou to all the _tirthas_ spoken of by Dhaumya and the
intelligent Narada, as also all those that have been spoken of by the
celestial Rishi Lomasa, endued with great ascetic wealth, and be thou,
by this, cleansed of all thy sins.'

"Thus addressed respectfully by them, the king--that bull amongst the
sons of Pandu--surrounded by his heroic brothers headed by Bhima, with
tears of joy in his eyes, said unto all those ascetics, 'Let it be so.'
With the permission then of Lomasa, as also of his priest Dhaumya, that
foremost of Pandu's sons with soul under complete control, resolved,
along with his brothers and Drupada's daughter of faultless features, to
set out. Just at this time, the blessed Vyasa, as also Parvata and
Narada, all endued with high intelligence, came to Kamyaka for seeing
the son of Pandu. Beholding them, king Yudhishthira worshipped them with
due rites. And worshipped by the monarch thus, those blessed ones,
addressing Yudhishthira, said, 'O Yudhishthira, O Bhima, and ye twins,
banish all evil thoughts from your minds. Purify your hearts and then
set out for the _tirthas_. The Brahmanas have said that the observance
of regulations in respect of the body are called earthly vows, while
efforts to purify the heart, so that it may be free from evil thoughts,
are called spiritual vows. O king, the mind that is free from all evil
thoughts is highly pure. Purifying yourselves, therefore, harbouring
only friendly feelings for all, behold ye the _tirthas_. Observing
earthly vows in respect of your bodies and purifying your minds by
spiritual vows, obtain ye the fruits as recited, of pilgrimages.'

"Saying, 'So be it,' the Pandavas with Krishna, caused those celestial
and human Rishis to perform the usual propitiatory ceremonies. And those
heroes, having worshipped the feet of Lomasa and Dwaipayana and Narada
and the celestial Rishi Parvata, O king, and accompanied by Dhaumya as
also the ascetics that had been residing with them in the woods, set out
on the day following the full moon of _Agrahayana_ in which the
constellation _Pushya_ was ascendant. Dressed in barks and hides, and
with matted lock on head, they were all cased in impenetrable mail and
armed with swords. And O Janamejaya, the heroic sons of Pandu with
quivers and arrows and scimitars and other weapons, and accompanied by
Indrasena and other attendants with fourteen and one cars, a number of
cooks and servants of other classes, set out with faces turned towards
the east!"


SECTION XCIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of celestial Rishis, I do not think that I
am without merits. Yet am I afflicted with so much sorrow that there
never was a king like me. I think, however, that my enemies are
destitute of good qualities and even destitute of morality. Yet why, O
Lomasa, do they prosper in this world?'

"Lomasa said, 'Grieve not ever, O king, O son of Pritha, that sinful men
should often prosper in consequence of the sins they commit. A man may
be seen to prosper by his sins, obtain good therefrom and vanquish his
foes. Destruction, however, overtakes him to the roots. O king, I have
seen many Daityas and Danavas prosper by sin but I have also seen
destruction overtake them. O exalted one, I have seen all this in the
righteous age of yore. The gods practised virtue, while the Asuras
abandoned it. The gods visited the _tirthas_, while the Asuras did not
visit them. And at first the sinful Asuras were possessed with pride.
And pride begat vanity and vanity begat wrath. And from wrath arose
every kind of evil propensities, and from these latter sprang
shamelessness. And in consequence of shamelessness, good behaviour
disappeared from among them. And because they had become shameless and
destitute of virtuous propensities and good conduct and virtuous vows,
forgiveness and prosperity and morality forsook them in no time. And
prosperity then, O king, sought the gods, while adversity sought the
Asuras. And when the Daityas and the Danavas, deprived of sense by
pride, were possessed by adversity, Kali also sought to possess them.
And, O son of Kunti, overwhelmed with pride, and destitute of rites and
sacrifices, and devoid of reason and feeling, and their hearts full of
vanity, destruction overtook them soon. And covered with infamy, the
Daityas were soon exterminated. The gods, however, who were virtuous in
their practices, going to the seas, the rivers, the lakes and the holy
spots, cleansed themselves of all sins, O son of Pandu, by means of
ascetic penances and sacrifices and gifts and blessings, and obtained
prosperity and the consequence. And because the gods always performed
sacrifices and holy deeds abandoning every practice that was evil, and
visited the _tirthas_, as the consequence thereof they acquired great
good fortune. Guided by this, O king, do thou also, with thy brothers,
bathe in _tirthas_, for then thou wilt obtain prosperity once more. Even
this is the eternal road. And, O monarch, as king Nriga and Shivi and
Ausinara and Bhagiratha and Vasumanas and Gaya and Puru and Pururavas,
by practising ascetic penances and visiting _tirthas_ and touching
sacred waters and beholding illustrious ascetics, obtained fame and
sanctity and merit and wealth, so wilt thou also obtain prosperity that
is great. And as Ikshwaku with his sons, friends and followers, as
Muchukunda and Mandhatri and king Marutta, as the gods through power of
asceticism and the celestial Rishis also, had all obtained fame, so wilt
thou also obtain great celebrity. The sons of Dhritarashtra, on the
other hand, enslaved by sinfulness and ignorance, will, without doubt,
be soon exterminated like the Daityas.'"


SECTION XCV

Vaisampayana said, "The heroic sons of Pandu, accompanied by their
followers, proceeding from place to place, at last arrived at Naimisha.
O king, reaching the Gomati, the Pandavas bathed in the sacred _tirtha_
of that stream, and having performed their ablutions there, they gave
away, O Bharata, both kine and wealth! And repeatedly offering oblations
of water, O Bharata, to the gods, the pitris, and the Brahmanas, in the
_tirthas_ called Kanya, Aswa, and Go and staying (as directed) in
Kalakoti and the Vishaprastha hills, the Kauravas then, O king, reached
Vahuda and performed their ablution in that stream. Proceeding next, O
lord of earth, to the sacrificial region of the gods known by the name
Prayaga, they bathed in the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna and residing
there practised ascetic penances of great merit. And the Pandavas, of
truthful promises, bathing in the _tirtha_, cleansed themselves of every
sin. The sons of Pandu then, O king of the Bharata race, accompanied by
those Brahmanas, proceeded to the _tirtha_ called _Vedi_, sacred to the
Creator and adored by the ascetics. Residing there for some time and
gratifying the Brahmanas with the fruit and roots of the wilderness and
clarified butter, those heroes began to practise ascetic penances of
