disease changed, and the doctor said he was better."

The father, who had thus been proving the Lord with this test of prayer
and its identity of time in his answer, was so overwhelmingly convinced
of the real power of prayer, and thereby of the real existence of God,
and that a Christian life was one of facts as well as beliefs, now
finding that the Lord had indeed kept His own promise, he, too, kept his
promise and gave his heart to the Lord, and became henceforth, a
professing Christian.

But there were more wonderful things yet to happen--a period of five
years passed. Other children were added to the family, and one day, the
youngest, a sweet, beautiful girl, was taken suddenly ill with
convulsions. The sickness for days tasked the strength of the mother,
and the skill of the doctor, but no care, ingenuity, or knowledge could
overcome the disease or subdue the pain. The little girl's fits were
severe and distressing, and there were but short intervals between, just
time to come out of one and with a gasp, pass into another still more
terrible. In its occasional moments of reason, it would look piteously
as if mutely appealing, and then the next convulsion would take it and
seem to leave it just at death's door.

All attendants were worn with care, the doctor fairly lived in the house
and forsook all his other business. The clergyman came and comforted the
anxious hearts with words of sympathy and prayer; but her _little
brother Merrill_, (whose own life we have just related,) tender-hearted,
a mere child, scarce seven years of age, who had known of the Lord, and
who believed that He was everywhere and could do everything, was
intensely grieved at "Mamie's" distress, and came at last to his mother
and asked if he could go and "_make a prayer to God for Sissy_." The
mother said, "Go." The little boy went back into his room, and kneeling
humbly by the side of his bed, as he did at his night and morning
prayers, uttered this request:

_"O God, please to bless little sister, she is very sick. Please stop
her fits so she won't have any more. For Jesus' sake, amen."_

He came back, told his mamma what he said, and added: "_Mamma, I don't
think she will have any more_."

Now mark how the Lord honored this simple faith of the little child.
_From that very moment the fits left her. They never returned; and the
child soon entirely recovered_.

Notice the full beauty and instruction of these two incidents: _Little
Merrill's life was saved in answer to prayer; was the means of his
father's salvation, and when he in turn had grown to an age when he
could learn of God, his own prayer was the means of saving his own
sister's life_.

Notice, too, that all earthly available means were used to save each
child, but to no effect. Physicians and parents considered the case
hopeless, and then committed it to the decision of God.

Notice, too, that when little Merrill was so sick, that the mother and
doctor both prayed, yet it was not until his father had also prayed that
the answer came. God meant to honor the faith of the first two, but was
_waiting for the prayer of the third_ ere he granted the request. That
child's sickness was one of the purposes of God. Notice in the second
case, that while father, mother, doctor, the clergyman, and others of
the house were all trusting in prayer, yet the Lord _was waiting for the
prayer of the little brother_, ere he sent the blessing of relief. Such
an incident draws its own conclusion. _Never cease in prayer for
anything which is to God's honor and glory. Use all the possible means
to help God. Where human means are of no avail, commit it to God and
wait in humble resignation. Ask others to pray, too, for the same
object_, that when the answer comes, God may be glorified before the
sight of others as well as your own. When so many are waiting to see if
_God_ will honor his promises, depend upon it, _God will be found
faithful to all his word_.


TRUSTING IN GOD'S PROMISES.


"It was a fierce, wild night in March, and the blustering wind was
blowing, accompanied by the sharp, sleety snow. It was very desolate
without, but still more desolate within the home I am going to describe
to you. The room was large and almost bare, and the wind whistled
through the cracks in the most dismal manner. In one corner of the room
stood an old-fashioned bedstead upon which a woman lay, her emaciated
form showing her to be in the last stage of consumption. A low fire
burned in the large fire-place, and before it a little girl was
kneeling. She had a small testament, and was trying by the dim
fire-light to read a chapter, as was her custom, before going to bed. A
faint voice called to her from the bed, 'Nellie, my daughter, read the
14th chapter of St. John for your Mother.' 'Yes, Mother,' was the reply,
and after turning the leaves a few moments, the child began. All that
long Winter day that poor mother had been tortured with pain and
remorse. She was poor, very poor, and she knew she must die and leave
her child to the mercies of the world. Her husband had died several
years before. Since then she had struggled on, as best she could, till
now she had almost grown to doubt God's promises to the helpless. 'In my
Father's house are many mansions.' 'I go to prepare a place for you.'
Here the little reader paused, and crept to her mother's side. She lay
motionless, with closed eyes, while great hot tears were stealing down
her wasted cheeks. 'Mother, He has a place almost ready for you, hasn't
He.' 'Yes, my child, and I am going very soon, but _He_ will watch over
you, Nellie, when Mother has gone to her last home.'

"The weeks went slowly by to the suffering invalid; but when the violets
were blooming, they made a grave upon the hillside, and laid the weary
body down to rest, but the spirit had gone to the home which Christ
himself had gone to prepare.

"Years passed away. It was sunny May. The little church of Grenville was
crowded. I noticed in one of the seats a lady plainly but neatly
attired. There was nothing remarkable in the face with its mournful
brown eyes, and decided looking mouth and chin. I ransacked my memory to
find who the lady was. Suddenly a vision of the poor widow came. This,
then, was the little girl, little Nellie Mason. 'We will read a part of
the 14th chapter of St. John,' the minister said. 'In my Father's house
are many mansions; I go to prepare a place for you.' The slow,
deliberate tones recalled me from my reverie, and I looked at Nellie.
Her head was bowed, but I could see the tears flowing like rain."


THE FAITH OF A LITTLE CHILD.


An incident most beautiful was told in the Fulton Street prayer meeting
by a converted Jew.

"Journeying in the cars, I was attracted by two little girls, Jewesses.
I asked them if they loved Jesus. To my surprise, they said they did. I
found that their mother was in a seat near by. She had attended some of
the gospel meetings for Jews, and was interested in them. She said her
husband had not been to church or synagogue for eleven years, and she
did not know his views on religion. Her two little girls had attended a
Methodist Sunday school, and there learned of Jesus. A day or so after,
the mother was taken very sick, and remedies failing, the eldest child,
a little over eight years old, said: 'O Mamma, if you will let me pray
to Jesus for you, He can take away your pains and give you sleep.' She
knelt with her sister and prayed in simple words to Jesus to heal her
mother, telling Him that He had so promised to hear prayer. Shortly
after, the mother, after long hours of restlessness and suffering, fell
into a deep sleep and awoke relieved of pain and much refreshed. She
heard from her daughter's lips the story of her faith in Jesus and love
for Him, and then sent for me, begging me to pray for her. I am glad to
tell you that she is now a converted woman, a believer in the Lord Jesus
Christ."


THE WANDERER FOUND.


A mother sent a request for prayer to the Fulton Street prayer-meeting,
that she might hear from him who had long ago left home, and wandered
far away. She had been praying very earnestly for him, and soon she
wrote that she had just heard from him, and heard too that he had become
a Christian and learned to trust in Him.


ARE YOU THERE.


A mother, one morning, gave her two little ones books and toys to amuse
them while she went up-stairs to attend to something. A half hour passed
quietly away, and then one of the little ones went to the foot of the
stairs, and in a timid voice called out, "Mamma, are you there?"

"Yes, darling."

"All right," said the little one, and-went on with her play. By-and-by
the question was repeated, "Mamma, are you there?"

"Yes, darling."

"All right," said the child again, and once more went on with her play.
And this is just the way we should feel towards Jesus. He has gone
up-stairs, to the right hand of God, to attend to some things for us. He
has left us down in this lower room of this world to be occupied here
for a while. But to keep us from being worried by fear or care, He
speaks to us from His word, as that mother spoke to her little ones. He
says to us, "Fear not; I am with thee. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee." "The Lord will provide."

And so we see how certain it is that God does provide relief in trouble
for those who love and serve Him.


GOD KNOWS THE BOTTOM OF THE BARREL.


"Mother, I think God always hears when we scrape the bottom of the
barrel," said a little boy to his mother one day. His mother was poor.
They often used up their last stick of wood and their last bit of bread
before they could tell where the next supply was to come from. But they
had so often been provided for in unexpected ways, just when they were
most in need, that the little boy thought _God always heard when they
scraped the bottom of the barrel_. This was only that little fellow's
way of saying what Abraham said when he called the name of the place
where God had delivered him, "Jehovah-Jireh."


GOD'S CARE FOR LITTLE CHILDREN IN LITTLE WANTS.


"I was early taught that God cares for His children, even to regard
their _little_ daily wants. An illustration of my implicit confidence,
which I do not remember ever to have been betrayed, occurred when I was
about ten years of age. I was accustomed to give five cents each Sabbath
at the Sunday School collection for foreign missions. This money was not
given me directly by my parents; but I was allowed to go on an errand,
or to do some little piece of work for a neighbor and thus earn it,
outside of the performance of the duties that naturally fell to my lot
at home. At one time, when I was attending school about a mile from
home, my time out of school was taken up by my walk to and from it and
the chores which necessarily fall to a farmer's boy, so that for some
months I had no opportunity of earning anything. One Sabbath morning, I
dropped my last silver piece into the collection, with a prayer--which I
always offered at such a time--that God would bless it to the heathen,
that some one might be led to Him by it.

"I went home that day with a child's anxiety, feeling that I could not
bear the thought of giving nothing for the heathen on next Sabbath, and
yet not seeing how I could possibly obtain it. That night I asked my
Heavenly Father to provide the money for me. The anxiety was all gone;
for I felt that God would answer. Next morning, when almost at the
school-house, I found a handkerchief in the road, in the corner of which
was securely tied a silver quarter and a silver dime. Instantly my
thoughts flew to the next Sabbath, and to the prayer I had offered. O,
yes! I thought, God has more than answered my prayer; instead of giving
me just enough for next Sabbath, He has given me enough, for seven
Sabbaths.

Then the thought came, somebody lost it; yes, it was my duty to find the
owner, which I did not expect would be difficult, although it was in
town. So I cheerfully gave it up, thinking that 'the Lord will provide'
in some other way. I took it directly to my teacher, and asked her to
find the owner. She made faithful inquiry, but no one was found to claim
it. Who can question this being an answer to prayer, when we think of
the numerous _chances_ against its occurring just as it did."


A CHILD'S PRAYER FOR PAPA.


A drunkard, who had run through his property, returned one night to his
unfurnished house. He entered his empty hall. Anguish was gnawing at his
heart-strings, and language was inadequate to express his agony as he
entered his wife's apartment, and there beheld the victims of his
appetite, his loving wife and a darling child. Morose and sullen, he
seated himself without saying a word; he could not speak; he could not
look up then. The mother said to the little angel at her side, "Come, my
child, it is time to go to bed;" and that little baby, as she was wont,
knelt by her mother's lap and gazing wistfully into the face of her
suffering parent, like a piece of chiseled statuary, slowly repeated her
nightly orison. When she had finished, the child (but four years of age)
said to her mother, "Dear Mother, may I not offer up one more prayer?"
"Yes, yes, my sweet pet, pray;" and she lifted up her tiny hands, closed
her eyes, and prayed: "O God! spare, oh! spare my dear papa!" That
prayer was lifted with electric rapidity to the throne of God. It was
heard on high--it was heard on earth. The responsive "Amen!" burst from
the father's lips, and his heart of stone became a heart of flesh. Wife
and child were both clasped to his bosom, and in penitence he said: "My
child, you have saved your father from the grave of a drunkard. I'll
sign the pledge!"


A LITTLE QUAKER BOY'S PRAYER RIGHT OUT IN MEETING.


A little Quaker boy, about six years old, after sitting, like the rest
of the congregation, in silence, all being afraid to speak first, as he
thought, got up on the seat, and, folding his arms over his breast,
murmured in a clear, sweet voice, just loud enough to be distinctly
heard on the front seat, "I do wish the Lord would make us all gooder,
and gooder, and gooder, till there is no bad left."


WHAT THE LITTLE CHILDREN MAY DO.


At family prayer, little Mary, one evening when all was silent, looked
anxiously in the face of her back-sliding father, who had ceased to pray
in his family, and said to him with quivering lips, "Pa, is God dead?"

"No, my child--why do you ask that?"

"Why, Pa, you never talk to him now as you used to do," she replied.

These words haunted the father until he was mercifully reclaimed.


THE UNBELIEVING FATHER LED TO GO TO CHURCH.


An unbelieving father came home one evening and asked where his little
girl was. "She has gone to bed," said his wife. "I'll just go and give
her one kiss," said the father, for he loved his little daughter dearly.
As he stood at the door of her bedroom, he heard some one praying. It
was his little Jane, and he heard her say, "Do, God Almighty, please
lead daddy to hear Mr. Stowell preach."

She had often asked him to go, and he had always said, "No, no, my
child." After listening to her prayer, he determined, the next time she
asked him, to accompany her, which he did, and heard a sermon which took
his attention and pricked his conscience. On leaving the church, he
clasped the hand of his little girl in his, and said, "Jane, thy God
shall be my God, and thy minister shall be my minister." And the man
became a true follower of the Lord.


A CHILD'S PRAYER FOR RELIEF


An interesting little daughter of a professor in Danville, Kentucky, in
the Summer of 1876, in eating a watermelon, got one of the seeds lodged
in her windpipe. The effort was made to remove it, but proved
ineffectual, and it was thought that the child would have to be taken to
one of the large cities to have an operation performed by a skillful
surgeon. To this she was decidedly opposed, and pleaded with her mamma
to tell her if there was no other way of relief. Finally, in order to
quiet her childish fears, her Christian mother told her to ask God to
help her.

The little one went into an adjoining room and offered her prayer to God
to help her. Shortly thereafter she came running to her mamma with the
seed in her hand, and her beautiful and intelligent face lighted up with
joy. In response to the eager inquiry of the mother, the little one said
that she had asked God to help her, and while she was praying she was
taken with a severe cough, in which she threw up the seed.


GOD'S CARE OVER HIS PEOPLE--THE PRAYING WIDOW


A young widow with two children was living in the city of Berlin. She
was a Christian woman, and trusted in Jehovah-Jireh to take care of her.
One evening she had to be away for a while. During her absence a man
entered her house for the purpose of robbing her. But "the Lord who
provides" protected her from this danger in a very singular way. On
returning to her home she found a note lying on her table, which read as
follows:

"Madam, I came here with the intention of robbing you, but the sight of
this little room, with the religious pictures hanging around in it, and
those two sweet-looking children quietly sleeping in their little bed,
have touched my heart. I cannot take anything of yours. The small amount
of money lying on your desk I leave untouched, and I take the liberty of
adding fifty dollars besides." The Bible tells us that "the hearts of
men are in the hands of God. and he turneth them as the rivers of waters
are turned." He turned the heart of this robber from his wicked purpose,
and in this way he protected the widow who trusted in him.


GOD SAVED A FAMILY MERCIFULLY.


One morning a Christian farmer, in Rhode Island, put two bushels of rye
in his wagon and started to the mill to get it ground. On his way to the
mill he had to drive over a bridge that had no railings to the sides of
it. When he reached the middle of this bridge his horse, a quiet, gentle
creature, began all at once to back. In spite of all the farmer could
do, he kept on backing till the hinder wheels went over the side of the
bridge, and the bag of grain was tipped out and fell into the stream.
Then the horse stood still. Some men came to help the farmer. The wagon
was lifted back and the bag of grain was fished up from the water. Of
course it could not be taken to the mill in that state. So the farmer
had to take it home and dry it. He had prayed that morning that God
would protect and help him through the day, and he wondered what this
accident had happened for. He found out, however, before long. On
spreading out the grain to dry he noticed a great many small pieces of
glass mixed up with it. If this had been ground up with the grain into
the flour it would have caused the death of himself and his family. But
Jehovah-Jireh was on that bridge. He made the horse back and throw the
grain into the water to save the family from the danger that threatened
them.


A CHILD'S FAITH IN THE LORD'S PRAYER.


About the 30th of July, 1864, the beautiful village of Chambersburgh was
invaded and pillaged by the Confederate army. A superintendent of a
Sabbath school, formerly resident in the South, but who had been obliged
to flee to the North because of his known faithfulness to the national
government, was residing there, knowing that if discovered by the
Confederate soldiers, he would be in great peril of life, property and
every indignity,--in the gray dawn of that memorable day, with his wife
and two little girls, again on foot, he fled to the chain of mountains
lying north-west of the doomed village.

After remaining out for some days and nights, with no shelter but such
as was afforded by the friendly boughs of large forest trees, and
without food, they became nearly famished. At last, the head of the
family, unable to endure the agony of beholding his wife and children
starving to death before his face, and he not able to render the needed
relief, withdrew to a place by himself, that he might not witness the
sad death of his loved ones. With his back against a large oak, he had
been seated only a short time, when his eldest little daughter, not
quite ten years old, came to him and exclaimed:

"_Father, father, I have found such a precious text in my little
Testament, which I brought to the mountain with me, for very joy I could
not stop to read it to mother, but hastened to you with it. Please
listen while I read_." To which he said:

"Yes, my child, read it. There is comfort to be found in the Scriptures.
We will not long be together on earth, and there could be no better way
of spending our last mortal hours." To which she replied:

"O, father, I believe that we will not die at this time; that we will
not be permitted to starve; that God will surely send us relief; but do
let me read." Then opening her dear little volume, at the ninth verse of
the sixth chapter of Matthew, she read as follows:

"'_Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom
come; Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread.' O, father, to think that our dear Saviour Himself taught
His disciples to pray for their daily bread. These are His own words. It
is not possible, therefore, that He will allow any person to starve,
who, in His own appointed language, asks Him for food. Will He not, dear
father, hear our prayers for bread_?"

At once and forever the scales fell from the eyes of that parent. With
tears streaming down his cheeks, he clasped his child to his bosom, and
earnestly repeated the Lord's Prayer. _He had scarcely finished it when
a small dog ran to where he and his daughter were upon their knees, and
barked so fiercely as to attract to the spot its owner, a wealthy
Pennsylvania farmer,_ who was upon the mountain in search of cattle that
he had lost for several days. The kind-hearted tiller of the soil
immediately piloted the suffering family to his own comfortable home,
and properly provided for their wants.


A CHILD PRESERVED FROM WOLVES.


A little girl only nine years old, named Sutherland, living at
Platteville, Col., was recently saved from death by ferocious forest
wolves as follows: The child went with her father on a cold afternoon to
the woods to find the cattle, and was told to follow the calves home,
while the father continued his search for the cows. She did so, but the
calves misled her, and very soon she became conscious that she was lost.
Night came on, and with it the cold of November and the dreaded wolves.
With a strange calmness she continued on her uncertain way. The next
day, Sunday, at 10 A.M., she reached, in her wanderings, the house of
John Beebe, near a place called Evans, having traveled constantly
eighteen hours, and a distance of not less than twenty-five miles. _All
night the wolves growled around her, but harmed her not_; neither was
she in the least frightened by them. All know that in ordinary cases
fierce packs of blood-thirsty wolves would devour a man, and even a
horse. But this little one was invincible in her trusting, simple faith.
The narrative states: "She said that the wolves kept close to her heels
and snapped at her feet; but her mother told her that if she was _good_
the Lord would _always_ take care of her; so she asked the Lord to take
care of her, and she knew the wolves would not hurt her, _because God
wouldn't let them_!" The child was hunted for by a great number of
people, and being found was restored shortly to her parents in perfect
health and soundness.


JESUS CURED ME.
