the legend of Samba. This same legend is also related in the Kapila
Samhita, a religious guide-book for Orissa, in connection with the
great Sun temple of Konarak.[1161]

In these temples the sun was represented by images, Hindu convention
thus getting the better of Zoroastrian prejudices, but the costume of
the images shows their origin, for the Brihatsamhita[1162] directs
that Surya is to be represented in the dress of the northerners,
covered from the feet upwards and wearing the girdle called avyanga
or viyanga. In Rajputana I have seen several statues of him in high
boots and they are probably to be found elsewhere.

Fortuitously or otherwise, the cult of the sun was often associated
with Buddhism, as is indicated by these temples in Gaya and Orissa and
by the fact that the Emperor Harsha styles his father, grandfather and
great-grandfather _paramadityabhakta_, great devotees of the
sun.[1163] He himself, though a devout Buddhist, also showed honour to
the image of Surya, as we hear from Hsuang Chuang.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1144: They are forbidden by strict theology, but in practice
there are exceptions, for instance, the winged figure believed to
represent Ahura Mazda, found on Achaemenian reliefs.]

[Footnote 1145: Though the principles of Zoroastrianism sound
excellent to Europeans, I cannot discover that ancient Persia was
socially or politically superior to India.]

[Footnote 1146: See Strabo, XV. 62. So, too, the Pitakas seem to
regard cemeteries as places where ordinary corpses are thrown away
rather than buried or burnt. In Dig. Nik. III, the Buddha says that
the ancient Sakyas married their sisters. Such marriages are said to
have been permitted in Persia.]

[Footnote 1147: "He who returns victorious from discussions with
Gaotama the heretic," Farvadin Yasht in _S.B.E._ XXIII. p. 184. The
reference of this passage to Buddhism has been much disputed and I am
quite incompetent to express any opinion about it. But who is Gaotama
if not the Buddha? It is true that there were many other Gautamas of
moderate eminence in India, but would any of them have been known in
Persia?]

[Footnote 1148: The inscriptions near the tomb of Darius at
Nakshi-Rustam appear to be hortatory like those of Asoka. See Williams
Jackson, _Persia_, p. 298 and references. The use of the Kharoshtri
script and of the word _dipi_ has also been noted as indicating
connection with Persia.]

[Footnote 1149: Perhaps the marked absence of figures representing the
Buddha in the oldest Indian sculptures, which seems to imply that the
holiest things must not be represented, is due to Persian sentiment.]

[Footnote 1150: Strictly speaking there is nothing final about
Maitreya who is merely the next in an infinite series of Buddhas, but
practically his figure has many analogies to Soshyos or Saoshant, the
Parsi saviour and renovator of the world.]

[Footnote 1151: See chap. XLI. p. 220.]

[Footnote 1152: See chap, on Mahayana, VI.]

[Footnote 1153: A convenient statement of what is known about this
cult will be found in Bhandarkar, _Vaishnavism and Saivism_, part II.
chap. XVI.]

[Footnote 1154: Chap. 60. 19. The work probably dates from about 650
A.D.]

[Footnote 1155: Chap. 139. See, for extracts from the text, Aufrecht.
Cat. Cod. Sansc. p. 30.]

[Footnote 1156: For Sakadvipa see Vishnu, p. II. IV. where it is
said that Brahmans are called there Mriga or Maga and Kshattriyas
Magadha. The name clearly means the country of the Sakas who were
regarded as Zoroastrians, whether they were Iranian by race or not.
But the topography is imaginary, for in this fanciful geography India
is the central continent and Sakadvipa the sixth, whereas if it
means Persia or the countries of the Oxus it ought to be near India.]

[Footnote 1157: The Garuda may itself be of Persian provenance, for
birds play a considerable part in Persian mythology.]

[Footnote 1158: The Aivyaonghen of the Avesta.]

[Footnote 1159: Watters, vol. II. 254, and _Life_, chap. IV.]

[Footnote 1160: Taranatha, tr. Schiefner, p. 128, and Vincent Smith's
remarks in _Early History_, p. 347, note 2.]

[Footnote 1161: See Rajendralala Mitra, _Antiquities of Orissa_, vol.
n. p. 145. He also quotes the Samba Purana. The temple is said to have
been built between 1240 and 1280 but the beauty of its architecture
suggests an earlier date.]

[Footnote 1162: 58. 47.]

[Footnote 1163: See Epig. Ind. 72-73.]




CHAPTER LVIII

MOHAMMEDANISM IN INDIA


Let us now turn to Mohammedanism. This is different from the cases
which we have been considering and we need not trouble ourselves with
any enquiry into opportunities and possibilities. The presence and
strength of the Prophet's religion in India are patent facts and it is
surprising that the result has not been greater.

The chief and most obvious method by which Islam influenced India was
the series of invasions, culminating in the Mughal conquest, which
poured through the mountain passes of the north-west frontier. But
there was also long established communication and to some extent
intermigration between the west coast and Mohammedan countries such as
Arabia and Persia. Compared with the enormous political and social
changes wrought by the land invasions, the results of this maritime
intercourse may seem unworthy of mention. Yet for the interchange of
ideas it was not without importance, the more so as it was
unaccompanied by violence and hostility. Thus the Mappilas or Moplahs
of Malabar appear to be the descendants of Arab immigrants who arrived
by sea about 900 A.D., and the sects known as Khojas and Bohras owe
their conversion to the zeal of Arab and Persian missionaries who
preached in the eleventh century. Apart from Mohammedan conquests
there must have been at this time in Gujarat, Bombay, and on the west
coast generally some knowledge of the teaching of Islam.

In the annals of invasions and conquests several stages can be
distinguished. First we have the Arab conquest of Sind in 712, which
had little effect. In 1021 Mahmud of Ghazni annexed the Panjab. He
conducted three campaigns against other kingdoms of India but, though
he sacked Muttra, Somnath and other religious centres, he did not
attempt to conquer these regions, still less to convert them to Islam.
The period of conquests as distinguished from raids did not begin
until the end of the twelfth century when Muhammad Ghori began his
campaigns and succeeded in making himself master of northern
India, which from 1193 to 1526 was ruled by Mohammedan dynasties,
mostly of Afghan or Turki descent. In the south the frontiers of
Vijayanagar marked the limits of Islam. To the north of them Rajputana
and Orissa still remained Hindu states, but with these exceptions the
Government was Mohammedan. In 1526 came the Mughal invasion, after
which all northern India was united under one Mohammedan Emperor for
about two centuries. Aurungzeb (1659-1707) was a fanatical Mohammedan:
his intolerant reign marked the beginning of disintegration in the
Empire and aroused the opposition of the Mahrattas and Sikhs. But
until this period Mohammedan rule was not marked by special bigotry or
by any persistent attempt to proselytize. A woeful chronicle of
selected outrages can indeed be drawn up. In the great towns of the
north hardly a temple remained unsacked and most were utterly
destroyed. At different periods individuals, such as Sikander Lodi of
Delhi and Jelaluddin (1414-1430) in Bengal, raged against Hinduism and
made converts by force. But such acts are scattered over a long period
and a great area; they are not characteristic of Islam in India.
Neither the earlier Mughal Emperors nor the preceding Sultans were of
irreproachable orthodoxy. Two of them at least, Ala-ud-Din and Akbar,
contemplated founding new religions of their own. Many of them were
connected with Hindu sovereigns by marriage or political alliances.

The works of Alberuni and Mohsin Fani show that educated Mohammedans
felt an interest not only in Indian science but in Indian religion. In
the Panjab and Hindustan Islam was strengthened by immigrations of
Mohammedan tribes from the north-west extending over many centuries.
Mohammedan sultans and governors held their court in the chief cities,
which thus tended to become Mohammedan not only by natural attraction
but because high caste Hindus preferred to live in the country and
would not frequent the company of those whom they considered as
outcasts. Still, Hindus were often employed as accountants and revenue
officers. All non-Moslims had to pay the jiziya or poll tax, and the
remission of this impost accorded to converts was naturally a powerful
incentive to change of faith. Yet Mohammedanism cannot record any
wholesale triumph in India such as it has won in Persia, Egypt and
Java. At the present day about one-fifth of the population are Moslim.
The strength of Islam in the Panjab is due to immigration as well as
conversion,[1164] but it was embraced by large numbers in Kashmir and
made rapid progress in Oudh and Eastern Bengal. The number of
Mohammedans in Bengal (twenty-five millions out of a total of
sixty-two in all India) is striking, seeing that the province is out
of touch with the chief Mohammedan centres, but is explicable by the
fact that Islam had to deal here not with an educated and organized
Hindu community but with imperfectly hinduized aboriginal races, who
welcomed a creed with no caste distinctions. Yet, apart from the
districts named, which lie on the natural line of march from the
Panjab down the Ganges to the sea, it made little progress. It has not
even conquered the slopes of the Himalayas or the country south of the
Jumna. If we deduct from the Mohammedan population the descendants of
Mohammedan immigrants and of those who, like the inhabitants of
Eastern Bengal, were not Hindus when they embraced the faith, the
impression produced by Islam on the religious thought of India is not
great, considering that for at least five centuries its temporal
supremacy was hardly contested.

It is not until the time of Kabir that we meet with a sect in which
Hindu and Mohammedan ideas are clearly blended, but it may be that the
theology of Ramanuja and Madhva, of the Lingayats and Sivaite sects of
the south, owes something to Islam. Its insistence on the unity and
personality of God may have vivified similar ideas existing within
Hinduism, but the expression which they found for themselves is not
Moslim in tone, just as nowadays the Arya Samaj is not European in
tone. Yet I think that the Arya Samaj would never have come into being
had not Hindus become conscious of certain strong points in European
religion. In the north it is natural that Moslim influence should not
have made itself felt at once. Islam came first as an enemy and a
raider and was no more sympathetic to the Brahmans than it was to the
Greek Church in Europe. Though Indian theism may sometimes seem
practically equivalent to Islam, yet it has a different and gentler
tone, and it often rests on the idea that God, the soul and matter are
all separate and eternal, an idea foreign to Mohammed's doctrine of
creation. But from the fifteenth century onwards we find a series
of sects which are obviously compromises and blends. Advances are made
from both sides. Thoughtful Mohammedans see the profundity of Hindu
theology: liberal Hindus declare that no caste or condition, including
birth in a Moslim family, disqualifies man for access to God.

The fusion of Islam with Hinduism exhibited in these sects has for its
basis the unity and omnipresence of God in the light of which minor
differences have no existence. But fusion also arises from an opposite
tendency, namely the toleration by Indian Moslims of Hindu ideas and
practices, especially respect for religious teachers and their
deification after death. While known by some such title as saint,
which does not shock unitarian susceptibility, they are in practice
honoured as godlings. The bare simplicity of the Arabian faith has not
proved satisfying to other nations, and Turks, Persians and Indians,
even when professing orthodoxy, have allowed embellishments and
accretions. Such supplementary beliefs thrive with special luxuriance
in India, where a considerable portion of the Moslim population are
descended from persons who accepted the new faith unwillingly or from
interested motives. They brought with them a plentiful baggage of
superstitions and did not attempt to sever the ties which bound them
to their Hindu neighbours. In the last century the efforts of the
Wahabis and other reformers are said to have been partly successful in
purifying Islam from Hindu observances, but even now the mixture is
noticeable, especially in the lower classes. Brahmans are employed to
cast horoscopes, Hindu ceremonies are observed in connection with
marriages and funerals, and the idea of pollution by eating with
unbelievers is derived from caste rules, for Mohammedans in other
countries have no objection to eating with Christians. Numerous sacred
sites, such as the shrine of Sheikh Chisti at Ajmere and of Bhairav
Nath at Muttra,[1165] are frequented by both Moslims and Hindus, and
it is an interesting parallel to find that the chief Moslim shrines of
Turkestan are erected on spots which were once Buddhist sanctuaries.
Sometimes the opposite happens: even Brahmans are known to adopt the
observances of Shiahs.[1166] But on the whole it is chiefly the
Mohammedans who borrow, not the main doctrines of Hinduism, but
popular magic and demonology. Ignorant Mohammedans in Bengal worship
Sitala, Kali, Dharmaraj, Baidyanath and other Hindu deities and also
respect certain mythical beings who seem to have a Moslim origin, but
to have acquired strange characters in the course of time. Such are
Khwaja Khizr who lives in rivers, Zindah Ghazi who rides on a tiger in
the Sandarbans, and Sultan Shahid who is said to be the bodyguard and
lover of Devi. But it is in the adoration of Pirs that this fusion of
the two religions is most apparent. A Pir is the Moslim equivalent of
a Guru and distinct from the Mollahs or official hierarchy. Just as
Hindus receive initiation from their Guru so most Moslims, except the
Wahabis and other purists, make a profession of faith before their
Pir, accept his guidance and promise him obedience. When an eminent
Pir dies his tomb becomes a place of prayer and pilgrimage. Even
educated Mohammedans admit that Pirs can intercede with the Almighty
and the uneducated offer to them not only direct supplications but
even sacrifices. The Shrine of an important Pir, such as Hazrat
Moin-ud-Din Chisti at Ajmere, is an edifice dedicated to a superhuman
being as much as any Hindu temple.

This veneration of saints attains its strangest development in the
sect of the Panchpiriyas or worshippers of the five Pirs. They are
treated by the last census of India as "Hindus whose religion has a
strong Mohammedan flavour."[1167] There is no agreement as to who the
five saints or deities are, but though the names vary from place to
place they usually comprise five of the best known semi-mythical
Pirs.[1168] Whoever they may be, they are worshipped under the form of
a small tomb with five domes or of a simple mound of clay set in the
corner of a room. Every Wednesday the mound is washed and offerings of
flowers and incense are made. A somewhat similar sect are the Malkanas
of the Panjab. These appear to be Hindus formerly converted to Islam
and now in process of reverting to Hinduism.

The influence of Hinduism on Indian Mohammedanism is thus obvious.
It is responsible for the addition to the Prophet's creed of much
superstition but also for rendering it less arid and more human. It is
harder to say how far Moslim mysticism and Sufiism are due to the same
influence. History and geography raise no difficulties to such an
origin. Arabia was in touch with the western coast of India for
centuries before the time of Mohammed: the same is true of the Persian
Gulf and Bagdad, and of Balkh and other districts near the frontiers
of India. But recent writers on Sufiism[1169] have shown a disposition
to seek its origin in Neoplatonism rather than in the east. This
hypothesis, like the other, presents no geographical difficulties.
Many Arab authors, such as Avicenna (Ibn Sina) and Averroes (Ibn
Rushd) were influenced by Greek Philosophy: Neoplatonists are said to
have taken refuge in Persia at the Court of Nushirwan (_c._ A.D. 532):
the Fihrist (_c._ 988) mentions Porphyry and Plotinus. If, therefore,
Sufiism, early or late, presents distinct resemblances to
Neoplatonism, we need not hesitate to ascribe them to direct
borrowing, remembering that Neoplatonism itself contains echoes of
India. But, admitting that much in the doctrine of the Sufis can be
found to the west as well as to the east of the countries where they
flourished, can it be said that their general tone is Neoplatonic?
Amongst their characteristics are pantheism; the institution of
religious orders and monasteries; the conception of the religious
life as a path or journey; a bold use of language in which metaphors
drawn from love, wine and music are freely used in speaking of divine
things and, although the doctrine of metempsychosis may be repudiated
as too obviously repugnant to Islam, a tendency to believe in
successive existences or states of the soul. Some of these features,
such as the use of erotic language, may be paralleled in other ancient
religions as well as Hinduism but the pantheism which, not content
with speaking of the soul's union with God, boldly identifies the soul
with the divinity and says I am God, does not seem traceable in
Neoplatonism. And though a distinction may justly be drawn between
early and later Sufiism and Indian influence be admitted as stronger
in the later developments, still an early Sufi, Al-Hallaj, was
executed in 922 A.D. for saying Ana 'l-Haqq, I am the Truth or
God, and we are expressly told that he visited India to study magic.
Many important Sufis made the same journey or at least came within the
geographical sphere of Indian influence. Faridu-'d-Din Attar travelled
in India and Turkestan; Jalalu-'d-Din er-Rumi was born at Balkh, once
a centre of Buddhism: Sa'di visited Balkh, Ghazna, the Panjab, and
Gujarat, and investigated Hindu temples.[1170] Hafiz was invited to
the Deccan by Sultan Muhammad Bahmani and, though shipwreck prevented
the completion of the visit, he was probably in touch with Indian
ideas. These journeys indicate that there was a prevalent notion that
wisdom was to be found in India and those who could not go there must
have had open ears for such Indian doctrines as might reach them by
oral teaching or in books. After the establishment of the Caliphate at
Bagdad in the eighth century translations of Indian authors became
accessible. Arabic versions were made of many works on astronomy,
mathematics and medicine and the example of Alberuni shows how easily
such treatises might be flavoured with a relish of theology. His book
and still more the Fihrist testify to the existence among Moslims,
especially in Bagdad and Persia, of an interest in all forms of
thought very different from the self-satisfied bigotry which too often
characterizes them. The Caliph Ma'mun was so fond of religious
speculation and discussion that he was suspected of being a Manichee
and nicknamed Amiru-'l-Kafirin, Commander of the Unbelievers.
Everything warrants the supposition that in the centuries preceding
Mohammed, Indian ideas were widely disseminated in western Asia,
partly as a direct overflow from India, for instance in Turkestan and
Afghanistan, and partly as entering, together with much other matter,
into the doctrines of Neoplatonists and Manichaeans. Amid the
intolerant victories of early Islam such ideas would naturally
retreat, but they soon recovered and effected an entrance into the
later phases of the faith and were strengthened by the visits of Sufi
pilgrims to Turkestan and India.

The form of Jewish mysticism known as Kabbala, which in Indian
terminology might be described as Jewish Tantrism, has a historical
connection with Sufiism and a real analogy to it, for both arise
from the desire to temper an austere and regal deism with concessions
to the common human craving for the interesting and picturesque, such
as mysticism and magic. If the accent of India can sometimes be heard
in the poems of the Sufis we may also admit that the Kabbala is its
last echo.

Experts do not assign any one region as the origin of the Kabbala but
it grew on parallel lines in both Egypt and Babylonia, in both of
which it was naturally in touch with the various oriental influences
which we have been discussing. It is said to have been introduced to
Europe about 900 A.D. but received important additions and
modifications at the hands of Isaac Luria (1534-72) who lived in
Palestine, although his disciples soon spread his doctrines among the
European Jews.

Many features of the Kabbala, such as the marvellous powers assigned
to letters, the use of charms and amulets, the emanations or phases of
the deity and the theory of the correspondence between macrocosm and
microcosm, are amazingly like Indian Tantrism but no doubt are more
justly regarded as belonging to the religious ideas common to most of
Asia.[1171] But in two points we seem able to discern definite Hindu
influence. These are metempsychosis and pantheism, which we have so
often found to have some connection with India when they exist in an
extreme form. Their presence here is specially remarkable because they
are alien to the spirit of orthodox Judaism. Yet the pre-existence and
repeated embodiment of the soul is taught in the Zohar and even more
systematically by Luria, in whose school were composed works called
Gilgulim, or lists of transmigrations. The ultimate Godhead is called
En soph or the infinite and is declared to be unknowable, not to be
described by positive epithets, and therefore in a sense non-existent,
since nothing which is predicated of existing beings can be truly
predicated of it. These are crumbs from the table of Plotinus and the
Upanishads.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1164: But see on this point _Census of India_, 1911, vol. I.
part I. p. 128.]

[Footnote 1165: Another instance is the shrine of Saiyad Salar Masud
at Bahraich. He was a nephew of Mahmud of Ghazni and was slain by
Hindus, but is now worshipped by them. See Grierson, _J.R.A.S._ 1911,
p. 195.]

[Footnote 1166: See for examples, _Census of India_, 1901, Panjab, p.
151, _e.g._ the Brahmans of a village near Rawal Pindi are said to be
Murids of Abdul-Kadir-Jilani.]

[Footnote 1167: _Census of India_, 1911, vol. I. part I. p. 195. The
Malkanas are described on the same page.]

[Footnote 1168: Such as Ghazi Miyan, Pir Badar, Zindha Ghazi, Sheikh
Farid, Sheikh Sadu and Khwaja Khizr.]

[Footnote 1169: E.G. Browne, _Literary History of Persia_: R.A.
Nicholson, _Selected Poems from the Divan of Shems-i-Tabriz_.]

[Footnote 1170: He describes how he discovered the mechanism by which
the priests made miraculous images move. See Browne, _Lit. Hist.
Persia_, II. 529.]

[Footnote 1171: But there is something very Indian in the reluctance
of the Kabbalists to accept creation _ex nihilo_ and to explain it
away by emanations, or by the doctrine of limitation, that is God's
self-withdrawal in order that the world might be created, or even by
the eternity of matter.]




INDEX


Abbot. _See_ Monasteries, and Organisation--ecclesiastical

Abdul Kadir Jilani, III. 459

Abhakta, III. 426

Abhayagiri, I. 292, 293; III. 16, 19, 33, 297

Abhayakara, II. 112; III. 360, 387

Abhaya Raja, II. 113

Abhidhamma, I. 208, 256, 258, 276 _sq._, 280, 289, 291, 299, 300; II.
47 _sq._, 80, 82, 102; III. 30, 39, 61, 71, 372, 374

Abhidhammattha-sangaha, III. 71
  sangraha, III. 39, 45

Abhidharma, III. 292, 299
  Kosa, II. 89; III. 213, 286, 314
  Pitaka, II. 59, 81; III. 285, 373
  vibhashasastra, II. 78, 81; III. 213
  vyakhya, II. 89

Abhimukhi, II. 11

Abhinava Gupta, II. 223, 224

Abhinna, I. 317

Abhiraja, III. 50

Abhiras, II. 156

Abhisheka, II. 122, 275; III. 355

Ablur inscription, II. 225

Aboriginal deities, I. xxxvi, 6; II. 126, 127, 138, 285; III. 68, 97,
112, 182, 185, 224, 343, 382

Absolute Godhead. _See_ Brahman

Abu (Mount), I. 115, 120; II. 203

Abul Fazl, III. 417

Acala, II. 11; III. 392

Acaranga, I. 116

Acariyaparampara, III. 306

Acarya, II. 114, 221, 257; III. 121
  bhimana, II. 237
  Pasupata, III. 114
  Saiva, III. 114
  vada, I. 262

Achaemenian reliefs, III. 449

Aciravati, I. 150

Acit, II. 316

Acts of the Apostles, I. 255

Acyuta, III. 114

Acyutananda Dasa, II. 115

Adam, III. 217

Adam's Bridge, II. 150
  Peak, I. 7; III. 13, 43

Adhara Karikas, II. 224

Adharma, I. 106

Adhicitta, I. 313, 315; III. 310

Adhipanna, I. 313; III. 310

Adhyatma Ramayana, II. 152, 187, 194

Adi-Buddha, II. 13, 26, 31, 57, 117, 118, 119, 129; III. 173, 387

Adi-granth, II. 263, 268

Adityas, I. 61; II. 146

Adityavarman, III. 163

_Adonis, Attis and Osiris_, II. 285

Advaita (philosophy), I. cii, 74, 82, 235; II. 40, 74, 204, 225, 238,
258, 289, 307, 312 _sq_.; III. 305,421

  (P. N.), II. 254

Advaya, III. 173-181

Adyar Library, II. 195, 210, 270, 322

_Aeltere vedanta_, II. 315

Aeons, III. 444

Afghanistan, I. 19, 24, 28, 29, 31, 264;
II. 272; III. 199, 456

agamana, II. 43, 92

Agama pramanya, II. 232

Agamas, II. 128, 188, 189, 190, 204, 216, 222, 282; III. 214, 282,
292, 296, 297, 299

[Greek: agape], I. 184, 216, 253

Agarwals, II. 177

Agastya, II. 213

Aggabodhi, king, III. 33

Agganna Sutra, I. 336

Aghora, II. 198, 234

Aghoris, II. 203, 289

Agisala, II. 77

Agni, I. 56, 62

Agnihotri, I. 90

Agni Purana, II. 130, 281

Agnishtoma, I. 66; II. 170

Agnostic teachers, I. 98

Agra, I. 87

Agrayana, II. 3

Agriculture forbidden, I. 113

Ahamkara, I. lxxvii; II. 299

Ahan, III. 282, 296

Ahar, III. 116

Ahimsa, I. lvi; II. 114, 170 _sq_., 200; III. 248

Ahinas, I. 69

Ahirbudhnya Samhita, II. 147, 194, 195
  of the Pancaratra Agama, II. 188

Ahirs, II. 158

Ahmadabad, I. 115, 119; II. 175, 252, 266

Ahmadnagar, I. 29

Ahoms (kingdom, etc.), II. 259, 280, 288; III. 79

Ahriman, I. 336

Ahuna-vairya, III. 220
  Mazda, I. 60, 64; II. 198; III. 220, 449

Ai (emperor), III. 245

Aihole, II. 172; III. 106

Aisvarya, II. 196

Aitareya Brahmana, I. 67

Aivyaonghen, III. 453

Aiyar Sesha, II. 219

Aiyengar, Krishna Swami, II. 233, 238

Ajanta, I. 26, 212; II. 108; III. 102

Ajata Satru, king (Ajata Sattu), I. 36, 74, 77, 87, 111, 131, 132,
153, 156, 157, 158, 161, 169, 172, 221, 298; III. 23, 24

Ajayadeva, I. 114

Ajita, I. 99; II. 21

Ajiva, I. 107

Ajivikas, I. 49, 99, 123, 241, 268; III. 13

Ajmer, I. 29; III. 458, 459

Akalis, II. 272, 273

Akasagarbha, II. 24; III. 216, 283

Akbar, I. 30, 31, 115; II. 242, 266, 269; III. 417, 456

Akincannayatanam, I. 135

Akriyavadins, I. 99

Akshobhya (Buddha), II. 26, 27; III. 122, 166, 169, 173

Alabaster, III. 98

Alara Kalama, I. 135, 136, 303, 316

Alasanda, III. 18

Ala-ud-din, I. 29, 30; III. 456

Alavandar, II. 232
  stotram, II. 232

Alayavijnana, I. xxxix; II. 43, 44, 84, 87

Alberuni, II. 187, 189, 228; III. 446, 453, 456, 461

Albigenses, III. 445

Alexander, king, I. 268

Alexander of Macedon, I. xxx, xxxi, 21, 50, 177; III. 189, 413, 430,
450

Alexandria, III. 414

Al Hallaj, III. 460

Alkondavilli Govindacarya, I. 40; II. 233

Allah, I. 8; II. 216, 270. _See also_ God and Islam

Allahabad, II. 99

Allakappa, I. 169

Allopanishad, II. 270

All Souls' Day, III. 264, 332

Alompra, III. 47 _sq._, 169

A-lo-pen, III. 217

Alphabets, I. 61; III. 4, 51, 80, 82, 104, 106, 154, 157, 183, 190,
191, 192, 201, 300 _sq._, 348, 355, 450

Altan, III. 361

Alterer vedanta, II. 74

Alvar. _See_ Arvar

Amarakosha, II. 280; III. 181

Amarapura, III. 36, 37, 49

Amaravati stupa, II. 85, 108, 143
  (Quangnam), III. 137

Amardas Guru, II. 268

Amar Mul, II. 266
  Singh, II. 147

Amasis, III. 434

Ambaherana Salamevan, III. 40

Ambalatthika, I. 288

Amban, III. 367 _sq._

Ambapala, I. 163

Ambatthasutta, I. 87, 131; II. 175

Ambhojanetra, III. 122

Ambika, II. 277

Amdo, III. 358, 400

Ameretat, III. 220

American Lectures, I. 151, 212

Amesha Spenta, II. 12, 120, 198

Amida, I. 182, 215; III. 312, 321, 404, 418

Amidism, I. xlix; III. 220 _sq._

Amiru-'l-Kafirin, III. 461

Amitabha (Buddha), I. xxix, xxxii; II. 6, 13, 23, 26, 28, 33, 60, 66,
72, 86, 88, 181, 182; III. 124, 166, 173, 176, 218, 219 _sq._, 292,
313, 327, 365, 385, 390, 451

Amitayurdhyanasutra, II. 23, 29, 30; III. 313

Amitayus, II. 28, 30, 33, 103; III. 391

Amittaranpapatikad, I. 116

Amogha, III. 39, 264, 293, 327, 349

Amoghapasa, III. 163, 390

Amoghasiddhi, II. 26; III. 166, 173, 176, 181

Amoghavajra, III. 317

Amoghavarsha, I. 314

Amoy, III. 333

Ampel, III. 161

Amritsar, II. 268, 272

amsa, II. 239

Amulets, I. 109. _See also_ Magic

Anachronistic practices, II. 168

Anagamin, I. 227

Anagata-vamsa, II. 22

Anahit, II. 276

Analecta, I. 177; III. 227

Ananda, I. 133, 151, 153, 155, 156, 160, 162, 163 _sq._, 170, 174,
207, 209, 247, 256, 261, 288, 343, 344; II. 9, 29, 56; III. 20, 307,
342, 439

  Garbha, II. 128
  Giri, II. 110
  Kaya, II. 32

Anandam, I. 84

Ananda Pagoda, III. 74

Anandasrama Press, II. 195

Ananda Temple, II. 55, 56
  Tirtha, II. 237

Anantavarman Colaganga, I. 30

ananuvejjo, I. 235

anariyam, I. 241

Anatta, I. 191, 194, 219

anatthapindeka, I. 151, 180

Anawrata (king), I. xxv; III. 7, 11, 47 _sq._

Ancestor-worship, I. 3, 9, 10, 12, 33; III. 68, 116, 236, 344

An-Chou, III. 206, 216

_Ancient Ceylon_, III. 18, 19
  _India_, II. 153, 159

Anda, III. 361

Andal, II. 231

Andhakas, I. 261

Andhra (kingdom, etc.), I. 22; II. 85, 100, 108; III. 102

Andras, I. 268

_Anecdota Oxoniensia_, II. 52

Anekantavada, I. 108

Anesaki, I. 293; III. 294, 296, 297, 299, 317

Angada Guru, II. 268

Angas, I. 116, 149, 281; II. 279

Ang Chan (king), III. 111

Ang Duong (king), III. 112

Angela (St.) of Foligno, I. 160

Angirasas, I. 54; II. 152

Angkor Wat (Thom), III. 106, 109 _sq._, 132 _sq._

Angulimala Pitaka, I. 180, 293, 317; III. 422

Angulimalija Sutra, II. 103

Anguttara Nikaya, I. lxxiii, 134, 212, 223, 278, 288, 289, 295; II.
48, 49; III. 65, 296, 297

an-had, II. 262

An-hsi (Parthia), III. 248

aniccam, I. 219

Aniko Lama, III. 356

Animals, I. lvi, xcix, 68, 115, 267; II. 131, 167; III. 248, 254, 344,
445, 446.

  _See also_ Ahimsa

Animism, I. 104, 332; II. 167; III. 42, 98.
  _See also_ Aboriginal deities, Nats, Nature worship, Phis

Aniruddha, II. 196, 235

_Annales du Musee Guimet_, II. 122, 275

Annals (various), III. 104, 105, 108, 110, 111, 153, 344

Annam (Champa), I. xxiv, xxvi; II. 25; III. 6, 8, 111, 129, 135, 140,
141, 340 _sq._

Anoma, I. 175

An-shih Kao, II. 64; III. 248, 292, 313

Antagadasao, I. 116

Antakritad, I. 116

antaratman, III. 175

antaraya, I. 107

Antaryamin, II. 46, 235, 317

Antigonus, I. 268; III. 430

Antioch, I. 255

Antiochus, king, I. 268; III. 430

Anu, II. 223, 292

Anugita, II. 187

Anugraha, II. 180

Anukramani, II. 152

Anula (Princess), III. 17

Anumana, II. 293

an-upadi-sesa-nibbanam, I. 223

Anuradhapura, I. 143, 276; III. 16, 23

Anuruddha, I. 134, 155, 168; III. 39, 45

Anusasana purana, II. 194

Anuttara Yoga, II. 128, 189

Anuttarovavaidasao, I. 116

_Any Saint_, II. 162, 183

Apabhramsa, I. 299

Apah, I. 63

Apantaratamas, II. 202

Aparantaka, III. 50, 51

Apararajagirika, I. 259

Aparaselikas, I. 259

Aparimitayus Sutras, III. 191

Apocryphal Gospels, III. 441

Apollo, II. 139

Apollonius, III. 431, 447

Appar, II. 215

Apratishthita, I. 323

Apsus (Ephesus) (Chotscho), III. 205

apurva, II. 311

Apva, I. 102

Arabia (Arabs, etc.), I. 28; II. 109; III. 152, 154, 160, 263, 455

Aracosia, I. 23

Arahanta School, III. 59
  Thera, III. 55 _sq_.

Arahattam, I. xxi

Arakan, II. 105; III. 14, 36, 47

Aramaic Alphabet, III. 191

Aranyakas, I. 53; III. 53

Arati, I. 102

Arca (image), I. lxx; III. 185

_Archaeological Survey of Mayurabhanj_, II. 114, 126

Archbishop (R.C.), III. 417

Architecture, I. lxvi, 92, 119; II. 109, 211; III. 3, 51, 73, 89, 132
_sq_., 143 _sq_., 165 _sq_., 184 _sq_., 194, 239, 345, 450

arcismati, II. 11

Arcot, II. 113

Ardhanaresvara, II. 145

ardhanari image, III. 144

Arhat, I. 110, 145, 146, 166, 214, 223, 227, 232, 260; II. 6, 8; III.
57, 326 _sq._

Ariobalo, II. 14

Aris, III. 53

Aristobulus, III. 450

Aristocratic republics. _See_ Mallas, Sakyas, Vajjians

Ariyapariyesana sutta, I. 135, 152

Ariya saccani, I. 200
  vamsa, III. 61

Arjun (Guru), II. 268, 269

Arjuna, II. 156, 200, 253

Arjunavijaya, III. 172

Armenians, I. 122; III. 191

Arnold, Matthew, I. xcvi, 328

arogya, I. 201

Arrows in rite, I. 100; III. 219

Arsacidae, I. 22; III. 191

Arsha (Ardha) Magadha, I. 116

Art, I. xiii, xxix, xxxi, xxxiv, lxvi, xc, 22, 92, 137, 173, 212; II.
169, 211; III. 4, 96, 186, 194 _sq_., 240, 241, 242, 252, 269, 356,
382, 405

_l'Art Greco-Bouddhique du Gandhara_, II. 76

Artaxerxes Longimanus, I. 341

Artha pancaka, II. 237
  purana sastra, III. 142
  sastra, I. 18

Artjeh, III. 185

Arul, II. 217

Arunandi, II. 221

