Carmel there, when the Prioress, taking her to be St. Teresa of
Avila, addressed her as "our holy Mother," the visitor, adopting
her then official title, replied:--"Nay, I am not our holy
Mother, I am the Servant of God, _Soeur Therese of Lisieux_."
This, her own name of Soeur Therese, has been retained in the
present edition, unless where it was advisable to set down her
name in full--Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus and of the Holy
Face. The name of the "Little Flower," borrowed by her from the
Blessed Theophane Venard, and used so extensively in the pages of
her manuscript, is the one by which she is best known in
English-speaking lands. [Ed.]

[9] Cf. Prov. 19:11.

[10] Matt. 25:49.

[11] Wisdom 6:7.

[12] Cf. Ps. 75[76]:10.

[13] Cf. Ps. 17[18]:5.

[14] Cf. Ps. 22[23]:4.

[15] From the last poem written by Soeur Therese.

[16] Ps. 115[116]:15.

[17] John 12:24, 25.

_____________________________


COUNSELS AND REMINISCENCES OF SOEUR THERESE,
THE LITTLE FLOWER OF JESUS

_____________________________

Most of what follows has been gathered from the conversations of
Soeur Therese with her novices. Her advice cannot but prove
helpful to souls within the cloister, and likewise to many in the
world who may be attracted by her simple and easy _little way_ to
God.

*   *   *   *   *   *

One of the novices, greatly discouraged at the thought of her
imperfections, tells us that her mistress spoke to her as follows:

"You make me think of a little child that is learning to stand but
does not yet know how to walk. In his desire to reach the top of
the stairs to find his mother, he lifts his little foot to climb
the first step. It is all in vain, and at each renewed effort he
falls. Well, be like that little child. Always keep lifting your
foot to climb the ladder of holiness, and do not imagine that you
can mount even the first step. All God asks of you is good will.
From the top of the ladder He looks lovingly upon you, and soon,
touched by your fruitless efforts, He will Himself come down, and,
taking you in His Arms, will carry you to His Kingdom never again
to leave Him. But should you cease to raise your foot, you will be
left for long on the earth."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"The only way to advance rapidly in the path of love is to remain
always very little. That is what I did, and now I can sing with
our holy Father, St. John of the Cross:

'Then I abased myself so low, so very low, That I ascended to such
heights, such heights indeed, That I did overtake the prey I
chased!'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

Under a temptation which seemed to me irresistible, I said to her:
"This time, I cannot surmount it." She replied: "Why seek to
surmount it? Rather pass beneath. It is all well for great souls
to soar above the clouds when the storm rages; we have simply to
suffer the showers. What does it matter if we get wet? We shall
dry ourselves in the sunshine of love.

"It recalls a little incident of my childhood. One day a horse was
standing in front of the garden gate, and preventing us from
getting through. My companions talked to him and tried to make him
move off, but while they were still talking I quietly slipped
between his legs . . . Such is the advantage of remaining small."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Our Lord said to the mother of the sons of Zebedee: 'To sit on my
right or left hand is for them for whom it is prepared by my
Father.'[1] I imagine that these chosen places, which have been
refused alike to great Saints and Martyrs, will be reserved for
little children; and did not David foretell it when he said, that
'the little Benjamin will preside amidst the assemblies[2] of the
Saints.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"You are wrong to find fault with this thing and with that, or to
try and make everyone see things as you see them. We desire to be
'as little children,' and little children do not know what is
best: to them all seems right. Let us imitate their ways. Besides,
there is no merit in doing what reason dictates."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"My patrons and my special favourites in Heaven are those who, so
to speak, stole it, such as the Holy Innocents and the Good Thief.
The great Saints won it by their works; I wish to be like the
thieves and to win it by stratagem--a stratagem of love which will
open its gates both to me and to poor sinners. In the Book of
Proverbs the Holy Ghost encourages me, for He says: 'Come to me,
little one, to learn subtlety!'"[3]

*   *   *   *   *   *

"What would you do if you could begin over again your religious
life?"

"I think I should do as I have already done."

"Then you do not share the feeling of the hermit who said: 'While
a quarter of an hour, or even a breath of life still remains to
me, I shall fear the fires of hell even though I should have spent
long years in penance'?"

"No, I do not share that fear; I am too small. Little children are
not damned."

"You are ever seeking to be as little children are, but tell us
what must be done to obtain that childlike spirit. 'Remaining
little'--what does it mean?"

"'Remaining little' means--to recognise one's nothingness, to
await everything from the Goodness of God, to avoid being too much
troubled at our faults; finally, not to worry over amassing
spiritual riches, not to be solicitous about anything. Even
amongst the poor, while a child is still small, he is given what
is necessary; but, once he is grown up, his father will no longer
feed him, and tells him to seek work and support himself. Well, it
was to avoid hearing this, that I have never wished to grow up,
for I feel incapable of earning my livelihood, which is Life
Eternal!"

*   *   *   *   *   *

In imitation of our saintly Mistress I also wished never to grow
up; she called me therefore "the little one," and during a retreat
she wrote to me the following notes:

"Do not fear to tell Jesus that you love him, even though you may
not feel that love. In this way you will compel Him to come to
your aid, and to carry you like a little child who is too weak to
walk.

"It is indeed a great source of trial, when everything looks
black, but this does not depend entirely on yourself. Do all in
your power to detach your heart from earthly cares, especially
from creatures; then be assured Our Lord will do the rest. He
could not permit you to fall into the abyss. Be comforted, little
one! In Heaven everything will no longer look black, but dazzling
white. There all will be clothed in the Divine radiance of Our
Spouse--the Lily of the Valley. Together we will follow Him
whithersoever He goeth. Meantime we must make good use of this
life's brief day. Let us give Our Lord pleasure, let us by
self-sacrifice give Him souls! Above all, let us be little--so
little that everyone might tread us underfoot without our even
seeming to suffer pain.

"I am not surprised at the failures of the little one; she forgets
that in her role of missionary and warrior she ought to forgo all
childish consolations. It is wrong to pass one's time in fretting,
instead of sleeping on the Heart of Jesus.

"Should the little one fear the dark of the night, or complain at
not seeing Him who carries her, let her shut her eyes. It is the
one sacrifice God asks. By remaining thus, the dark will cease to
terrify, because she will not see it, and before long, peace--if
not joy--will re-enter her soul."

*   *   *   *   *   *

To help me accept a humiliation she confided to me what follows:

"If I had not been received into the Carmel, I would have entered
a Refuge, and lived there unknown and despised among the poor
'penitents.' My joy would have been to pass for one, and I would
have become an apostle among my companions, telling them my
thoughts on the Infinite Mercy of God."

"But how could you have hidden your innocence from your Confessor?"

"I would have told him that while still in the world I made a
general confession, and that it was forbidden me to repeat it."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Oh! When I think of all I have to acquire!"

"Or rather to lose! It is Jesus Who takes upon Himself to fill
your soul according as you rid it of imperfections. I see clearly
that you are mistaking the road, and that you will never arrive at
the end of your journey. You want to climb the mountain, whereas
God wishes you to descend it. He is awaiting you in the fruitful
valley of humility."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"To me it seems that humility is truth. I do not know whether I am
humble, but I do know that I see the truth in all things."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Indeed you are a Saint!"

"No, I am not a Saint. I have never wrought the works of a Saint.
_I am but a tiny soul whom Almighty God has loaded with His
favours._

"The truth of what I say will be made known to you in Heaven."

"But have you not always been faithful to those favours?"

"Yes, _from the age of three I have never refused our Good God
anything._ Still I cannot glorify myself. See how this evening the
tree-tops are gilded by the setting sun. So likewise my soul
appears to you all shining and golden because it is exposed to the
rays of Love. But should the Divine Sun no longer shine thereon,
it would instantly be sunk in gloom."

"We too would like to become all golden--what must we do?"

"You must practise the little virtues. This is sometimes
difficult, but God never refuses the first grace--courage for
self-conquest; and if the soul correspond to that grace, she at
once finds herself in God's sunlight. The praise given to Judith
has always struck me: 'Thou hast done manfully, and thy heart has
been strengthened.'[4] In the onset we must act with courage. By
this means the heart gains strength, and victory follows victory."

*   *   *   *   *   *

In conformity with the Rule, Soeur Therese never raised her eyes
in the refectory, and, as I found great difficulty in this
observance, she composed for me the following prayer. It reveals
her exceeding humility, because in it she asked a grace of which I
alone stood in need:

"O Jesus, in honour and in imitation of the example Thou gavest in
the house of Herod, Thy two little Spouses resolve to keep their
eyes cast down in the refectory. When that impious king scoffed at
Thee, O Infinite Beauty, no complaint came from Thy Lips. Thou
didst not even deign to fix on him Thy Adorable Eyes. He was not
worthy of the favour, but we who are Thy Spouses, we desire to
draw Thy Divine Gaze upon ourselves. As often as we refrain from
raising our eyes, we beg Thee to reward us by a glance of love,
and we even dare ask Thee not to refuse this sweet glance when we
fail in our self-control, for we will humble ourselves most
sincerely before Thee."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I confided to her that I made no progress, and that consequently I
had lost heart.

"Up to the age of fourteen," she said, "I practised virtue without
tasting its sweetness. I desired suffering, but I did not think of
making it my joy; that grace was vouchsafed me later. My soul was
like a beautiful tree the flowers of which had scarcely opened
when they fell.

"Offer to God the sacrifice of never gathering any fruit. If He
will that throughout your whole life you should feel a repugnance
to suffering and humiliation--if He permit that all the flowers of
your desires and of your good will should fall to the ground
without any fruit appearing, do not worry. At the hour of death,
in the twinkling of an eye, He will cause fair fruits to ripen on
the tree of your soul.

"We read in the Book of Ecclesiasticus: 'There is an inactive man
that wanteth help, is very weak in ability, and full of poverty:
yet the Eye of God hath looked upon him for good, and hath lifted
him up from his low estate, and hath exalted his head: and many
have wondered at him, and have glorified God. . . . Trust in God,
and stay in thy place. For it is easy in the Eyes of God, on a
sudden, to make the poor man rich. The blessing of God maketh
haste to reward the just, and in a swift hour His blessing beareth
fruit.'"[5]

"But if I fall, I shall always be found imperfect; whereas you are
looked upon as holy."

"That is, perhaps, because I have never desired to be considered
so. . . . But that you should be found imperfect is just what is
best. Here is your harvest. To believe oneself imperfect and
others perfect--this is true happiness. Should earthly creatures
think you devoid of holiness, they rob you of nothing, and you are
none the poorer: it is they who lose. For is there anything more
sweet than the inward joy of thinking well of our neighbour?

"As for myself I am glad and rejoice, not only when I am looked
upon as imperfect, but above all when I feel that it is true.
Compliments, on the contrary, do but displease me."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"God has a special love for you since He entrusts souls to your
care."

"That makes no difference, and I am really only what I am in His
Eyes. It is not because He wills me to be His interpreter among
you, that He loves me more; rather, He makes me your little
handmaid. It is for you, and not for myself, that He has bestowed
upon me those charms and those virtues which you see.

"I often compare myself to a little bowl filled by God with good
things. All the kittens come to eat from it, and they sometimes
quarrel as to which will have the largest share. But the Holy
Child Jesus keeps a sharp watch. 'I am willing you should feed
from My little bowl,' He says, 'but take heed lest you upset and
break it.'

"In truth there is no great danger, because I am already on the
ground. Not so with Prioresses; set, as they are, on tables, they
run far more risks. Honours are always dangerous. What poisonous
food is served daily to those in high positions! What deadly fumes
of incense! A soul must be well detached from herself to pass
unscathed through it all."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"It is a consolation for you to do good and to procure the Glory
of God. I wish I were equally favoured."

"What if God does make use of me, rather than of another, to
procure His Glory! Provided His Kingdom be established among
souls, the instrument matters not. Besides, He has no need of
anyone.

"Some time ago I was watching the flicker, almost invisible, of a
tiny night-light, when one of the Sisters drew near, and, lighting
her candle in the dying flame, passed it round to light all those
of the Community. 'Who dare glory in his own good works?' I
reflected. 'From one faint spark such as this, it would be
possible to set the whole earth on fire.' We often think we
receive graces and are divinely illumined by means of brilliant
candles. But from whence comes their light? From the prayers,
perhaps, of some humble, hidden soul, whose inward shining is not
apparent to human eyes; a soul of unrecognised virtue and, in her
own sight, of little value--a dying flame.

"What mysteries will yet be unveiled to us! I have often thought
that perhaps I owe all the graces with which I am laden, to some
little soul whom I shall know only in Heaven.

"It is God's Will that in this world souls shall dispense to each
other, by prayer, the treasures of Heaven, in order that when they
reach their Everlasting Home they may love one another with
grateful hearts, and with an affection far in excess of that which
reigns in the most perfect family on earth.

"There no looks of indifference will meet us, because all the
Saints will be mutually indebted to each other. No envious glances
will be cast, for the happiness of each one of the Blessed will be
the happiness of all. With the Doctors of the Church we shall be
like unto Doctors; with the Martyrs, like unto Martyrs; with the
Virgins, like unto Virgins; and just as the members of one family
are proud one of the other, so without the least jealousy shall we
take pride in our brothers and sisters.

"When we see the glory of the great Saints, and know that through
the secret working of Providence we have contributed to it, who
knows whether the joy we shall feel will not be as intense,
perhaps sweeter, than the happiness they themselves possess?

"And do you not think that the great Saints, on their side, seeing
what they owe to all little souls, will love them with a love
beyond compare? The friendships of Paradise will be both sweet and
full of surprise, of this I am certain. The familiar friend of an
Apostle, or of a great Doctor of the Church, may be a shepherd
boy, and a simple little child may be united in closest intimacy
with a Patriarch. . . . I long to enter that Kingdom of Love!"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Believe me, the writing of pious books, the composing of the
sublimest poetry, all that does not equal the smallest act of
self-denial. When, however, our inability to do good gives us
pain, our only resource is to offer up the good works of others,
and in this lies the benefit of the Communion of Saints. Recall to
mind that beautiful verse of the canticle of our Father, St. John
of the Cross:

'Return, my dove! See on the height The wounded Hart, To whom
refreshment brings The breeze, stirred by thy wings.'

"Thus the Spouse, the wounded Hart, is not attracted by the
height, but only by the breeze from the pinions of the dove--a
breeze which one single stroke of wing is sufficient to create."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"The one thing which is not open to envy is the lowest place. Here
