be more proper, that they may be known, and thus they will not be given
trouble; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

033.060
Y: Truly, if the Hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and
those who stir up sedition in the City, desist not, We shall certainly
stir thee up against them: Then will they not be able to stay in it as
thy neighbours for any length of time:

P: If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and the
alarmists in the city do not cease, We verily shall urge thee on
against them, then they will be your neighbours in it but a little
while.

S: If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the
agitators in the city do not desist, We shall most certainly set you
over them, then they shall not be your neighbors in it but for a little
while;

033.061
Y: They shall have a curse on them: whenever they are found, they shall
be seized and slain (without mercy).

P: Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain with a
(fierce) slaughter.

S: Cursed: wherever they are found they shall be seized and murdered, a
(horrible) murdering.

033.062
Y: (Such was) the practice (approved) of Allah among those who lived
aforetime: No change wilt thou find in the practice (approved) of
Allah.

P: That was the way of Allah in the case of those who passed away of
old; thou wilt not find for the way of Allah aught of power to change.

S: (Such has been) the course of Allah with respect to those who have
gone before; and you shall not find any change in the course of Allah.

033.063
Y: Men ask thee concerning the Hour: Say, "The knowledge thereof is with
Allah (alone)": and what will make thee understand?- perchance the Hour
is nigh!

P: Men ask thee of the Hour. Say: The knowledge of it is with Allah
only. What can convey (the knowledge) unto thee? It may be that the
Hour is nigh.

S: Men ask you about the hour; say: The knowledge of it is only with
Allah, and what will make you comprehend that the hour may be nigh.

033.064
Y: Verily Allah has cursed the Unbelievers and prepared for them a
Blazing Fire,-

P: Lo! Allah hath cursed the disbelievers, and hath prepared for them a
flaming fire,

S: Surely Allah has cursed the unbelievers and has prepared for them a
burning fire,

033.065
Y: To dwell therein for ever: no protector will they find, nor helper.

P: Wherein they will abide for ever. They will find (then) no protecting
friend nor helper.

S: To abide therein for a long time; they shall not find a protector or
a helper.

033.066
Y: The Day that their faces will be turned upside down in the Fire, they
will say: "Woe to us! Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the
Messenger!"

P: On the day when their faces are turned over in the Fire, they say:
Oh, would that we had obeyed Allah and had obeyed His messenger!

S: On the day when their faces shall be turned back into the fire, they
shall say: O would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger!

033.067
Y: And they would say: "Our Lord! We obeyed our chiefs and our great
ones, and they misled us as to the (right) Path."

P: And they say: Our Lord! Lo! we obeyed our princes and great men, and
they misled us from the Way.

S: And they shall say: O our Lord! surely we obeyed our leaders and our
great men, so they led us astray from the path;

033.068
Y: "Our Lord! Give them double Penalty and curse them with a very great
Curse!"

P: Our Lord! Oh, give them double torment and curse them with a mighty
curse.

S: O our Lord! give them a double punishment and curse them with a great
curse.

033.069
Y: O ye who believe! Be ye not like those who vexed and insulted Moses,
but Allah cleared him of the (calumnies) they had uttered: and he was
honourable in Allah's sight.

P: O ye who believe! Be not as those who slandered Moses, but Allah
proved his innocence of that which they alleged, and he was well
esteemed in Allah's sight.

S: O you who believe! be not like those who spoke evil things of Musa,
but Allah cleared him of what they said, and he was worthy of regard
with Allah.

033.070
Y: O ye who believe! Fear Allah, and (always) say a word directed to the
Right:

P: O ye who believe! Guard your duty to Allah, and speak words straight
to the point;

S: O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and speak the
right word,

033.071
Y: That He may make your conduct whole and sound and forgive you your
sins: He that obeys Allah and His Messenger, has already attained the
highest achievement.

P: He will adjust your works for you and will forgive you your sins.
Whosoever obeyeth Allah and His messenger, he verily hath gained a
signal victory.

S: He will put your deeds into a right state for you, and forgive you
your faults; and whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, he indeed
achieves a mighty success.

033.072
Y: We did indeed offer the Trust to the Heavens and the Earth and the
Mountains; but they refused to undertake it, being afraid thereof: but
man undertook it;- He was indeed unjust and foolish;-

P: Lo! We offered the trust unto the heavens and the earth and the
hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man
assumed it. Lo! he hath proved a tyrant and a fool.

S: Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to be unfaithful to it and feared from it,
and man has turned unfaithful to it; surely he is unjust, ignorant;

033.073
Y: (With the result) that Allah has to punish the Hypocrites, men and
women, and the Unbelievers, men and women, and Allah turns in Mercy to
the Believers, men and women: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.

P: So Allah punisheth hypocritical men and hypocritical women, and
idolatrous men and idolatrous women. But Allah pardoneth believing men
and believing women, and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: So Allah will chastise the hypocritical men and the hypocritical
women and the polytheistic men and the polytheistic women, and Allah
will turn (mercifully) to the believing women, and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 34:

                             SABA (SABA, SHEBA)
 Total Verses: 54 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

034.001
Y: Praise be to Allah, to Whom belong all things in the heavens and on
earth: to Him be Praise in the Hereafter: and He is Full of Wisdom,
acquainted with all things.

P: Praise be to Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth. His is the praise in the Hereafter, and
He is the Wise, the Aware.

S: (All) praise is due to Allah, Whose is what is in the heavens and
what is in the earth, and to Him is due (all) praise in the hereafter;
and He is the Wise, the Aware.

034.002
Y: He knows all that goes into the earth, and all that comes out
thereof; all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends thereto
and He is the Most Merciful, the Oft-Forgiving.

P: He knoweth that which goeth into the earth and that which cometh
forth from it, and that descendeth from the heaven and that which
ascendeth into it. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving.

S: He knows that which goes down into the earth and that which comes out
of it, and that which comes down from the heaven and that which goes up
to it; and He is the Merciful, the Forgiving.

034.003
Y: The Unbelievers say, "Never to us will come the Hour": Say, "Nay! but
most surely, by my Lord, it will come upon you;- by Him Who knows the
unseen,- from Whom is not hidden the least little atom in the heavens
or on earth: Nor is there anything less than that, or greater, but is
in the Record Perspicuous:"

P: Those who disbelieve say: The Hour will never come unto us. Say: Nay,
by my Lord, but it is coming unto you surely. (He is) the Knower of the
Unseen. Not an atom's weight, or less than that or greater, escapeth
Him in the heavens or in the earth, but it is in a clear Record,

S: And those who disbelieve say: The hour shall not come upon us. Say:
Yea! by my Lord, the Knower of the unseen, it shall certainly come upon
you; not the weight of an atom becomes absent from Him, in the heavens
or in the earth, and neither less than that nor greater, but (all) is
in a clear book,

034.004
Y: "That He may reward those who believe and work deeds of righteousness:
for such is Forgiveness and a Sustenance Most Generous."

P: That He may reward those who believe and do good works. For them is
pardon and a rich provision.

S: That He may reward those who believe and do good; these it is for
whom is forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.

034.005
Y: But those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them,- for such
will be a Penalty,- a Punishment most humiliating.

P: But those who strive against Our revelations, challenging (Us),
theirs will be a painful doom of wrath.

S: And (as for) those who strive hard in opposing Our communications,
these it is for whom is a painful chastisement of an evil kind.

034.006
Y: And those to whom knowledge has come see that the (Revelation) sent
down to thee from thy Lord - that is the Truth, and that it guides to
the Path of the Exalted (in might), Worthy of all praise.

P: Those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed unto
thee from thy Lord is the truth and leadeth unto the path of the
Mighty, the Owner of Praise.

S: And those to whom the knowledge has been given see that which has
been revealed to you from your Lord, that is the truth, and it guides
into the path of the Mighty, the Praised.

034.007
Y: The Unbelievers say (in ridicule): "Shall we point out to you a man
that will tell you, when ye are all scattered to pieces in
disintegration, that ye shall (then be raised) in a New Creation?"

P: Those who disbelieve say: Shall we show you a man who will tell you
(that) when ye have become dispersed in dust with most complete
dispersal still, even then, ye will be created anew?

S: And those who disbelieve say: Shall we point out to you a man who
informs you that when you are scattered the utmost scattering you shall
then be most surely (raised) in (to) a new creation?

034.008
Y: "Has he invented a falsehood against Allah, or has a spirit (seized)
him?"- Nay, it is those who believe not in the Hereafter, that are in
(real) Penalty, and in farthest error.

P: Hath he invented a lie concerning Allah, or is there in him a
madness? Nay, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are in torment
and far error.

S: He has forged a lie against Allah or there is madness in him. Nay!
those who do not believe in the hereafter are in torment and in great
error.

034.009
Y: See they not what is before them and behind them, of the sky and the
earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them up, or
cause a piece of the sky to fall upon them. Verily in this is a Sign
for every devotee that turns to Allah (in repentance).

P: Have they not observed what is before them and what is behind them of
the sky and the earth? If We will, We can make the earth swallow them,
or cause obliteration from the sky to fall on them. Lo! herein surely
is a portent for every slave who turneth (to Allah) repentant.

S: Do they not then consider what is before them and what is behind them
of the heaven and the earth? If We please We will make them disappear
in the land or bring down upon them a portion from the heaven; most
surely there is a sign in this for every servant turning (to Allah).

034.010
Y: We bestowed Grace aforetime on David from ourselves: "O ye Mountains!
Sing ye back the Praises of Allah with him! and ye birds (also)! And We
made the iron soft for him;"-

P: And assuredly We gave David grace from Us, (saying): O ye hills and
birds, echo his psalms of praise! And We made the iron supple unto him,

S: And certainly We gave to Dawood excellence from Us: O mountains! sing
praises with him, and the birds; and We made the iron pliant to him,

034.011
Y: (Commanding), "Make thou coast of mail, balancing well the rings of
chain armour, and work ye righteousness; for be sure I see (clearly)
all that ye do."

P: Saying: Make thou long coats of mail and measure the links (thereof).
And do ye right. Lo! I am Seer of what ye do.

S: Saying: Make ample (coats of mail), and assign a time to the making
of coats of mail and do good; surely I am Seeing what you do.

034.012
Y: And to Solomon (We made) the Wind (obedient): Its early morning
(stride) was a month's (journey), and its evening (stride) was a
month's (journey); and We made a Font of molten brass to flow for him;
and there were jinns that worked in front of him, by the leave of his
Lord, and if any of them turned aside from Our command, We made him
taste of the Penalty of the Blazing Fire.

P: And unto Solomon (We gave) the wind, whereof the morning course was a
month's journey and the evening course a month's journey, and We caused
the fount of copper to gush forth for him, and (We gave him) certain of
the jinn who worked before him by permission of his Lord. And such of
them as deviated from Our command, them We caused to taste the
punishment of flaming fire.

S: And (We made) the wind (subservient) to Sulaiman, which made a
month's journey in the morning and a month's journey in the evening, and
We made a fountain of molten copper to flow out for him, and of the
jinn there were those who worked before him by the command of his Lord;
and whoever turned aside from Our command from among them, We made him
taste of the punishment of burning.

034.013
Y: They worked for him as he desired, (making) Arches, Images, Basons as
large as Reservoirs, and (cooking) Cauldrons fixed (in their places):
"Work ye, sons of David, with thanks! but few of My servants are
grateful!"

P: They made for him what he willed: synagogues and statues, basins like
wells and boilers built into the ground. Give thanks, O House of David!
Few of My bondmen are thankful.

S: They made for him what he pleased of fortresses and images, and bowls
(large) as watering-troughs and cooking-pots that will not move from
their place; give thanks, O family of Dawood! and very few of My
servants are grateful.

034.014
Y: Then, when We decreed (Solomon's) death, nothing showed them his
death except a little worm of the earth, which kept (slowly) gnawing
away at his staff: so when he fell down, the jinns saw plainly that if
they had known the unseen, they would not have tarried in the
humiliating Penalty (of their Task).

P: And when We decreed death for him, nothing showed his death to them
save a creeping creature of the earth which gnawed away his staff. And
when he fell the jinn saw clearly how, if they had known the Unseen,
they would not have continued in despised toil.

S: But when We decreed death for him, naught showed them his death but a
creature of the earth that ate away his staff; and when it fell down,
the jinn came to know plainly that if they had known the unseen, they
would not have tarried in abasing torment.

034.015
Y: There was, for Saba, aforetime, a Sign in their home-land - two
Gardens to the right and to the left. "Eat of the Sustenance (provided)
by your Lord, and be grateful to Him: a territory fair and happy, and a
Lord Oft-Forgiving!"

P: There was indeed a sign for Sheba in their dwelling-place: Two
gardens on the right hand and the left (as who should say): Eat of the
provision of your Lord and render thanks to Him. A fair land and an
indulgent Lord!

S: Certainly there was a sign for Saba in their abode; two gardens on
the right and the left; eat of the sustenance of your Lord and give
thanks to Him: a good land and a Forgiving Lord!

034.016
Y: But they turned away (from Allah), and We sent against them the Flood
(released) from the dams, and We converted their two garden (rows) into
"gardens" producing bitter fruit, and tamarisks, and some few (stunted)
Lote-trees.

P: But they were froward, so We sent on them the flood of 'Iram, and in
exchange for their two gardens gave them two gardens bearing bitter
fruit, the tamarisk and here and there a lote-tree.

S: But they turned aside, so We sent upon them a torrent of which the
rush could not be withstood, and in place of their two gardens We gave
to them two gardens yielding bitter fruit and (growing) tamarisk and a
few lote-trees.

034.017
Y: That was the Requital We gave them because they ungratefully rejected
Faith: and never do We give (such) requital except to such as are
ungrateful rejecters.

P: This We awarded them because of their ingratitude. Punish We ever any
save the ingrates?

S: This We requited them with because they disbelieved; and We do not
punish any but the ungrateful.

034.018
Y: Between them and the Cities on which We had poured our blessings, We
had placed Cities in prominent positions, and between them We had
appointed stages of journey in due proportion: "Travel therein, secure,
by night and by day."

P: And We set, between them and the towns which We had blessed, towns
easy to be seen, and We made the stage between them easy, (saying):
Travel in them safely both by night and day.

S: And We made between them and the towns which We had blessed (other)
towns to be easily seen, and We apportioned the journey therein: Travel
through them nights and days, secure.

034.019
Y: But they said: "Our Lord! Place longer distances between our
journey-stages": but they wronged themselves (therein). At length We
made them as a tale (that is told), and We dispersed them all in
scattered fragments. Verily in this are Signs for every (soul that is)
patiently constant and grateful.

P: But they said: Our Lord! Make the stage between our journeys longer.
And they wronged themselves, therefore We made them bywords (in the
land) and scattered them abroad, a total scattering. Lo! herein verily
are portents for each steadfast, grateful (heart).

S: And they said: O our Lord! make spaces to be longer between our
journeys; and they were unjust to themselves so We made them stories
and scattered them with an utter scattering; most surely there are
signs in this for every patient, grateful one.

034.020
Y: And on them did Satan prove true his idea, and they followed him, all
but a party that believed.

P: And Satan indeed found his calculation true concerning them, for they
follow him, all save a group of true believers.

S: And certainly the Shaitan found true his conjecture concerning them,
so they follow him, except a party of the believers.

034.021
Y: But he had no authority over them,- except that We might test the man
who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it:
and thy Lord doth watch over all things.

P: And he had no warrant whatsoever against them, save that We would
know him who believeth in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt
thereof; and thy Lord (O Muhammad) taketh note of all things.

S: And he has no authority over them, but that We may distinguish him
who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it;
and your Lord is the Preserver of all things.

034.022
Y: Say: "Call upon other (gods) whom ye fancy, besides Allah: They have
no power,- not the weight of an atom,- in the heavens or on earth: No
(sort of) share have they therein, nor is any of them a helper to
Allah."

P: Say (O Muhammad): Call upon those whom ye set up beside Allah! They
possess not an atom's weight either in the heavens or in the earth, nor
have they any share in either, nor hath He an auxiliary among them.

S: Say: Call upon those whom you assert besides Allah; they do not
control the weight of an atom in the heavens or in the earth nor have
they any partnership in either, nor has He among them any one to back
(Him) up.

034.023
Y: "No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for those for whom
He has granted permission. So far (is this the case) that, when terror
is removed from their hearts (at the Day of Judgment, then) will they
say, 'What is it that your Lord commanded?' they will say, 'That which
is true and just'; and He is the Most High, Most Great."

P: No intercession availeth with Him save for him whom He permitteth.
Yet, when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: What was it
that your Lord said? They say: The Truth. And He is the Sublime, the
Great.

S: And intercession will not avail aught with Him save of him whom He
permits. Until when fear shall be removed from their hearts, they shall
say: What is it that your Lord said? They shall say: The truth. And He
is the Most High, the Great.

034.024
Y: Say: "Who gives you sustenance, from the heavens and the earth?" Say:
"It is Allah; and certain it is that either we or ye are on right
guidance or in manifest error!"

P: Say: Who giveth you provision from the sky and the earth? Say: Allah,
Lo! we or you assuredly are rightly guided or in error manifest.

S: Say: Who gives you the sustenance from the heavens and the earth?
Say: Allah. And most surely we or you are on a right way or in manifest
error.

034.025
Y: Say: "Ye shall not be questioned as to our sins, nor shall we be
questioned as to what ye do."

P: Say: Ye will not be asked of what we committed, nor shall we be asked
of what ye do.

S: Say: You will not be questioned as to what we are guilty of, nor
shall we be questioned as to what you do.

034.026
Y: Say: "Our Lord will gather us together and will in the end decide the
matter between us (and you) in truth and justice: and He is the one to
decide, the One Who knows all."

P: Say: Our Lord will bring us all together, then He will judge between
us with truth. He is the All-knowing Judge.

S: Say: Our Lord will gather us together, then will He judge between us
with the truth; and He is the greatest Judge, the All-knowing.

034.027
Y: Say: "Show me those whom ye have joined with Him as partners: by no
means (can ye). Nay, He is Allah, the Exalted in Power, the Wise."

P: Say: Show me those whom ye have joined unto Him as partners. Nay (ye
dare not)! For He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

S: Say: Show me those whom you have joined with Him as associates; by no
means (can you do it). Nay! He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

034.028
Y: We have not sent thee but as a universal (Messenger) to men, giving
them glad tidings, and warning them (against sin), but most men
understand not.

P: And We have not sent thee (O Muhammad) save as a bringer of good
tidings and a warner unto all mankind; but most of mankind know not.

S: And We have not sent you but to all the men as a bearer of good news
and as a warner, but most men do not know.

034.029
Y: They say: "When will this promise (come to pass) if ye are telling
the truth?"

P: And they say: When is this promise (to be fulfilled) if ye are
truthful?

S: And they say: When will this promise be (fulfilled) if you are
truthful?

034.030
Y: Say: "The appointment to you is for a Day, which ye cannot put back
for an hour nor put forward."

P: Say (O Muhammad): Yours is the promise of a Day which ye cannot
postpone nor hasten by an hour.

S: Say: You have the appointment of a day from which you cannot hold
back any while, nor can you bring it on.

034.031
Y: The Unbelievers say: "We shall neither believe in this scripture nor
in (any) that (came) before it." Couldst thou but see when the
wrong-doers will be made to stand before their Lord, throwing back the
word (of blame) on one another! Those who had been despised will say to
the arrogant ones: "Had it not been for you, we should certainly have
been believers!"

P: And those who disbelieve say: We believe not in this Qur'an nor in
that which was before it; but oh, if thou couldst see, when the
wrong-doers are brought up before their Lord, how they cast the blame
one to another; how those who were despised (in the earth) say unto
those who were proud: But for you, we should have been believers.

S: And those who disbelieve say: By no means will we believe in this
Quran, nor in that which is before it; and could you see when the
unjust shall be made to stand before their Lord, bandying words one
with another! Those who were reckoned weak shall say to those who were
proud: Had it not been for you we would certainly have been believers.

034.032
Y: The arrogant ones will say to those who had been despised: "Was it we
who kept you back from Guidance after it reached you? Nay, rather, it
was ye who transgressed."

P: Those who were proud say unto those who were despised: Did we drive
you away from the guidance after it had come unto you? Nay, but ye were
guilty.

S: Those who were proud shall say to those who were deemed weak: Did we
turn you away from the guidance after it had come to you? Nay, you
(yourselves) were guilty.

034.033
Y: Those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones: "Nay! it
was a plot (of yours) by day and by night: Behold! Ye (constantly)
ordered us to be ungrateful to Allah and to attribute equals to Him!"
They will declare (their) repentance when they see the Penalty: We
shall put yokes on the necks of the Unbelievers: It would only be a
requital for their (ill) Deeds.

P: Those who were despised say unto those who were proud: Nay but (it
was your) scheming night and day, when ye commanded us to disbelieve in
Allah and set up rivals unto Him. And they are filled with remorse when
they behold the doom; and We place carcans on the necks of those who
disbelieved. Are they requited aught save what they used to do?

S: And those who were deemed weak shall say to those who were proud.
Nay, (it was) planning by night and day when you told us to disbelieve
in Allah and to set up likes with Him. And they shall conceal regret
when they shall see the punishment; and We will put shackles on the
necks of those who disbelieved; they shall not be requited but what
they did.

034.034
Y: Never did We send a warner to a population, but the wealthy ones
among them said: "We believe not in the (Message) with which ye have
been sent."

P: And We sent not unto any township a warner, but its pampered ones
declared: Lo! we are disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been sent.

S: And We never sent a warner to a town but those who led lives in ease
in it said: We are surely disbelievers in what you are sent with.

034.035
Y: They said: "We have more in wealth and in sons, and we cannot be
punished."

P: And they say: We are more (than you) in wealth and children. We are
not the punished!

S: And they say: We have more wealth and children, and we shall not be
punished.

034.036
Y: Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges and restricts the Provision to whom He
pleases, but most men understand not."

P: Say (O Muhammad): Lo! my Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He
will and narroweth it (for whom He will). But most of mankind know not.

S: Say: Surely my Lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom He
pleases and straitens (for whom He pleases), but most men do not know.

034.037
Y: It is not your wealth nor your sons, that will bring you nearer to Us
in degree: but only those who believe and work righteousness - these
are the ones for whom there is a multiplied Reward for their deeds,
while secure they (reside) in the dwellings on high!

P: And it is not your wealth nor your children that will bring you near
unto Us, but he who believeth and doeth good (he draweth near). As for
such, theirs will be twofold reward for what they did and they will
dwell secure in lofty halls.

S: And not your wealth nor your children, are the things which bring you
near Us in station, but whoever believes and does good, these it is for
whom is a double reward for what they do, and they shall be secure in
the highest places.

034.038
Y: Those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them, will be given
over into Punishment.

P: And as for those who strive against Our revelations, challenging,
they will be brought to the doom.

S: And (as for) those who strive in opposing Our communications, they
shall be caused to be brought to the chastisement.

034.039
Y: Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges and restricts the Sustenance to such of
his servants as He pleases: and nothing do ye spend in the least (in
His cause) but He replaces it: for He is the Best of those who grant
Sustenance."

P: Say: Lo! my Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will of His
bondmen, and narroweth (it) for him. And whatsoever ye spend (for good)
He replaceth it. And He is the Best of Providers.

S: Say: Surely my Lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom He
pleases of His servants and straitens (them) for whom (He pleases), and
whatever thing you spend, He exceeds it in reward, and He is the best
of Sustainers.

034.040
Y: One Day He will gather them all together, and say to the angels,

"Was it you that these men used to worship?"
P: And on the day when He will gather them all together, He will say
unto the angels: Did these worship you?

S: And on the day when He will gather them all together, then will He
say to the angels: Did these worship you?

034.041
Y: They will say, "Glory to Thee! our (tie) is with Thee - as Protector
- not with them. Nay, but they worshipped the jinns: most of them
believed in them."

P: They will say: Be Thou Glorified. Thou (alone) art our Guardian, not
them! Nay, but they worshipped the jinn; most of them were believers in
them.

S: They shall say: Glory be to Thee! Thou art our Guardian, not they;
nay! they worshipped the jinn; most of them were believers in them.

034.042
Y: So on that Day no power shall they have over each other, for profit
or harm: and We shall say to the wrong-doers, "Taste ye the Penalty of
the Fire,- the which ye were wont to deny!"

P: That day ye will possess no use nor hurt one for another. And We
shall say unto those who did wrong: Taste the doom of the Fire which ye
used to deny.

S: So on that day one of you shall not control profit or harm for
another, and We will say to those who were unjust: Taste the
chastisement of the fire which you called a lie.

034.043
Y: When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, they say, "This is only a
man who wishes to hinder you from the (worship) which your fathers
practised." And they say, "This is only a falsehood invented!" and the
Unbelievers say of the Truth when it comes to them, "This is nothing
but evident magic!"

P: And if Our revelations are recited unto them in plain terms, they
say: This is naught else than a man who would turn you away from what
your fathers used to worship; and they say: This is naught else than an
invented lie. Those who disbelieve say of the truth when it reacheth
them: This is naught else than mere magic.

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them, they say: This
is naught but a man who desires to turn you away from that which your
fathers worshipped. And they say: This is naught but a lie that is
forged. And those who disbelieve say of the truth when it comes to
them: This is only clear enchantment.

034.044
Y: But We had not given them Books which they could study, nor sent
messengers to them before thee as Warners.

P: And We have given them no scriptures which they study, nor sent We
unto them, before thee, any warner.

S: And We have not given them any books which they read, nor did We send
to them before you a warner.

034.045
Y: And their predecessors rejected (the Truth); these have not received
a tenth of what We had granted to those: yet when they rejected My
messengers, how (terrible) was My rejection (of them)!

P: Those before them denied, and these have not attained a tithe of that
which We bestowed on them (of old); yet they denied My messengers. How
intense then was My abhorrence (of them)!

S: And those before them rejected (the truth), and these have not yet
attained a tenth of what We gave them, but they gave the lie to My
messengers, then how was the manifestation of My disapproval?

034.046
Y: Say: "I do admonish you on one point: that ye do stand up before
Allah,- (It may be) in pairs, or (it may be) singly,- and reflect
(within yourselves): your Companion is not possessed: he is no less
than a warner to you, in face of a terrible Penalty."

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I exhort you unto one thing only: that
ye awake, for Allah's sake, by twos and singly, and then reflect: There
is no madness in your comrade. He is naught else than a warner unto you
in face of a terrific doom.

S: Say: I exhort you only to one thing, that rise up for Allah's sake in
twos and singly, then ponder: there is no madness in your
fellow-citizen; he is only a warner to you before a severe
chastisement.

034.047
Y: Say: "No reward do I ask of you: it is (all) in your interest: my
reward is only due from Allah: And He is witness to all things."

P: Say: Whatever reward I might have asked of you is yours. My reward is
the affair of Allah only. He is Witness over all things.

S: Say: Whatever reward I have asked of you, that is only for
yourselves; my reward is only with Allah, and He is a witness of all
things.

034.048
Y: Say: "Verily my Lord doth cast the (mantle of) Truth (over His
servants),- He that has full knowledge of (all) that is hidden."

P: Say: Lo! my Lord hurleth the truth. (He is) the Knower of Things
Hidden.

S: Say: Surely my Lord utters the truth, the great Knower of the unseen.

034.049
Y: Say: "The Truth has arrived, and Falsehood neither creates anything
new, nor restores anything."

P: Say: The Truth hath come, and falsehood showeth not its face and will
not return.

S: Say: The truth has come, and the falsehood shall vanish and shall not
come back.

034.050
Y: Say: "If I am astray, I only stray to the loss of my own soul: but if
I receive guidance, it is because of the inspiration of my Lord to me:
it is He Who hears all things, and is (ever) near."

P: Say: If I err, I err only to my own loss, and if I am rightly guided
it is because of that which my Lord hath revealed unto me. Lo! He is
Hearer, Nigh.

S: Say: If I err, I err only against my own soul, and if I follow a
right direction, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me; surely He
is Hearing, Nigh.

034.051
Y: If thou couldst but see when they will quake with terror; but then
there will be no escape (for them), and they will be seized from a
position (quite) near.

P: Couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape, and are
seized from near at hand,

S: And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place,

034.052
Y: And they will say, "We do believe (now) in the (Truth)"; but how
could they receive (Faith) from a position (so) far off,-

P: And say: We (now) believe therein. But how can they reach (faith)
from afar off,

S: And they shall say: We believe in it. And how shall the attaining (of
faith) be possible to them from a distant place?

034.053
Y: Seeing that they did reject Faith (entirely) before, and that they
(continually) cast (slanders) on the unseen from a position far off?

P: When they disbelieved in it of yore. They aim at the unseen from afar
off.

S: And they disbelieved in it before, and they utter conjectures with
regard to the unseen from a distant place.

034.054
Y: And between them and their desires, is placed a barrier, as was done
in the past with their partisans: for they were indeed in suspicious
(disquieting) doubt.

P: And a gulf is set between them and that which they desire, as was
done for people of their kind of old. Lo! they were in hopeless doubt.

S: And a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they
desire, as was done with the likes of them before: surely they are in a
disquieting doubt.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 35:

                       FATIR (THE ANGELS, ORIGINATOR)
 Total Verses: 45 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

035.001
Y: Praise be to Allah, Who created (out of nothing) the heavens and the
earth, Who made the angels, messengers with wings,- two, or three, or
four (pairs): He adds to Creation as He pleases: for Allah has power
over all things.

P: Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who
appointeth the angels messengers having wings two, three and four. He
multiplieth in creation what He will. Lo! Allah is Able to do all
things.

S: All praise is due to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the
earth, the Maker of the angels, messengers flying on wings, two, and
three, and four; He increases in creation what He pleases; surely Allah
has power over all things.

035.002
Y: What Allah out of his Mercy doth bestow on mankind there is none can
withhold: what He doth withhold, there is none can grant, apart from
Him: and He is the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

P: That which Allah openeth unto mankind of mercy none can withhold it;
and that which He withholdeth none can release thereafter. He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

S: Whatever Allah grants to men of (His) mercy, there is none to
withhold it, and what He withholds there is none to send it forth after
that, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

035.003
Y: O men! Call to mind the grace of Allah unto you! is there a creator,
other than Allah, to give you sustenance from heaven or earth? There is
no god but He: how then are ye deluded away from the Truth?

P: O mankind! Remember Allah's grace toward you! Is there any creator
other than Allah who provideth for you from the sky and the earth?
There is no God save Him. Whither then are ye turned?

S: O men! call to mind the favor of Allah on you; is there any creator
besides Allah who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth?
There is no god but He; whence are you then turned away?

035.004
Y: And if they reject thee, so were messengers rejected before thee: to
Allah go back for decision all affairs.

P: And if they deny thee, (O Muhammad), messengers (of Allah) were
denied before thee. Unto Allah all things are brought back.

S: And if they call you a liar, truly messengers before you were called
liars, and to Allah are all affairs returned.

035.005
Y: O men! Certainly the promise of Allah is true. Let not then this
present life deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about
Allah.

P: O mankind! Lo! the promise of Allah is true. So let not the life of
the world beguile you, and let not the (avowed) beguiler beguile you
with regard to Allah.

S: O men! surely the promise of Allah is true, therefore let not the
life of this world deceive you, and let not the archdeceiver deceive
you respecting Allah.

035.006
Y: Verily Satan is an enemy to you: so treat him as an enemy. He only
invites his adherents, that they may become Companions of the Blazing
Fire.

P: Lo! the devil is an enemy for you, so treat him as an enemy. He only
summoneth his faction to be owners of the flaming Fire.

S: Surely the Shaitan is your enemy, so take him for an enemy; he only
invites his party that they may be inmates of the burning fire.

035.007
Y: For those who reject Allah, is a terrible Penalty: but for those who
believe and work righteous deeds, is Forgiveness, and a magnificent
Reward.

P: Those who disbelieve, theirs will be an awful doom; and those who
believe and do good works, theirs will be forgiveness and a great
reward.

S: (As for) those who disbelieve, they shall have a severe punishment,
and (as for) those who believe and do good, they shall have forgiveness
and a great reward.

035.008
Y: Is he, then, to whom the evil of his conduct is made alluring, so
that he looks upon it as good, (equal to one who is rightly guided)?
For Allah leaves to stray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. So
let not thy soul go out in (vainly) sighing after them: for Allah knows
well all that they do!

P: Is he, the evil of whose deeds is made fairseeming unto him so that
he deemeth it good, (other than Satan's dupe)? Allah verily sendeth
whom He will astray, and guideth whom He will; so let not thy soul
expire in sighings for them. Lo! Allah is Aware of what they do!

S: What! is he whose evil deed is made fairseeming to him so much so
that he considers it good? Now surely Allah makes err whom He pleases
and guides aright whom He pleases, so let not your soul waste away in
grief for them; surely Allah is Cognizant of what they do.

035.009
Y: It is Allah Who sends forth the Winds, so that they raise up the
Clouds, and We drive them to a land that is dead, and revive the earth
therewith after its death: even so (will be) the Resurrection!

P: And Allah it is Who sendeth the winds and they raise a cloud; then We
lead it unto a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its
death. Such is the Resurrection.

S: And Allah is He Who sends the winds so they raise a cloud, then We
drive it on to a dead country, and therewith We give life to the earth
after its death; even so is the quickening.

035.010
Y: If any do seek for glory and power,- to Allah belong all glory and
power. To Him mount up (all) Words of Purity: It is He Who exalts each
Deed of Righteousness. Those that lay Plots of Evil,- for them is a
Penalty terrible; and the plotting of such will be void (of result).

P: Whoso desireth power (should know that) all power belongeth to Allah.
Unto Him good words ascend, and the pious deed doth He exalt; but those
who plot iniquities, theirs will be an awful doom; and the plotting of
such (folk) will come to naught.

S: Whoever desires honor, then to Allah belongs the honor wholly. To Him
do ascend the good words; and the good deeds, lift them up, and (as
for) those who plan evil deeds, they shall have a severe chastisement;
and (as for) their plan, it shall perish.

035.011
Y: And Allah did create you from dust; then from a sperm-drop; then He
made you in pairs. And no female conceives, or lays down (her load),
but with His knowledge. Nor is a man long-lived granted length of days,
nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Decree (ordained). All
this is easy to Allah.

P: Allah created you from dust, then from a little fluid, then He made
you pairs (the male and female). No female beareth or bringeth forth
save with His knowledge. And no-one groweth old who groweth old, nor is
aught lessened of his life, but it is recorded in a Book, Lo! that is
easy for Allah.

S: And Allah created you of dust, then of the life-germ, then He made
you pairs; and no female bears, nor does she bring forth, except with
His knowledge; and no one whose life is lengthened has his life
lengthened, nor is aught diminished of one's life, but it is all in a
book; surely this is easy to Allah.

035.012
Y: Nor are the two bodies of flowing water alike,- the one palatable,
sweet, and pleasant to drink, and the other, salt and bitter. Yet from
each (kind of water) do ye eat flesh fresh and tender, and ye extract
ornaments to wear; and thou seest the ships therein that plough the
waves, that ye may seek (thus) of the Bounty of Allah that ye may be
grateful.

P: And the two seas are not alike: this, fresh, sweet, good to drink,
this (other) bitter, salt. And from them both ye eat fresh meat and
derive the ornament that ye wear. And thou seest the ship cleaving them
with its prow that ye may seek of His bounty, and that haply ye may
give thanks.

S: And the two seas are not alike: the one sweet, that subdues thirst by
its excessive sweetness, pleasant to drink; and the other salt, that
burns by its saltness; yet from each of them you eat fresh flesh and
bring forth ornaments which you wear; and you see the ships cleave
through it that you may seek of His bounty and that you may be
grateful.

035.013
Y: He merges Night into Day, and he merges Day into Night, and he has
subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law): each one runs its course
for a term appointed. Such is Allah your Lord: to Him belongs all
Dominion. And those whom ye invoke besides Him have not the least
power.

P: He maketh the night to pass into the day and He maketh the day to
pass into the night. He hath subdued the sun and moon to service. Each
runneth unto an appointed term. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the
Sovereignty; and those unto whom ye pray instead of Him own not so much
as the white spot on a date-stone.

S: He causes the night to enter in upon the day, and He causes the day
to enter in upon the night, and He has made subservient (to you) the
sun and the moon; each one follows its course to an appointed time;
this is Allah, your Lord, His is the kingdom; and those whom you call
upon besides Him do not control a straw.

035.014
Y: If ye invoke them, they will not listen to your call, and if they
were to listen, they cannot answer your (prayer). On the Day of
Judgment they will reject your "Partnership". and none, (O man!) can
tell thee (the Truth) like the One Who is acquainted with all things.

P: If ye pray unto them they hear not your prayer, and if they heard
they could not grant it you. On the Day of Resurrection they will
disown association with you. None can inform you like Him Who is Aware.

S: If you call on them they shall not hear your call, and even if they
could hear they shall not answer you; and on the resurrection day they
will deny your associating them (with Allah); and none can inform you
like the One Who is Aware.

035.015
Y: O ye men! It is ye that have need of Allah: but Allah is the One Free
of all wants, worthy of all praise.

P: O mankind! Ye are the poor in your relation to Allah. And Allah! He
is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.

S: O men! you are they who stand in need of Allah, and Allah is He Who
is the Self-sufficient, the Praised One.

035.016
Y: If He so pleased, He could blot you out and bring in a New Creation.

P: If He will, He can be rid of you and bring (instead of you) some new
creation.

S: If He please, He will take you off and bring a new generation.

035.017
Y: Nor is that (at all) difficult for Allah.

P: That is not a hard thing for Allah.

S: And this is not hard to Allah.

035.018
Y: Nor can a bearer of burdens bear another's burdens if one heavily
laden should call another to (bear) his load. Not the least portion of
it can be carried (by the other). Even though he be nearly related.
Thou canst but admonish such as fear their Lord unseen and establish
regular Prayer. And whoever purifies himself does so for the benefit of
his own soul; and the destination (of all) is to Allah.

P: And no burdened soul can bear another's burden, and if one heavy
laden crieth for (help with) his load, naught of it will be lifted even
though he (unto whom he crieth) be of kin. Thou warnest only those who
fear their Lord in secret, and have established worship. He who groweth
(in goodness), groweth only for himself, (he cannot by his merit redeem
others). Unto Allah is the journeying.

S: And a burdened soul cannot bear the burden of another and if one
weighed down by burden should cry for (another to carry) its burden,
not aught of it shall be carried, even though he be near of kin. You
warn only those who fear their Lord in secret and keep up prayer; and
whoever purifies himself, he purifies himself only for (the good of)
his own soul; and to Allah is the eventual coming.

035.019
Y: The blind and the seeing are not alike;

P: The blind man is not equal with the seer;

S: And the blind and the seeing are not alike

035.020
Y: Nor are the depths of Darkness and the Light;

P: Nor is darkness (tantamount to) light;

S: Nor the darkness and the light,

035.021
Y: Nor are the (chilly) shade and the (genial) heat of the sun:

P: Nor is the shadow equal with the sun's full heat;

S: Nor the shade and the heat,

035.022
Y: Nor are alike those that are living and those that are dead. Allah
can make any that He wills to hear; but thou canst not make those to
hear who are (buried) in graves.

P: Nor are the living equal with the dead. Lo! Allah maketh whom He will
to hear. Thou canst not reach those who are in the graves.

S: Neither are the living and the dead alike. Surely Allah makes whom He
pleases hear, and you cannot make those hear who are in the graves.

035.023
Y: Thou art no other than a warner.

P: Thou art but a warner.

S: You are naught but a warner.

035.024
Y: Verily We have sent thee in truth, as a bearer of glad tidings, and
as a warner: and there never was a people, without a warner having
lived among them (in the past).

P: Lo! We have sent thee with the Truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a
warner; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among them.

S: Surely We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a
warner; and there is not a people but a warner has gone among them.

035.025
Y: And if they reject thee, so did their predecessors, to whom came
their messengers with Clear Signs, Books of dark prophecies, and the
Book of Enlightenment.

P: And if they deny thee, those before them also denied. Their
messengers came unto them with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty),
and with the Psalms and the Scripture giving light.

S: And if they call you a liar, so did those before them indeed call
(their messengers) liars; their messengers had come to them with clear
arguments, and with scriptures, and with the illuminating book.

035.026
Y: In the end did I punish those who rejected Faith: and how (terrible)
was My rejection (of them)!

P: Then seized I those who disbelieved, and how intense was My
abhorrence!

S: Then did I punish those who disbelieved, so how was the manifestation
of My disapproval?

035.027
Y: Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky? With it We
then bring out produce of various colours. And in the mountains are
tracts white and red, of various shades of colour, and black intense in
hue.

P: Hast thou not seen that Allah causeth water to fall from the sky, and
We produce therewith fruit of divers hues; and among the hills are
streaks white and red, of divers hues, and (others) raven-black;

S: Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud, then We
bring forth therewith fruits of various colors; and in the mountains
are streaks, white and red, of various hues and (others) intensely
black?

035.028
Y: And so amongst men and crawling creatures and cattle, are they of
various colours. Those truly fear Allah, among His Servants, who have
knowledge: for Allah is Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving.

P: And of men and beasts and cattle, in like manner, divers hues? The
erudite among His bondmen fear Allah alone. Lo! Allah is Mighty,
Forgiving.

S: And of men and beasts and cattle are various species of it likewise;
those of His servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear Allah;
surely Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.

035.029
Y: Those who rehearse the Book of Allah, establish regular Prayer, and
spend (in Charity) out of what We have provided for them, secretly and
openly, hope for a commerce that will never fail:

P: Lo! those who read the Scripture of Allah, and establish worship, and
spend of that which We have bestowed on them secretly and openly, they
look forward to imperishable gain,

S: Surely they who recite the Book of Allah and keep up prayer and spend
out of what We have given them secretly and openly, hope for a gain
which will not perish.

035.030
Y: For He will pay them their meed, nay, He will give them (even) more
out of His Bounty: for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate
(service).

P: That He will pay them their wages and increase them of His grace. Lo!
He is Forgiving, Responsive.

S: That He may pay them back fully their rewards and give them more out
of His grace: surely He is Forgiving, Multiplier of rewards.

035.031
Y: That which We have revealed to thee of the Book is the Truth,-
confirming what was (revealed) before it: for Allah is assuredly- with
respect to His Servants - well acquainted and Fully Observant.

P: As for that which We inspire in thee of the Scripture, it is the
Truth confirming that which was (revealed) before it. Lo! Allah is
indeed Observer, Seer of His slaves.

S: And that which We have revealed to you of the Book, that is the truth
verifying that which is before it; most surely with respect to His
servants Allah is Aware, Seeing.

035.032
Y: Then We have given the Book for inheritance to such of Our Servants
as We have chosen: but there are among them some who wrong their own
souls; some who follow a middle course; and some who are, by Allah's
leave, foremost in good deeds that is the highest Grace.

P: Then We gave the Scripture as inheritance unto those whom We elected
of Our bondmen. But of them are some who wrong themselves and of them
are some who are lukewarm, and of them are some who outstrip (others)
through good deeds, by Allah's leave. That is the great favour!

S: Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from
among Our servants; but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a
loss, and of them is he who takes a middle course, and of them is he
who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah's permission; this is the
great excellence.

035.033
Y: Gardens of Eternity will they enter: therein will they be adorned
with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments there will be of
silk.

P: Gardens of Eden! They enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl
and their raiment therein is silk.

S: Gardens of perpetuity, they shall enter therein; they shad be made to
wear therein bracelets of gold and pearls, and their dress therein
shall be silk.

035.034
Y: And they will say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all)
sorrow: for our Lord is indeed Oft-Forgiving Ready to appreciate
(service):"

P: And they say: Praise be to Allah Who hath put grief away from us. Lo!
Our Lord is Forgiving, Bountiful,

S: And they shall say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made grief
to depart from us; most surely our Lord is Forgiving, Multiplier of
rewards,

035.035
Y: "Who has, out of His Bounty, settled us in a Home that will last: no
toil nor sense of weariness shall touch us therein."

P: Who, of His grace, hath installed us in the mansion of eternity,
where toil toucheth us not nor can weariness affect us.

S: Who has made us alight in a house abiding for ever out of His
grace; toil shall not touch us therein, nor shall fatigue therein
afflict us.

035.036
Y: But those who reject (Allah) - for them will be the Fire of Hell: No
term shall be determined for them, so they should die, nor shall its
Penalty be lightened for them. Thus do We reward every ungrateful one!

P: But as for those who disbelieve, for them is fire of hell; it taketh
not complete effect upon them so that they can die, nor is its torment
lightened for them. Thus We punish every ingrate.

S: And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is the fire of hell; it
shall not be finished with them entirely so that they should die, nor
shall the chastisement thereof be lightened to them: even thus do We
retribute every ungrateful one.

035.037
Y: Therein will they cry aloud (for assistance): "Our Lord! Bring us
out: we shall work righteousness, not the (deeds) we used to do!" -
"Did We not give you long enough life so that he that would should
receive admonition? and (moreover) the warner came to you. So taste ye
(the fruits of your deeds): for the wrong-doers there is no helper."

P: And they cry for help there, (saying): Our Lord! Release us; we will
do right, not (the wrong) that we used to do. Did not We grant you a
life long enough for him who reflected to reflect therein? And the
warner came unto you. Now taste (the flavour of your deeds), for
evil-doers have no helper.

S: And they shall cry therein for succour: O our Lord! take us out, we
will do good deeds other than those which we used to do. Did We not
preserve you alive long enough, so that he who would be mindful in it
should mind? And there came to you the warner; therefore taste; because
for the unjust, there is no helper.

035.038
Y: Verily Allah knows (all) the hidden things of the heavens and the
earth: verily He has full knowledge of all that is in (men's) hearts.

P: Lo! Allah is the Knower of the Unseen of the heavens and the earth.
Lo! He is Aware of the secret of (men's) breasts.

S: Surely Allah is the Knower of what is unseen in the heavens and the
earth; surely He is Cognizant of what is in the hearts.

035.039
Y: He it is that has made you inheritors in the earth: if, then, any do
reject (Allah), their rejection (works) against themselves: their
rejection but adds to the odium for the Unbelievers in the sight of
their Lord: their rejection but adds to (their own) undoing.

P: He it is Who hath made you regents in the earth; so he who
disbelieveth, his disbelief be on his own head. Their disbelief
increaseth for the disbelievers, in their Lord's sight, naught save
abhorrence. Their disbelief increaseth for the disbelievers naught save
loss.

S: He it is Who made you rulers in the land; therefore whoever
disbelieves, his unbelief is against himself; and their unbelief does
not increase the disbelievers with their Lord in anything except
hatred; and their unbelief does not increase the disbelievers in
anything except loss.

035.040
Y: Say: "Have ye seen (these) 'Partners' of yours whom ye call upon
besides Allah? Show Me what it is they have created in the (wide)
earth. Or have they a share in the heavens? Or have We given them a
Book from which they (can derive) clear (evidence)?- Nay, the
wrong-doers promise each other nothing but delusions."

P: Say: Have ye seen your partner-gods to whom ye pray beside Allah?
Show me what they created of the earth! Or have they any portion in the
heavens? Or have We given them a scripture so they act on clear proof
therefrom? Nay, the evil-doers promise one another only to deceive.

S: Say: Have you considered your associates which you call upon besides
Allah? Show me what part of the earth they have created, or have they
any share in the heavens; or, have We given them a book so that they
follow a clear argument thereof? Nay, the unjust do not hold out
promises one to another but only to deceive.

035.041
Y: It is Allah Who sustains the heavens and the earth, lest they cease
(to function): and if they should fail, there is none - not one - can
sustain them thereafter: Verily He is Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving.

P: Lo! Allah graspeth the heavens and the earth that they deviate not,
and if they were to deviate there is not one that could grasp them
after Him. Lo! He is ever Clement, Forgiving.

S: Surely Allah upholds the heavens and the earth lest they come to
naught; and if they should come to naught, there is none who can uphold
them after Him; surely He is the Forbearing, the Forgiving.

035.042
Y: They swore their strongest oaths by Allah that if a warner came to
them, they would follow his guidance better than any (other) of the
Peoples: But when a warner came to them, it has only increased their
flight (from righteousness),-

P: And they swore by Allah, their most binding oath, that if a warner
came unto them they would be more tractable than any of the nations;
yet, when a warner came unto them it aroused in them naught save
repugnance,

S: And they swore by Allah with the strongest of their oaths that if
there came to them a warner they would be better guided than any of the
nations; but when there came to them a warner it increased them in
naught but aversion.

035.043
Y: On account of their arrogance in the land and their plotting of Evil,
but the plotting of Evil will hem in only the authors thereof. Now are
they but looking for the way the ancients were dealt with? But no
change wilt thou find in Allah's way (of dealing): no turning off wilt
thou find in Allah's way (of dealing).

P: (Shown in their) behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil;
and the evil plot encloseth but the men who make it. Then, can they
expect aught save the treatment of the folk of old? Thou wilt not find
for Allah's way of treatment any substitute, nor wilt thou find for
Allah's way of treatment aught of power to change.

S: (In) behaving proudly in the land and in planning evil; and the evil
plans shall not beset any save the authors of it. Then should they wait
for aught except the way of the former people? For you shall not find
any alteration in the course of Allah; and you shall not find any
change in the course of Allah.

035.044
Y: Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the End of
those before them,- though they were superior to them in strength? Nor
is Allah to be frustrated by anything whatever in the heavens or on
earth: for He is All-Knowing. All-Powerful.

P: Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the
consequence for those who were before them, and they were mightier than
these in power? Allah is not such that aught in the heavens or in the
earth escapeth Him. Lo! He is the Wise, the Mighty.

S: Have they not travelled in the land and seen how was the end of those
before them while they were stronger than these in power? And Allah is
not such that any thing in the heavens or in the earth should escape
Him; surely He is Knowing, Powerful.

035.045
Y: If Allah were to punish men according to what they deserve. He would
not leave on the back of the (earth) a single living creature: but He
gives them respite for a stated Term: when their Term expires, verily
Allah has in His sight all His Servants.

P: If Allah took mankind to task by that which they deserve, He would
not leave a living creature on the surface of the earth; but He
reprieveth them unto an appointed term, and when their term cometh -
then verily (they will know that) Allah is ever Seer of His slaves.

S: And were Allah to punish men for what they earn, He would not leave
on the back of it any creature, but He respites them till an appointed
term; so when their doom shall come, then surely Allah is Seeing with
respect to His servants.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 36:

                             YA-SEEN (YA-SEEN)
 Total Verses: 83 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

036.001
Y: Ya Sin.

P: Ya Sin.

S: Ya Seen.

036.002
Y: By the Qur'an, full of Wisdom,-

P: By the wise Qur'an,

S: I swear by the Quran full of wisdom

036.003
Y: Thou art indeed one of the messengers,

P: Lo! thou art of those sent

S: Most surely you are one of the messengers

036.004
Y: On a Straight Way.

P: On a straight path,

S: On a right way.

036.005
Y: It is a Revelation sent down by (Him), the Exalted in Might, Most
Merciful.

P: A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful,

S: A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful.

036.006
Y: In order that thou mayest admonish a people, whose fathers had
received no admonition, and who therefore remain heedless (of the Signs
of Allah).

P: That thou mayst warn a folk whose fathers were not warned, so they
are heedless.

S: That you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, so they are
heedless.

036.007
Y: The Word is proved true against the greater part of them: for they do
not believe.

P: Already hath the judgment, (for their infidelity) proved true of most
of them, for they believe not.

S: Certainly the word has proved true of most of them, so they do not
believe.

036.008
Y: We have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins, so that
their heads are forced up (and they cannot see).

P: Lo! We have put on their necks carcans reaching unto the chins, so
that they are made stiff-necked.

S: Surely We have placed chains on their necks, and these reach up to
their chins, so they have their heads raised aloft.

036.009
Y: And We have put a bar in front of them and a bar behind them, and
further, We have covered them up; so that they cannot see.

P: And We have set a bar before them and a bar behind them, and (thus)
have covered them so that they see not.

S: And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We have covered them over so that they do not see.

036.010
Y: The same is it to them whether thou admonish them or thou do not
admonish them: they will not believe.

P: Whether thou warn them or thou warn them not, it is alike for them,
for they believe not.

S: And it is alike to them whether you warn them or warn them not: they
do not believe.

036.011
Y: Thou canst but admonish such a one as follows the Message and fears
the (Lord) Most Gracious, unseen: give such a one, therefore, good
tidings, of Forgiveness and a Reward most generous.

P: Thou warnest only him who followeth the Reminder and feareth the
Beneficent in secret. To him bear tidings of forgiveness and a rich
reward.

S: You can only warn him who follows the reminder and fears the
Beneficent Allah in secret; so announce to him forgiveness and an
honorable reward.

036.012
Y: Verily We shall give life to the dead, and We record that which they
send before and that which they leave behind, and of all things have We
taken account in a clear Book (of evidence).

P: Lo! We it is Who bring the dead to life. We record that which they
send before (them), and their footprints. And all things We have kept in
a clear Register.

S: Surely We give life to the dead, and We write down what they have
sent before and their footprints, and We have recorded everything in a
clear writing.

036.013
Y: Set forth to them, by way of a parable, the (story of) the Companions
of the City. Behold, there came messengers to it.

P: Coin for them a similitude: The people of the city when those sent
(from Allah) came unto them;

S: And set out to them an example of the people of the town, when the
messengers came to it.

036.014
Y: When We (first) sent to them two messengers, they rejected them: But
We strengthened them with a third: they said, "Truly, we have been sent
on a mission to you."

P: When We sent unto them twain, and they denied them both, so We
reinforced them with a third, and they said: Lo! we have been sent unto
you.

S: When We sent to them two, they rejected both of them, then We
strengthened (them) with a third, so they said: Surely we are
messengers to you.

036.015
Y: The (people) said: "Ye are only men like ourselves; and (Allah) Most
Gracious sends no sort of revelation: ye do nothing but lie."

P: They said: Ye are but mortals like unto us. The Beneficent hath
naught revealed. Ye do but lie!

S: They said: You are naught but mortals like ourselves, nor has the
Beneficent Allah revealed anything; you only lie.

036.016
Y: They said: "Our Lord doth know that we have been sent on a mission to
you:"

P: They answered: Our Lord knoweth that we are indeed sent unto you,

S: They said: Our Lord knows that we are most surely messengers to you.

036.017
Y: "And our duty is only to proclaim the clear Message."

P: And our duty is but plain conveyance (of the message).

S: And nothing devolves on us but a clear deliverance (of the message).

036.018
Y: The (people) said: "for us, we augur an evil omen from you: if ye
desist not, we will certainly stone you. And a grievous punishment
indeed will be inflicted on you by us."

P: (The people of the city) said: We augur ill of you. If ye desist not,
we shall surely stone you, and grievous torture will befall you at our
hands.

S: They said: Surely we augur evil from you; if you do not desist, we
will certainly stone you, and there shall certainly afflict vou a
painful chastisement from us.

036.019
Y: They said: "Your evil omens are with yourselves: (deem ye this an
evil omen). If ye are admonished? Nay, but ye are a people
transgressing all bounds!"

P: They said: Your evil augury be with you! Is it because ye are
reminded (of the truth)? Nay, but ye are froward folk!

S: They said: Your evil fortune is with you; what! if you are reminded!
Nay, you are an extravagant people.

036.020
Y: Then there came running, from the farthest part of the City, a man,
saying, "O my people! Obey the messengers:"

P: And there came from the uttermost part of the city a man running. He
cried: O my people! Follow those who have been sent!

S: And from the remote part of the city there came a man running, he
said: O my people! follow the messengers;

036.021
Y: "Obey those who ask no reward of you (for themselves), and who have
themselves received Guidance."

P: Follow those who ask of you no fee, and who are rightly guided.

S: Follow him who does not ask you for reward, and they are the
followers of the right course;

036.022
Y: "It would not be reasonable in me if I did not serve Him Who created
me, and to Whom ye shall (all) be brought back."

P: For what cause should I not serve Him Who hath created me, and unto
Whom ye will be brought back?

S: And what reason have I that I should not serve Him Who brought me
into existence? And to Him you shall be brought back;

036.023
Y: "Shall I take (other) gods besides Him? If (Allah) Most Gracious
should intend some adversity for me, of no use whatever will be their
intercession for me, nor can they deliver me."

P: Shall I take (other) gods in place of Him when, if the Beneficent
should wish me any harm, their intercession will avail me naught, nor
can they save?

S: What! shall I take besides Him gods whose intercession, if the
Beneficent Allah should desire to afflict me with a harm, shall not
avail me aught, nor shall they be able to deliver me?

036.024
Y: "I would indeed, if I were to do so, be in manifest Error."

P: Then truly I should be in error manifest.

S: In that case I shall most surely be in clear error:

036.025
Y: "For me, I have faith in the Lord of you (all): listen, then, to me!"

P: Lo! I have believed in your Lord, so hear me!

S: Surely I believe in your Lord, therefore hear me.

036.026
Y: It was said: "Enter thou the Garden." He said: "Ah me! Would that my
People knew (what I know)!"-

P: It was said (unto him): Enter paradise. He said: Would that my people
knew,

S: It was said: Enter the garden. He said: O would that my people had
known,

036.027
Y: "For that my Lord has granted me Forgiveness and has enrolled me
among those held in honour!"

P: With what (munificence) my Lord hath pardoned me and made me of the
honoured ones!

S: Of that on account of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me of
the honored ones!

036.028
Y: And We sent not down against his People, after him, any hosts from
heaven, nor was it needful for Us so to do.

P: We sent not down against his people after him a host from heaven, nor
do We ever send.

S: And We did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from
heaven, nor do We ever send down.

036.029
Y: It was no more than a single mighty Blast, and behold! they were
(like ashes) quenched and silent.

P: It was but one Shout, and lo! they were extinct.

S: It was naught but a single cry, and lo! they were still.

036.030
Y: Ah! Alas for (My) Servants! There comes not a messenger to them but
they mock him!

P: Ah, the anguish for the bondmen! Never came there unto them a
messenger but they did mock him!

S: Alas for the servants! there comes not to them a messenger but they
mock at him.

036.031
Y: See they not how many generations before them we destroyed? Not to
them will they return:

P: Have they not seen how many generations We destroyed before them,
which indeed returned not unto them;

S: Do they not consider how many of the generations have We destroyed
before them, because they do not turn to them?

036.032
Y: But each one of them all - will be brought before Us (for judgment).

P: But all, without exception, will be brought before Us.

S: And all of them shall surely be brought before Us.

036.033
Y: A Sign for them is the earth that is dead: We do give it life, and
produce grain therefrom, of which ye do eat.

P: A token unto them is the dead earth. We revive it, and We bring forth
from it grain so that they eat thereof;

S: And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring
forth from it grain SQ they eat of it.

036.034
Y: And We produce therein orchard with date-palms and vines, and We
cause springs to gush forth therein:

P: And We have placed therein gardens of the date-palm and grapes, and
We have caused springs of water to gush forth therein,

S: And We make therein gardens of palms and grapevines and We make
springs to flow forth in it,

036.035
Y: That they may enjoy the fruits of this (artistry): It was not their
hands that made this: will they not then give thanks?

P: That they may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands made it not.
Will they not, then, give thanks?

S: That they may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands did not make
it; will they not then be grateful?

036.036
Y: Glory to Allah, Who created in pairs all things that the earth
produces, as well as their own (human) kind and (other) things of which
they have no knowledge.

P: Glory be to Him Who created all the sexual pairs, of that which the
earth groweth, and of themselves, and of that which they know not!

S: Glory be to Him Who created pairs of all things, of what the earth
grows, and of their kind and of what they do not know.

036.037
Y: And a Sign for them is the Night: We withdraw therefrom the Day, and
behold they are plunged in darkness;

P: A token unto them is night. We strip it of the day, and lo! they are
in darkness.

S: And a sign to them is the night: We draw forth from it the day, then
lo! they are in the dark;

036.038
Y: And the sun runs his course for a period determined for him: that is
the decree of (Him), the Exalted in Might, the All-Knowing.

P: And the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him. That is the
measuring of the Mighty, the Wise.

S: And the sun runs on to a term appointed for it; that is the ordinance
of the Mighty, the Knowing.

036.039
Y: And the Moon,- We have measured for her mansions (to traverse) till
she returns like the old (and withered) lower part of a date-stalk.

P: And for the moon We have appointed mansions till she return like an
old shrivelled palm-leaf.

S: And (as for) the moon, We have ordained for it stages till it becomes
again as an old dry palm branch.

036.040
Y: It is not permitted to the Sun to catch up the Moon, nor can the
Night outstrip the Day: Each (just) swims along in (its own) orbit
(according to Law).

P: It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor doth the night
outstrip the day. They float each in an orbit.

S: Neither is it allowable to the sun that it should overtake the moon,
nor can the night outstrip the day; and all float on in a sphere.

036.041
Y: And a Sign for them is that We bore their race (through the Flood) in
the loaded Ark;

P: And a token unto them is that We bear their offspring in the laden
ship,

S: And a sign to them is that We bear their offspring in the laden ship.

036.042
Y: And We have created for them similar (vessels) on which they ride.

P: And have created for them of the like thereof whereon they ride.

S: And We have created for them the like of it, what they will ride on.

036.043
Y: If it were Our Will, We could drown them: then would there be no
helper (to hear their cry), nor could they be delivered,

P: And if We will, We drown them, and there is no help for them, neither
can they be saved;

S: And if We please, We can drown them, then there shall be no succorer
for them, nor shall they be rescued,

036.044
Y: Except by way of Mercy from Us, and by way of (world) convenience (to
serve them) for a time.

P: Unless by mercy from Us and as comfort for a while.

S: But (by) mercy from Us and for enjoyment till a time.

036.045
Y: When they are told, "Fear ye that which is before you and that which
will be after you, in order that ye may receive Mercy," (they turn
back).

P: When it is said unto them: Beware of that which is before you and
that which is behind you, that haply ye may find mercy (they are
heedless).

S: And when it is said to them: Guard against what is before you and
what is behind you, that mercy may be had on you.

036.046
Y: Not a Sign comes to them from among the Signs of their Lord, but they
turn away therefrom.

P: Never came a token of the tokens of their Lord to them, but they did
turn away from it!

S: And there comes not to them a communication of the communications of
their Lord but they turn aside from it.

036.047
Y: And when they are told, "Spend ye of (the bounties) with which Allah
has provided you," the Unbelievers say to those who believe: "Shall we
then feed those whom, if Allah had so willed, He would have fed,
(Himself)?- Ye are in nothing but manifest error."

P: And when it is said unto them: Spend of that wherewith Allah hath
provided you, those who disbelieve say unto those who believe: Shall we
feed those whom Allah, if He willed, would feed? Ye are in naught else
than error manifest.

S: And when it is said to them: Spend out of what Allah has given you,
those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Shall we feed him whom,
if Allah please, He could feed? You are in naught but clear error.

036.048
Y: Further, they say, "When will this promise (come to pass), if what ye
say is true?"

P: And they say: When will this promise be fulfilled, if ye are
truthful?

S: And they say: When will this threat come to pass, if you are
truthful?

036.049
Y: They will not (have to) wait for aught but a single Blast: it will
seize them while they are yet disputing among themselves!

P: They await but one Shout, which will surprise them while they are
disputing.

S: They wait not for aught but a single cry which will overtake them
while they yet contend with one another.

036.050
Y: No (chance) will they then have, by will, to dispose (of their
affairs), nor to return to their own people!

P: Then they cannot make bequest, nor can they return to their own folk.

S: So they shall not be able to make a bequest, nor shall they return to
their families.

036.051
Y: The trumpet shall be sounded, when behold! from the sepulchres (men)
will rush forth to their Lord!

P: And the trumpet is blown and lo! from the graves they hie unto their
Lord,

S: And the trumpet shall be blown, when lo! from their graves they
shall hasten on to their Lord.

036.052
Y: They will say: "Ah! Woe unto us! Who hath raised us up from our beds
of repose?"... (A voice will say:) "This is what (Allah) Most Gracious
had promised. And true was the word of the messengers!"

P: Crying: Woe upon us! Who hath raised us from our place of sleep? This
is that which the Beneficent did promise, and the messengers spoke
truth.

S: They shall say: O woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent Allah promised and the
messengers told the truth.

036.053
Y: It will be no more than a single Blast, when lo! they will all be
brought up before Us!

P: It is but one Shout, and behold them brought together before Us!

S: There would be naught but a single cry, when lo! they shall all be
brought before Us.

036.054
Y: Then, on that Day, not a soul will be wronged in the least, and ye
shall but be repaid the meeds of your past Deeds.

P: This day no soul is wronged in aught; nor are ye requited aught save
what ye used to do.

S: So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and
you shall not be rewarded aught but that which you did.

036.055
Y: Verily the Companions of the Garden shall that Day have joy in all
that they do;

P: Lo! those who merit paradise this day are happily employed,

S: Surely the dwellers of the garden shall on that day be in an
occupation quite happy.

036.056
Y: They and their associates will be in groves of (cool) shade,
reclining on Thrones (of dignity);

P: They and their wives, in pleasant shade, on thrones reclining;

S: They and their wives shall be in shades, reclining on raised couches.

036.057
Y: (Every) fruit (enjoyment) will be there for them; they shall have
whatever they call for;

P: Theirs the fruit (of their good deeds) and theirs (all) that they
ask;

S: They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever they
desire.

036.058
Y: "Peace!" - a word (of salutation) from a Lord Most Merciful!

P: The word from a Merciful Lord (for them) is: Peace!

S: Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord.

036.059
Y: "And O ye in sin! Get ye apart this Day!"

P: But avaunt ye, O ye guilty, this day!

S: And get aside today, O guilty ones!

036.060
Y: "Did I not enjoin on you, O ye Children of Adam, that ye should not
worship Satan; for that he was to you an enemy avowed?"-

P: Did I not charge you, O ye sons of Adam, that ye worship not the
devil - Lo! he is your open foe!

S: Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy,

036.061
Y: "And that ye should worship Me, (for that) this was the Straight Way?"

P: But that ye worship Me? That was the right path.

S: And that you should serve Me; this is the right way.

036.062
Y: "But he did lead astray a great multitude of you. Did ye not, then,
understand?"

P: Yet he hath led astray of you a great multitude. Had ye then no
sense?

S: And certainly he led astray numerous people from among you. What!
could you not then understand?

036.063
Y: "This is the Hell of which ye were (repeatedly) warned!"

P: This is hell which ye were promised (if ye followed him).

S: This is the hell with which you were threatened.

036.064
Y: "Embrace ye the (fire) this Day, for that ye (persistently) rejected
(Truth)."

P: Burn therein this day for that ye disbelieved.

S: Enter into it this day because you disbelieved.

036.065
Y: That Day shall We set a seal on their mouths. But their hands will
speak to us, and their feet bear witness, to all that they did.

P: This day We seal up their mouths, and their hands speak out to Us and
their feet bear witness as to what they used to earn.

S: On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands
shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they
earned.

036.066
Y: If it had been our Will, We could surely have blotted out their eyes;
then should they have run about groping for the Path, but how could
they have seen?

P: And had We willed, We verily could have quenched their eyesight so
that they should struggle for the way. Then how could they have seen?

S: And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes, then they
would run about groping for the way, but how should they see?

036.067
Y: And if it had been Our Will, We could have transformed them (to
remain) in their places; then should they have been unable to move
about, nor could they have returned (after error).

P: And had We willed, We verily could have fixed them in their place,
making them powerless to go forward or turn back.

S: And if We please We would surely transform them in their place, then
they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.

036.068
Y: If We grant long life to any, We cause him to be reversed in nature:
Will they not then understand?

P: He whom we bring unto old age, We reverse him in creation (making him
go back to weakness after strength). Have ye then no sense?

S: And whomsoever We cause to live long, We reduce (him) to an abject
state in constitution; do they not then understand?

036.069
Y: We have not instructed the (Prophet) in Poetry, nor is it meet for
him: this is no less than a Message and a Qur'an making things clear:

P: And We have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry, nor is it meet for him.
This is naught else than a Reminder and a Lecture making plain,

S: And We have not taught him poetry, nor is it meet for him; it is
nothing but a reminder and a plain Quran,

036.070
Y: That it may give admonition to any (who are) alive, and that the
charge may be proved against those who reject (Truth).

P: To warn whosoever liveth, and that the word may be fulfilled against
the disbelievers.

S: That it may warn him who would have life, and (that) the word may
prove true against the unbelievers.

036.071
Y: See they not that it is We Who have created for them - among the
things which Our hands have fashioned - cattle, which are under their
dominion?-

P: Have they not seen how We have created for them of Our handiwork the
cattle, so that they are their owners,

S: Do they not see that We have created cattle for them, out of what Our
hands have wrought, so they are their masters?

036.072
Y: And that We have subjected them to their (use)? of them some do carry
them and some they eat:

P: And have subdued them unto them, so that some of them they have for
riding, some for food?

S: And We have subjected them to them, so some of them they have to ride
upon, and some of them they eat.

036.073
Y: And they have (other) profits from them (besides), and they get
(milk) to drink. Will they not then be grateful?

P: Benefits and (divers) drinks have they from them. Will they not then
give thanks?

S: And therein they have advantages and drinks; will they not then be
grateful?

036.074
Y: Yet they take (for worship) gods other than Allah, (hoping) that they
might be helped!

P: And they have taken (other) gods beside Allah, in order that they may
be helped.

S: And they have taken gods besides Allah that they may be helped.

036.075
Y: They have not the power to help them: but they will be brought up
(before Our Judgment-seat) as a troop (to be condemned).

P: It is not in their power to help them; but they (the worshippers) are
unto them a host in arms.

S: (But) they shall not be able to assist them, and they shall be a host
brought up before them.

036.076
Y: Let not their speech, then, grieve thee. Verily We know what they
hide as well as what they disclose.

P: So let not their speech grieve thee (O Muhammad). Lo! We know what
they conceal and what proclaim.

S: Therefore let not their speech grieve you; surely We know what they
do in secret and what they do openly.

036.077
Y: Doth not man see that it is We Who created him from sperm? yet
behold! he (stands forth) as an open adversary!

P: Hath not man seen that We have created him from a drop of seed? Yet
lo! he is an open opponent.

S: Does not man see that We have created him from the small seed? Then
lo! he is an open disputant.

036.078
Y: And he makes comparisons for Us, and forgets his own (origin and)
Creation: He says, "Who can give life to (dry) bones and decomposed
ones (at that)?"

P: And he hath coined for Us a similitude, and hath forgotten the fact
of his creation, saying: Who will revive these bones when they have
rotted away?

S: And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own creation.
Says he: Who will give life to the bones when they are rotten?

036.079
Y: Say, "He will give them life Who created them for the first time! for
He is Well-versed in every kind of creation!"-

P: Say: He will revive them Who produced them at the first, for He is
Knower of every creation,

S: Say: He will give life to them Who brought them into existence at
first, and He is cognizant of all creation,

036.080
Y: "The same Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when
behold! ye kindle therewith (your own fires)!"

P: Who hath appointed for you fire from the green tree, and behold! ye
kindle from it.

S: He Who has made for you the fire (to burn) from the green tree, so
that with it you kindle (fire).

036.081
Y: "Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the
like thereof?" - Yea, indeed! for He is the Creator Supreme, of skill
and knowledge (infinite)!

P: Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth Able to create the
like of them? Aye, that He is! for He is the All-Wise Creator,

S: Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the
like of them? Yea! and He is the Creator (of all), the Knower.

036.082
Y: Verily, when He intends a thing, His Command is, "be", and it is!

P: But His command, when He intendeth a thing, is only that He saith
unto it: Be! and it is.

S: His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so
it is.

036.083
Y: So glory to Him in Whose hands is the dominion of all things: and to
Him will ye be all brought back.

P: Therefor Glory be to Him in Whose hand is the dominion over all
things! Unto Him ye will be brought back.

S: Therefore glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom of all things,
and to Him you shall be brought back.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 37:

           AS-SAAFFAT (THOSE WHO SET THE RANKS, DRAWN UP IN RANKS)
 Total Verses: 182 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

037.001
Y: By those who range themselves in ranks,

P: By those who set the ranks in battle order

S: I swear by those who draw themselves out in ranks

037.002
Y: And so are strong in repelling (evil),

P: And those who drive away (the wicked) with reproof

S: Then those who drive away with reproof,

037.003
Y: And thus proclaim the Message (of Allah)!

P: And those who read (the Word) for a reminder,

S: Then those who recite, being mindful,

037.004
Y: Verily, verily, your Allah is one!-

P: Lo! thy Lord is surely One;

S: Most surely your Allah is One:

037.005
Y: Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all between them, and Lord
of every point at the rising of the sun!

P: Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that is between them,
and Lord of the sun's risings.

S: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and
Lord of the easts.

037.006
Y: We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty (in) the stars,-

P: Lo! We have adorned the lowest heaven with an ornament, the planets;

S: Surely We have adorned the nearest heaven with an adornment, the
stars,

037.007
Y: (For beauty) and for guard against all obstinate rebellious evil
spirits,

P: With security from every froward devil.

S: And (there is) a safeguard against every rebellious Shaitan.

037.008
Y: (So) they should not strain their ears in the direction of the
Exalted Assembly but be cast away from every side,

P: They cannot listen to the Highest Chiefs for they are pelted from
every side,

S: They cannot listen to the exalted assembly and they are thrown at
from every side,

037.009
Y: Repulsed, for they are under a perpetual penalty,

P: Outcast, and theirs is a perpetual torment;

S: Being driven off, and for them is a perpetual chastisement,

037.010
Y: Except such as snatch away something by stealth, and they are pursued
by a flaming fire, of piercing brightness.

P: Save him who snatcheth a fragment, and there pursueth him a piercing
flame.

S: Except him who snatches off but once, then there follows him a
brightly shining flame.

037.011
Y: Just ask their opinion: are they the more difficult to create, or the
(other) beings We have created? Them have We created out of a sticky
clay!

P: Then ask them (O Muhammad): Are they stronger as a creation, or those
(others) whom we have created? Lo! We created them of plastic clay.

S: Then ask them whether they are stronger in creation or those (others)
whom We have created. Surely We created them of firm clay.

037.012
