else in thy mind.  But out of My tenderness and grace alone art
thou permitted to draw nigh unto My table; as though a beggar
were called to a rich man's dinner, and had no other recompense
to offer him for the benefits done unto him, but to humble
himself and to give him thanks.  Do therefore as much as lieth in
thee, and do it diligently, not of custom, nor of necessity, but
with fear, reverence, and affection, receive the Body of thy
beloved Lord God, who vouchsafeth to come unto thee.  I am He who
hath called thee; I commanded it to be done; I will supply what
is lacking to thee; come and receive Me.

3. When I give the grace of devotion, give thanks unto thy God;
it is not because thou art worthy, but because I had mercy on
thee.  If thou hast not devotion, but rather feelest thyself dry,
be instant in prayer, cease not to groan and knock; cease not
until thou prevail to obtain some crumb or drop of saving grace.
Thou hast need of Me, I have no need of thee.  Nor dost thou come
to sanctify Me, but I come to sanctify thee and make thee better.
Thou comest that thou mayest be sanctified by Me, and be united
to Me; that thou mayest receive fresh grace, and be kindled anew
to amendment of life.  See that thou neglect not this grace, but
prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receive thy Beloved
unto thee.

4. But thou oughtest not only to prepare thyself for devotion
before Communion, thou must also keep thyself with all diligence
therein after receiving the Sacrament; nor is less watchfulness
needed afterwards, than devout preparation beforehand: for good
watchfulness afterwards becometh in turn the best preparation for
the gaining more grace.  For hereby is a man made entirely
indisposed to good, if he immediately return from Communion to
give himself up to outward consolations.  Beware of much
speaking; remain in a secret place, and hold communion with thy
God; for thou hast Him whom the whole world cannot take away from
thee.  I am He to whom thou oughtest wholly to give thyself; so
that now thou mayest live not wholly in thyself, but in Me, free
from all anxiety.

(1) Mark xiv. 14, 15.   (2) 1 Corinthians v. 7.
(3) Psalm cii. 7.


CHAPTER XIII

That the devout soul ought with the whole heart to yearn after
union with Christ in the Sacrament

The Voice of the Disciple

Who shall grant unto me, O Lord, that I may find Thee alone, and
open all my heart unto Thee, and enjoy Thee as much as my soul
desireth; and that no man may henceforth look upon me, nor any
creature move me or have respect unto me, but Thou alone speak
unto me and I unto Thee, even as beloved is wont to speak unto
beloved, and friend to feast with friend?  For this do I pray,
this do I long for, that I may be wholly united unto Thee, and
may withdraw my heart from all created things, and by means of
Holy Communion and frequent celebration may learn more and more
to relish heavenly and eternal things.  Ah, Lord God, when shall
I be entirely united and lost in Thee, and altogether forgetful
of myself?  Thou in me, and I in Thee;(1) even so grant that we
may in like manner continue together in one.

2. Verily Thou art my Beloved, the choicest among ten
thousand,(2) in whom my soul delighteth to dwell all the days of
her life.  Verily Thou art my Peacemaker, in Whom is perfect
peace and true rest, apart from Whom is labour and sorrow and
infinite misery.  Verily Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, and
Thy counsel is not with the wicked, but Thy Word is with the
humble and the simple.  O how sweet, O Lord, is Thy spirit, who
that Thou mightest manifest Thy sweetness towards Thy children,
dost vouchsafe to refresh them with the bread which is full of
sweetness, which cometh down from heaven.  Verily there is no
other nation so great, which hath its gods drawing nigh to them,
as Thou, our God, art present unto all Thy faithful ones,(3) unto
whom for their daily solace, and for lifting up their heart unto
heaven, Thou givest Thyself for their food and delight.

3. For what other nation is there so renowned as the Christian
people?  Or what creature is so beloved under heaven as the
devout soul to which God entereth in, that he may feed it with
His glorious flesh?  O unspeakable grace!  O wonderful
condescension!  O immeasurable love specially bestowed upon men!
But what reward shall I give unto the Lord for this grace, for
charity so mighty?  There is nothing which I am able to present
more acceptable than to give my heart altogether unto God, and to
join it inwardly to Him.  Then all my inward parts shall rejoice,
when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God.  Then shall He
say unto me, "If thou wilt be with Me, I will be with thee."  And
I will answer Him, "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to abide with me, I will
gladly be with Thee; this is my whole desire, even that my heart
be united unto Thee."

(1) John xv. 4.   (2) Cant. v. 10.   (3) Deuteronomy iv. 7.


CHAPTER XIV

Of the fervent desire of certain devout persons to receive the
Body and Blood of Christ

The Voice of the Disciple

O how great is the abundance of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou
hast laid up for them that fear Thee.  When I call to mind some
devout persons who draw nigh to Thy Sacrament, O Lord, with the
deepest devotion and affection, then very often I am confounded
in myself and blush for shame, that I approach Thine altar and
table of Holy Communion so carelessly and coldly, that I remain
so dry and without affection, that I am not wholly kindled with
love before Thee, my God, nor so vehemently drawn and affected as
many devout persons have been, who out of the very earnest desire
of the Communion, and tender affection of heart, could not
refrain from weeping, but as it were with mouth of heart and body
alike panted inwardly after Thee, O God, O Fountain of Life,
having no power to appease or satiate their hunger, save by
receiving Thy Body with all joyfulness and spiritual eagerness.

2. O truly ardent faith of those, becoming a very proof of Thy
Sacred Presence!  For they verily know their Lord in the breaking
of bread, whose heart so ardently burneth within them(1) when
Jesus walketh with them by the way.  Ah me! far from me for the
most part is such love and devotion as this, such vehement love
and ardour.  Be merciful unto me, O Jesus, good, sweet, and kind,
and grant unto Thy poor suppliant to feel sometimes, in Holy
Communion, though it be but a little, the cordial affection of
Thy love, that my faith may grow stronger, my hope in Thy
goodness increase, and my charity, once kindled within me by the
tasting of the heavenly manna, may never fail.

3. But Thy mercy is able even to grant me the grace which I long
for, and to visit me most tenderly with the spirit of fervour
when the day of Thy good pleasure shall come.  For, although I
burn not with desire so vehement as theirs who are specially
devout towards Thee, yet, through Thy grace, I have a desire
after that greatly inflamed desire, praying and desiring to be
made partaker with all those who so fervently love Thee, and to
be numbered among their holy company.

(1) Luke xxiv. 32.


CHAPTER XV

That the grace of devotion is acquired by humility and
self-denial

The Voice of the Beloved

Thou oughtest to seek earnestly the grace of devotion, to ask it
fervently, to wait for it patiently and faithfully, to receive it
gratefully, to preserve it humbly, to work with it diligently,
and to leave to God the time and manner of heavenly visitation
until it come.  Chiefly oughtest thou to humble thyself when thou
feelest inwardly little or no devotion, yet not to be too much
cast down, nor to grieve out of measure.  God ofttimes giveth in
one short moment what He hath long time denied; He sometimes
giveth at the end what at the beginning of prayer He hath
deferred to give.

2. If grace were always given immediately, and were at hand at
the wish, it would be hardly bearable to weak man.  Wherefore the
grace of devotion is to be waited for with a good hope and with
humble patience.  Yet impute it to thyself and to thy sins when
it is not given, or when it is mysteriously taken away.  It is
sometimes a small thing which hindereth and hideth grace; (if
indeed that ought to be called small and not rather great, which
hindereth so great a good); but if thou remove this, be it small
or great, and perfectly overcome it, thou wilt have what thou
hast asked.

3. For immediately that thou hast given thyself unto God with all
thine heart, and hast sought neither this nor that according to
thine own will and pleasure, but hast altogether settled thyself
in Him, thou shalt find thyself united and at peace; because
nothing shall give thee so sweet relish and delight, as the good
pleasure of the Divine will.  Whosoever therefore shall have
lifted up his will unto God with singleness of heart, and shall
have delivered himself from every inordinate love or dislike of
any created thing, he will be the most fit for receiving grace,
and worthy of the gift of devotion.  For where the Lord findeth
empty vessels,(1) there giveth He His blessing.  And the more
perfectly a man forsaketh things which cannot profit, and the
more he dieth to himself, the more quickly doth grace come, the
more plentifully doth it enter in, and the higher doth it lift up
the free heart.

4. Then shall he see, and flow together, and wonder, and his
heart shall be enlarged within him,(2) because the hand of the
Lord is with him, and he hath put himself wholly in His hand,
even for ever.  Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that seeketh
God with all his heart, and receiveth not his soul in vain.  This
man in receiving the Holy Eucharist obtaineth the great grace of
Divine Union; because he hath not regard to his own devotion and
comfort, but, above all devotion and comfort, to the glory and
honour of God.

(1) 2 Kings iv.   (2) Isaiah lx. 5.


CHAPTER XVI

That we ought to lay open our necessities to Christ and to
require His Grace

The Voice of the Disciple

O most sweet and loving Lord, whom now I devoutly desire to
receive, Thou knowest my infirmity and the necessity which I
suffer, in what evils and vices I lie; how often I am weighed
down, tempted, disturbed, and defiled.  I come unto Thee for
remedy, I beseech of Thee consolation and support.  I speak unto
Thee who knowest all things, to whom all my secrets are open, and
who alone art able perfectly to comfort and help me.  Thou
knowest what good thing I most stand in need of, and how poor I
am in virtues.

2. Behold, I stand poor and naked before Thee, requiring grace,
and imploring mercy.  Refresh the hungry suppliant, kindle my
coldness with the fire of Thy love, illuminate my blindness with
the brightness of Thy presence.  Turn thou all earthly things
into bitterness for me, all grievous and contrary things into
patience, all things worthless and created into contempt and
oblivion.  Lift up my heart unto Thee in Heaven, and suffer me
not to wander over the earth.  Be Thou alone sweet unto me from
this day forward for ever, because Thou alone art my meat and
drink, my love and joy, my sweetness and my whole good.

3. Oh that Thou wouldest altogether by Thy presence, kindle,
consume, and transform me into Thyself; that I may be made one
spirit with Thee, by the grace of inward union, and the melting
of earnest love!  Suffer me not to go away from Thee hungry and
dry; but deal mercifully with me, as oftentimes Thou hast dealt
wondrously with Thy saints.  What marvel if I should be wholly
kindled from Thee, and in myself should utterly fail, since Thou
art fire always burning and never failing, love purifying the
heart and enlightening the understanding.


CHAPTER XVII

Of fervent love and vehement desire of receiving Christ

The Voice of the Disciple

With the deepest devotion and fervent love, with all affection
and fervour of heart, I long to receive Thee, O Lord, even as many
Saints and devout persons have desired Thee in communicating, who
were altogether well pleasing to Thee by their sanctity of life,
and dwelt in all ardent devotion.  O my God, Eternal Love, my
whole Good, Happiness without measure, I long to receive Thee
with the most vehement desire and becoming reverence which any
Saint ever had or could have.

2. And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of
devotion, yet do I offer Thee the whole affection of my heart,
even as though I alone had all those most grateful inflamed
desires.  Yea, also, whatsoever things a pious mind is able to
conceive and long for, all these with the deepest veneration and
inward fervour do I offer and present unto Thee.  I desire to
reserve nothing unto myself, but freely and entirely to offer
myself and all that I have unto Thee for a sacrifice.  O Lord my
God, my Creator and Redeemer! with such affection, reverence,
praise, and honour, with such gratitude, worthiness, and love,
with such faith, hope, and purity do I desire to receive Thee
this day, as Thy most blessed Mother, the glorious Virgin Mary,
received and desired Thee, when she humbly and devoutly answered
the Angel who brought unto her the glad tidings of the mystery of
the Incarnation.  Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy word.(1)

3. And as Thy blessed forerunner, the most excellent of Saints,
John Baptist, being full of joy in Thy presence, leapt while yet
in the womb of his mother, for joy in the Holy Ghost; and
afterwards discerning Jesus walking amongst men, humbled himself
exceedingly, and said, with devout affection, The friend of the
bridegroom, who standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly
because of the bridegroom's voice;(2) even so I wish to be
inflamed with great and holy desires, and to present myself unto
Thee with my whole heart.  Whence also, on behalf of myself and
of all commended to me in prayer, I offer and present unto Thee
the jubilation of all devout hearts, their ardent affections,
their mental ecstasies, and supernatural illuminations and
heavenly visions, with all the virtues and praises celebrated and
to be celebrated by every creature in heaven and earth; to the
end that by all Thou mayest worthily be praised and glorified for
ever.

4. Receive my prayers, O Lord my God, and my desires of giving
Thee infinite praise and unbounded benediction, which, according
to the multitude of Thine unspeakable greatness, are most justly
due unto Thee.  These do I give Thee, and desire to give every
day and every moment; and with beseechings and affectionate
desires I call upon all celestial spirits and all Thy faithful
people to join with me in rendering Thee thanks and praises.

5. Let all peoples, nations, and tongues praise Thee, and magnify
Thy holy and sweet-sounding Name, with highest jubilations and
ardent devotion.  And let all who reverently and devoutly
celebrate Thy most high Sacrament, and receive it with full
assurance of faith, be accounted worthy to find grace and mercy
with Thee, and intercede with all supplication for me a sinner;
and when they shall have attained unto their wished-for devotion
and joyous union with Thee, and shall depart full of comfort and
wondrously refreshed from Thy holy, heavenly table, let them
vouchsafe to be mindful of me, for I am poor and needy.

(1) Luke i. 38.   (2) John iii. 29.


CHAPTER XVIII

That a man should not be a curious searcher of the Sacrament, but
a humble imitator of Christ, submitting his sense to holy faith

The Voice of the Beloved

Thou must take heed of curious and useless searching into this
most profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not be plunged into the
abyss of doubt.  He that is a searcher of Majesty shall be
oppressed by the glory thereof.(1)  God is able to do more than
man can understand.  A pious and humble search after truth is to
be allowed, when it is always ready to be taught, and striving
to walk after the wholesome opinions of the fathers.

2. Blessed is the simplicity which leaveth alone the difficult
paths of questionings, and followeth the plain and firm steps of
God's commandments.  Many have lost devotion whilst they sought
to search into deeper things.  Faith is required of thee, and a
sincere life, not loftiness of intellect, nor deepness in the
mysteries of God.  If thou understandest not nor comprehendest
the things which are beneath thee, how shalt thou comprehend
those which are above thee?  Submit thyself unto God, and humble
thy sense to faith, and the light of knowledge shall be given
thee, as shall be profitable and necessary unto thee.

3. There are some who are grievously tempted concerning faith and
the Sacrament; but this is not to be imputed to themselves but
rather to the enemy.  Care not then for this, dispute not with
thine own thoughts, nor make answer to the doubts which are cast
into thee by the devil; but believe the words of God, believe His
Saints and Prophets, and the wicked enemy shall flee from thee.
Often it profiteth much, that the servant of God endureth such
things.  For the enemy tempteth not unbelievers and sinners,
because he already hath secure possession of them; but he
tempteth and harasseth the faithful and devout by various means.

4. Go forward therefore with simple and undoubting faith, and
draw nigh unto the Sacrament with supplicating reverence.  And
whatsoever thou art not enabled to understand, that commit
without anxiety to Almighty God.  God deceiveth thee not; he is
deceived who believeth too much in himself.  God walketh with the
simple, revealeth Himself to the humble, giveth understanding to
babes, openeth the sense to pure minds, and hideth grace from the
curious and proud.  Human reason is weak and may be deceived; but
true faith cannot be deceived.
