Augustine says (De Perfect. Justit. ii) that "the act of sin is not a
thing." Now whatever is from God is a thing. Therefore the act of sin
is not from God.

Obj. 2: Further, man is not said to be the cause of sin, except
because he is the cause of the sinful act: for "no one works,
intending evil," as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Now God is not a
cause of sin, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore God is not the cause
of the act of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, some actions are evil and sinful in their species,
as was shown above (Q. 18, AA. 2, 8). Now whatever is the cause of a
thing, causes whatever belongs to it in respect of its species. If
therefore God caused the act of sin, He would be the cause of sin,
which is false, as was proved above (A. 1). Therefore God is not the
cause of the act of sin.

_On the contrary,_ The act of sin is a movement of the free-will. Now
"the will of God is the cause of every movement," as Augustine
declares (De Trin. iii, 4, 9). Therefore God's will is the cause of
the act of sin.

_I answer that,_ The act of sin is both a being and an act; and in
both respects it is from God. Because every being, whatever the mode
of its being, must be derived from the First Being, as Dionysius
declares (Div. Nom. v). Again every action is caused by something
existing in act, since nothing produces an action save in so far as
it is in act; and every being in act is reduced to the First Act,
viz. God, as to its cause, Who is act by His Essence. Therefore God
is the cause of every action, in so far as it is an action. But sin
denotes a being and an action with a defect: and this defect is from
the created cause, viz. the free-will, as falling away from the order
of the First Agent, viz. God. Consequently this defect is not reduced
to God as its cause, but to the free-will: even as the defect of
limping is reduced to a crooked leg as its cause, but not to the
motive power, which nevertheless causes whatever there is of movement
in the limping. Accordingly God is the cause of the act of sin: and
yet He is not the cause of sin, because He does not cause the act to
have a defect.

Reply Obj. 1: In this passage Augustine calls by the name of "thing,"
that which is a thing simply, viz. substance; for in this sense the
act of sin is not a thing.

Reply Obj. 2: Not only the act, but also the defect, is reduced to
man as its cause, which defect consists in man not being subject to
Whom he ought to be, although he does not intend this principally.
Wherefore man is the cause of the sin: while God is the cause of the
act, in such a way, that nowise is He the cause of the defect
accompanying the act, so that He is not the cause of the sin.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 72, A. 1), acts and habits do not
take their species from the privation itself, wherein consists the
nature of evil, but from some object, to which that privation is
united: and so this defect which consists in not being from God,
belongs to the species of the act consequently, and not as a specific
difference.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 79, Art. 3]

Whether God Is the Cause of Spiritual Blindness and Hardness of
Heart?

Objection 1: It would seem that God is not the cause of spiritual
blindness and hardness of heart. For Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu.
3) that God is not the cause of that which makes man worse. Now man
is made worse by spiritual blindness and hardness of heart. Therefore
God is not the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of heart.

Obj. 2: Further, Fulgentius says (De Dupl. Praedest. i, 19): "God
does not punish what He causes." Now God punishes the hardened heart,
according to Ecclus. 3:27: "A hard heart shall fear evil at the
last." Therefore God is not the cause of hardness of heart.

Obj. 3: Further, the same effect is not put down to contrary causes.
But the cause of spiritual blindness is said to be the malice of man,
according to Wis. 2:21: "For their own malice blinded them," and
again, according to 2 Cor. 4:4: "The god of this world hath blinded
the minds of unbelievers": which causes seem to be opposed to God.
Therefore God is not the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of
heart.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Isa. 6:10): "Blind the heart of
this people, and make their ears heavy," and Rom. 9:18: "He hath
mercy on whom He will, and whom He will He hardeneth."

_I answer that,_ Spiritual blindness and hardness of heart imply two
things. One is the movement of the human mind in cleaving to evil,
and turning away from the Divine light; and as regards this, God is
not the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of heart, just as
He is not the cause of sin. The other thing is the withdrawal of
grace, the result of which is that the mind is not enlightened by God
to see aright, and man's heart is not softened to live aright; and as
regards this God is the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of
heart.

Now we must consider that God is the universal cause of the
enlightening of souls, according to John 1:9: "That was the true
light which enlighteneth every man that cometh into this world," even
as the sun is the universal cause of the enlightening of bodies,
though not in the same way; for the sun enlightens by necessity of
nature, whereas God works freely, through the order of His wisdom.
Now although the sun, so far as it is concerned, enlightens all
bodies, yet if it be encountered by an obstacle in a body, it leaves
it in darkness, as happens to a house whose window-shutters are
closed, although the sun is in no way the cause of the house being
darkened, since it does not act of its own accord in failing to light
up the interior of the house; and the cause of this is the person who
closed the shutters. On the other hand, God, of His own accord,
withholds His grace from those in whom He finds an obstacle: so that
the cause of grace being withheld is not only the man who raises an
obstacle to grace; but God, Who, of His own accord, withholds His
grace. In this way, God is the cause of spiritual blindness, deafness
of ear, and hardness of heart.

These differ from one another in respect of the effects of grace,
which both perfects the intellect by the gift of wisdom, and softens
the affections by the fire of charity. And since two of the senses
excel in rendering service to the intellect, viz. sight and hearing,
of which the former assists "discovery," and the latter, "teaching,"
hence it is that spiritual "blindness" corresponds to sight,
"heaviness of the ears" to hearing, and "hardness of heart" to the
affections.

Reply Obj. 1: Blindness and hardheartedness, as regards the
withholding of grace, are punishments, and therefore, in this
respect, they make man no worse. It is because he is already worsened
by sin that he incurs them, even as other punishments.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers hardheartedness in so far as it
is a sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Malice is the demeritorious cause of blindness, just as
sin is the cause of punishment: and in this way too, the devil is
said to blind, in so far as he induces man to sin.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 79, Art. 4]

Whether Blindness and Hardness of Heart Are Directed to the Salvation
of Those Who Are Blinded and Hardened?

Objection 1: It would seem that blindness and hardness of heart are
always directed to the salvation of those who are blinded and
hardened. For Augustine says (Enchiridion xi) that "as God is
supremely good, He would nowise allow evil to be done, unless He
could draw some good from every evil." Much more, therefore, does He
direct to some good, the evil of which He Himself is the cause. Now
God is the cause of blindness and hardness of heart, as stated above
(A. 3). Therefore they are directed to the salvation of those who are
blinded and hardened.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Wis. 1:13) that "God hath no pleasure
in the destruction of the ungodly [*Vulg.: 'God made not death,
neither hath He pleasure in the destruction of the living.']." Now He
would seem to take pleasure in their destruction, if He did not turn
their blindness to their profit: just as a physician would seem to
take pleasure in torturing the invalid, if he did not intend to heal
the invalid when he prescribes a bitter medicine for him. Therefore
God turns blindness to the profit of those who are blinded.

Obj. 3: Further, "God is not a respecter of persons" (Acts 10:34).
Now He directs the blinding of some, to their salvation, as in the
case of some of the Jews, who were blinded so as not to believe in
Christ, and, through not believing, to slay Him, and afterwards were
seized with compunction, and converted, as related by Augustine (De
Quaest. Evang. iii). Therefore God turns all blindness to the
spiritual welfare of those who are blinded.

Obj. 4: On the other hand, according to Rom. 3:8, evil should not be
done, that good may ensue. Now blindness is an evil. Therefore God
does not blind some for the sake of their welfare.

_I answer that,_ Blindness is a kind of preamble to sin. Now sin has
a twofold relation--to one thing directly, viz. to the sinner's
damnation--to another, by reason of God's mercy or providence, viz.
that the sinner may be healed, in so far as God permits some to fall
into sin, that by acknowledging their sin, they may be humbled and
converted, as Augustine states (De Nat. et Grat. xxii). Therefore
blindness, of its very nature, is directed to the damnation of those
who are blinded; for which reason it is accounted an effect of
reprobation. But, through God's mercy, temporary blindness is
directed medicinally to the spiritual welfare of those who are
blinded. This mercy, however, is not vouchsafed to all those who are
blinded, but only to the predestinated, to whom "all things work
together unto good" (Rom. 8:28). Therefore as regards some, blindness
is directed to their healing; but as regards others, to their
damnation; as Augustine says (De Quaest. Evang. iii).

Reply Obj. 1: Every evil that God does, or permits to be done, is
directed to some good; yet not always to the good of those in whom
the evil is, but sometimes to the good of others, or of the whole
universe: thus He directs the sin of tyrants to the good of the
martyrs, and the punishment of the lost to the glory of His justice.

Reply Obj. 2: God does not take pleasure in the loss of man, as
regards the loss itself, but by reason of His justice, or of the good
that ensues from the loss.

Reply Obj. 3: That God directs the blindness of some to their
spiritual welfare, is due to His mercy; but that the blindness of
others is directed to their loss is due to His justice: and that He
vouchsafes His mercy to some, and not to all, does not make God a
respecter of persons, as explained in the First Part (Q. 23, A. 5, ad
3).

Reply Obj. 4: Evil of fault must not be done, that good may ensue;
but evil of punishment must be inflicted for the sake of good.
________________________

QUESTION 80

OF THE CAUSE OF SIN, AS REGARDS THE DEVIL
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the cause of sin, as regards the devil; and
under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the devil is directly the cause of sin?

(2) Whether the devil induces us to sin, by persuading us inwardly?

(3) Whether he can make us sin of necessity?

(4) Whether all sins are due to the devil's suggestion?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 80, Art. 1]

Whether the Devil Is Directly the Cause of Man's Sinning?

Objection 1: It would seem that the devil is directly the cause of
man's sinning. For sin consists directly in an act of the appetite.
Now Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 12) that "the devil inspires his
friends with evil desires"; and Bede, commenting on Acts 5:3, says
that the devil "draws the mind to evil desires"; and Isidore says (De
Summo Bono ii, 41; iii, 5) that the devil "fills men's hearts with
secret lusts." Therefore the devil is directly the cause of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Jerome says (Contra Jovin. ii, 2) that "as God is
the perfecter of good, so is the devil the perfecter of evil." But
God is directly the cause of our good. Therefore the devil is
directly the cause of our sins.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says in a chapter of the _Eudeme[a]n
Ethics_ (vii, 18): "There must needs be some extrinsic principle of
human counsel." Now human counsel is not only about good things but
also about evil things. Therefore, as God moves man to take good
counsel, and so is the cause of good, so the devil moves him to take
evil counsel, and consequently is directly the cause of sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine proves (De Lib. Arb. i, 11) that
"nothing else than his own will makes man's mind the slave of his
desire." Now man does not become a slave to his desires, except
through sin. Therefore the cause of sin cannot be the devil, but
man's own will alone.

_I answer that,_ Sin is an action: so that a thing can be directly
the cause of sin, in the same way as anyone is directly the cause of
an action; and this can only happen by moving that action's proper
principle to act. Now the proper principle of a sinful action is the
will, since every sin is voluntary. Consequently nothing can be
directly the cause of sin, except that which can move the will to act.

Now the will, as stated above (Q. 9, AA. 3, 4, 6), can be moved by
two things: first by its object, inasmuch as the apprehended
appetible is said to move the appetite: secondly by that agent which
moves the will inwardly to will, and this is no other than the will
itself, or God, as was shown above (Q. 9, AA. 3, 4, 6). Now God
cannot be the cause of sin, as stated above (Q. 79, A. 1). Therefore
it follows that in this respect, a man's will alone is directly the
cause of his sin.

As regards the object, a thing may be understood as moving the will
in three ways. First, the object itself which is proposed to the
will: thus we say that food arouses man's desire to eat. Secondly, he
that proposes or offers this object. Thirdly, he that persuades the
will that the object proposed has an aspect of good, because he also,
in a fashion, offers the will its proper object, which is a real or
apparent good of reason. Accordingly, in the first way the sensible
things, which approach from without, move a man's will to sin. In the
second and third ways, either the devil or a man may incite to sin,
either by offering an object of appetite to the senses, or by
persuading the reason. But in none of these three ways can anything
be the direct cause of sin, because the will is not, of necessity,
moved by any object except the last end, as stated above (Q. 10, AA.
1, 2). Consequently neither the thing offered from without, nor he
that proposes it, nor he that persuades, is the sufficient cause of
sin. Therefore it follows that the devil is a cause of sin, neither
directly nor sufficiently, but only by persuasion, or by proposing
the object of appetite.

Reply Obj. 1: All these, and other like authorities, if we meet with
them, are to be understood as denoting that the devil induces man to
affection for a sin, either by suggesting to him, or by offering him
objects of appetite.

Reply Obj. 2: This comparison is true in so far as the devil is
somewhat the cause of our sins, even as God is in a certain way the
cause of our good actions, but does not extend to the mode of
causation: for God causes good things in us by moving the will
inwardly, whereas the devil cannot move us in this way.

Reply Obj. 3: God is the universal principle of all inward movements
of man; but that the human will be determined to an evil counsel, is
directly due to the human will, and to the devil as persuading or
offering the object of appetite.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 80, Art. 2]

Whether the Devil Can Induce Man to Sin, by Internal Instigations?

Objection 1: It would seem that the devil cannot induce man to sin,
by internal instigations. Because the internal movements of the soul
are vital functions. Now no vital functions can be exercised except
by an intrinsic principle, not even those of the vegetal soul, which
are the lowest of vital functions. Therefore the devil cannot
instigate man to evil through his internal movements.

Obj. 2: Further, all the internal movements arise from the external
senses according to the order of nature. Now it belongs to God alone
to do anything beside the order of nature, as was stated in the First
Part (Q. 110, A. 4). Therefore the devil cannot effect anything in
man's internal movements, except in respect of things which are
perceived by the external senses.

Obj. 3: Further, the internal acts of the soul are to understand and
to imagine. Now the devil can do nothing in connection with either of
these, because, as stated in the First Part (Q. 111, AA. 2, 3, ad 2),
the devil cannot impress species on the human intellect, nor does it
seem possible for him to produce imaginary species, since imaginary
forms, being more spiritual, are more excellent than those which are
in sensible matter, which, nevertheless, the devil is unable to
produce, as is clear from what we have said in the First Part (Q.
110, A. 2; Q. 111, AA. 2, 3, ad 2). Therefore the devil cannot
through man's internal movements induce him to sin.

_On the contrary,_ In that case, the devil would never tempt man,
unless he appeared visibly; which is evidently false.

_I answer that,_ The interior part of the soul is intellective and
sensitive; and the intellective part contains the intellect and the
will. As regards the will, we have already stated (A. 1; I, Q. 111,
A. 1) what is the devil's relation thereto. Now the intellect, of its
very nature, is moved by that which enlightens it in the knowledge of
truth, which the devil has no intention of doing in man's regard;
rather does he darken man's reason so that it may consent to sin,
which darkness is due to the imagination and sensitive appetite.
Consequently the operation of the devil seems to be confined to the
imagination and sensitive appetite, by moving either of which he can
induce man to sin. For his operation may result in presenting certain
forms to the imagination; and he is able to incite the sensitive
appetite to some passion or other.

The reason of this is, that as stated in the First Part (Q. 110, A.
3), the corporeal nature has a natural aptitude to be moved locally
by the spiritual nature: so that the devil can produce all those
effects which can result from the local movement of bodies here
below, except he be restrained by the Divine power. Now the
representation of forms to the imagination is due, sometimes, to
local movement: for the Philosopher says (De Somno et Vigil.) [*De
Insomn. iii, iv.] that "when an animal sleeps, the blood descends in
abundance to the sensitive principle, and the movements descend with
it, viz. the impressions left by the action of sensible objects,
which impressions are preserved by means of sensible species, and
continue to move the apprehensive principle, so that they appear just
as though the sensitive principles were being affected by them at the
time." Hence such a local movement of the vital spirits or humors can
be procured by the demons, whether man sleep or wake: and so it
happens that man's imagination is brought into play.

In like manner, the sensitive appetite is incited to certain passions
according to certain fixed movements of the heart and the vital
spirits: wherefore the devil can cooperate in this also. And through
certain passions being aroused in the sensitive appetite, the result
is that man more easily perceives the movement or sensible image
which is brought in the manner explained, before the apprehensive
principle, since, as the Philosopher observes (De Somno et Virgil.:
De Insomn. iii, iv), "lovers are moved, by even a slight likeness, to
an apprehension of the beloved." It also happens, through the rousing
of a passion, that what is put before the imagination, is judged, as
being something to be pursued, because, to him who is held by a
passion, whatever the passion inclines him to, seems good. In this
way the devil induces man inwardly to sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Although vital functions are always from an intrinsic
principle, yet an extrinsic agent can cooperate with them, even as
external heat cooperates with the functions of the vegetal soul, that
food may be more easily digested.

Reply Obj. 2: This apparition of imaginary forms is not altogether
outside the order of nature, nor is it due to a command alone, but
according to local movement, as explained above.

Consequently the Reply to the Third Objection is clear, because these
forms are received originally from the senses.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q, 80, Art. 3]

Whether the Devil Can Induce Man to Sin of Necessity?

Objection 1: It would seem that the devil can induce man to sin of
necessity. Because the greater can compel the lesser. Now it is said
of the devil (Job 41:24) that "there is no power on earth that can
compare with him." Therefore he can compel man to sin, while he
dwells on the earth.

Obj. 2: Further, man's reason cannot be moved except in respect of
things that are offered outwardly to the senses, or are represented
to the imagination: because "all our knowledge arises from the
senses, and we cannot understand without a phantasm" (De Anima iii,
text. 30. 39). Now the devil can move man's imagination, as stated
above (A. 2); and also the external senses, for Augustine says (Qq.
lxxxiii, qu. 12) that "this evil," of which, to wit, the devil is the
cause, "extends gradually through all the approaches to the senses,
it adapts itself to shapes, blends with colors, mingles with sounds,
seasons every flavor." Therefore it can incline man's reason to sin
of necessity.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 4) that "there is
some sin when the flesh lusteth against the spirit." Now the devil
can cause concupiscence of the flesh, even as other passions, in the
way explained above (A. 2). Therefore he can induce man to sin of
necessity.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 Pet. 5:8): "Your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour."
Now it would be useless to admonish thus, if it were true that man
were under the necessity of succumbing to the devil. Therefore he
cannot induce man to sin of necessity.

Further, it is likewise written (Jam. 4:7): "Be subject . . . to God,
but resist the devil, and he will fly from you," which would be said
neither rightly nor truly, if the devil were able to compel us, in
any way whatever, to sin; for then neither would it be possible to
resist him, nor would he fly from those who do. Therefore he does not
compel to sin.

_I answer that,_ The devil, by his own power, unless he be restrained
by God, can compel anyone to do an act which, in its genus, is a sin;
but he cannot bring about the necessity of sinning. This is evident
from the fact that man does not resist that which moves him to sin,
except by his reason; the use of which the devil is able to impede
altogether, by moving the imagination and the sensitive appetite; as
is the case with one who is possessed. But then, the reason being
thus fettered, whatever man may do, it is not imputed to him as a
sin. If, however, the reason is not altogether fettered, then, in so
far as it is free, it can resist sin, as stated above (Q. 77, A. 7).
It is consequently evident that the devil can nowise compel man to
sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Not every power that is greater than man, can move
man's will; God alone can do this, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 6).

Reply Obj. 2: That which is apprehended by the senses or the
imagination does not move the will, of necessity, so long as man has
the use of reason; nor does such an apprehension always fetter the
reason.

Reply Obj. 3: The lusting of the flesh against the spirit, when the
reason actually resists it, is not a sin, but is matter for the
exercise of virtue. That reason does not resist, is not in the
devil's power; wherefore he cannot bring about the necessity of
sinning.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 80, Art. 4]

Whether All the Sins of Men Are Due to the Devil's Suggestion?

Objection 1: It would seem that all the sins of men are due to the
devil's suggestion. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that the "crowd
of demons are the cause of all evils, both to themselves and to
others."

Obj. 2: Further, whoever sins mortally, becomes the slave of the
devil, according to John 8:34: "Whosoever committeth sin is the slave
[Douay: 'servant'] of sin." Now "by whom a man is overcome, of the
same also he is the slave" (2 Pet. 2:19). Therefore whoever commits a
sin, has been overcome by the devil.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. iv, 10) the sin of the devil is
irreparable, because he sinned at no other's suggestion. Therefore,
if any men were to sin of their own free-will and without suggestion
from any other, their sin would be irremediable: which is clearly
false. Therefore all the sins of men are due to the devil's
suggestion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (De Eccl. Dogm. lxxxii): "Not all
our evil thoughts are incited by the devil; sometimes they are due to
a movement of the free-will."

_I answer that,_ the devil is the occasional and indirect cause of
all our sins, in so far as he induced the first man to sin, by reason
of whose sin human nature is so infected, that we are all prone to
sin: even as the burning of wood might be imputed to the man who
dried the wood so as to make it easily inflammable. He is not,
however, the direct cause of all the sins of men, as though each were
the result of his suggestion. Origen proves this (Peri Archon iii, 2)
from the fact that even if the devil were no more, men would still
have the desire for food, sexual pleasures and the like; which desire
might be inordinate, unless it were subordinate to reason, a matter
that is subject to the free-will.

Reply Obj. 1: The crowd of demons are the cause of all our evils, as
regards their original cause, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: A man becomes another's slave not only by being
overcome by him, but also by subjecting himself to him spontaneously:
it is thus that one who sins of his own accord, becomes the slave of
the devil.

Reply Obj. 3: The devil's sin was irremediable, not only because he
sinned without another's suggestion; but also because he was not
already prone to sin, on account of any previous sin; which can be
said of no sin of man.
________________________

QUESTION 81

OF THE CAUSE OF SIN, ON THE PART OF MAN
(In Five Articles)

We must now consider the cause of sin, on the part of man. Now, while
man, like the devil, is the cause of another's sin, by outward
suggestion, he has a certain special manner of causing sin, by way of
origin. Wherefore we must speak about original sin, the consideration
of which will be three-fold: (1) Of its transmission; (2) of its
essence; (3) of its subject.

Under the first head there are five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether man's first sin is transmitted, by way of origin to his
descendants?

(2) Whether all the other sins of our first parent, or of any other
parents, are transmitted to their descendants, by way of origin?

(3) Whether original sin is contracted by all those who are begotten
of Adam by way of seminal generation?

(4) Whether it would be contracted by anyone formed miraculously from
some part of the human body?

(5) Whether original sin would have been contracted if the woman, and
not the man, had sinned?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 81, Art. 1]

Whether the First Sin of Our First Parent Is Contracted by His
Descendants, by Way of Origin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the first sin of our first parent is
not contracted by others, by way of origin. For it is written (Ezech.
18:20): "The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father." But he
would bear the iniquity if he contracted it from him. Therefore no
one contracts any sin from one of his parents by way of origin.

Obj. 2: Further, an accident is not transmitted by way of origin,
unless its subject be also transmitted, since accidents do not pass
from one subject to another. Now the rational soul which is the
subject of sin, is not transmitted by way of origin, as was shown in
the First Part (Q. 118, A. 2). Therefore neither can any sin be
transmitted by way of origin.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is transmitted by way of human origin, is
caused by the semen. But the semen cannot cause sin, because it lacks
the rational part of the soul, which alone can be a cause of sin.
Therefore no sin can be contracted by way of origin.

Obj. 4: Further, that which is more perfect in nature, is more
powerful in action. Now perfect flesh cannot infect the soul united
to it, else the soul could not be cleansed of original sin, so long
as it is united to the body. Much less, therefore, can the semen
infect the soul.

Obj. 5: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 5): "No one finds
fault with those who are ugly by nature, but only those who are so
through want of exercise and through carelessness." Now those are
said to be "naturally ugly," who are so from their origin. Therefore
nothing which comes by way of origin is blameworthy or sinful.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 5:12): "By one man sin
entered into this world, and by sin death." Nor can this be
understood as denoting imitation or suggestion, since it is written
(Wis. 2:24): "By the envy of the devil, death came into this world."
It follows therefore that through origin from the first man sin
entered into the world.

_I answer that,_ According to the Catholic Faith we are bound to hold
that the first sin of the first man is transmitted to his
descendants, by way of origin. For this reason children are taken to
be baptized soon after their birth, to show that they have to be
washed from some uncleanness. The contrary is part of the Pelagian
heresy, as is clear from Augustine in many of his books [*For
instance, Retract. i, 9; De Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. ix; Contra
Julian. iii, 1; De Dono Persev. xi, xii.]

In endeavoring to explain how the sin of our first parent could be
transmitted by way of origin to his descendants, various writers have
gone about it in various ways. For some, considering that the subject
of sin is the rational soul, maintained that the rational soul is
transmitted with the semen, so that thus an infected soul would seem
to produce other infected souls. Others, rejecting this as erroneous,
endeavored to show how the guilt of the parent's soul can be
transmitted to the children, even though the soul be not transmitted,
from the fact that defects of the body are transmitted from parent to
child--thus a leper may beget a leper, or a gouty man may be the
father of a gouty son, on account of some seminal corruption,
although this corruption is not leprosy or gout. Now since the body
is proportionate to the soul, and since the soul's defects redound
into the body, and vice versa, in like manner, say they, a culpable
defect of the soul is passed on to the child, through the
transmission of the semen, albeit the semen itself is not the subject
of the guilt.

But all these explanations are insufficient. Because, granted that
some bodily defects are transmitted by way of origin from parent to
child, and granted that even some defects of the soul are transmitted
in consequence, on account of a defect in the bodily habit, as in the
case of idiots begetting idiots; nevertheless the fact of having a
defect by the way of origin seems to exclude the notion of guilt,
which is essentially something voluntary. Wherefore granted that the
rational soul were transmitted, from the very fact that the stain on
the child's soul is not in its will, it would cease to be a guilty
stain binding its subject to punishment; for, as the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii, 5), "no one reproaches a man born blind; one rather
takes pity on him."

Therefore we must explain the matter otherwise by saying that all men
born of Adam may be considered as one man, inasmuch as they have one
common nature, which they receive from their first parents; even as
in civil matters, all who are members of one community are reputed as
one body, and the whole community as one man. Indeed Porphyry says
(Praedic., De Specie) that "by sharing the same species, many men are
one man." Accordingly the multitude of men born of Adam, are as so
many members of one body. Now the action of one member of the body,
of the hand for instance, is voluntary not by the will of that hand,
but by the will of the soul, the first mover of the members.
Wherefore a murder which the hand commits would not be imputed as a
sin to the hand, considered by itself as apart from the body, but is
imputed to it as something belonging to man and moved by man's first
moving principle. In this way, then, the disorder which is in this
man born of Adam, is voluntary, not by his will, but by the will of
his first parent, who, by the movement of generation, moves all who
originate from him, even as the soul's will moves all the members to
their actions. Hence the sin which is thus transmitted by the first
parent to his descendants is called "original," just as the sin which
flows from the soul into the bodily members is called "actual." And
just as the actual sin that is committed by a member of the body, is
not the sin of that member, except inasmuch as that member is a part
of the man, for which reason it is called a "human sin"; so original
sin is not the sin of this person, except inasmuch as this person
receives his nature from his first parent, for which reason it is
called the "sin of nature," according to Eph. 2:3: "We . . . were by
nature children of wrath."

Reply Obj. 1: The son is said not to bear the iniquity of his father,
because he is not punished for his father's sin, unless he share in
his guilt. It is thus in the case before us: because guilt is
transmitted by the way of origin from father to son, even as actual
sin is transmitted through being imitated.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the soul is not transmitted, because the power
in the semen is not able to cause the rational soul, nevertheless the
motion of the semen is a disposition to the transmission of the
rational soul: so that the semen by its own power transmits the human
nature from parent to child, and with that nature, the stain which
infects it: for he that is born is associated with his first parent
in his guilt, through the fact that he inherits his nature from him
by a kind of movement which is that of generation.

Reply Obj. 3: Although the guilt is not actually in the semen, yet
human nature is there virtually accompanied by that guilt.

Reply Obj. 4: The semen is the principle of generation, which is an
act proper to nature, by helping it to propagate itself. Hence the
soul is more infected by the semen, than by the flesh which is
already perfect, and already affixed to a certain person.

Reply Obj. 5: A man is not blamed for that which he has from his
origin, if we consider the man born, in himself. But it we consider
him as referred to a principle, then he may be reproached for it:
thus a man may from his birth be under a family disgrace, on account
of a crime committed by one of his forbears.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 81, Art. 2]

Whether Also Other Sins of the First Parent or of Nearer Ancestors
Are Transmitted to Their Descendants?

Objection 1: It would seem that also other sins, whether of the first
parent or of nearer ancestors, are transmitted to their descendants.
For punishment is never due unless for fault. Now some are punished
by the judgment of God for the sin of their immediate parents,
according to Ex. 20:5: "I am . . . God . . . jealous, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation." Furthermore, according to human law, the children of
those who are guilty of high treason are disinherited. Therefore the
guilt of nearer ancestors is also transmitted to their descendants.

Obj. 2: Further, a man can better transmit to another, that which he
has of himself, than that which he has received from another: thus
fire heats better than hot water does. Now a man transmits to his
children, by the way, of origin, the sin which he has from Adam. Much
more therefore should he transmit the sin which he has contracted of
himself.

Obj. 3: Further, the reason why we contract original sin from our
first parent is because we were in him as in the principle of our
nature, which he corrupted. But we were likewise in our nearer
ancestors, as in principles of our nature, which however it be
corrupt, can be corrupted yet more by sin, according to Apoc. 22:11:
"He that is filthy, let him be filthier still." Therefore children
contract, by the way of origin, the sins of their nearer ancestors,
even as they contract the sin of their first parent.

_On the contrary,_ Good is more self-diffusive than evil. But the
merits of the nearer ancestors are not transmitted to their
descendants. Much less therefore are their sins.

_I answer that,_ Augustine puts this question in the _Enchiridion_
xlvi, xlvii, and leaves it unsolved. Yet if we look into the matter
carefully we shall see that it is impossible for the sins of the
nearer ancestors, or even any other but the first sin of our first
parent to be transmitted by way of origin. The reason is that a man
begets his like in species but not in individual. Consequently those
things that pertain directly to the individual, such as personal
actions and matters affecting them, are not transmitted by parents to
their children: for a grammarian does not transmit to his son the
knowledge of grammar that he has acquired by his own studies. On the
other hand, those things that concern the nature of the species, are
transmitted by parents to their children, unless there be a defect of
nature: thus a man with eyes begets a son having eyes, unless nature
fails. And if nature be strong, even certain accidents of the
individual pertaining to natural disposition, are transmitted to the
children, e.g. fleetness of body, acuteness of intellect, and so
forth; but nowise those that are purely personal, as stated above.

Now just as something may belong to the person as such, and also
something through the gift of grace, so may something belong to the
nature as such, viz. whatever is caused by the principles of nature,
and something too through the gift of grace. In this way original
justice, as stated in the First Part (Q. 100, A. 1), was a gift of
grace, conferred by God on all human nature in our first parent. This
gift the first man lost by his first sin. Wherefore as that original
justice together with the nature was to have been transmitted to his
posterity, so also was its disorder. Other actual sins, however,
whether of the first parent or of others, do not corrupt the nature
as nature, but only as the nature of that person, i.e. in respect of
the proneness to sin: and consequently other sins are not transmitted.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Augustine in his letter to Avitus [*Ep. ad
Auxilium ccl.], children are never inflicted with spiritual punishment
on account of their parents, unless they share in their guilt, either
in their origin, or by imitation, because every soul is God's
immediate property, as stated in Ezech. 18:4. Sometimes, however, by
Divine or human judgment, children receive bodily punishment on their
parents' account, inasmuch as the child, as to its body, is part of
its father.

Reply Obj. 2: A man can more easily transmit that which he has of
himself, provided it be transmissible. But the actual sins of our
nearer ancestors are not transmissible, because they are purely
personal, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: The first sin infects nature with a human corruption
pertaining to nature; whereas other sins infect it with a corruption
pertaining only to the person.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 81, Art. 3]

Whether the Sin of the First Parent Is Transmitted, by the Way of
Origin, to All Men?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of the first parent is not
transmitted, by the way of origin, to all men. Because death is a
punishment consequent upon original sin. But not all those, who are
born of the seed of Adam, will die: since those who will be still
living at the coming of our Lord, will never die, as, seemingly, may
be gathered from 1 Thess. 4:14: "We who are alive . . . unto the
coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them who have slept." Therefore
they do not contract original sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no one gives another what he has not himself. Now a
man who has been baptized has not original sin. Therefore he does not
transmit it to his children.

Obj. 3: Further, the gift of Christ is greater than the sin of Adam,
as the Apostle declares (Rom. 5:15, seqq). But the gift of Christ is
not transmitted to all men: neither, therefore, is the sin of Adam.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 5:12): "Death passed upon
all men in whom all have sinned."

_I answer that,_ According to the Catholic Faith we must firmly
believe that, Christ alone excepted, all men descended from Adam
contract original sin from him; else all would not need redemption
[*Cf. Translator's note inserted before III, Q. 27] which is through
Christ; and this is erroneous. The reason for this may be gathered
from what has been stated (A. 1), viz. that original sin, in virtue
of the sin of our first parent, is transmitted to his posterity, just
as, from the soul's will, actual sin is transmitted to the members of
the body, through their being moved by the will. Now it is evident
that actual sin can be transmitted to all such members as have an
inborn aptitude to be moved by the will. Therefore original sin is
transmitted to all those who are moved by Adam by the movement of
generation.

Reply Obj. 1: It is held with greater probability and more commonly
that all those that are alive at the coming of our Lord, will die,
and rise again shortly, as we shall state more fully in the Third
Part (Suppl., Q. 78, A. 1, Obj. 1). If, however, it be true, as
others hold, that they will never die, (an opinion which Jerome
mentions among others in a letter to Minerius, on the Resurrection of
the Body--Ep. cxix), then we must say in reply to the objection, that
although they are not to die, the debt of death is none the less in
them, and that the punishment of death will be remitted by God, since
He can also forgive the punishment due for actual sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Original sin is taken away by Baptism as to the guilt,
in so far as the soul recovers grace as regards the mind.
Nevertheless original sin remains in its effect as regards the
_fomes,_ which is the disorder of the lower parts of the soul and of
the body itself, in respect of which, and not of the mind, man
exercises his power of generation. Consequently those who are
baptized transmit original sin: since they do not beget as being
renewed in Baptism, but as still retaining something of the oldness
of the first sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as Adam's sin is transmitted to all who are born
of Adam corporally, so is the grace of Christ transmitted to all that
are begotten of Him spiritually, by faith and Baptism: and this, not
only unto the removal of sin of their first parent, but also unto the
removal of actual sins, and the obtaining of glory.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 81, Art. 4]

Whether Original Sin Would Be Contracted by a Person Formed
Miraculously from Human Flesh?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin would be contracted by a
person formed miraculously from human flesh. For a gloss on Gen. 4:1
says that "Adam's entire posterity was corrupted in his loins,
because they were not severed from him in the place of life, before
he sinned, but in the place of exile after he had sinned." But if a
man were to be formed in the aforesaid manner, his flesh would be
severed in the place of exile. Therefore it would contract original
sin.

Obj. 2: Further, original sin is caused in us by the soul being
infected through the flesh. But man's flesh is entirely corrupted.
Therefore a man's soul would contract the infection of original sin,
from whatever part of the flesh it was formed.

Obj. 3: Further, original sin comes upon all from our first parent,
in so far as we were all in him when he sinned. But those who might
be formed out of human flesh, would have been in Adam. Therefore they
would contract original sin.

_On the contrary,_ They would not have been in Adam _according to
seminal virtue,_ which alone is the cause of the transmission of
original sin, as Augustine states (Gen. ad lit. x, 18, seqq.).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 1, 3), original sin is
transmitted from the first parent to his posterity, inasmuch as they
are moved by him through generation, even as the members are moved by
the soul to actual sin. Now there is no movement to generation except
by the active power of generation: so that those alone contract
original sin, who are descended from Adam through the active power of
generation originally derived from Adam, i.e. who are descended from
him through seminal power; for the seminal power is nothing else than
the active power of generation. But if anyone were to be formed by
God out of human flesh, it is evident that the active power would not
be derived from Adam. Consequently he would not contract original
sin: even as a hand would have no part in a human sin, if it were
moved, not by the man's will, but by some external power.

Reply Obj. 1: Adam was not in the place of exile until after his sin.
Consequently it is not on account of the place of exile, but on
account of the sin, that original sin is transmitted to those to whom
his active generation extends.

Reply Obj. 2: The flesh does not corrupt the soul, except in so far
as it is the active principle in generation, as we have stated.

Reply Obj. 3: If a man were to be formed from human flesh, he would
have been in Adam, "by way of bodily substance" [*The expression is
St. Augustine's (Gen. ad lit. x). Cf. Summa Theologica, III, Q. 31,
A. 6, Reply to First Objection.], but not according to seminal
virtue, as stated above. Therefore he would not contract original sin.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 81, Art. 5]

Whether If Eve, and Not Adam, Had Sinned, Their Children Would Have
Contracted Original Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that if Eve, and not Adam, had sinned,
their children would have contracted original sin. Because we
contract original sin from our parents, in so far as we were once in
them, according to the word of the Apostle (Rom. 5:12): "In whom all
have sinned." Now a man pre-exists in his mother as well as in his
father. Therefore a man would have contracted original sin from his
mother's sin as well as from his father's.

Obj. 2: Further, if Eve, and not Adam, had sinned, their children
would have been born liable to suffering and death, since it is "the
mother" that "provides the matter in generation" as the Philosopher
states (De Gener. Animal. ii, 1, 4), when death and liability to
suffering are the necessary results of matter. Now liability to
suffering and the necessity of dying are punishments of original sin.
Therefore if Eve, and not Adam, had sinned, their children would
contract original sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 3) that "the Holy
Ghost came upon the Virgin," (of whom Christ was to be born without
original sin) "purifying her." But this purification would not have
been necessary, if the infection of original sin were not contracted
from the mother. Therefore the infection of original sin is
contracted from the mother: so that if Eve had sinned, her children
would have contracted original sin, even if Adam had not sinned.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 5:12): "By one man sin
entered into this world." Now if the woman would have transmitted
original sin to her children, he should have said that it entered by
two, since both of them sinned, or rather that it entered by a woman,
since she sinned first. Therefore original sin is transmitted to the
children, not by the mother, but by the father.

_I answer that,_ The solution of this question is made clear by what
has been said. For it has been stated (A. 1) that original sin is
transmitted by the first parent in so far as he is the mover in the
begetting of his children: wherefore it has been said (A. 4) that if
anyone were begotten materially only, of human flesh, they would not
contract original sin. Now it is evident that in the opinion of
philosophers, the active principle of generation is from the father,
while the mother provides the matter. Therefore original sin is
contracted, not from the mother, but from the father: so that,
accordingly, if Eve, and not Adam, had sinned, their children would
not contract original sin: whereas, if Adam, and not Eve, had sinned,
they would contract it.

Reply Obj. 1: The child pre-exists in its father as in its active
principle, and in its mother, as in its material and passive
principle. Consequently the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 2: Some hold that if Eve, and not Adam, had sinned, their
children would be immune from the sin, but would have been subject to
the necessity of dying and to other forms of suffering that are a
necessary result of the matter which is provided by the mother, not
as punishments, but as actual defects. This, however, seems
unreasonable. Because, as stated in the First Part (Q. 97, AA. 1, 2,
ad 4), immortality and impassibility, in the original state, were a
result, not of the condition of matter, but of original justice,
whereby the body was subjected to the soul, so long as the soul
remained subject to God. Now privation of original justice is
original sin. If, therefore, supposing Adam had not sinned, original
sin would not have been transmitted to posterity on account of Eve's
sin; it is evident that the children would not have been deprived of
original justice: and consequently they would not have been liable to
suffer and subject to the necessity of dying.

Reply Obj. 3: This prevenient purification in the Blessed Virgin was
not needed to hinder the transmission of original sin, but because it
behooved the Mother of God "to shine with the greatest purity" [*Cf.
Anselm, De Concep. Virg. xviii.]. For nothing is worthy to receive
God unless it be pure, according to Ps. 92:5: "Holiness becometh Thy
House, O Lord."
________________________

QUESTION 82

OF ORIGINAL SIN, AS TO ITS ESSENCE
(Question 82)

We must now consider original sin as to its essence, and under this
head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether original sin is a habit?

(2) Whether there is but one original sin in each man?

(3) Whether original sin is concupiscence?

(4) Whether original sin is equally in all?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 82, Art. 1]

Whether Original Sin Is a Habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin is not a habit. For
original sin is the absence of original justice, as Anselm states (De
Concep. Virg. ii, iii, xxvi), so that original sin is a privation.
But privation is opposed to habit. Therefore original sin is not a
habit.

Obj. 2: Further, actual sin has the nature of fault more than
original sin, in so far as it is more voluntary. Now the habit of
actual sin has not the nature of a fault, else it would follow that a
man while asleep, would be guilty of sin. Therefore no original habit
has the nature of a fault.

Obj. 3: Further, in wickedness act always precedes habit, because
evil habits are not infused, but acquired. Now original sin is not
preceded by an act. Therefore original sin is not a habit.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in his book on the Baptism of
infants (De Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i, 39) that on account of
original sin little children have the aptitude of concupiscence
though they have not the act. Now aptitude denotes some kind of
habit. Therefore original sin is a habit.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 49, A. 4; Q. 50, A. 1), habit is
twofold. The first is a habit whereby power is inclined to an act:
thus science and virtue are called habits. In this way original sin
is not a habit. The second kind of habit is the disposition of a
complex nature, whereby that nature is well or ill disposed to
something, chiefly when such a disposition has become like a second
nature, as in the case of sickness or health. In this sense original
sin is a habit. For it is an inordinate disposition, arising from the
destruction of the harmony which was essential to original justice,
even as bodily sickness is an inordinate disposition of the body, by
reason of the destruction of that equilibrium which is essential to
health. Hence it is that original sin is called the "languor of
nature" [*Cf. Augustine, In Ps. 118, serm. iii].

Reply Obj. 1: As bodily sickness is partly a privation, in so far as
it denotes the destruction of the equilibrium of health, and partly
something positive, viz. the very humors that are inordinately
disposed, so too original sin denotes the privation of original
justice, and besides this, the inordinate disposition of the parts of
the soul. Consequently it is not a pure privation, but a corrupt
habit.

Reply Obj. 2: Actual sin is an inordinateness of an act: whereas
original sin, being the sin of nature, is an inordinate disposition
of nature, and has the character of fault through being transmitted
from our first parent, as stated above (Q. 81, A. 1). Now this
inordinate disposition of nature is a kind of habit, whereas the
inordinate disposition of an act is not: and for this reason original
sin can be a habit, whereas actual sin cannot.

Reply Obj. 3: This objection considers the habit which inclines a
power to an act: but original sin is not this kind of habit.
Nevertheless a certain inclination to an inordinate act does follow
from original sin, not directly, but indirectly, viz. by the removal
of the obstacle, i.e. original justice, which hindered inordinate
movements: just as an inclination to inordinate bodily movements
results indirectly from bodily sickness. Nor is it necessary to say
that original sin is a habit "infused," or a habit "acquired" (except
by the act of our first parent, but not by our own act): but it is a
habit "inborn" due to our corrupt origin.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 82, Art. 2]

Whether There Are Several Original Sins in One Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are many original sins in one
man. For it is written (Ps. 1:7): "Behold I was conceived in
iniquities, and in sins did my mother conceive me." But the sin in
which a man is conceived is original sin. Therefore there are several
original sins in man.

Obj. 2: Further, one and the same habit does not incline its subject
to contraries: since the inclination of habit is like that of nature
which tends to one thing. Now original sin, even in one man, inclines
to various and contrary sins. Therefore original sin is not one
habit; but several.

Obj. 3: Further, original sin infects every part of the soul. Now the
different parts of the soul are different subjects of sin, as shown
above (Q. 74). Since then one sin cannot be in different subjects, it
seems that original sin is not one but several.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 1:29): "Behold the Lamb of
God, behold Him Who taketh away the sin of the world": and the reason
for the employment of the singular is that the "sin of the world" is
original sin, as a gloss expounds this passage.

_I answer that,_ In one man there is one original sin. Two reasons
may be assigned for this. The first is on the part of the cause of
original sin. For it has been stated (Q. 81, A. 2), that the first
sin alone of our first parent was transmitted to his posterity.
Wherefore in one man original sin is one in number; and in all men,
it is one in proportion, i.e. in relation to its first principle. The
second reason may be taken from the very essence of original sin.
Because in every inordinate disposition, unity of species depends on
the cause, while the unity of number is derived from the subject. For
example, take bodily sickness: various species of sickness proceed
from different causes, e.g. from excessive heat or cold, or from a
lesion in the lung or liver; while one specific sickness in one man
will be one in number. Now the cause of this corrupt disposition that
is called original sin, is one only, viz. the privation of original
justice, removing the subjection of man's mind to God. Consequently
original sin is specifically one, and, in one man, can be only one in
number; while, in different men, it is one in species and in
proportion, but is numerically many.

Reply Obj. 1: The employment of the plural--"in sins"--may be
explained by the custom of the Divine Scriptures in the frequent use
of the plural for the singular, e.g. "They are dead that sought the
life of the child"; or by the fact that all actual sins virtually
pre-exist in original sin, as in a principle so that it is virtually
many; or by the fact of there being many deformities in the sin of
our first parent, viz. pride, disobedience, gluttony, and so forth;
or by several parts of the soul being infected by original sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Of itself and directly, i.e. by its own form, one habit
cannot incline its subject to contraries. But there is no reason why
it should not do so, indirectly and accidentally, i.e. by the removal
of an obstacle: thus, when the harmony of a mixed body is destroyed,
the elements have contrary local tendencies. In like manner, when the
harmony of original justice is destroyed, the various powers of the
soul have various opposite tendencies.

Reply Obj. 3: Original sin infects the different parts of the
soul, in so far as they are the parts of one whole; even as original
justice held all the soul's parts together in one. Consequently there
is but one original sin: just as there is but one fever in one man,
although the various parts of the body are affected.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 82, Art. 3]

Whether Original Sin Is Concupiscence?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin is not concupiscence.
For every sin is contrary to nature, according to Damascene (De Fide
Orth. ii, 4, 30). But concupiscence is in accordance with nature,
since it is the proper act of the concupiscible faculty which is a
natural power. Therefore concupiscence is not original sin.

Obj. 2: Further, through original sin "the passions of sins" are in
us, according to the Apostle (Rom. 7:5). Now there are several other
passions besides concupiscence, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 4).
Therefore original sin is not concupiscence any more than another
passion.

Obj. 3: Further, by original sin, all the parts of the soul are
disordered, as stated above (A. 2, Obj. 3). But the intellect is the
highest of the soul's parts, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. x, 7).
Therefore original sin is ignorance rather than concupiscence.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Retract. i, 15): "Concupiscence is
the guilt of original sin."

_I answer that,_ Everything takes its species from its form: and it
has been stated (A. 2) that the species of original sin is taken from
its cause. Consequently the formal element of original sin must be
considered in respect of the cause of original sin. But contraries
have contrary causes. Therefore the cause of original sin must be
considered with respect to the cause of original justice, which is
opposed to it. Now the whole order of original justice consists in
man's will being subject to God: which subjection, first and chiefly,
was in the will, whose function it is to move all the other parts to
the end, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 1), so that the will being turned
away from God, all the other powers of the soul become inordinate.
Accordingly the privation of original justice, whereby the will was
made subject to God, is the formal element in original sin; while
every other disorder of the soul's powers, is a kind of material
element in respect of original sin. Now the inordinateness of the
other powers of the soul consists chiefly in their turning
inordinately to mutable good; which inordinateness may be called by
the general name of concupiscence. Hence original sin is
concupiscence, materially, but privation of original justice,
formally.

Reply Obj. 1: Since, in man, the concupiscible power is naturally
governed by reason, the act of concupiscence is so far natural to
man, as it is in accord with the order of reason; while, in so far as
it trespasses beyond the bounds of reason, it is, for a man, contrary
to reason. Such is the concupiscence of original sin.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 25, A. 1), all the irascible
passions are reducible to concupiscible passions, as holding the
princip[al] place: and of these, concupiscence is the most impetuous
in moving, and is felt most, as stated above (Q. 25, A. 2, ad 1).
Therefore original sin is ascribed to concupiscence, as being the
chief passion, and as including all the others, in a fashion.

Reply Obj. 3: As, in good things, the intellect and reason
stand first, so conversely in evil things, the lower part of the soul
is found to take precedence, for it clouds and draws the reason, as
stated above (Q. 77, AA. 1, 2;Q. 80, A. 2). Hence original
sin is called concupiscence rather than ignorance, although ignorance
is comprised among the material defects of original sin.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 82, Art. 4]

Whether Original Sin Is Equally in All?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin is not equally in all.
Because original sin is inordinate concupiscence, as stated above
(A. 3). Now all are not equally prone to acts of concupiscence.
Therefore original sin is not equally in all.

Obj. 2: Further, original sin is an inordinate disposition of the
soul, just as sickness is an inordinate disposition of the body. But
sickness is subject to degrees. Therefore original sin is subject to
degrees.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Nup. et Concep. i, 23) that "lust
transmits original sin to the child." But the act of generation may
be more lustful in one than in another. Therefore original sin may be
greater in one than in another.

_On the contrary,_ Original sin is the sin of nature, as stated above
(Q. 81, A. 1). But nature is equally in all. Therefore original sin
is too.

_I answer that,_ There are two things in original sin: one is the
privation of original justice; the other is the relation of this
privation to the sin of our first parent, from whom it is transmitted
to man through his corrupt origin. As to the first, original sin has
no degrees, since the gift of original justice is taken away
entirely; and privations that remove something entirely, such as
death and darkness, cannot be more or less, as stated above (Q. 73,
A. 2). In like manner, neither is this possible, as to the second:
since all are related equally to the first principle of our corrupt
origin, from which principle original sin takes the nature of guilt;
for relations cannot be more or less. Consequently it is evident that
original sin cannot be more in one than in another.

Reply Obj. 1: Through the bond of original justice being broken,
which held together all the powers of the soul in a certain order,
each power of the soul tends to its own proper movement, and the more
impetuously, as it is stronger. Now it happens that some of the
soul's powers are stronger in one man than in another, on account of
the different bodily temperaments. Consequently if one man is more
prone than another to acts of concupiscence, this is not due to
original sin, because the bond of original justice is equally broken
in all, and the lower parts of the soul are, in all, left to
themselves equally; but it is due to the various dispositions of the
powers, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: Sickness of the body, even sickness of the same
species, has not an equal cause in all; for instance if a fever be
caused by corruption of the bile, the corruption may be greater or
less, and nearer to, or further from a vital principle. But the cause
of original sin is equal to all, so that there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: It is not the actual lust that transmits original sin:
for, supposing God were to grant to a man to feel no inordinate lust
in the act of generation, he would still transmit original sin; we
must understand this to be habitual lust, whereby the sensitive
appetite is not kept subject to reason by the bonds of original
justice. This lust is equally in all.
________________________

QUESTION 83

OF THE SUBJECT OF ORIGINAL SIN
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the subject of original sin, under which head
there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the subject of original sin is the flesh rather than the
soul?

(2) If it be the soul, whether this be through its essence, or
through its powers?

(3) Whether the will prior to the other powers is the subject of
original sin?

(4) Whether certain powers of the soul are specially infected, viz.
the generative power, the concupiscible part, and the sense of touch?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 83, Art. 1]

Whether Original Sin Is More in the Flesh Than in the Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin is more in the flesh
than in the soul. Because the rebellion of the flesh against the mind
arises from the corruption of original sin. Now the root of this
rebellion is seated in the flesh: for the Apostle says (Rom. 7:23):
"I see another law in my members fighting against the law of my
mind." Therefore original sin is seated chiefly in the flesh.

Obj. 2: Further, a thing is more in its cause than in its effect:
thus heat is in the heating fire more than in the hot water. Now the
soul is infected with the corruption of original sin by the carnal
semen. Therefore original sin is in the flesh rather than in the soul.

Obj. 3: Further, we contract original sin from our first parent, in
so far as we were in him by reason of seminal virtue. Now our souls
were not in him thus, but only our flesh. Therefore original sin is
not in the soul, but in the flesh.

Obj. 4: Further, the rational soul created by God is infused into the
body. If therefore the soul were infected with original sin, it would
follow that it is corrupted in its creation or infusion: and thus God
would be the cause of sin, since He is the author of the soul's
creation and fusion.

Obj. 5: Further, no wise man pours a precious liquid into a vessel,
knowing that the vessel will corrupt the liquid. But the rational
soul is more precious than any liquid. If therefore the soul, by
being united with the body, could be corrupted with the infection of
original sin, God, Who is wisdom itself, would never infuse the soul
into such a body. And yet He does; wherefore it is not corrupted by
the flesh. Therefore original sin is not in the soul but in the flesh.

_On the contrary,_ The same is the subject of a virtue and of the
vice or sin contrary to that virtue. But the flesh cannot be the
subject of virtue: for the Apostle says (Rom. 7:18): "I know that
there dwelleth not in me, that is to say, in my flesh, that which is
good." Therefore the flesh cannot be the subject of original sin, but
only the soul.

_I answer that,_ One thing can be in another in two ways. First, as
in its cause, either principal, or instrumental; secondly, as in its
subject. Accordingly the original sin of all men was in Adam indeed,
as in its principal cause, according to the words of the Apostle
(Rom. 5:12): "In whom all have sinned": whereas it is in the bodily
semen, as in its instrumental cause, since it is by the active power
of the semen that original sin together with human nature is
transmitted to the child. But original sin can nowise be in the flesh
as its subject, but only in the soul.

The reason for this is that, as stated above (Q. 81, A. 1), original
sin is transmitted from the will of our first parent to this
posterity by a certain movement of generation, in the same way as
actual sin is transmitted from any man's will to his other parts. Now
in this transmission it is to be observed, that whatever accrues from
the motion of the will consenting to sin, to any part of man that can
in any way share in that guilt, either as its subject or as its
instrument, has the character of sin. Thus from the will consenting
to gluttony, concupiscence of food accrues to the concupiscible
faculty, and partaking of food accrues to the hand and the mouth,
which, in so far as they are moved by the will to sin, are the
instruments of sin. But that further action is evoked in the
nutritive power and the internal members, which have no natural
aptitude for being moved by the will, does not bear the character of
guilt.

Accordingly, since the soul can be the subject of guilt, while the
flesh, of itself, cannot be the subject of guilt; whatever accrues to
the soul from the corruption of the first sin, has the character of
guilt, while whatever accrues to the flesh, has the character, not of
guilt but of punishment: so that, therefore, the soul is the subject
of original sin, and not the flesh.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (Retract. i, 27) [*Cf. QQ. lxxxiii,
qu. 66], the Apostle is speaking, in that passage, of man already
redeemed, who is delivered from guilt, but is still liable to
punishment, by reason of which sin is stated to dwell "in the flesh."
Consequently it follows that the flesh is the subject, not of guilt,
but of punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: Original sin is caused by the semen as instrumental
cause. Now there is no need for anything to be more in the
instrumental cause than in the effect; but only in the principal
cause: and, in this way, original sin was in Adam more fully, since
in him it had the nature of actual sin.

Reply Obj. 3: The soul of any individual man was in Adam, in respect
of his seminal power, not indeed as in its effective principle, but
as in a dispositive principle: because the bodily semen, which is
transmitted from Adam, does not of its own power produce the rational
soul, but disposes the matter for it.

Reply Obj. 4: The corruption of original sin is nowise caused by God,
but by the sin alone of our first parent through carnal generation.
And so, since creation implies a relation in the soul to God alone,
it cannot be said that the soul is tainted through being created. On
the other hand, infusion implies relation both to God infusing and to
the flesh into which the soul is infused. And so, with regard to God
infusing, it cannot be said that the soul is stained through being
infused; but only with regard to the body into which it is infused.

Reply Obj. 5: The common good takes precedence of private good.
Wherefore God, according to His wisdom, does not overlook the general
order of things (which is that such a soul be infused into such a
body), lest this soul contract a singular corruption: all the more
that the nature of the soul demands that it should not exist prior to
its infusion into the body, as stated in the First Part (Q. 90, A.
4; Q. 118, A. 3). And it is better for the soul to be thus,
according to its nature, than not to be at all, especially since it
can avoid damnation, by means of grace.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 83, Art. 2]

Whether Original Sin Is in the Essence of the Soul Rather Than in the
Powers?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin is not in the essence of
the soul rather than in the powers. For the soul is naturally apt to
be the subject of sin, in respect of those parts which can be moved
by the will. Now the soul is moved by the will, not as to its essence
but only as to the powers. Therefore original sin is in the soul, not
according to its essence, but only according to the powers.

Obj. 2: Further, original sin is opposed to original justice. Now
original justice was in a power of the soul, because power is the
subject of virtue. Therefore original sin also is in a power of the
soul, rather than in its essence.

Obj. 3: Further, just as original sin is derived from the soul as
from the flesh, so is it derived by the powers from the essence. But
original sin is more in the soul than in the flesh. Therefore it is
more in the powers than in the essence of the soul.

Obj. 4: Further, original sin is said to be concupiscence, as stated
(Q. 82, A. 3). But concupiscence is in the powers of the soul.
Therefore original sin is also.

_On the contrary,_ Original sin is called the sin of nature, as
stated above (Q. 81, A. 1). Now the soul is the form and nature of
the body, in respect of its essence and not in respect of its powers,
as stated in the First Part (Q. 76, A. 6). Therefore the soul is the
subject of original sin chiefly in respect of its essence.

_I answer that,_ The subject of a sin is chiefly that part of the
soul to which the motive cause of that sin primarily pertains: thus
if the motive cause of a sin is sensual pleasure, which regards the
concupiscible power through being its proper object, it follows that
the concupiscible power is the proper subject of that sin. Now it is
evident that original sin is caused through our origin. Consequently
that part of the soul which is first reached by man's origin, is the
primary subject of original sin. Now the origin reaches the soul as
the term of generation, according as it is the form of the body: and
this belongs to the soul in respect of its essence, as was proved in
the First Part (Q. 76, A. 6). Therefore the soul, in respect of its
essence, is the primary subject of original sin.

Reply Obj. 1: As the motion of the will of an individual reaches to
the soul's powers and not to its essence, so the motion of the will
of the first generator, through the channel of generation, reaches
first of all to the essence of the soul, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: Even original justice pertained radically to the
essence of the soul, because it was God's gift to human nature, to
which the essence of the soul is related before the powers. For the
powers seem to regard the person, in as much as they are the
principles of personal acts. Hence they are the proper subjects of
actual sins, which are the sins of the person.

Reply Obj. 3: The body is related to the soul as matter to form,
which though it comes second in order of generation, nevertheless
comes first in the order of perfection and nature. But the essence of
the soul is related to the powers, as a subject to its proper
accidents, which follow their subject both in the order of generation
and in that of perfection. Consequently the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 4: Concupiscence, in relation to original sin, holds the
position of matter and effect, as stated above (Q. 82, A. 3).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 83, Art. 3]

Whether Original Sin Infects the Will Before the Other Powers?

Objection 1: It would seem that original sin does not infect the will
before the other powers. For every sin belongs chiefly to that power
by whose act it was caused. Now original sin is caused by an act of
the generative power. Therefore it seems to belong to the generative
power more than to the others.

Obj. 2: Further, original sin is transmitted through the carnal
semen. But the other powers of the soul are more akin to the flesh
than the will is, as is evident with regard to all the sensitive
powers, which use a bodily organ. Therefore original sin is in them
more than in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, the intellect precedes the will, for the object of
the will is only the good understood. If therefore original sin
infects all the powers of the soul, it seems that it must first of
all infect the intellect, as preceding the others.

_On the contrary,_ Original justice has a prior relation to the will,
because it is "rectitude of the will," as Anselm states (De Concep.
Virg. iii). Therefore original sin, which is opposed to it, also has
a prior relation to the will.

_I answer that,_ Two things must be considered in the infection of
original sin. First, its inherence to its subject; and in this
respect it regards first the essence of the soul, as stated above (A.
2). In the second place we must consider its inclination to act; and
in this way it regards the powers of the soul. It must therefore
regard first of all that power in which is seated the first
inclination to commit a sin, and this is the will, as stated above
(Q. 74, AA. 1, 2). Therefore original sin regards first of all the
will.

Reply Obj. 1: Original sin, in man, is not caused by the generative
power of the child, but by the act of the parental generative power.
Consequently, it does not follow that the child's generative power is
the subject of original sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Original sin spreads in two ways; from the flesh to the
soul, and from the essence of the soul to the powers. The former
follows the order of generation, the latter follows the order of
perfection. Therefore, although the other, viz. the sensitive powers,
are more akin to the flesh, yet, since the will, being the higher
power, is more akin to the essence of the soul, the infection of
original sin reaches it first.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellect precedes the will, in one way, by
proposing its object to it. In another way, the will precedes the
intellect, in the order of motion to act, which motion pertains to
sin.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 83, Art. 4]

Whether the Aforesaid Powers Are More Infected Than the Others?

Objection 1: It would seem that the aforesaid powers are not more
infected than the others. For the infection of original sin seems to
pertain more to that part of the soul which can be first the subject
of sin. Now this is the rational part, and chiefly the will.
Therefore that power is most infected by original sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no power of the soul is infected by guilt, except in
so far as it can obey reason. Now the generative power cannot obey
reason, as stated in _Ethic._ i, 13. Therefore the generative power
is not the most infected by original sin.

Obj. 3: Further, of all the senses the sight is the most spiritual
and the nearest to reason, in so far "as it shows us how a number of
things differ" (Metaph. i). But the infection of guilt is first of
all in the reason. Therefore the sight is more infected than touch.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 16, seqq., 24)
that the infection of original sin is most apparent in the movements
of the members of generation, which are not subject to reason. Now
those members serve the generative power in the mingling of sexes,
wherein there is the delectation of touch, which is the most powerful
incentive to concupiscence. Therefore the infection of original sin
regards these three chiefly, viz. the generative power, the
concupiscible faculty and the sense of touch.

_I answer that,_ Those corruptions especially are said to be
infectious, which are of such a nature as to be transmitted from one
subject to another: hence contagious diseases, such as leprosy and
murrain and the like, are said to be infectious. Now the corruption
of original sin is transmitted by the act of generation, as stated
above (Q. 81, A. 1). Therefore the powers which concur in this act,
are chiefly said to be infected. Now this act serves the generative
power, in as much as it is directed to generation; and it includes
delectation of the touch, which is the most powerful object of the
concupiscible faculty. Consequently, while all the parts of the soul
are said to be corrupted by original sin, these three are said
specially to be corrupted and infected.

Reply Obj. 1: Original sin, in so far as it inclines to actual sins,
belongs chiefly to the will, as stated above (A. 3). But in so far as
it is transmitted to the offspring, it belongs to the aforesaid
powers proximately, and to the will, remotely.

Reply Obj. 2: The infection of actual sin belongs only to the powers
which are moved by the will of the sinner. But the infection of
original sin is not derived from the will of the contractor, but
through his natural origin, which is effected by the generative
power. Hence it is this power that is infected by original sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Sight is not related to the act of generation except in
respect of remote disposition, in so far as the concupiscible species
is seen through the sight. But the delectation is completed in the
touch. Wherefore the aforesaid infection is ascribed to the touch
rather than to the sight.
________________________

QUESTION 84

OF THE CAUSE OF SIN, IN RESPECT OF ONE SIN BEING THE CAUSE OF ANOTHER
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the cause of sin, in so far as one sin can be
the cause of another. Under this head there are four points of
inquiry:

(1) Whether covetousness is the root of all sins?

(2) Whether pride is the beginning of every sin?

(3) Whether other special sins should be called capital vices,
besides pride and covetousness?

(4) How many capital vices there are, and which are they?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 84, Art. 1]

Whether Covetousness Is the Root of All Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that covetousness is not the root of all
sins. For covetousness, which is immoderate desire for riches, is
opposed to the virtue of liberality. But liberality is not the root
of all virtues. Therefore covetousness is not the root of all sins.

Obj. 2: Further, the desire for the means proceeds from desire for
the end. Now riches, the desire for which is called covetousness, are
not desired except as being useful for some end, as stated in
_Ethic._ i, 5. Therefore covetousness is not the root of all sins,
but proceeds from some deeper root.

Obj. 3: Further, it often happens that avarice, which is another name
for covetousness, arises from other sins; as when a man desires money
through ambition, or in order to sate his gluttony. Therefore it is
not the root of all sins.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Tim. 6:10): "The desire of
money is the root of all evil."

_I answer that,_ According to some, covetousness may be understood in
different ways. First, as denoting inordinate desire for riches: and
thus it is a special sin. Secondly, as denoting inordinate desire for
any temporal good: and thus it is a genus comprising all sins,
because every sin includes an inordinate turning to a mutable good,
as stated above (Q. 72, A. 2). Thirdly, as denoting an inclination of
a corrupt nature to desire corruptible goods inordinately: and they
say that in this sense covetousness is the root of all sins,
comparing it to the root of a tree, which draws its sustenance from
earth, just as every sin grows out of the love of temporal things.

Now, though all this is true, it does not seem to explain the mind of
the Apostle when he states that covetousness is the root of all sins.
For in that passage he clearly speaks against those who, because they
"will become rich, fall into temptation, and into the snare of the
devil . . . for covetousness is the root of all evils." Hence it is
evident that he is speaking of covetousness as denoting the
inordinate desire for riches. Accordingly, we must say that
covetousness, as denoting a special sin, is called the root of all
sins, in likeness to the root of a tree, in furnishing sustenance to
the whole tree. For we see that by riches man acquires the means of
committing any sin whatever, and of sating his desire for any sin
whatever, since money helps man to obtain all manner of temporal
goods, according to Eccles. 10:19: "All things obey money": so that
in this desire for riches is the root of all sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue and sin do not arise from the same source. For
sin arises from the desire of mutable good; and consequently the
desire of that good which helps one to obtain all temporal goods, is
called the root of all sins. But virtue arises from the desire for
the immutable God; and consequently charity, which is the love of
God, is called the root of the virtues, according to Eph. 3:17:
"Rooted and founded in charity."

Reply Obj. 2: The desire of money is said to be the root of sins, not
as though riches were sought for their own sake, as being the last
end; but because they are much sought after as useful for any
temporal end. And since a universal good is more desirable than a
particular good, they move the appetite more than any individual
goods, which along with many others can be procured by means of money.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as in natural things we do not ask what
always happens, but what happens most frequently, for the reason that
the nature of corruptible things can be hindered, so as not always to
act in the same way; so also in moral matters, we consider what
happens in the majority of cases, not what happens invariably, for the
reason that the will does not act of necessity. So when we say that
covetousness is the root of all evils, we do not assert that no other
evil can be its root, but that other evils more frequently arise
therefrom, for the reason given.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 84, Art. 2]

Whether Pride Is the Beginning of Every Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that pride is not the beginning of every
sin. For the root is a beginning of a tree, so that the beginning of
a sin seems to be the same as the root of sin. Now covetousness is
the root of every sin, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore it is also
the beginning of every sin, and not pride.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 10:14): "The beginning of the
pride of man is apostasy [Douay: 'to fall off'] from God." But
apostasy from God is a sin. Therefore another sin is the beginning of
pride, so that the latter is not the beginning of every sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the beginning of every sin would seem to be that
which causes all sins. Now this is inordinate self-love, which,
according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv), "builds up the city of
Babylon." Therefore self-love and not pride, is the beginning of
every sin.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ecclus. 10:15): "Pride is the
beginning of all sin."

_I answer that,_ Some say pride is to be taken in three ways. First,
as denoting inordinate desire to excel; and thus it is a special sin.
Secondly, as denoting actual contempt of God, to the effect of not
being subject to His commandment; and thus, they say, it is a generic
sin. Thirdly, as denoting an inclination to this contempt, owing to
the corruption of nature; and in this sense they say that it is the
beginning of every sin, and that it differs from covetousness,
because covetousness regards sin as turning towards the mutable good
by which sin is, as it were, nourished and fostered, for which reason
covetousness is called the "root"; whereas pride regards sin as
turning away from God, to Whose commandment man refuses to be
subject, for which reason it is called the "beginning," because the
beginning of evil consists in turning away from God.

Now though all this is true, nevertheless it does not explain the
mind of the wise man who said (Ecclus. 10:15): "Pride is the
beginning of all sin." For it is evident that he is speaking of pride
as denoting inordinate desire to excel, as is clear from what follows
(verse 17): "God hath overturned the thrones of proud princes";
indeed this is the point of nearly the whole chapter. We must
therefore say that pride, even as denoting a special sin, is the
beginning of every sin. For we must take note that, in voluntary
actions, such as sins, there is a twofold order, of intention, and of
execution. In the former order, the principle is the end, as we have
stated many times before (Q. 1, A. 1, ad 1; Q. 18, A. 7, ad 2; Q. 15,
A. 1, ad 2; Q. 25, A. 2). Now man's end in acquiring all temporal
goods is that, through their means, he may have some perfection and
excellence. Therefore, from this point of view, pride, which is the
desire to excel, is said to be the "beginning" of every sin. On the
other hand, in the order of execution, the first place belongs to
that which by furnishing the opportunity of fulfilling all desires of
sin, has the character of a root, and such are riches; so that, from
this point of view, covetousness is said to be the "root" of all
evils, as stated above (A. 1).

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Apostasy from God is stated to be the beginning of
pride, in so far as it denotes a turning away from God, because from
the fact that man wishes not to be subject to God, it follows that he
desires inordinately his own excellence in temporal things.
Wherefore, in the passage quoted, apostasy from God does not denote
the special sin, but rather that general condition of every sin,
consisting in its turning away from God. It may also be said that
apostasy from God is said to be the beginning of pride, because it is
the first species of pride. For it is characteristic of pride to be
unwilling to be subject to any superior, and especially to God; the
result being that a man is unduly lifted up, in respect of the other
species of pride.

Reply Obj. 3: In desiring to excel, man loves himself, for to love
oneself is the same as to desire some good for oneself. Consequently
it amounts to the same whether we reckon pride or self-love as the
beginning of every evil.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 84, Art. 3]

Whether Any Other Special Sins, Besides Pride and Avarice, Should Be
Called Capital?

Objection 1: It would seem that no other special sins, besides pride
and avarice, should be called capital. Because "the head seems to be
to an animal, what the root is to a plant," as stated in _De Anima_
ii, text. 38: for the roots are like a mouth. If therefore
covetousness is called the "root of all evils," it seems that it
alone, and no other sin, should be called a capital vice.

Obj. 2: Further, the head bears a certain relation of order to the
other members, in so far as sensation and movement follow from the
head. But sin implies privation of order. Therefore sin has not the
character of head: so that no sins should be called capital.

Obj. 3: Further, capital crimes are those which receive capital
punishment. But every kind of sin comprises some that are punished
thus. Therefore the capital sins are not certain specific sins.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17) enumerates certain
special vices under the name of capital.

_I answer that,_ The word capital is derived from _caput_ (a head).
Now the head, properly speaking, is that part of an animal's body,
which is the principle and director of the whole animal. Hence,
metaphorically speaking, every principle is called a head, and even
men who direct and govern others are called heads. Accordingly a
capital vice is so called, in the first place, from "head" taken in
the proper sense, and thus the name "capital" is given to a sin for
which capital punishment is inflicted. It is not in this sense that
we are now speaking of capital sins, but in another sense, in which
the term "capital" is derived from head, taken metaphorically for a
principle or director of others. In this way a capital vice is one
from which other vices arise, chiefly by being their final cause,
which origin is formal, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 6). Wherefore a
capital vice is not only the principle of others, but is also their
director and, in a way, their leader: because the art or habit, to
which the end belongs, is always the principle and the commander in
matters concerning the means. Hence Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17)
compares these capital vices to the "leaders of an army."

Reply Obj. 1: The term "capital" is taken from _caput_ and applied to
something connected with, or partaking of the head, as having some
property thereof, but not as being the head taken literally. And
therefore the capital vices are not only those which have the
character of primary origin, as covetousness which is called the
"root," and pride which is called the beginning, but also those which
have the character of proximate origin in respect of several sins.

Reply Obj. 2: Sin lacks order in so far as it turns away from God,
for in this respect it is an evil, and evil, according to Augustine
(De Natura Boni iv), is "the privation of mode, species and order."
But in so far as sin implies a turning to something, it regards some
good: wherefore, in this respect, there can be order in sin.

Reply Obj. 3: This objection considers capital sin as so called from
the punishment it deserves, in which sense we are not taking it here.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 84, Art. 4]

Whether the Seven Capital Vices Are Suitably Reckoned?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to reckon seven capital
vices, viz. vainglory, envy, anger, sloth, covetousness, gluttony,
lust. For sins are opposed to virtues. But there are four principal
virtues, as stated above (Q. 61, A. 2). Therefore there are only four
