top of a hill just above Hasbeiya, called Khulwat el Biyad. In their
revolt against Ibrahim Pasha in 1838, he was aided by the
Christians, and when the Druzes were defeated in a battle near this
place, their sacred place was entered, and several chests of books,
setting forth their tenets, were scattered through the land. The
Christians paid dearly for their trespass. The leader of the Hauran
rebellion became, for a time, the governor of Hasbeiya, and for this
loss imposed exorbitant indemnities on every one, who had been known
to take a book. The consequent enmity between the parties doubtless
had much to do with the events described above.

Abeih, now a missionary station, was inhabited by both Druzes and
Maronites, and the conflict began there on the 9th of May. Our
brethren were all along assured by both parties, that neither they
nor their property would be molested, whichever was victorious. The
Druzes early had the advantage, and the Maronite part of the village
was speedily in flames, and more than three hundred and fifty
Maronites were obliged to take refuge in a strong palace belonging
to one of the Shehab Emirs. About two hundred more, and among them
several of the most obnoxious, found an asylum in the houses of the
missionaries, and in the house of a native helper of the mission,
which, being in the centre of the Maronite quarter, was crowded with
refugees. Mr. Thomson ventured out in the midst of the tumult, and
succeeded in getting a guard of Druzes and Greeks whom he could
trust, placed around this house, and thus the people with their
goods were secured. The palace was in danger of being taken by
storm, and the people within it all massacred; when the leaders of
the Druzes, to avoid this, requested Mr. Thomson to carry a flag of
truce, with offers of safety and permission to retire whenever they
might choose. This was done at some risk, as the battle was still
raging. After the surrender, Dr. Van Dyck dressed the wounded
Maronites in the palace, and brought several of them to his own
house. He also performed like services for the wounded Druzes. This
he did not without peril to himself; for, returning alone from the
neighboring village, where he had gone on this professional errand,
a Druze warrior mistook him for a Maronite, and was so enraged that
one in an Arab dress and with an Arab tongue should pretend to be an
American, that, but for the providential coming up of one who knew
the Doctor, he would have killed him on the spot. Meanwhile Mr.
Laurie had come safely from Beirut, attended by only two
janissaries, and passing through hordes of the victorious Druzes.
Finding, on his arrival, a half-burned corpse of the Italian padre
lying in the street, he buried it under the pavement of his chapel.

The Maronites being in a starving condition, the missionaries baked
for them all the flour they had on hand, and sent express by night
to Beirut for more. Fearing, too, that the Maronites might be
massacred by the Druzes on their way down to Beirut, notwithstanding
their Turkish escort, they sent an express to Colonel Rose, the
English Consul-general, which brought him up immediately with his
most efficient protection. It should be added, that on the day the
Maronites left Abeih, a strong proclamation came out from the
Maronite and Greek Catholic bishops at Beirut to all their people,
requiring them to protect all the members of the American mission.

The reflections of Mr. Smith on the death of the persecuting
Patriarch, are just and impressive. "What a lesson," he says, "does
that event, in such circumstances, teach us! After having martyred
that faithful witness Asaad Shidiak, caused the Bible often to be
burned, had missionaries insulted and stoned, and boasted that he
had at last left no spot open for them to enter the mountains, he
finds himself stripped of all his power; missionaries established
permanently in the midst of his flock, and his own favorite bishop
constrained to give orders for their protection; his people once and
again ravaged and ruined in wars, which his own measures have
hastened, if they have not originated; and finally he sinks himself
under his disappointment and dies. How signally has the blood of the
martyred Asaad been avenged upon him even in this life."

The war broke up the schools in the mountains; but in the following
year there were ten schools in charge of the station at Abeih, with
four hundred and thirty-six pupils. One hundred and forty-four of
these were girls, and one hundred and ninety-seven Druzes. Connected
with the Beirut station, were four schools for boys and girls, and
one for girls alone. In Suk el-Ghurb, a village four miles from
Abeih, a Protestant secession from the Greek Church was in progress,
embracing fourteen families, and religious services were held with
them every Sabbath. At Bhamdun, the summer residence for the
brethren of the Beirut station, there were a number of decided
Protestants, who declared that they found persons to sympathize with
them wherever they went. Even in Zahleh, the hot-bed of fanaticism,
there were men who openly argued from the Gospel against the
prevailing errors. Mr. Smith wrote of a village on Mount Hermon,
that sixty men were known to be standing ready to follow the example
of Hasbeiya, as soon as the Protestants in that place had made good
their position. He also declared the movement in Hasbeiya the
beginning of what would doubtless have been a great revolution, had
persecution been delayed.

Mr. Lanneau's health constrained him to retire from the field in
1846. In the same year, Dr. Van Dyck, having acquired an
extraordinary facility in the use of the Arabic language, was
ordained to the work of the Gospel ministry.






CHAPTER XVII.

GREECE.

DR. JONAS KING AND THE GREEK HIERARCHY.

1845-1847.


The struggle of Dr. Jonas King with the Greek Hierarchy, deserves a
permanent record. The point at issue between them was, freedom to
worship God and to preach the Gospel in Greece. The conflict was not
waged by Dr. King as a Greek citizen, for such he never claimed to
be, though he was a property-owner in Athens, and married to a Greek
lady, who retained her nominal connection with the Greek Church.

These facts were helpful to him, as was also his American
citizenship. A mere citizen of Greece could not have maintained his
ground after the persecuting hierarchy had overawed the courts of
justice and the officers of state. His courage resembled that of
Martin Luther. He was a sturdy Puritan, which no Greek at that time
could have been; and he had strong resemblances to the great
Reformer, as will abundantly appear in the sequel. Yet the fact of
his foreign origin made him to be no more than the forerunner of a
Grecian Luther. His labors and sufferings only prepared the way for
a national reformation, which it may be hoped is yet to come.

Early in 1845, a public accusation was made against Dr. King, that
he had uttered impious language respecting the Virgin Mary. In
reply, he quoted from Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, one of the
Fathers of the Eastern Church, who says: "Let the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost be worshipped; Mary, let no one worship."
Such a defense, as the writer anticipated, only increased the
excitement. The most abusive epithets were heaped upon him. Among
other things, he was accused of falsifying the testimony of the
Fathers. He published a "Defense," in a small volume of about two
hundred pages; embracing a history of the controversy from the
beginning, and proving his teachings to be, as he affirmed,
doctrines of the Greek Church. This he did by freely quoting from
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Clemens, and others. The book was sent to
the most prominent men, civil and ecclesiastical, in Greece and
Turkey, and produced a powerful impression. Several persons of
distinction confessed that it was true.

It was not to be expected, however, that such a publication would
escape the condemnation of the more bigoted members of the Greek
Church. The opposition became furious, with threats of personal
violence. In August, the "Holy Synod of the kingdom of Greece"
formally denounced the book and its author. Dr. King was
characterized as a hypocrite, imposter, deceiver, as impious and
abominable, and a vessel of Satan; and after a confused and lame
attempt at an answer, every orthodox Christian was forbidden to read
it, and required to deliver it to the flames. The writer was
pronounced "an outlaw, whom no one might salute or greet in the
street," and all were forbidden to enter his dwelling, or to eat or
drink with him, on pain of the most severe ecclesiastical penalty.
The Synod also requested the government to institute a criminal
prosecution. In view of all this, Dr. King consoles himself with the
Saviour's words (Luke vi. 22, 23), "Blessed are ye when men shall
hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of
man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy."

In September, officers of justice entered the house of the
missionary, and seized all the copies of his book they could find,
ninety-seven in number. About nine hundred had been previously
distributed. He was then summoned to appear before one of the judges
to be examined. I give his own characteristic statement.

"My examination and answers were as follows:--

_Question_. What is your name?

_Answer_. Jonas King.

_Q_. Your country?

_A_. The United States of America.

_Q_. Of what city?

_A_. Hawley, a country town.

_Q_. What is your age?

_A_. Fifty-three.

_Q_. What is your profession?

_A_. I am an evangelist, that is, a preacher of the Word of God.

_Q_. What is your religion?

_A_. What God teaches in His Word; I am a Christian, most orthodox.

_Q_. Did you publish this book, entitled "Jonas King's Defense,
etc.?"

_A_. I did, and distributed it here and elsewhere. I gave it to all
the professors in the University, and to others.

"The Judge then read to me my accusation as follows: 'You are
accused of having in your book reviled the Mother of God, the holy
images, the liturgy of Chrysostom and Basil, the seven oecumenical
councils, and the transformation of the bread and wine into the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ in the fearful mystery of the
communion. Have you any defense to make?'

"_A_. Those things in my book with regard to Mary, with regard to
transubstantiation, and with regard to images, I did not say; but
the most brilliant luminaries of the Eastern Church, St. Epiphanius,
St. Chrysostom, the great St. Basil, St. Irenaeus, Clemens, and
Eusebius Pamphyli, say them.

_Q_. Have you anything to add?

_A_. Nothing.

_Q_. Do you know how to write?

_A_. Enough to write my name.

"I was then directed to subscribe my name to the examination, which
I did, and went away."

In October, intelligence came of the "excommunication" of the book
and its author by the "Great Church" at Constantinople. They
assigned the publicity which the "Defense" had obtained in Turkey as
the reason for this act; and this was doubtless the reason why the
synodical accusation was sent extensively to be read in the Greek
churches of the East.

The case went to trial, and was decided against Dr. King in three
successive courts, the last of which was the Areopagus, or highest
court of appeal. This was in April, 1846. In this latter court, he
was well defended by two Greek lawyers, and permission was granted
him, at his request, to address the court. But after about twenty
minutes and repeated interruptions by the President, he was silenced
altogether; not having the freedom which the Pagan Areopagus of
ancient times gave to the first missionary to Greece. The effect of
these decisions was to declare the offenses charged against Dr. King
to be criminal in law, and to refer the case, for trial as to the
truth of the charges and the infliction of punishment, to the
criminal court. If condemned, he must suffer imprisonment. The trial
was to take place at Syra in July. An inflammatory pamphlet was
secretly printed by a priest, named Callistratus, for distribution
at the place of trial among judges, jurors, and the populace. It was
industriously circulated among the lowest class, with the avowed
sanction of the high priest of the Cyclades. Dr. King soon
ascertained that a conspiracy was formed there against his life,
similar to the one which endangered the life of the great Apostle on
his last visit to Jerusalem. Three Greek lawyers were engaged for
his defense at Syra, of whom one was Mr. Stephen Galatti, who had
been educated by the Board in America, and two of these accompanied
him in the steamer. At least a thousand people awaited his landing.
Such was the excitement, that even the lawyers dreaded to go among
them, and the governor of the island confessed his inability to give
effectual protection. The king's attorney decided, that he could not
be legally compelled to submit to a trial on that day. His lawyers
therefore advised him to return in the steamer to Athens, which he
did. Learning, soon after his arrival, through his wife, of a
combination there to take his life, he acquainted Sir Edmund Lyons,
the British Ambassador, with the fact, and that gentleman kindly
offered him British protection in case of need.

It would be charitable to suppose, that the government had not
entered into this prosecution willingly, but were urged on by the
hierarchy. Certain it is, that the whole subject was allowed to rest
for nearly a year. But on the 4th of June, 1847, the missionary
received a citation from the officers of government to appear in
person for trial before the criminal court at Syra. As a similar
court was at that moment holding a session in Athens, he could
regard the motive of the citation as not very different from that
which led the Jews to demand the transfer of St. Paul's trial from
Caesarea to Jerusalem. It was subsequently affirmed, that this
proceeding had been without the knowledge of the Prime Minister and
the Minister of Justice; and the King's attorney soon after recalled
the citation. The British Ambassador again proffered his kind
offices, and there were friends among the Greeks themselves. But the
great body of the people were hostile, and Dr. King concludes one of
his letters thus: "I feel that my Lord and Master has called me to
this combat, and though it seems to be waxing hotter and hotter, so
long as my Captain and Leader lives, I have nothing to fear." He was
somewhat cheered by the assurance of a Greek of standing, that his
book, though the cause of much suffering to the author, had given a
turn to public opinion.

After this Dr. King ventured out into the city with considerable
freedom, and conversed with such as he met on the subject of
religion. Many, even some of the priests, saluted him in the
streets, though contrary to the commands of the Holy Synod. A member
of the Synod, who had subscribed the excommunication, on meeting him
returned his salutation.

There was only a lull in the storm. In July of the same year, a
series of articles appeared in a leading newspaper of Athens called
the "Age," designed to excite the prejudices of the Greeks against
our missionary, and to urge them to put a stop to the scandal of his
preaching. The last and most extraordinary of these was avowedly
from Simonides, and was fitted to produce an excitement in the Greek
community. Its statements were improbable in the highest degree, and
there could not have been a more affecting proof of the superstition
and bigotry of the people of Athens, than the general credence given
to this gross fabrication.

The article was called "The Orgies," and was under the headings of
"Mystery of Marriage," and "Mystery of Baptism;" and a translation
of it may be found in the "Missionary Herald" for 1847.1

1 See _Missionary Herald_ for 1847, pp. 366-368.

It was subsequently ascertained, that Simonides was materially aided
by two priests; who were elevated, not long after, one to an
archdeaconry, the other to an archbishopric, under the "Great
Church" at Constantinople. What immediately followed, will be
described by Dr. King himself.

"While reading the article in my family, the Governor of Attica, Mr.
Soutzos, came in and desired to speak with me alone. He informed me
that he had come to say to me from the Minister of the Interior,
that, on the one hand, they wished to give me protection, and that,
a week before, there was no reason for suspecting any difficulty,
unless it were from my own conscience; but that they desired me to
put a stop to the scandal of my preaching. He had also to say to me
from the Minister of Religion, that I must do so, or the government
would take some measures against me.

"To this I replied, that I considered it an insult, on the part of
the Minister of the Interior, to say that I had no reason for fear
except from my own conscience, as I had reason to fear from the
threats I had heard from various quarters; that my conscience was
perfectly clear, inasmuch as I had done nothing but my duty; that as
to my preaching, I considered myself free to preach the Gospel in my
own house. 'Yes,' said he, 'but not to admit others of the Greek
religion.' I replied, that I considered myself as having the same
right, which is enjoyed by the Roman Catholics, by the English, by
the King's chaplain, and by the Queen's, to hold my service with
open doors; that the government did not demand of any person of any
other rite to close his doors against such as might wish to come,
and that, should I do this, I might be justly suspected of doing
something improper; that I had a right to preach in my own house,
and that the constitution protected me in this right; that I
intended to preach, and with open doors, and whosoever wished might
come; that what had appeared in the "Age" with regard to my
religious service, called the "Orgies," and with regard to
proselytes, was all false; and that it was folly for the government
to found an accusation, or take any measures against me, on the
ground of such abominable falsehoods. But if they chose to prevent
Greeks from coming to my service, they had the power so to do.

"The governor said that this was the last advice the Minister of
Religion had to give me, and it would be followed by severe
measures.

"During the greater part of this conversation, my wife was present,
and added remarks vindicating my right to do as I pleased in my own
house, and declaring the accusations, which had appeared in the
'Age' of the preceding day, to be false."

One of the two Greek lawyers already mentioned, on being consulted
with regard to an article in the Penal Code, to which the Governor
had referred, said that it had no reference whatever to the case of
Dr. King, but only to secret societies. In the evening, the
