administering sacraments, those who receive sacraments from them,
co-operate in their sin. Therefore they would sin also; which seems
unreasonable.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems that no one should act when in doubt, for
thus man would be driven to despair, as being unable to avoid sin.
But if the wicked were to sin in administering sacraments, they would
be in a state of perplexity: since sometimes they would sin also if
they did not administer sacraments; for instance, when by reason of
their office it is their bounden duty to do so; for it is written (1
Cor. 9:16): "For a necessity lieth upon me: Woe is unto me if I
preach not the gospel." Sometimes also on account of some danger; for
instance, if a child in danger of death be brought to a sinner for
baptism. Therefore it seems that the wicked do not sin in
administering the sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. i) that "it is wrong
for the wicked even to touch the symbols," i.e. the sacramental
signs. And he says in the epistle to Demophilus: "It seems
presumptuous for such a man," i.e. a sinner, "to lay hands on
priestly things; he is neither afraid nor ashamed, all unworthy that
he is, to take part in Divine things, with the thought that God does
not see what he sees in himself: he thinks, by false pretenses, to
cheat Him Whom he calls his Father; he dares to utter, in the person
of Christ, words polluted by his infamy, I will not call them
prayers, over the Divine symbols."

_I answer that,_ A sinful action consists in this, that a man "fails
to act as he ought to," as the Philosopher explains (Ethic. ii). Now
it has been said (A. 5, ad 3) that it is fitting for the ministers of
sacraments to be righteous; because ministers should be like unto
their Lord, according to Lev. 19:2: "Be ye holy, because I . . . am
holy"; and Ecclus. 10:2: "As the judge of the people is himself, so
also are his ministers." Consequently, there can be no doubt that the
wicked sin by exercising the ministry of God and the Church, by
conferring the sacraments. And since this sin pertains to irreverence
towards God and the contamination of holy things, as far as the man
who sins is concerned, although holy things in themselves cannot be
contaminated; it follows that such a sin is mortal in its genus.

Reply Obj. 1: Works of charity are not made holy by some process of
consecration, but they belong to the holiness of righteousness, as
being in a way parts of righteousness. Consequently, when a man shows
himself as a minister of God, by doing works of charity, if he be
righteous, he will be made yet holier; but if he be a sinner, he is
thereby disposed to holiness. On the other hand, the sacraments are
holy in themselves owing to their mystical consecration. Wherefore
the holiness of righteousness is required in the minister, that he
may be suitable for his ministry: for which reason he acts
unbecomingly and sins, if while in a state of sin he attempts to
fulfil that ministry.

Reply Obj. 2: He who approaches a sacrament, receives it from a
minister of the Church, not because he is such and such a man, but
because he is a minister of the Church. Consequently, as long as the
latter is tolerated in the ministry, he that receives a sacrament
from him, does not communicate in his sin, but communicates with the
Church from whom he has his ministry. But if the Church, by
degrading, excommunicating, or suspending him, does not tolerate him
in the ministry, he that receives a sacrament from him sins, because
he communicates in his sin.

Reply Obj. 3: A man who is in mortal sin is not perplexed simply, if
by reason of his office it be his bounden duty to minister
sacraments; because he can repent of his sin and so minister
lawfully. But there is nothing unreasonable in his being perplexed,
if we suppose that he wishes to remain in sin.

However, in a case of necessity when even a lay person might baptize,
he would not sin in baptizing. For it is clear that then he does not
exercise the ministry of the Church, but comes to the aid of one who
is in need of his services. It is not so with the other sacraments,
which are not so necessary as baptism, as we shall show further on
(Q. 65, AA. 3, 4; Q. 62, A. 3).
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 7]

Whether Angels Can Administer Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that angels can administer sacraments. Because
a higher minister can do whatever the lower can; thus a priest can do
whatever a deacon can: but not conversely. But angels are higher
ministers in the hierarchical order than any men whatsoever, as
Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. ix). Therefore, since men can be
ministers of sacraments, it seems that much more can angels be.

Obj. 2: Further, in heaven holy men are likened to the angels (Matt.
22:30). But some holy men, when in heaven, can be ministers of the
sacraments; since the sacramental character is indelible, as stated
above (Q. 63, A. 5). Therefore it seems that angels too can be
ministers of sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (Q. 8, A. 7), the devil is head of
the wicked, and the wicked are his members. But sacraments can be
administered by the wicked. Therefore it seems that they can be
administered even by demons.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Heb. 5:1): "Every high priest taken
from among men, is ordained for men in the things that appertain to
God." But angels whether good or bad are not taken from among men.
Therefore they are not ordained ministers in the things that
appertain to God, i.e. in the sacraments.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3; Q. 62, A. 5), the whole power
of the sacraments flows from Christ's Passion, which belongs to Him
as man. And Him in their very nature men, not angels, resemble;
indeed, in respect of His Passion, He is described as being "a little
lower than the angels" (Heb. 2:9). Consequently, it belongs to men,
but not to angels, to dispense the sacraments and to take part in
their administration.

But it must be observed that as God did not bind His power to the
sacraments, so as to be unable to bestow the sacramental effect
without conferring the sacrament; so neither did He bind His power to
the ministers of the Church so as to be unable to give angels power
to administer the sacraments. And since good angels are messengers of
truth; if any sacramental rite were performed by good angels, it
should be considered valid, because it ought to be evident that this
is being done by the will of God: for instance, certain churches are
said to have been consecrated by the ministry of the angels [*See
Acta S.S., September 29]. But if demons, who are "lying spirits,"
were to perform a sacramental rite, it should be pronounced as
invalid.

Reply Obj. 1: What men do in a less perfect manner, i.e. by sensible
sacraments, which are proportionate to their nature, angels also do,
as ministers of a higher degree, in a more perfect manner, i.e.
invisibly--by cleansing, enlightening, and perfecting.

Reply Obj. 2: The saints in heaven resemble the angels as to their
share of glory, but not as to the conditions of their nature: and
consequently not in regard to the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: Wicked men do not owe their power of conferring
sacraments to their being members of the devil. Consequently, it does
not follow that _a fortiori_ the devil, their head, can do so.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 8]

Whether the Minister's Intention Is Required for the Validity of a
Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the minister's intention is not required
for the validity of a sacrament. For the minister of a sacrament
works instrumentally. But the perfection of an action does not depend
on the intention of the instrument, but on that of the principal
agent. Therefore the minister's intention is not necessary for the
perfecting of a sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, one man's intention cannot be known to another.
Therefore if the minister's intention were required for the validity
of a sacrament, he who approaches a sacrament could not know whether
he has received the sacrament. Consequently he could have no
certainty in regard to salvation; the more that some sacraments are
necessary for salvation, as we shall state further on (Q. 65, A. 4).

Obj. 3: Further, a man's intention cannot bear on that to which he
does not attend. But sometimes ministers of sacraments do not attend
to what they say or do, through thinking of something else. Therefore
in this respect the sacrament would be invalid through want of
intention.

_On the contrary,_ What is unintentional happens by chance. But this
cannot be said of the sacramental operation. Therefore the sacraments
require the intention of the minister.

_I answer that,_ When a thing is indifferent to many uses, it must
needs be determined to one, if that one has to be effected. Now those
things which are done in the sacraments, can be done with various
intent; for instance, washing with water, which is done in baptism,
may be ordained to bodily cleanliness, to the health of the body, to
amusement, and many other similar things. Consequently, it needs to
be determined to one purpose, i.e. the sacramental effect, by the
intention of him who washes. And this intention is expressed by the
words which are pronounced in the sacraments; for instance the words,
"I baptize thee in the name of the Father," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: An inanimate instrument has no intention regarding the
effect; but instead of the intention there is the motion whereby it
is moved by the principal agent. But an animate instrument, such as a
minister, is not only moved, but in a sense moves itself, in so far
as by his will he moves his bodily members to act. Consequently, his
intention is required, whereby he subjects himself to the principal
agent; that is, it is necessary that he intend to do that which
Christ and the Church do.

Reply Obj. 2: On this point there are two opinions. For some hold
that the mental intention of the minister is necessary; in the
absence of which the sacrament is invalid: and that this defect in
the case of children who have not the intention of approaching the
sacrament, is made good by Christ, Who baptizes inwardly: whereas in
adults, who have that intention, this defect is made good by their
faith and devotion.

This might be true enough of the ultimate effect, i.e. justification
from sins; but as to that effect which is both real and sacramental,
viz. the character, it does not appear possible for it to be made
good by the devotion of the recipient, since a character is never
imprinted save by a sacrament.

Consequently, others with better reason hold that the minister of a
sacrament acts in the person of the whole Church, whose minister he
is; while in the words uttered by him, the intention of the Church is
expressed; and that this suffices for the validity of the sacrament,
except the contrary be expressed on the part either of the minister
or of the recipient of the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: Although he who thinks of something else, has no actual
intention, yet he has habitual intention, which suffices for the
validity of the sacrament; for instance if, when a priest goes to
baptize someone, he intends to do to him what the Church does.
Wherefore if subsequently during the exercise of the act his mind be
distracted by other matters, the sacrament is valid in virtue of his
original intention. Nevertheless, the minister of a sacrament should
take great care to have actual intention. But this is not entirely in
man's power, because when a man wishes to be very intent on
something, he begins unintentionally to think of other things,
according to Ps. 39:18: "My heart hath forsaken me."
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 9]

Whether Faith Is Required of Necessity in the Minister of a Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that faith is required of necessity in the
minister of a sacrament. For, as stated above (A. 8), the intention
of the minister is necessary for the validity of a sacrament. But
"faith directs in intention" as Augustine says against Julian (In
Psalm xxxi, cf. Contra Julian iv). Therefore, if the minister is
without the true faith, the sacrament is invalid.

Obj. 2: Further, if a minister of the Church has not the true faith,
it seems that he is a heretic. But heretics, seemingly, cannot confer
sacraments. For Cyprian says in an epistle against heretics (lxxiii):
"Everything whatsoever heretics do, is carnal, void and counterfeit,
so that nothing that they do should receive our approval." And Pope
Leo says in his epistle to Leo Augustus (clvi): "It is a matter of
notoriety that the light of all the heavenly sacraments is
extinguished in the see of Alexandria, by an act of dire and
senseless cruelty. The sacrifice is no longer offered, the chrism is
no longer consecrated, all the mysteries of religion have fled at the
touch of the parricide hands of ungodly men." Therefore a sacrament
requires of necessity that the minister should have the true faith.

Obj. 3: Further, those who have not the true faith seem to be
separated from the Church by excommunication: for it is written in
the second canonical epistle of John (10): "If any man come to you,
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into the house, nor say
to him; God speed you": and (Titus 3:10): "A man that is a heretic,
after the first and second admonition avoid." But it seems that an
excommunicate cannot confer a sacrament of the Church: since he is
separated from the Church, to whose ministry the dispensation of the
sacraments belongs. Therefore a sacrament requires of necessity that
the minister should have the true faith.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says against the Donatist Petilian:
"Remember that the evil lives of wicked men are not prejudicial to
God's sacraments, by rendering them either invalid or less holy."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 5), since the minister works
instrumentally in the sacraments, he acts not by his own but by
Christ's power. Now just as charity belongs to a man's own power so
also does faith. Wherefore, just as the validity of a sacrament does
not require that the minister should have charity, and even sinners
can confer sacraments, as stated above (A. 5); so neither is it
necessary that he should have faith, and even an unbeliever can
confer a true sacrament, provided that the other essentials be there.

Reply Obj. 1: It may happen that a man's faith is defective in regard
to something else, and not in regard to the reality of the sacrament
which he confers: for instance, he may believe that it is unlawful to
swear in any case whatever, and yet he may believe that baptism is an
efficient cause of salvation. And thus such unbelief does not hinder
the intention of conferring the sacrament. But if his faith be
defective in regard to the very sacrament that he confers, although
he believe that no inward effect is caused by the thing done
outwardly, yet he does know that the Catholic Church intends to
confer a sacrament by that which is outwardly done. Wherefore, his
unbelief notwithstanding, he can intend to do what the Church does,
albeit he esteem it to be nothing. And such an intention suffices for
a sacrament: because as stated above (A. 8, ad 2) the minister of a
sacrament acts in the person of the Church by whose faith any defect
in the minister's faith is made good.

Reply Obj. 2: Some heretics in conferring sacraments do not observe
the form prescribed by the Church: and these confer neither the
sacrament nor the reality of the sacrament. But some do observe the
form prescribed by the Church: and these confer indeed the sacrament
but not the reality. I say this in the supposition that they are
outwardly cut off from the Church; because from the very fact that
anyone receives the sacraments from them, he sins; and consequently
is hindered from receiving the effect of the sacrament. Wherefore
Augustine (Fulgentius, De Fide ad Pet.) says: "Be well assured and
have no doubt whatever that those who are baptized outside the
Church, unless they come back to the Church, will reap disaster from
their Baptism." In this sense Pope Leo says that "the light of the
sacraments was extinguished in the Church of Alexandria"; viz. in
regard to the reality of the sacrament, not as to the sacrament
itself.

Cyprian, however, thought that heretics do not confer even the
sacrament: but in this respect we do not follow his opinion. Hence
Augustine says (De unico Baptismo xiii): "Though the martyr Cyprian
refused to recognize Baptism conferred by heretics or schismatics,
yet so great are his merits, culminating in the crown of martyrdom,
that the light of his charity dispels the darkness of his fault, and
if anything needed pruning, the sickle of his passion cut it off."

Reply Obj. 3: The power of administering the sacraments belongs to
the spiritual character which is indelible, as explained above (Q.
63, A. 3). Consequently, if a man be suspended by the Church, or
excommunicated or degraded, he does not lose the power of conferring
sacraments, but the permission to use this power. Wherefore he does
indeed confer the sacrament, but he sins in so doing. He also sins
that receives a sacrament from such a man: so that he does not
receive the reality of the sacrament, unless ignorance excuses him.
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 64, Art. 10]

Whether the Validity of a Sacrament Requires a Good Intention in the
Minister?

Objection 1: It seems that the validity of a sacrament requires a
good intention in the minister. For the minister's intention should
be in conformity with the Church's intention, as explained above (A.
8, ad 1). But the intention of the Church is always good. Therefore
the validity of a sacrament requires of necessity a good intention in
the minister.

Obj. 2: Further, a perverse intention seems worse than a playful one.
But a playful intention destroys a sacrament: for instance, if
someone were to baptize anybody not seriously but in fun. Much more,
therefore, does a perverse intention destroy a sacrament: for
instance, if somebody were to baptize a man in order to kill him
afterwards.

Obj. 3: Further, a perverse intention vitiates the whole work,
according to Luke 11:34: "If thy eye be evil, thy" whole "body will
be darksome." But the sacraments of Christ cannot be contaminated by
evil men; as Augustine says against Petilian (Cont. Litt. Petil ii).
Therefore it seems that, if the minister's intention is perverse, the
sacrament is invalid.

_On the contrary,_ A perverse intention belongs to the wickedness of
the minister. But the wickedness of the minister does not annul the
sacrament: neither, therefore, does his perverse intention.

_I answer that,_ The minister's intention may be perverted in two
ways. First in regard to the sacrament: for instance, when a man does
not intend to confer a sacrament, but to make a mockery of it. Such a
perverse intention takes away the truth of the sacrament, especially
if it be manifested outwardly.

Secondly, the minister's intention may be perverted as to something
that follows the sacrament: for instance, a priest may intend to
baptize a woman so as to be able to abuse her; or to consecrate the
Body of Christ, so as to use it for sorcery. And because that which
comes first does not depend on that which follows, consequently such
a perverse intention does not annul the sacrament; but the minister
himself sins grievously in having such an intention.

Reply Obj. 1: The Church has a good intention both as to the validity
of the sacrament and as to the use thereof: but it is the former
intention that perfects the sacrament, while the latter conduces to
the meritorious effect. Consequently, the minister who conforms his
intention to the Church as to the former rectitude, but not as to the
latter, perfects the sacrament indeed, but gains no merit for himself.

Reply Obj. 2: The intention of mimicry or fun excludes the first kind
of right intention, necessary for the validity of a sacrament.
Consequently, there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: A perverse intention perverts the action of the one who
has such an intention, not the action of another. Consequently, the
perverse intention of the minister perverts the sacrament in so far
as it is his action: not in so far as it is the action of Christ,
Whose minister he is. It is just as if the servant [minister] of some
man were to carry alms to the poor with a wicked intention, whereas
his master had commanded him with a good intention to do so.
_______________________

QUESTION 65

OF THE NUMBER OF THE SACRAMENTS
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider the number of the sacraments: and concerning
this there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there are seven sacraments?

(2) The order of the sacraments among themselves;

(3) Their mutual comparison;

(4) Whether all the sacraments are necessary for salvation?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 65, Art. 1]

Whether There Should Be Seven Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that there ought not to be seven sacraments.
For the sacraments derive their efficacy from the Divine power, and
the power of Christ's Passion. But the Divine power is one, and
Christ's Passion is one; since "by one oblation He hath perfected for
ever them that are sanctified" (Heb. 10:14). Therefore there should
be but one sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, a sacrament is intended as a remedy for the defect
caused by sin. Now this is twofold, punishment and guilt. Therefore
two sacraments would be enough.

Obj. 3: Further, sacraments belong to the actions of the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, as Dionysius explains (Eccl. Hier. v). But,
as he says, there are three actions of the ecclesiastical hierarchy,
namely, "to cleanse, to enlighten, to perfect." Therefore there
should be no more than three sacraments.

Obj. 4: Further, Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix) that the
"sacraments" of the New Law are "less numerous" than those of the Old
Law. But in the Old Law there was no sacrament corresponding to
Confirmation and Extreme Unction. Therefore these should not be
counted among the sacraments of the New Law.

Obj. 5: Further, lust is not more grievous than other sins, as we
have made clear in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 74, A. 5; II-II, Q. 154,
A. 3). But there is no sacrament instituted as a remedy for other
sins. Therefore neither should matrimony be instituted as a remedy
for lust.

Obj. 6: On the other hand, It seems that there should be more than
seven sacraments. For sacraments are a kind of sacred sign. But in
the Church there are many sanctifications by sensible signs, such as
Holy Water the Consecration of Altars, and such like. Therefore there
are more than seven sacraments.

Obj. 7: Further, Hugh of St. Victor (De Sacram. i) says that the
sacraments of the Old Law were oblations, tithes and sacrifices. But
the Sacrifice of the Church is one sacrament, called the Eucharist.
Therefore oblations also and tithes should be called sacraments.

Obj. 8: Further, there are three kinds of sin, original, mortal and
venial. Now Baptism is intended as a remedy against original sin, and
Penance against mortal sin. Therefore besides the seven sacraments,
there should be another against venial sin.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 62, A. 5; Q. 63, A. 1), the
sacraments of the Church were instituted for a twofold purpose:
namely, in order to perfect man in things pertaining to the worship
of God according to the religion of Christian life, and to be a
remedy against the defects caused by sin. And in either way it is
becoming that there should be seven sacraments.

For spiritual life has a certain conformity with the life of the
body: just as other corporeal things have a certain likeness to
things spiritual. Now a man attains perfection in the corporeal life
in two ways: first, in regard to his own person; secondly, in regard
to the whole community of the society in which he lives, for man is
by nature a social animal. With regard to himself man is perfected in
the life of the body, in two ways; first, directly (_per se_), i.e.
by acquiring some vital perfection; secondly, indirectly (_per
accidens_), i.e. by the removal of hindrances to life, such as
ailments, or the like. Now the life of the body is perfected
_directly,_ in three ways. First, by generation whereby a man begins
to be and to live: and corresponding to this in the spiritual life
there is Baptism, which is a spiritual regeneration, according to
Titus 3:5: "By the laver of regeneration," etc. Secondly, by growth
whereby a man is brought to perfect size and strength: and
corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is Confirmation, in
which the Holy Ghost is given to strengthen us. Wherefore the
disciples who were already baptized were bidden thus: "Stay you in
the city till you be endued with power from on high" (Luke 24:49).
Thirdly, by nourishment, whereby life and strength are preserved to
man; and corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is the
Eucharist. Wherefore it is said (John 6:54): "Except you eat of the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, you shall not have life
in you."

And this would be enough for man if he had an impassible life, both
corporally and spiritually; but since man is liable at times to both
corporal and spiritual infirmity, i.e. sin, hence man needs a cure
from his infirmity; which cure is twofold. One is the healing, that
restores health: and corresponding to this in the spiritual life
there is Penance, according to Ps. 40:5: "Heal my soul, for I have
sinned against Thee." The other is the restoration of former vigor by
means of suitable diet and exercise: and corresponding to this in the
spiritual life there is Extreme Unction, which removes the remainder
of sin, and prepares man for final glory. Wherefore it is written
(James 5:15): "And if he be in sins they shall be forgiven him."

In regard to the whole community, man is perfected in two ways.
First, by receiving power to rule the community and to exercise
public acts: and corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is
the sacrament of order, according to the saying of Heb. 7:27, that
priests offer sacrifices not for themselves only, but also for the
people. Secondly in regard to natural propagation. This is
accomplished by Matrimony both in the corporal and in the spiritual
life: since it is not only a sacrament but also a function of nature.

We may likewise gather the number of the sacraments from their being
instituted as a remedy against the defect caused by sin. For Baptism
is intended as a remedy against the absence of spiritual life;
Confirmation, against the infirmity of soul found in those of recent
birth; the Eucharist, against the soul's proneness to sin; Penance,
against actual sin committed after baptism; Extreme Unction, against
the remainders of sins--of those sins, namely, which are not
sufficiently removed by Penance, whether through negligence or
through ignorance; order, against divisions in the community;
Matrimony, as a remedy against concupiscence in the individual, and
against the decrease in numbers that results from death.

Some, again, gather the number of sacraments from a certain
adaptation to the virtues and to the defects and penal effects
resulting from sin. They say that Baptism corresponds to Faith, and
is ordained as a remedy against original sin; Extreme Unction, to
Hope, being ordained against venial sin; the Eucharist, to Charity,
being ordained against the penal effect which is malice; Order, to
Prudence, being ordained against ignorance; Penance to Justice, being
ordained against mortal sin; Matrimony, to Temperance, being ordained
against concupiscence; Confirmation, to Fortitude, being ordained
against infirmity.

Reply Obj. 1: The same principal agent uses various instruments unto
various effects, in accordance with the thing to be done. In the same
way the Divine power and the Passion of Christ work in us through the
various sacraments as through various instruments.

Reply Obj. 2: Guilt and punishment are diversified both according to
species, inasmuch as there are various species of guilt and
punishment, and according to men's various states and habitudes. And
in this respect it was necessary to have a number of sacraments, as
explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: In hierarchical actions we must consider the agents,
the recipients and the actions. The agents are the ministers of the
Church; and to these the sacrament of order belongs. The recipients
are those who approach the sacraments: and these are brought into
being by Matrimony. The actions are "cleansing,"    "enlightening,"
and "perfecting." Mere cleansing, however, cannot be a sacrament of
the New Law, which confers grace: yet it belongs to certain
sacramentals, i.e. catechism and exorcism. But cleansing coupled with
enlightening, according to Dionysius, belongs to Baptism; and, for
him who falls back into sin, they belong secondarily to Penance and
Extreme Unction. And perfecting, as regards power, which is, as it
were, a formal perfection, belongs to Confirmation: while, as regards
the attainment of the end, it belongs to the Eucharist.

Reply Obj. 4: In the sacrament of Confirmation we receive the fulness
of the Holy Ghost in order to be strengthened; while in Extreme
Unction man is prepared for the immediate attainment of glory; and
neither of these two purposes was becoming to the Old Testament.
Consequently, nothing in the old Law could correspond to these
sacraments. Nevertheless, the sacraments of the old Law were more
numerous, on account of the various kinds of sacrifices and
ceremonies.

Reply Obj. 5: There was need for a special sacrament to be applied as
a remedy against venereal concupiscence: first because by this
concupiscence, not only the person but also the nature is defiled:
secondly, by reason of its vehemence whereby it clouds the reason.

Reply Obj. 6: Holy Water and other consecrated things are not called
sacraments, because they do not produce the sacramental effect, which
is the receiving of grace. They are, however, a kind of disposition
to the sacraments: either by removing obstacles, thus holy water is
ordained against the snares of the demons, and against venial sins:
or by making things suitable for the conferring of a sacrament; thus
the altar and vessels are consecrated through reverence for the
Eucharist.

Reply Obj. 7: Oblations and tithes, both the Law of nature and in the
Law of Moses, ere ordained not only for the sustenance of the
ministers and the poor, but also figuratively; and consequently they
were sacraments. But now they remain no longer as figures, and
therefore they are not sacraments.

Reply Obj. 8: The infusion of grace is not necessary for the blotting
out of venial sin. Wherefore, since grace is infused in each of the
sacraments of the New Law, none of them was instituted directly
against venial sin. This is taken away by certain sacramentals, for
instance, Holy Water and such like. Some, however, hold that Extreme
Unction is ordained against venial sin. But of this we shall speak in
its proper place (Suppl., Q. 30, A. 1).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 65, Art. 2]

Whether the Order of the Sacraments, As Given Above, Is Becoming?

Objection 1: It seems that the order of the sacraments as given above
is unbecoming. For according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:46), "that was
. . . first . . . which is natural, afterwards that which is
spiritual." But man is begotten through Matrimony by a first and
natural generation; while in Baptism he is regenerated as by a second
and spiritual generation. Therefore Matrimony should precede Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, through the sacrament of order man receives the
power of agent in sacramental actions. But the agent precedes his
action. Therefore order should precede Baptism and the other
sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, the Eucharist is a spiritual food; while
Confirmation is compared to growth. But food causes, and consequently
precedes, growth. Therefore the Eucharist precedes Confirmation.

Obj. 4: Further, Penance prepares man for the Eucharist. But a
disposition precedes perfection. Therefore Penance should precede the
Eucharist.

Obj. 5: Further, that which is nearer the last end comes after other
things. But, of all the sacraments, Extreme Unction is nearest to the
last end which is Happiness. Therefore it should be placed last among
the sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ The order of the sacraments, as given above, is
commonly adopted by all.

_I answer that,_ The reason of the order among the sacraments appears
from what has been said above (A. 1). For just as unity precedes
multitude, so those sacraments which are intended for the perfection
of the individual, naturally precede those which are intended for the
perfection of the multitude; and consequently the last place among
the sacraments is given to order and Matrimony, which are intended
for the perfection of the multitude: while Matrimony is placed after
order, because it has less participation in the nature of the
spiritual life, to which the sacraments are ordained. Moreover, among
things ordained to the perfection of the individual, those naturally
come first which are ordained directly to the perfection of the
spiritual life, and afterwards, those which are ordained thereto
indirectly, viz. by removing some supervening accidental cause of
harm; such are Penance and Extreme Unction: while, of these, Extreme
Unction is naturally placed last, for it preserves the healing which
was begun by Penance.

Of the remaining three, it is clear that Baptism which is a spiritual
regeneration, comes first; then Confirmation, which is ordained to
the formal perfection of power; and after these the Eucharist which
is ordained to final perfection.

Reply Obj. 1: Matrimony as ordained to natural life is a function of
nature. But in so far as it has something spiritual it is a
sacrament. And because it has the least amount of spirituality it is
placed last.

Reply Obj. 2: For a thing to be an agent it must first of all be
perfect in itself. Wherefore those sacraments by which a man is
perfected in himself, are placed before the sacrament of order, in
which a man is made a perfecter of others.

Reply Obj. 3: Nourishment both precedes growth, as its cause; and
follows it, as maintaining the perfection of size and power in man.
Consequently, the Eucharist can be placed before Confirmation, as
Dionysius places it (Eccl. Hier. iii, iv), and can be placed after
it, as the Master does (iv, 2, 8).

Reply Obj. 4: This argument would hold if Penance were required of
necessity as a preparation to the Eucharist. But this is not true:
for if anyone be without mortal sin, he does not need Penance in
order to receive the Eucharist. Thus it is clear that Penance is an
accidental preparation to the Eucharist, that is to say, sin being
supposed. Wherefore it is written in the last chapter of the second
Book of Paralipomenon (cf. 2 Paral 33:18): "Thou, O Lord of the
righteous, didst not impose penance on righteous men." [*The words
quoted are from the apocryphal Prayer of Manasses, which, before the
Council of Trent, was to be found inserted in some Latin copies of
the Bible.]

Reply Obj. 5: Extreme Unction, for this very reason, is given the
last place among those sacraments which are ordained to the
perfection of the individual.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 65, Art. 3]

Whether the Eucharist Is the Greatest of the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that the Eucharist is not the principal of the
sacraments. For the common good is of more account than the good of
the individual (1 _Ethic._ ii). But Matrimony is ordained to the
common good of the human race by means of generation: whereas the
sacrament of the Eucharist is ordained to the private good of the
recipient. Therefore it is not the greatest of the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, those sacraments, seemingly, are greater, which are
conferred by a greater minister. But the sacraments of Confirmation
and order are conferred by a bishop only, who is a greater minister
than a mere minister such as a priest, by whom the sacraments of the
Eucharist is conferred. Therefore those sacraments are greater.

Obj. 3: Further, those sacraments are greater that have the greater
power. But some of the sacraments imprint a character, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation and order; whereas the Eucharist does not. Therefore
those sacraments are greater.

Obj. 4: Further, that seems to be greater, on which others depend
without its depending on them. But the Eucharist depends on Baptism:
since no one can receive the Eucharist except he has been baptized.
Therefore Baptism is greater than the Eucharist.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii) that "No one
receives hierarchical perfection save by the most God-like
Eucharist." Therefore this sacrament is greater than all the others
and perfects them.

_I answer that,_ Absolutely speaking, the sacrament of the Eucharist
is the greatest of all the sacraments: and this may be shown in three
ways. First of all because it contains Christ Himself substantially:
whereas the other sacraments contain a certain instrumental power
which is a share of Christ's power, as we have shown above (Q. 62, A.
4, ad 3, A. 5). Now that which is essentially such is always of more
account than that which is such by participation.

Secondly, this is made clear by considering the relation of the
sacraments to one another. For all the other sacraments seem to be
ordained to this one as to their end. For it is manifest that the
sacrament of order is ordained to the consecration of the Eucharist:
and the sacrament of Baptism to the reception of the Eucharist: while
a man is perfected by Confirmation, so as not to fear to abstain from
this sacrament. By Penance and Extreme Unction man is prepared to
receive the Body of Christ worthily. And Matrimony at least in its
signification, touches this sacrament; in so far as it signifies the
union of Christ with the Church, of which union the Eucharist is a
figure: hence the Apostle says (Eph. 5:32): "This is a great
sacrament: but I speak in Christ and in the Church."

Thirdly, this is made clear by considering the rites of the
sacraments. For nearly all the sacraments terminate in the Eucharist,
as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii): thus those who have been
ordained receive Holy Communion, as also do those who have been
baptized, if they be adults.

The remaining sacraments may be compared to one another in several
ways. For on the ground of necessity, Baptism is the greatest of the
sacraments; while from the point of view of perfection, order comes
first; while Confirmation holds a middle place. The sacraments of
Penance and Extreme Unction are on a degree inferior to those
mentioned above; because, as stated above (A. 2), they are ordained
to the Christian life, not directly, but accidentally, as it were,
that is to say, as remedies against supervening defects. And among
these, Extreme Unction is compared to Penance, as Confirmation to
Baptism; in such a way, that Penance is more necessary, whereas
Extreme Unction is more perfect.

Reply Obj. 1: Matrimony is ordained to the common good as regards the
body. But the common spiritual good of the whole Church is contained
substantially in the sacrament itself of the Eucharist.

Reply Obj. 2: By order and Confirmation the faithful of Christ are
deputed to certain special duties; and this can be done by the prince
alone. Consequently the conferring of these sacraments belongs
exclusively to a bishop, who is, as it were, a prince in the Church.
But a man is not deputed to any duty by the sacrament of the
Eucharist, rather is this sacrament the end of all duties, as stated
above.

Reply Obj. 3: The sacramental character, as stated above (Q. 63, A.
3), is a kind of participation in Christ's priesthood. Wherefore the
sacrament that unites man to Christ Himself, is greater than a
sacrament that imprints Christ's character.

Reply Obj. 4: This argument proceeds on the ground of necessity. For
thus Baptism, being of the greatest necessity, is the greatest of the
sacraments, just as order and Confirmation have a certain excellence
considered in their administration; and Matrimony by reason of its
signification. For there is no reason why a thing should not be
greater from a certain point of view which is not greater absolutely
speaking.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 65, Art. 4]

Whether All the Sacraments Are Necessary for Salvation?

Objection 1: It seems that all the sacraments are necessary for
salvation. For what is not necessary seems to be superfluous. But no
sacrament is superfluous, because "God does nothing without a
purpose" (De Coelo et Mundo i). Therefore all the sacraments are
necessary for salvation.

Obj. 2: Further, just as it is said of Baptism (John 3:5): "Unless a
man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter in to
the kingdom of God," so of the Eucharist is it said (John 6:54):
"Except you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink of His
blood, you shall not have life in you." Therefore, just as Baptism is
a necessary sacrament, so is the Eucharist.

Obj. 3: Further, a man can be saved without the sacrament of Baptism,
provided that some unavoidable obstacle, and not his contempt for
religion, debar him from the sacrament, as we shall state further on
(Q. 68, A. 2). But contempt of religion in any sacrament is a
hindrance to salvation. Therefore, in like manner, all the sacraments
are necessary for salvation.

_On the contrary,_ Children are saved by Baptism alone without the
other sacraments.

_I answer that,_ Necessity of end, of which we speak now, is twofold.
First, a thing may be necessary so that without it the end cannot be
attained; thus food is necessary for human life. And this is simple
necessity of end. Secondly, a thing is said to be necessary, if,
without it, the end cannot be attained so becomingly: thus a horse is
necessary for a journey. But this is not simple necessity of end.

In the first way, three sacraments are necessary for salvation. Two
of them are necessary to the individual; Baptism, simply and
absolutely; Penance, in the case of mortal sin committed after
Baptism; while the sacrament of order is necessary to the Church,
since "where there is no governor the people shall fall" (Prov.
11:14).

But in the second way the other sacraments are necessary. For in a
sense Confirmation perfects Baptism; Extreme Unction perfects
Penance; while Matrimony, by multiplying them, preserves the numbers
in the Church.

Reply Obj. 1: For a thing not to be superfluous it is enough if it be
necessary either in the first or the second way. It is thus that the
sacraments are necessary, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: These words of our Lord are to be understood of
spiritual, and not of merely sacramental, eating, as Augustine
explains (Tract. xxvi super Joan.).

Reply Obj. 3: Although contempt of any of the sacraments is a
hindrance to salvation, yet it does not amount to contempt of the
sacrament, if anyone does not trouble to receive a sacrament that is
not necessary for salvation. Else those who do not receive orders,
and those who do not contract Matrimony, would be guilty of contempt
of those sacraments.
_______________________

QUESTION 66

OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM
(In Twelve Articles)

We have now to consider each sacrament specially: (1) Baptism;
(2) Confirmation; (3) the Eucharist; (4) Penance; (5) Extreme
Unction; (6) Order; (7) Matrimony.

Concerning the first, our consideration will be twofold: (1) of
Baptism itself; (2) of things preparatory to Baptism.

Concerning the first, four points arise for our consideration:
(1) Things pertaining to the sacrament of Baptism; (2) The minister
of this sacrament; (3) The recipients of this sacrament; (4) The
effect of this sacrament.

Concerning the first there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) What is Baptism? Is it a washing?

(2) Of the institution of this sacrament;

(3) Whether water be the proper matter of this sacrament?

(4) Whether plain water be required?

(5) Whether this be a suitable form of this sacrament: "I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost"?

(6) Whether one could baptize with this form: "I baptize thee in the
name of Christ?"

(7) Whether immersion is necessary for Baptism?

(8) Whether trine immersion is necessary?

(9) Whether Baptism can be reiterated?

(10) Of the Baptismal rite;

(11) Of the various kinds of Baptism;

(12) Of the comparison between various Baptisms.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 1]

Whether Baptism Is the Mere Washing?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism is not the mere washing. For the
washing of the body is something transitory: but Baptism is something
permanent. Therefore Baptism is not the mere washing; but rather is
it "the regeneration, the seal, the safeguarding, the enlightenment,"
as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv).

Obj. 2: Further, Hugh of St. Victor says (De Sacram. ii) that
"Baptism is water sanctified by God's word for the blotting out of
sins." But the washing itself is not water, but a certain use of
water.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Tract. lxxx super Joan.): "The word
is added to the element, and this becomes a sacrament." Now, the
element is the water. Therefore Baptism is the water and not the
washing.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ecclus. 34:30): "He that washeth
himself (_baptizatur_) after touching the dead, if he touch him
again, what does his washing avail?" It seems, therefore, that
Baptism is the washing or bathing.

_I answer that,_ In the sacrament of Baptism, three things may be
considered: namely, that which is _sacrament only;_ that which is
_reality and sacrament;_ and that which is _reality only._ That which
is sacrament only, is something visible and outward; the sign,
namely, of the inward effect: for such is the very nature of a
sacrament. And this outward something that can be perceived by the
sense is both the water itself and its use, which is the washing.
Hence some have thought that the water itself is the sacrament: which
seems to be the meaning of the passage quoted from Hugh of St.
Victor. For in the general definition of a sacrament he says that it
is "a material element": and in defining Baptism he says it is
"water."

But this is not true. For since the sacraments of the New Law effect
a certain sanctification, there the sacrament is completed where the
sanctification is completed. Now, the sanctification is not completed
in water; but a certain sanctifying instrumental virtue, not
permanent but transient, passes from the water, in which it is, into
man who is the subject of true sanctification. Consequently the
sacrament is not completed in the very water, but in applying the
water to man, i.e. in the washing. Hence the Master (iv, 3) says that
"Baptism is the outward washing of the body done together with the
prescribed form of words."

The Baptismal character is both reality and sacrament: because it is
something real signified by the outward washing; and a sacramental
sign of the inward justification: and this last is the reality only,
in this sacrament--namely, the reality signified and not signifying.

Reply Obj. 1: That which is both sacrament and reality--i.e. the
character--and that which is reality only--i.e. the inward
justification--remain: the character remains and is indelible, as
stated above (Q. 63, A. 5); the justification remains, but can be
lost. Consequently Damascene defined Baptism, not as to that which is
done outwardly, and is the sacrament only; but as to that which is
inward. Hence he sets down two things as pertaining to the
character--namely, "seal" and "safeguarding"; inasmuch as the
character which is called a seal, so far as itself is concerned,
safeguards the soul in good. He also sets down two things as
pertaining to the ultimate reality of the sacrament--namely,
"regeneration" which refers to the fact that man by being baptized
begins the new life of righteousness; and "enlightenment," which
refers especially to faith, by which man receives spiritual life,
according to Habac 2 (Heb. 10:38; cf. Habac 2:4): "But (My) just man
liveth by faith"; and Baptism is a sort of protestation of faith;
whence it is called the "Sacrament of Faith." Likewise Dionysius
defined Baptism by its relation to the other sacraments, saying
(Eccl. Hier. ii) that it is "the principle that forms the habits of
the soul for the reception of those most holy words and sacraments";
and again by its relation to heavenly glory, which is the universal
end of all the sacraments, when he adds, "preparing the way for us,
whereby we mount to the repose of the heavenly kingdom"; and again as
to the beginning of spiritual life, when he adds, "the conferring of
our most sacred and Godlike regeneration."

Reply Obj. 2: As already stated, the opinion of Hugh of St. Victor on
this question is not to be followed. Nevertheless the saying that
"Baptism is water" may be verified in so far as water is the material
principle of Baptism: and thus there would be "causal predication."

Reply Obj. 3: When the words are added, the element becomes a
sacrament, not in the element itself, but in man, to whom the element
is applied, by being used in washing him. Indeed, this is signified
by those very words which are added to the element, when we say: "I
baptize thee," etc.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 2]

Whether Baptism Was Instituted After Christ's Passion?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism was instituted after Christ's
Passion. For the cause precedes the effect. Now Christ's Passion
operates in the sacraments of the New Law. Therefore Christ's Passion
precedes the institution of the sacraments of the New Law: especially
the sacrament of Baptism since the Apostle says (Rom. 6:3): "All we,
who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in His death," etc.

Obj. 2: Further, the sacraments of the New Law derive their efficacy
from the mandate of Christ. But Christ gave the disciples the mandate
of Baptism after His Passion and Resurrection, when He said: "Going,
teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father," etc.
(Matt. 28:19). Therefore it seems that Baptism was instituted after
Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, Baptism is a necessary sacrament, as stated above
(Q. 65, A. 4): wherefore, seemingly, it must have been binding on man
as soon as it was instituted. But before Christ's Passion men were
not bound to be baptized: for Circumcision was still in force, which
was supplanted by Baptism. Therefore it seems that Baptism was not
instituted before Christ's Passion.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany
(Append. Serm., clxxxv): "As soon as Christ was plunged into the
waters, the waters washed away the sins of all." But this was before
Christ's Passion. Therefore Baptism was instituted before Christ's
Passion.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 62, A. 1), sacraments derive
from their institution the power of conferring grace. Wherefore it
seems that a sacrament is then instituted, when it receives the power
of producing its effect. Now Baptism received this power when Christ
was baptized. Consequently Baptism was truly instituted then, if we
consider it as a sacrament. But the obligation of receiving this
sacrament was proclaimed to mankind after the Passion and
Resurrection. First, because Christ's Passion put an end to the
figurative sacraments, which were supplanted by Baptism and the other
sacraments of the New Law. Secondly, because by Baptism man is "made
conformable" to Christ's Passion and Resurrection, in so far as he
dies to sin and begins to live anew unto righteousness. Consequently
it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again, before proclaiming to
man his obligation of conforming himself to Christ's Death and
Resurrection.

Reply Obj. 1: Even before Christ's Passion, Baptism, inasmuch as it
foreshadowed it, derived its efficacy therefrom; but not in the same
way as the sacraments of the Old Law. For these were mere figures:
whereas Baptism derived the power of justifying from Christ Himself,
to Whose power the Passion itself owed its saving virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: It was not meet that men should be restricted to a
number of figures by Christ, Who came to fulfil and replace the
figure by His reality. Therefore before His Passion He did not make
Baptism obligatory as soon as it was instituted; but wished men to
become accustomed to its use; especially in regard to the Jews, to
whom all things were figurative, as Augustine says (Contra Faust.
iv). But after His Passion and Resurrection He made Baptism
obligatory, not only on the Jews, but also on the Gentiles, when He
gave the commandment: "Going, teach ye all nations."

Reply Obj. 3: Sacraments are not obligatory except when we are
commanded to receive them. And this was not before the Passion, as
stated above. For our Lord's words to Nicodemus (John 3:5), "Unless a
man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, seem to refer to the future rather than to the
present."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 3]

Whether Water Is the Proper Matter of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that water is not the proper matter of Baptism.
For Baptism, according to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v) and Damascene (De
Fide Orth. iv), has a power of enlightening. But enlightenment is a
special characteristic of fire. Therefore Baptism should be conferred
with fire rather than with water: and all the more since John the
Baptist said when foretelling Christ's Baptism (Matt. 3:11): "He
shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire."

Obj. 2: Further, the washing away of sins is signified in Baptism.
But many other things besides water are employed in washing, such as
wine, oil, and such like. Therefore Baptism can be conferred with
these also; and consequently water is not the proper matter of
Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, the sacraments of the Church flowed from the side of
Christ hanging on the cross, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 5). But not
only water flowed therefrom, but also blood. Therefore it seems that
Baptism can also be conferred with blood. And this seems to be more
in keeping with the effect of Baptism, because it is written (Apoc.
1:5): "(Who) washed us from our sins in His own blood."

Obj. 4: Further, as Augustine (cf. Master of the Sentences, iv, 3)
and Bede (Exposit. in Luc. iii, 21) say, Christ, by "the touch of His
most pure flesh, endowed the waters with a regenerating and cleansing
virtue." But all waters are not connected with the waters of the
Jordan which Christ touched with His flesh. Consequently it seems
that Baptism cannot be conferred with any water; and therefore water,
as such, is not the proper matter of Baptism.

Obj. 5: Further, if water, as such, were the proper matter of
Baptism, there would be no need to do anything to the water before
using it for Baptism. But in solemn Baptism the water which is used
for baptizing, is exorcized and blessed. Therefore it seems that
water, as such, is not the proper matter of Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God."

_I answer that,_ By Divine institution water is the proper matter of
Baptism; and with reason. First, by reason of the very nature of
Baptism, which is a regeneration unto spiritual life. And this
answers to the nature of water in a special degree; wherefore seeds,
from which all living things, viz. plants and animals are generated,
are moist and akin to water. For this reason certain philosophers
held that water is the first principle of all things.

Secondly, in regard to the effects of Baptism, to which the
properties of water correspond. For by reason of its moistness it
cleanses; and hence it fittingly signifies and causes the cleansing
from sins. By reason of its coolness it tempers superfluous heat:
wherefore it fittingly mitigates the concupiscence of the fomes. By
reason of its transparency, it is susceptive of light; hence its
adaptability to Baptism as the "sacrament of Faith."

Thirdly, because it is suitable for the signification of the
mysteries of Christ, by which we are justified. For, as Chrysostom
says (Hom. xxv in Joan.) on John 3:5, "Unless a man be born again,"
etc., "When we dip our heads under the water as in a kind of tomb our
old man is buried, and being submerged is hidden below, and thence he
rises again renewed."

Fourthly, because by being so universal and abundant, it is a matter
suitable to our need of this sacrament: for it can easily be obtained
everywhere.

Reply Obj. 1: Fire enlightens actively. But he who is baptized does
not become an enlightener, but is enlightened by faith, which "cometh
by hearing" (Rom. 10:17). Consequently water is more suitable, than
fire, for Baptism.

But when we find it said: "He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and
fire," we may understand fire, as Jerome says (In Matth. ii), to mean
the Holy Ghost, Who appeared above the disciples under the form of
fiery tongues (Acts 2:3). Or we may understand it to mean
tribulation, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iii in Matth.): because
tribulation washes away sin, and tempers concupiscence. Or again, as
Hilary says (Super Matth. ii) that "when we have been baptized in the
Holy Ghost," we still have to be "perfected by the fire of the
judgment."

Reply Obj. 2: Wine and oil are not so commonly used for washing, as
water. Neither do they wash so efficiently: for whatever is washed
with them, contracts a certain smell therefrom; which is not the case
if water be used. Moreover, they are not so universal or so abundant
as water.

Reply Obj. 3: Water flowed from Christ's side to wash us; blood, to
redeem us. Wherefore blood belongs to the sacrament of the Eucharist,
while water belongs to the sacrament of Baptism. Yet this latter
sacrament derives its cleansing virtue from the power of Christ's
blood.

Reply Obj. 4: Christ's power flowed into all waters, by reason of,
not connection of place, but likeness of species, as Augustine says
in a sermon on the Epiphany (Append. Serm. cxxxv): "The blessing that
flowed from the Saviour's Baptism, like a mystic river, swelled the
course of every stream, and filled the channels of every spring."

Reply Obj. 5: The blessing of the water is not essential to Baptism,
but belongs to a certain solemnity, whereby the devotion of the
faithful is aroused, and the cunning of the devil hindered from
impeding the baptismal effect.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 4]

Whether Plain Water Is Necessary for Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that plain water is not necessary for Baptism.
For the water which we have is not plain water; as appears especially
in sea-water, in which there is a considerable proportion of the
earthly element, as the Philosopher shows (Meteor. ii). Yet this
water may be used for Baptism. Therefore plain and pure water is not
necessary for Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, in the solemn celebration of Baptism, chrism is
poured into the water. But this seems to take away the purity and
plainness of the water. Therefore pure and plain water is not
necessary for Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, the water that flowed from the side of Christ
hanging on the cross was a figure of Baptism, as stated above (A. 3,
ad 3). But that water, seemingly, was not pure, because the elements
do not exist actually in a mixed body, such as Christ's. Therefore it
seems that pure or plain water is not necessary for Baptism.

Obj. 4: Further, lye does not seem to be pure water, for it has the
properties of heating and drying, which are contrary to those of
water. Nevertheless it seems that lye can be used for Baptism; for
the water of the Baths can be so used, which has filtered through a
sulphurous vein, just as lye percolates through ashes. Therefore it
seems that plain water is not necessary for Baptism.

Obj. 5: Further, rose-water is distilled from roses, just as chemical
waters are distilled from certain bodies. But seemingly, such like
waters may be used in Baptism; just as rain-water, which is distilled
from vapors. Since, therefore, such waters are not pure and plain
water, it seems that pure and plain water is not necessary for
Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ The proper matter of Baptism is water, as stated
above (A. 3). But plain water alone has the nature of water.
Therefore pure plain water is necessary for Baptism.

_I answer that,_ Water may cease to be pure or plain water in two
ways: first, by being mixed with another body; secondly, by
alteration. And each of these may happen in a twofold manner;
artificially and naturally. Now art fails in the operation of nature:
because nature gives the substantial form, which art cannot give; for
whatever form is given by art is accidental; except perchance when
art applies a proper agent to its proper matter, as fire to a
combustible; in which manner animals are produced from certain things
by way of putrefaction.

Whatever artificial change, then, takes place in the water, whether
by mixture or by alteration, the water's nature is not changed.
Consequently such water can be used for Baptism: unless perhaps such
a small quantity of water be mixed artificially with a body that the
compound is something other than water; thus mud is earth rather than
water, and diluted wine is wine rather than water.

But if the change be natural, sometimes it destroys the nature of the
water; and this is when by a natural process water enters into the
substance of a mixed body: thus water changed into the juice of the
grape is wine, wherefore it has not the nature of water. Sometimes,
however, there may be a natural change of the water, without
destruction of species: and this, both by alteration, as we may see
in the case of water heated by the sun; and by mixture, as when the
water of a river has become muddy by being mixed with particles of
earth.

We must therefore say that any water may be used for Baptism, no
matter how much it may be changed, as long as the species of water is
not destroyed; but if the species of water be destroyed, it cannot be
used for Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: The change in sea-water and in other waters which we
have to hand, is not so great as to destroy the species of water. And
therefore such waters may be used for Baptism.

Reply Obj. 2: Chrism does not destroy the nature of the water by
being mixed with it: just as neither is water changed wherein meat
and the like are boiled: except the substance boiled be so dissolved
that the liquor be of a nature foreign to water; in this we may be
guided by the specific gravity (_spissitudine_). If, however, from
the liquor thus thickened plain water be strained, it can be used for
Baptism: just as water strained from mud, although mud cannot be used
for baptizing.

Reply Obj. 3: The water which flowed from the side of Christ hanging
on the cross, was not the phlegmatic humor, as some have supposed.
For a liquid of this kind cannot be used for Baptism, as neither can
the blood of an animal, or wine, or any liquid extracted from plants.
It was pure water gushing forth miraculously like the blood from a
dead body, to prove the reality of our Lord's body, and confute the
error of the Manichees: water, which is one of the four elements,
showing Christ's body to be composed of the four elements; blood,
proving that it was composed of the four humors.

Reply Obj. 4: Baptism may be conferred with lye and the waters of
Sulphur Baths: because such like waters are not incorporated,
artificially or naturally, with certain mixed bodies, and suffer only
a certain alteration by passing through certain bodies.

Reply Obj. 5: Rose-water is a liquid distilled from roses:
consequently it cannot be used for Baptism. For the same reason
chemical waters cannot be used, as neither can wine. Nor does the
comparison hold with rain-water, which for the most part is formed by
the condensing of vapors, themselves formed from water, and contains
a minimum of the liquid matter from mixed bodies; which liquid matter
by the force of nature, which is stronger than art, is transformed in
this process of condensation into real water, a result which cannot
be produced artificially. Consequently rain-water retains no
properties of any mixed body; which cannot be said of rose-water or
chemical waters.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 5]

Whether This Be a Suitable Form of Baptism: "I Baptize Thee in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"?

Objection 1: It seems that this is not a suitable form of Baptism: "I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost." For action should be ascribed to the principal agent
rather than to the minister. Now the minister of a sacrament acts as
an instrument, as stated above (Q. 64, A. 1); while the principal
agent in Baptism is Christ, according to John 1:33, "He upon Whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is
that baptizeth." It is therefore unbecoming for the minister to say,
"I baptize thee": the more so that _Ego_ (I) is understood in the
word _baptizo_ (I baptize), so that it seems redundant.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no need for a man who does an action, to
make mention of the action done; thus he who teaches, need not say,
"I teach you." Now our Lord gave at the same time the precepts both
of baptizing and of teaching, when He said (Matt. 28:19): "Going,
teach ye all nations," etc. Therefore there is no need in the form of
Baptism to mention the action of baptizing.

Obj. 3: Further, the person baptized sometimes does not understand
the words; for instance, if he be deaf, or a child. But it is useless
to address such a one; according to Ecclus. 32:6: "Where there is no
hearing, pour not out words." Therefore it is unfitting to address
the person baptized with these words: "I baptize thee."

Obj. 4: Further, it may happen that several are baptized by several
at the same time; thus the apostles on one day baptized three
thousand, and on another, five thousand (Acts 2, 4). Therefore the
form of Baptism should not be limited to the singular number in the
words, "I baptize thee": but one should be able to say, "We baptize
you."

Obj. 5: Further, Baptism derives its power from Christ's Passion. But
Baptism is sanctified by the form. Therefore it seems that Christ's
Passion should be mentioned in the form of Baptism.

Obj. 6: Further, a name signifies a thing's property. But there are
three Personal Properties of the Divine Persons, as stated in the
First Part (Q. 32, A. 3). Therefore we should not say, "in the name,"
but "in the names of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost."

Obj. 7: Further, the Person of the Father is designated not only by
the name Father, but also by that of "Unbegotten and Begetter"; and
the Son by those of "Word," "Image," and "Begotten"; and the Holy
Ghost by those of "Gift," "Love," and the "Proceeding One." Therefore
it seems that Baptism is valid if conferred in these names.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (Matt. 28:19): "Going . . . teach ye
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

_I answer that,_ Baptism receives its consecration from its form,
according to Eph. 5:26: "Cleansing it by the laver of water in the
word of life." And Augustine says (De Unico Baptismo iv) that
"Baptism is consecrated by the words of the Gospel." Consequently the
cause of Baptism needs to be expressed in the baptismal form. Now
this cause is twofold; the principal cause from which it derives its
virtue, and this is the Blessed Trinity; and the instrumental cause,
viz. the minister who confers the sacrament outwardly. Wherefore both
causes should be expressed in the form of Baptism. Now the minister
is designated by the words, "I baptize thee"; and the principal cause
in the words, "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost." Therefore this is the suitable form of Baptism: "I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."

Reply Obj. 1: Action is attributed to an instrument as to the
immediate agent; but to the principal agent inasmuch as the
instrument acts in virtue thereof. Consequently it is fitting that in
the baptismal form the minister should be mentioned as performing the
act of baptizing, in the words, "I baptize thee"; indeed, our Lord
attributed to the ministers the act of baptizing, when He said:
"Baptizing them," etc. But the principal cause is indicated as
conferring the sacrament by His own power, in the words, "in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost": for Christ
does not baptize without the Father and the Holy Ghost.

The Greeks, however, do not attribute the act of baptizing to the
minister, in order to avoid the error of those who in the past
ascribed the baptismal power to the baptizers, saying (1 Cor. 1:12):
"I am of Paul . . . and I of Cephas." Wherefore they use the form:
"May the servant of Christ, N . . ., be baptized, in the name of the
Father," etc. And since the action performed by the minister is
expressed with the invocation of the Trinity, the sacrament is
validly conferred. As to the addition of "Ego" in our form, it is not
essential; but it is added in order to lay greater stress on the
intention.

Reply Obj. 2: Since a man may be washed with water for several
reasons, the purpose for which it is done must be expressed by the
words of the form. And this is not done by saying: "In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"; because we are
bound to do all things in that Name (Col. 3:17). Wherefore unless the
act of baptizing be expressed, either as we do, or as the Greeks do,
the sacrament is not valid; according to the decretal of Alexander
III: "If anyone dip a child thrice in the water in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen, without saying,
I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Amen, the child is not baptized."

Reply Obj. 3: The words which are uttered in the sacramental forms,
are said not merely for the purpose of signification, but also for
the purpose of efficiency, inasmuch as they derive efficacy from that
Word, by Whom "all things were made." Consequently they are
becomingly addressed not only to men, but also to insensible
creatures; for instance, when we say: "I exorcize thee, creature
salt" (Roman Ritual).

Reply Obj. 4: Several cannot baptize one at the same time: because an
action is multiplied according to the number of the agents, if it be
done perfectly by each. So that if two were to combine, of whom one
were mute, and unable to utter the words, and the other were without
hands, and unable to perform the action, they could not both baptize
at the same time, one saying the words and the other performing the
action.

On the other hand, in a case of necessity, several could be baptized
at the same time; for no single one of them would receive more than
one baptism. But it would be necessary, in that case, to say: "I
baptize ye." Nor would this be a change of form, because "ye" is the
same as "thee and thee." Whereas "we" does not mean "I and I," but "I
and thou"; so that this would be a change of form.

Likewise it would be a change of form to say, "I baptize myself":
consequently no one can baptize himself. For this reason did Christ
choose to be baptized by John (Extra, De Baptismo et ejus effectu,
cap. Debitum).

Reply Obj. 5: Although Christ's Passion is the principal cause as
compared to the minister, yet it is an instrumental cause as compared
to the Blessed Trinity. For this reason the Trinity is mentioned
rather than Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 6: Although there are three personal names of the three
Persons, there is but one essential name. Now the Divine power which
works in Baptism, pertains to the Essence; and therefore we say, "in
the name," and not, "in the names."

Reply Obj. 7: Just as water is used in Baptism, because it is more
commonly employed in washing, so for the purpose of designating the
three Persons, in the form of Baptism, those names are chosen, which
are generally used, in a particular language, to signify the Persons.
Nor is the sacrament valid if conferred in any other names.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 6]

Whether Baptism Can Be Conferred in the Name of Christ?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism can be conferred in the name of
Christ. For just as there is "one Faith," so is there "one Baptism"
(Eph. 4:5). But it is related (Acts 8:12) that "in the name of Jesus
Christ they were baptized, both men and women." Therefore now also
can Baptism be conferred in the name of Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Spir. Sanct. i): "If you mention
Christ, you designate both the Father by Whom He was anointed, and
the Son Himself, Who was anointed, and the Holy Ghost with Whom He
was anointed." But Baptism can be conferred in the name of the
Trinity: therefore also in the name of Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, Pope Nicholas I, answering questions put to him by
the Bulgars, said: "Those who have been baptized in the name of the
Trinity, or only in the name of Christ, as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles (it is all the same, as Blessed Ambrose saith), must not be
rebaptized." But they would be baptized again if they had not been
validly baptized with that form. Therefore Baptism can be celebrated
in the name of Christ by using this form: "I baptize thee in the name
of Christ."

_On the contrary,_ Pope Pelagius II wrote to the Bishop Gaudentius:
"If any people living in your Worship's neighborhood, avow that they
have been baptized in the name of the Lord only, without any
hesitation baptize them again in the name of the Blessed Trinity,
when they come in quest of the Catholic Faith." Didymus, too, says
(De Spir. Sanct.): "If indeed there be such a one with a mind so
foreign to faith as to baptize while omitting one of the aforesaid
names," viz. of the three Persons, "he baptizes invalidly."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 64, A. 3), the sacraments derive
their efficacy from Christ's institution. Consequently, if any of
those things be omitted which Christ instituted in regard to a
sacrament, it is invalid; save by special dispensation of Him Who did
not bind His power to the sacraments. Now Christ commanded the
sacrament of Baptism to be given with the invocation of the Trinity.
And consequently whatever is lacking to the full invocation of the
Trinity, destroys the integrity of Baptism.

Nor does it matter that in the name of one Person another is implied,
as the name of the Son is implied in that of the Father, or that he
who mentions the name of only one Person may believe aright in the
Three; because just as a sacrament requires sensible matter, so does
it require a sensible form. Hence, for the validity of the sacrament
it is not enough to imply or to believe in the Trinity, unless the
Trinity be expressed in sensible words. For this reason at Christ's
Baptism, wherein was the source of the sanctification of our Baptism,
the Trinity was present in sensible signs: viz. the Father in the
voice, the Son in the human nature, the Holy Ghost in the dove.

Reply Obj. 1: It was by a special revelation from Christ that in the
primitive Church the apostles baptized in the name of Christ; in
order that the name of Christ, which was hateful to Jews and
Gentiles, might become an object of veneration, in that the Holy
Ghost was given in Baptism at the invocation of that Name.

Reply Obj. 2: Ambrose here gives this reason why exception could,
without inconsistency, be allowed in the primitive Church; namely,
because the whole Trinity is implied in the name of Christ, and
therefore the form prescribed by Christ in the Gospel was observed in
its integrity, at least implicitly.

Reply Obj. 3: Pope Nicolas confirms his words by quoting the two
authorities given in the preceding objections: wherefore the answer
to this is clear from the two solutions given above.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 7]

Whether Immersion in Water Is Necessary for Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that immersion in water is necessary for
Baptism. Because it is written (Eph. 4:5): "One faith, one baptism."
But in many parts of the world the ordinary way of baptizing is by
immersion. Therefore it seems that there can be no Baptism without
immersion.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 6:3, 4): "All we who are
baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in His death: for we are
buried together with Him, by Baptism into death." But this is done by
immersion: for Chrysostom says on John 3:5: "Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost," etc.: "When we dip our heads
under the water as in a kind of tomb, our old man is buried, and
being submerged, is hidden below, and thence he rises again renewed."
Therefore it seems that immersion is essential to Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, if Baptism is valid without total immersion of the
body, it would follow that it would be equally sufficient to pour
water over any part of the body. But this seems unreasonable; since
original sin, to remedy which is the principal purpose of Baptism, is
not in only one part of the body. Therefore it seems that immersion
is necessary for Baptism, and that mere sprinkling is not enough.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Heb. 10:22): "Let us draw near with
a true heart in fulness of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed with clean water."

_I answer that,_ In the sacrament of Baptism water is put to the use
of a washing of the body, whereby to signify the inward washing away
of sins. Now washing may be done with water not only by immersion,
but also by sprinkling or pouring. And, therefore, although it is
safer to baptize by immersion, because this is the more ordinary
fashion, yet Baptism can be conferred by sprinkling or also by
pouring, according to Ezech. 36:25: "I will pour upon you clean
water," as also the Blessed Lawrence is related to have baptized. And
this especially in cases of urgency: either because there is a great
number to be baptized, as was clearly the case in Acts 2 and 4, where
we read that on one day three thousand believed, and on another five
thousand: or through there being but a small supply of water, or
through feebleness of the minister, who cannot hold up the candidate
for Baptism; or through feebleness of the candidate, whose life might
be endangered by immersion. We must therefore conclude that immersion
is not necessary for Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: What is accidental to a thing does not diversify its
essence. Now bodily washing with water is essential to Baptism:
wherefore Baptism is called a "laver," according to Eph. 5:26:
"Cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life." But that
the washing be done this or that way, is accidental to Baptism. And
consequently such diversity does not destroy the oneness of Baptism.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's burial is more clearly represented by
immersion: wherefore this manner of baptizing is more frequently in
use and more commendable. Yet in the other ways of baptizing it is
represented after a fashion, albeit not so clearly; for no matter how
the washing is done, the body of a man, or some part thereof, is put
under water, just as Christ's body was put under the earth.

Reply Obj. 3: The principal part of the body, especially in relation
to the exterior members, is the head, wherein all the senses, both
interior and exterior, flourish. And therefore, if the whole body
cannot be covered with water, because of the scarcity of water, or
because of some other reason, it is necessary to pour water over the
head, in which the principle of animal life is made manifest.

And although original sin is transmitted through the members that
serve for procreation, yet those members are not to be sprinkled in
preference to the head, because by Baptism the transmission of
original sin to the offspring by the act of procreation is not
deleted, but the soul is freed from the stain and debt of sin which
it has contracted. Consequently that part of the body should be
washed in preference, in which the works of the soul are made
manifest.

Nevertheless in the Old Law the remedy against original sin was
affixed to the member of procreation; because He through Whom
original sin was to be removed, was yet to be born of the seed of
Abraham, whose faith was signified by circumcision according to Rom.
4:11.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 8]

Whether Trine Immersion Is Essential to Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that trine immersion is essential to Baptism.
For Augustine says in a sermon on the Symbol, addressed to the
Neophytes: "Rightly were you dipped three times, since you were
baptized in the name of the Trinity. Rightly were you dipped three
times, because you were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, Who on
the third day rose again from the dead. For that thrice repeated
immersion reproduces the burial of the Lord by which you were buried
with Christ in Baptism." Now both seem to be essential to Baptism,
namely, that in Baptism the Trinity of Persons should be signified,
and that we should be conformed to Christ's burial. Therefore it
seems that trine immersion is essential to Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, the sacraments derive their efficacy from Christ's
mandate. But trine immersion was commanded by Christ: for Pope
Pelagius II wrote to Bishop Gaudentius: "The Gospel precept given by
our Lord God Himself, our Saviour Jesus Christ, admonishes us to
confer the sacrament of Baptism to each one in the name of the
Trinity and also with trine immersion." Therefore, just as it is
essential to Baptism to call on the name of the Trinity, so is it
essential to baptize by trine immersion.

Obj. 3: Further, if trine immersion be not essential to Baptism, it
follows that the sacrament of Baptism is conferred at the first
immersion; so that if a second or third immersion be added, it seems
that Baptism is conferred a second or third time, which is absurd.
Therefore one immersion does not suffice for the sacrament of
Baptism, and trine immersion is essential thereto.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory wrote to the Bishop Leander: "It cannot be
in any way reprehensible to baptize an infant with either a trine or
a single immersion: since the Trinity can be represented in the three
immersions, and the unity of the Godhead in one immersion."

I answer that As stated above (A. 7, ad 1), washing with water is of
itself required for Baptism, being essential to the sacrament:
whereas the mode of washing is accidental to the sacrament.
Consequently, as Gregory in the words above quoted explains, both
single and trine immersion are lawful considered in themselves; since
one immersion signifies the oneness of Christ's death and of the
Godhead; while trine immersion signifies the three days of Christ's
burial, and also the Trinity of Persons.

But for various reasons, according as the Church has ordained, one
mode has been in practice, at one time, the other at another time.
For since from the very earliest days of the Church some have had
false notions concerning the Trinity, holding that Christ is a mere
man, and that He is not called the "Son of God" or "God" except by
reason of His merit, which was chiefly in His death; for this reason
they did not baptize in the name of the Trinity, but in memory of
Christ's death, and with one immersion. And this was condemned in the
early Church. Wherefore in the Apostolic Canons (xlix) we read: "If
any priest or bishop confer baptism not with the trine immersion in
the one administration, but with one immersion, which baptism is said
to be conferred by some in the death of the Lord, let him be
deposed": for our Lord did not say, "Baptize ye in My death," but "In
the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

Later on, however, there arose the error of certain schismatics and
heretics who rebaptized: as Augustine (Super. Joan., cf. De Haeres.
lxix) relates of the Donatists. Wherefore, in detestation of their
error, only one immersion was ordered to be made, by the (fourth)
council of Toledo, in the acts of which we read: "In order to avoid
the scandal of schism or the practice of heretical teaching let us
hold to the single baptismal immersion."

But now that this motive has ceased, trine immersion is universally
observed in Baptism: and consequently anyone baptizing otherwise
would sin gravely, through not following the ritual of the Church. It
would, however, be valid Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: The Trinity acts as principal agent in Baptism. Now the
likeness of the agent enters into the effect, in regard to the form
and not in regard to the matter. Wherefore the Trinity is signified
in Baptism by the words of the form. Nor is it essential for the
Trinity to be signified by the manner in which the matter is used;
although this is done to make the signification clearer.

In like manner Christ's death is sufficiently represented in the one
immersion. And the three days of His burial were not necessary for
our salvation, because even if He had been buried or dead for one
day, this would have been enough to consummate our redemption: yet
those three days were ordained unto the manifestation of the reality
of His death, as stated above (Q. 53, A. 2). It is therefore clear
that neither on the part of the Trinity, nor on the part of Christ's
Passion, is the trine immersion essential to the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: Pope Pelagius understood the trine immersion to be
ordained by Christ in its equivalent; in the sense that Christ
commanded Baptism to be conferred "in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Nor can we argue from the form to
the use of the matter, as stated above (ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 64, A. 8), the intention is
essential to Baptism. Consequently, one Baptism results from the
intention of the Church's minister, who intends to confer one Baptism
by a trine immersion. Wherefore Jerome says on Eph. 4:5, 6: "Though
the Baptism," i.e. the immersion, "be thrice repeated, on account of
the mystery of the Trinity, yet it is reputed as one Baptism."

If, however, the intention were to confer one Baptism at each
immersion together with the repetition of the words of the form, it
would be a sin, in itself, because it would be a repetition of
Baptism.
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 9]

Whether Baptism May Be Reiterated?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism may be reiterated. For Baptism was
instituted, seemingly, in order to wash away sins. But sins are
reiterated. Therefore much more should Baptism be reiterated: because
Christ's mercy surpasses man's guilt.

Obj. 2: Further, John the Baptist received special commendation from
Christ, Who said of him (Matt. 11:11): "There hath not risen among
them that are born of women, a greater than John the Baptist." But
those whom John had baptized were baptized again, according to Acts
19:1-7, where it is stated that Paul rebaptized those who had
received the Baptism of John. Much more, therefore, should those be
rebaptized, who have been baptized by heretics or sinners.

Obj. 3: Further, it was decreed in the Council of Nicaea (Can. xix)
that if "any of the Paulianists or Cataphrygians should be converted
to the Catholic Church, they were to be baptized": and this seemingly
should be said in regard to other heretics. Therefore those whom the
heretics have baptized, should be baptized again.

Obj. 4: Further, Baptism is necessary for salvation. But sometimes
there is a doubt about the baptism of those who really have been
baptized. Therefore it seems that they should be baptized again.

Obj. 5: Further, the Eucharist is a more perfect sacrament than
Baptism, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 3). But the sacrament of the
Eucharist is reiterated. Much more reason, therefore, is there for
Baptism to be reiterated.

_On the contrary,_ It is written, (Eph. 4:5): "One faith, one Baptism."

